

On July 16th, 1979, five people boarded a plane in Costa Rica; they were on their way to Leon, the second city of Nicaragua. The five constituted the Provisional Government of Reconstruction of Nicaragua – a small country of under 3 million people at the strategic heart of Central America. They represented different social forces. Daniel Ortega was a member of the National Directorate of the Frente Sandinista; Moises Hassan, a mathematician, and Sergio Ramirez, a writer, were long-standing members of the Frente. The other two came from very different backgrounds. Alfonso Robelo, a wealthy cotton farmer and industrialist, was leader of the National Democratic Movement (MDN) and head of the private enterprise organisation COSEP; Violeta Chamorro was the widow of a newspaper editor who had led the bourgeois opposition to Somoza for many years.
On the same day, Anastasio Somoza, the last of a dynasty that had determined the destiny of Nicaragua since 1934, was in his concrete bunker, built on a hill at the centre of the capital, Managua, overlooking the lake of Tiscapa. From there he was directing a massive military operation throughout the city. During the day, his planes bombed factories and hospitals, while helicopters dropped 500 lb oil drums full of explosive on the working-class districts. Later, the National Guard, a highly trained military force that was the basis of his power, swept through the same districts, killing and torturing – partly in search of hidden members of the Frente Sandinista, partly in order to terrorise the population.
That night in the bunker, and surrounded by the elite of the National Guard, Somoza and his mistress Dinorah Sampson drank too much and listened to the radio reports. What they heard was that six of Nicaragua’s main towns were under the control of insurrectionary forces. Many of the National Guard had either succumbed to the people’s vengeance or were being held for trial. The streets were controlled by young men and women wearing the red and black of the Sandinistas and carrying every kind of weapon, from sophisticated automatics to machetes.






Some of the more important organisations cited




FSLN


Sandinista National Liberation Front (formed 1961, called Sandinista from 1963).




ONU


United National Opposition; bourgeois opposition front formed 1967.




UDEL


United Democratic Liberation; broad opposition front led by P.J. Chamorro; formed 1974 (including PSN).




FAO


Last anti-Somoza bourgeois front, formed 1978 after Chamorro’s murder; led by Alfonso Robelo.




MPU


Broad front of political opponents to Somoza plus trade unions and including the FSLN.
Formed 1978.




FPR


Formed February 1979 after breakup of FAO.
Opposition front under FSLN leadership.




PSN


Nicaraguan Socialist Party (in fact the Communist Party) formed 1944.




PCN


Nicaraguan Communist Party; small Stalinist organisation, split from PSN in 1977 over collaboration with the FSLN.




FO


Workers Front; small Maoist organisation, formed in 1970 after split from FSLN.
Newspaper, El Pueblo closed in 1980.




MDN


Major bourgeois opposition party after 1979.
Led by Robelo, it became ‘semi-clandestine’ in mid 1982.




COSEP


The business organisation, also led by Robelo before he left Nicaragua in April 1982.




CGTI


PSN-led trade union federation.




CTN


Christian Democrat trade union organisation.




CUS


Trade union federation formed in 1970s by the American AFL-CIO.




CST


Sandinista Trade Union Federation, formed after the revolution.




ATC


Agricultural Sandinista Workers Union, first formed in 1978.




UNAG


Sandinista organisation of peasants and small farmers, formed 1981.




CDDS


Sandinista (neighbourhood) Defence Committees.




AMNLAE


Sandinista Womens’ Organisation.




JS-19


Sandinista Youth Organisation.













Chronology of the Nicaraguan Revolution




1893


Zelaya takes power.




1909


Zelaya overthrown; US marines enter Nicaragua.




1926


Liberal rising under Moncada followed by surrender.
One general – Sandino – refuses to lay down his arms and continues struggle against US occupation.




1933


US troops leave Nicaragua; Somoza appointed head of the National Guard; Sandino retires to Wiwili.




1934


Sandino murdered by Somoza.




1936


Anastasio Somoza takes power.




1956


The first Somoza assassinated; replaced by his son Luis.




1961


Sandinista Front formed.




1963–9


FSLN pursues guerrilla war strategy.




1967


Death of Luis Somoza; replaced by his brother Anastasio II.
Jan. 22, 400 opposition demonstrators killed.




1972


Earthquake destroys Managua; 20,000 dead.




1975


Broad opposition front – UDEL – formed with participation of the PSN.
FSLN attacks Somocista Christmas party; wins release of prisoners.
Martial law imposed.




1975


FSLN splits into tendencies – two at first, then three.




1976


Carlos Fonseca, founder of the FSLN, killed in action.




1977


Martial Law ended (September); FSLN Insurrectional Tendency attacks three National Guard barracks.
Group of Twelve formed.




1978


Assassination of Chamorro; bosses’ strike called (January).
Rising of Monimbo (February).
FAO formed (May).
National student strike (June).
MPU formed; group of twelve return to Nicaragua (July).
Attack on the National palace by FSLN; FAO calls general strike (August).
Mass insurrections in Leon, Masaya, Esteli (September).
US tries to negotiate transfer of power from Somoza – but Somoza refuses (October)




1979


FPR organised by FSLN (February).
Reunification of the three FSLN tendencies (March).
‘Final Offensive’ launched north and south; general strike (April).
Offensive continues; first towns liberated in the north (May).
Risings in Leon, Esteli, Matagalpa, and their liberation.
Formation of Provisional government in Costa Rica.
Several Latin American governments break relations with Somoza.
ABC-TV correspondent Bill Stewart murdered by National Guard.
Major street battles in Managua, ending in mass withdrawal to Masaya (June).
All major cities except Managua under FSLN control (by 17 July).
Somoza leaves for Miami, leaving Congress leader Urcuyo in charge of transfer of power.
Urcuyo refuses to hand over power (17 July).
FSLN columns enter Managua (19 July).
The new government formally assumes power (July 20).




1980


Somoza executed by Montoneros in Paraguay (July 17).






The next day, the 17th, is celebrated in today’s Nicaragua as ‘The Day of Joy’. Somoza fled the country, on his way to Miami. He had destroyed almost everything he could not take with him; like those in his immediate circle, he had been sending money out of the country for years. Before he left, Somoza passed the Presidency to the Congressional leader, Urcuyo, whose job was to hand over power, formally, to the Provisional Government. But Urcuyo announced, unexpectedly, his intention of remaining in power until the scheduled 1981 elections.
The announcement killed the last attempts by the US government to exercise some control over the manner of Somoza’s downfall. It was now the Frente Sandinista, undisputed leader of the armed rising, which seized the initiative – and the insurrectionaries began their march on the capital. By the afternoon of July 19th, all vestiges of the former state had gone.
Only six months earlier, the Nicaraguan bourgeoisie believed it was in control of the situation. Mass risings in Matagalpa, Leon and Esteli in September 1978 were followed by massive ‘Clean-Up’ operations by the National Guard which left 6,000 dead. The bourgeois organisations, grouped in a broad opposition front, the FAO, assumed that this signalled defeat for the insurrectionary strategy of the FSLN, and turned to the United States for a negotiated solution. For its part the FSLN retreated to the hills with large numbers of new recruits. It was short of arms – but far from crushed. A Mediation Commission was set up to organise Somoza’s resignation and ensure an ‘orderly transfer of power’. Had Somoza resigned promptly, things might have been very different – but he refused to give up his power. From that moment on, a negotiated solution was no longer possible.
In November, 1978, the FSLN walked out of the FAO, taking with it the trade unions and the Nicaraguan Communist Party (the PSN). In February, these organisations formed the Revolutionary Patriotic Front (FPR) under FSLN leadership. In the same month, the US stopped arms sales to Somoza; two months later, Mexico broke off diplomatic relations.
In March, the Final Offensive began in Esteli. ‘The FSLN’s tactic was to create an indefinite number of operational zones through combinations of strike movements, local uprisings and the activity of its own military units.’ [1] In military terms, this was designed to disperse the forces of the Guard; politically, it represented a coordination of the three areas of Frente activity, each of which had been developed by a different tendency.
The conditions were right. Several thousand combatants moved in from the war fronts, better armed than before. In the cities, the mass movement was also preparing for a final thrust – and the bombing of Esteli did nothing to hold back the preparations.
On June 4th, the Sandinistas issued a call for an insurrectional general strike. The next day, everything stopped; and the cities prepared for the final confrontation with the Guard. On June 10th, Managua rose in battle – it was spontaneous and occurred earlier than planned. By the end of the month it was clear that, until the rest of the country was consolidated in the hands of the insurrection, Managua could not hold out against the savage assault of the Guard. The Frente determined a strategic withdrawal, and 6,000 people (or more) marched through the night the 25 kilometres to Masaya. The vengeance wreaked by Somoza in Managua was terrible; yet Masaya was almost impregnable. Fourteen days later, the final assault on Managua brought the Somoza regime to its end.
The final weeks had been extraordinarily bloody. The Guard had embarked on an orgy of revenge and murder; yet this only swelled the ranks of the insurrection. There was now no turning back. The young, the very young, the old were all involved. The barricades made out of Somoza’s paving stones rose up throughout the city. The contact bombs and home-made weapons would have to be enough – there was nothing left to lose.
By early July, the United States – which had played the usual dual role, cutting arms but voting for emergency aid for Somoza – instructed its Managua ambassador, Lawrence Pezzullo, to stay in his hotel and not present his credentials to Somoza. Meanwhile, its Central American representative, William Bowdler, was in Costa Rica, trying for the last time to ensure a National Guard presence in the Provisional Government. But no-one was speaking to Somoza.
In the end the diplomatic manoeuvres and political discussions had little effect on what happened on those July days. In the eight weeks after Jinotega was taken, it was the masses in insurrection that seized command of the process. It was the people themselves who, step by step, took back the streets.
 
The roots of revolution
The Somoza state was now overthrown. The ‘orderly transfer of power’, which the bourgeoisie had argued for, had not occurred. Instead, the FSLN had seized state power at the head of a mass insurrectionary movement. As the columns of fighters entered Managua throughout the day, they had behind them an armed people, the embryo of a new army to replace the National Guard – the force on which Somoza’s power had always rested, and whose final destruction guaranteed his downfall.
The basis of a new form of social organisation had been glimpsed in the course of the insurrection; in the Civil Defence Committees, the Popular Militias and the Sandinista Agricultural Communes.
The hegemony of the FSLN in this new Nicaragua was undisputed. The revolution in a narrow sense – the armed overthrow of the state and the abolition of its armed force by popular insurrection – had taken place. The revolution in a broad sense, however – the assumption of power over the whole of society by the working class – faced a series of limitations which derived from the peculiar character of Nicaragua’s historical development. It would be impossible to explain Sandinismo, or the circumstances in which it came to power, without understanding that history.
The economic structure of Nicaragua was to a large extent determined by the end of the last century. Until the 1890s, economic activity was divided between the great cattle ranches of the oligarchy and the small communities engaged in the subsistence production of maize and beans. Coffee was first planted in 1850, but from 1890 onwards its rising price on the world market accelerated Nicaragua’s coffee production. As more land was devoted to the new crop, communal lands were absorbed into the plantations. The peasant population remained as seasonal labour or was driven further into the interior in search of land. The fierce resistance of the indigenous population was crushed. [2] This pattern of dispossession and proletarianisation continued as export agriculture developed, creating a growing seasonal labour force, some of whom were able (barely) to survive for the rest of the year from the produce of their tiny isolated plots of land. [3]
With expanding coffee production, a new bourgeoisie emerged, opposed to the old oligarchy and linked to the world market. Its political philosophy – liberalism – and its advocacy of centralisation, national integration and free trade reflected the aim of centralising control over national resources in support of the expanding new industry, and the search for more beneficial exchange relationships by diversifying markets and sources of capital and manufactures. This was the programme of Zelaya, who was in power between 1893 and 1909. Zelaya succeeded in establishing central control over the national economy and tying it to coffee, and in creating a ‘free’ labour force through dispossession. At the same time, he established relations with European capital. It was this which most sorely provoked the imperialist power of the north – the United States. In the first place, US capital (then in its most aggressive ‘dollar diplomacy’ phase) was unhappy about losing a key area of investment in Central America. Secondly, Nicaragua had then – prior to the construction of the Panama Canal – been singled out as the location for the strategic interoceanic canal. When Zelaya offered the canal contract to a consortium of European companies, US capital rose in protest, and found a sympathetic ear in Secretary of State Philander Knox, who happened to be a director of a company with interests on Nicaragua’s Atlantic coast.
Zelaya’s government was overthrown in 1909. American marines landed at Bluefields, on the Atlantic coast, and assumed direct control. By the time the Bryan-Chamorro Pact was signed in 1912, the US had established complete control over Nicaragua, not only appointing presidents, but also imposing a plan for economic ‘stabilisation’ to be overseen by a mixed US-Nicaraguan Commission. The real meaning of the Plan emerged clearly when, in exchange for a short-term loan of $100,000, American banks assumed direct control of the Customs, the railways, the National Bank and the collection of taxes. [4] Zelaya’s plan for the development of an autonomous national state capable of renegotiating the terms of its unequal insertion into the world economy, lay in ruins.
Between 1909 and 1926, the liberal bourgeoisie supported a number of armed risings against the regime, bids for power where no electoral means existed. Their banners were nationalism and development; but the weakness of the bourgeoisie, its incapacity to accumulate, ensured that the slogan of national development was never more than words: ‘The role that might have corresponded to the incipient national industry, was occupied at a very early stage by external suppliers, thus deepening the subordination of the Nicaraguan economy in its relations with the centres that had hegemony over world trade.’ [5]
The last great Liberal rising under Moncada in 1926, proved to be just another bid for a share of power, and ended in an agreement between liberals, conservatives and the US which took Moncada to the Presidency. This time, however, there was a difference. One of the liberal generals, Augusto Cesar Sandino, refused to lay down his arms. For the next seven years, he led a struggle against US intervention that again took up the call for independent national development, though this time in a more radical form, and carried much further the battle against imperialism.
Sandino, born in the village of Niquinohomo in 1895, was vilified and dismissed as a bandit and madman for forty years after his death. Yet in the countryside, he was remembered; today it is his name, and the outline of his famous stetson hat, that graces almost every wall in Nicaragua. Sandino’s ‘crazy little army’ was often reduced, in the course of its struggle, to a handful of starving people; yet he was known in the rest of the world, and his portrait hung behind the platform at the Brussels Anti-Imperialist Congress of 1928. [6]
Sandino’s was a peasant army, though his own ideas were framed by liberalism:
We must expel completely from our homeland all North American citizens and capital, who represent an imminent danger for the nation that innocently received them into its midst. We must develop our own industry and our own trade ...
Our project is based on the right of peoples to express their opinion ... on the liberty and independence of our republics ... and on the wonderful natural privileges with which God has endowed these countries and which have been the cause of the domination exercised over us. [7]
The 1927 Political Manifesto assigns the struggle to the oppressed; its political perspective is nationalist, its economic idea rooted in national development. [8] It was in no sense an anti-capitalist programme (Sandino wanted a consortium of Latin American capital to take charge of the canal project), and its politics seem to be derived mainly from the petit-bourgeois anti-imperialism of the Peruvian APRA party. The programme identified imperialism as the main obstacle to development, and foresaw a new form of agriculture-based development, organised through a cooperative community of small landowners, self-sufficient in food, and growing towards a healthy, Latin American agrarian capitalism. There is nothing in his writings to suggest a vision of industrial growth, though in this Sandino did no more than reflect the reality of a Nicaragua with no industrial sector outside the isolated US-owned mines, no industrial proletariat except the semi-enslaved Indian miners and lumber workers in the US enclaves of the Atlantic coast [9], and a stagnant agro-export economy serviced by a semi-proletarian labour force.
It was the un-diversified nature of that economy that explained why the world recession at the end of the twenties hit Nicaragua early and hard. Its victims swelled Sandino’s army. In the 1920s, 90% of the population were hungry, 50% of Nicaragua’s children died before they were nine, and 75% of the people had no education at all. [10]
As the struggle developed, and Sandino understood that ‘only the workers and the peasants will take the struggle through to its ultimate consequences’, Sandino’s manifestos began to move in the direction of an alternative form of socio-economic organisation – the peasant cooperative within a liberated area, like the community of Wiwili, formed in the course of the war.
The radicalisation of the military struggle, the shift from regular to guerrilla warfare, took Sandino closer to a concept of ‘people’s war’ based on the peasantry. The new tactic was in part dictated by the conduct of the war itself; the Marines took savage measures of reprisal against the Sandino’s base of support – air raids (on the town of Ocotal in 1927) [11], terror, the selective murder of civilians and the removal of whole communities to ‘strategic hamlets’. As a military tactician, Sandino was very able; his conduct of the war, after the first costly attempts at trench warfare, turned on an extremely mobile form of guerrilla war based on ambush and escape – a tactic which assumed a close identification between army and peasants, and guaranteed an intimate knowledge of the terrain and the ability of the guerrillas to fade back into the rural population.
At the political level, Sandino’s vision was limited by the objective reality. His irritable dismissal of Farabundo Marti, once his secretary and later leader of the Communist Party of El Salvador and organiser of the 1932 peasant insurrection there suggested Sandino’s resistance to socialist politics. [12] Yet in practice, he also understood that the servile bourgeoisie of Nicaragua was too weak to carry such a project forward and that the social force for achieving the programme would have the peasantry at its core – they alone would do the fighting.
Humberto Ortega argues that Sandino’s movement was class-based, and that it had working-class demands. [13] While the class composition of the guerrilla army was clear, the alliance that was its political basis centred on the expulsion of the Americans. When that was achieved (on February 1st, 1933), Sandino’s petit-bourgeois support disappeared, and Sandino himself withdrew to Wiwili, taking a small military force with him to protect the community.
Ortega describes this withdrawal as being rather like Mao’s Long March – as a tactic of accumulation of forces. There is nothing in Sandino’s writings to suggest this – in any event, we shall never know. A year later, the new head of the National Guard, Anastasio Somoza’s hired thugs murdered the General of Free Men in the street. In the next two days, Wiwili was destroyed and its inhabitants shot to pieces.
With Sandino’s death, the project for national development remained untried. And a weak bourgeoisie finally preferred a consolidation of the agro-export model under Somoza to the structural changes Sandino had argued for.
 
The Somoza dynasty
Anastasio Somoza made his first profits from forging dollar bills and selling used cars in the United States. His knowledge of English got him a job as interpreter for the occupying Marines. By 1933, the US commander had named him head of the National Guard – and it was this control over the armed force of the state that enabled him to seize power after the US withdrawal and found a dynasty that would last for more than forty years.
Somoza’s role was to consolidate the agro-export model. As coffee prices fell, the landowners simply annexed more land and raised the quantity produced. The production of subsistence crops suffered as more peasants were dispossessed [14], but Somoza’s strong state was there to stifle any resistance to the process. He exacted a high price for his trouble; the bourgeoisie was obliged to pay new taxes direct to Somoza, state employees had to make a 5% contribution from their salary to finance Somoza’s new political party, and foreign companies paid direct tributes in exchange for the right to operate without interference in their Atlantic coast enclaves. These contributions, together with German property expropriated during the Second World War, converted Somoza into the biggest private landowner in Nicaragua. By 1944, he owned 51 cattle ranches, 46 coffee estates, 8 sugar plantations, as well as a personal fortune of over $60m – the fruit of wartime profiteering. [15]
The interrelationship with the US economy had deepened during the war, as Nicaragua became almost exclusively a supplier of raw materials for it. But the period brought protests from the bourgeoisie, which felt it was paying too dearly for Somoza’s protection. In 1944, the announcement that Somoza would be standing for election again in 1947 provoked mass student protests and the formation of the Independent Liberal Party (PLI). [16] In the same year the PSN (Nicaraguan Communist Party) was formed – at a meeting in support of Somoza. [17] And the same year had seen strikes among rubber workers, and by bus drivers and textile workers in Leon and Managua. [18] If the PSN ever had ambitions to build on working-class activity, Somoza swept the ground from under their feet. On May 1st, 1945, a new Labour Code was passed, guaranteeing wages, social services etc. It was, of course, never implemented. Somoza’s price was social peace, and it was a price the PSN accepted on the basis of the USSR’s call for the formation of broad antifascist alliances, a policy which had already led to the voluntary dissolution of some CPs and the inclusion of others in bourgeois governments (as in Cuba). When the ‘antifascist’ Somoza turned against his erstwhile ally, the PSN could offer no resistance to the repression unleashed after 1947.
By 1950, the bourgeoisie was reconciled with Somoza. A new period of agro-export expansion began, based principally on the growth in cotton production (from 379 tons exported in 1949 to 43,791 in 1955; by 1960, cotton represented 23% of total exports). [19] For the bourgeoisie, the first consideration was a harmonious process of expansion – even though this meant a recognition that the Somoza state was an essential component of their relationship with imperialism and the world market. [20]
In this period, opposition was limited to the tiny PLI, whose youth section was a crucible for many of those who would later form the Frente Sandinista. It produced, too, the student-poet Rigoberto Lopez Perez, who in 1956 assassinated Somoza at a banquet. In the months of repression that followed, it became clear that it was not to be the ‘beginning of the end’ that Rigoberto had predicted; for Somoza’s two sons, Luis (who became President in 1957) and Anastasio (head of the National Guard) were well-trained to maintain the dynasty. [21]
Under Luis Somoza, the repression of the rural population continued, but there was a relative liberalisation in the urban areas-permitted by the general agreement reached between Somoza and the bourgeoisie after 1950. The pact was based on a clear definition of territories, of zones of operation. Thus Somoza could become a pillar of the gradualist, developmentalist strategies represented by the Alliance for Progress, set up by the United States after 1959 to isolate the Cuban Revolution and form a solid military and political alliance to maintain that isolation. (The Bay of Pigs invasion, in 1961, for example, was launched from Nicaragua.) As part of the same ‘reformist’ policy, Luis Somoza even ceded power to a civilian, Rene Schick, between 1963 and 1967. Under Schick, the level of political opposition rose, and union organisation, although tiny, drew in increasing numbers as industry expanded under the impact of the Central American Common Market. Direct US investment increased [22], the infrastructure was expanded [23] and urban assembly and consumer industries developed. The financial bourgeoisie greatly extended its operations, forming two powerful new financial-industrial groups – BANIC and BANAMERICA [24] – with the tacit approval of Somoza. Yet in the countryside, social relations were characterised by poverty, dispossession, hunger and deepening exploitation. This was the model of reform with repression, of a deepening contradiction between country and city. The model lasted until 1967.
As its economic power grew, the conservative opposition again prepared a challenge for political power, based on an active student movement and a growing trade union organisation, linked through the first bourgeois political front, the ONU. Its bid for control of the state ended in the mass demonstration of January 22nd, 1967, which was brutally repressed, leaving 400 dead. The demonstration marked a new phase, as Anastasio Somoza assumed direct control after the death of his brother. Once again, the bourgeoisie entered a pact with the dynasty. For the next five years, the Somozas embarked on a new period of accumulation – but they shared its fruits with what Wheelock calls this ‘consular bourgeoisie’, which had fought only for power within the structure, but had never challenged the structure itself.
By the end of the decade, US investors began to withdraw from Central America and turn their capital towards armaments or to investments in the developed world. [25] Throughout Latin America, the contradiction at the heart of the Alliance for Progress was beginning to be revealed. [26] Somoza II directed his investments into new fields; he turned to the ‘sunbelt’ financiers like Howard Hughes and Robert Vesco, and to the Cuban exiles of Miami, for joint ventures into the more immediately rewarding fields of construction, gambling, drugs and prostitution.
On December 29th, 1972, the centre of Managua was destroyed by a huge earthquake. Between 10,000 and 20,000 died in the ruins, and 75% of housing and 90% of commerce were destroyed. The UN estimated the damage at $772m. An international appeal was launched, and this aid provided the basis for the third and most speculative period of Somocista accumulation. The aid was earmarked for immediate relief and reconstruction. The centre of Managua today, with its gaping torn buildings and vast empty spaces still lumpy with rubble, are eloquent testimony to the mockery Somoza made of the relief programme. While most of Managua’s shops were destroyed, members of the National Guard set up makeshift stalls in the streets selling the medicines, clothes and food sent by international organisations. The cash was appropriated by Somoza himself and invested in a series of speculative projects – mainly construction. It was not public housing he built, of course, but shopping centres and middle-class residential areas, or new roads surfaced with the curious hexagonal road tiles made exclusively in one of Somoza’s factories. For the National Guard, who were the basis of Somoza’s power and whose loyalty was maintained by a mix of corruption and internal terror [27], the earthquake provided an unparalleled opportunity for pillage and profit. For a week or so, it was 600 American troops who maintained ‘law and order’, while the Guard ransacked Managua.
The two years that followed were a period of economic boom, fuelled by the construction industry. They were also years of drought, bringing hunger to the rural population and drawing waves of migrants to the slum barrios of Managua. Trade union activity was unprecedented; in 1973, building workers launched a major strike for a 10% wage rise and against Somoza’s attempt to raise the working week from 48 to 60 hours. Strikes by workers in health and the textile industry followed. The bourgeoisie, too, took to the streets in protest against Somoza’s monopolisation of the post-earthquake bonanza.
Despite this ‘false boom’, the seventies were a period of economic recession. This intensified the struggle between Somoza and a bourgeoisie who looked on as the shrinking product of the agro-export model was increasingly redistributed towards Somoza. Yet the bourgeoisie had no political alternative to offer; as the bourgeois opposition grew, and formed its new front organisation, UDEL, its perspectives remained fundamentally electoral. The political agitation and open criticism of Somoza, however, were taken up by other sectors. The three trade union federations, as well as the PSN, joined UDEL. The rural workers, the peasants and the urban poor – whose conditions of life were deteriorating rapidly – had no political expression; yet it was they who had known the full force of Somoza’s repression – the arbitrary dispossession by landowners with the support of the Guard, extortion by the network of spies and informers set up by Somoza, arbitrary arrests and torture in the urban barrios. And it was their bitterness and anger that exploded in the Indian community of Monimbo, in February 1978. These were the sectors that the FSLN saw as the motor of the armed struggle against Somocismo.
 
Resistance to Somocismo
Sandino’s murder in 1934 brought the possibility of resistance to an effective end, though some of his aides, like Pedro Altamirano, tried to sustain the struggle for a short time. The renewed mass activity of 1944–47 proved short-lived, as the re-imposition of the state of siege in 1947 closed all doors to open political opposition. A frustrated conservative opposition turned to arms – not in an attempt to develop the armed struggle as such, but rather in an attempt to identify dissident element within the National Guard and challenge Somoza from within. It was the classic model of the ‘palace coup’. [28] Repression also followed the assassination of the first Somoza in 1956. Among those arrested and tortured was Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, later editor of La Prensa. [29]
The economic crisis of the late fifties that provided the conditions for renewed mass activity. [30] To worsening conditions in the countryside were added new confrontations in the cities. The number of trade unions rose from 5 to 18 in 1958 alone, and the student movement, influenced by the Cuban Revolution, became increasingly active. Yet the movement had no unified political direction. The Conservative Party had once again reached an agreement with Somoza; and the PLI, though it produced many of the student leaders, was unable to provide that leadership. Nor was there any revolutionary organisation capable of filling the vacuum. [31] There had been virtually no urban working class in Nicaragua until the late fifties, and the PSN had been content to build a narrow base among small groups of workers that did exist, and to ignore the agricultural proletariat. Furthermore, the PSN’s early compromises with Somoza, and its determination to operate within a legal framework, left it wide open to repression on the one hand, and gained it a collaborationist reputation on the other. Socialist politics, therefore, were to an extent discredited; the vacuum was filled by a mixture of liberalism and vague references to Sandino. In 1956, a small group of students started a Marxist study circle at the University of Leon – but it was the Cuban interpretation of revolutionary practice to which they turned.
The Frente de Liberacion Nacional itself, was founded in Honduras, in 1961, by Carlos Fonseca, Tomas Borge and Silvio Mayorga. Its roots were in the student movement, and its theory came from Cuba. [32] In 1963, the word Sandinista was added – and the organisation became the Sandinista Front, the FSLN. It was more than a change of name: Fonseca had argued from the outset for a politics derived from Sandino – guerrilla war based in the peasantry. In this context, mass work meant preparation of a support network for the armed revolutionaries, and a strong rejection of the kind of public activity – demonstrations, public protests etc. – that were identified with the PSN. For a short time, Fonseca and the others had held out some hope that the line of the PSN could be changed – the formation of the FSLN buried that idea. [33]
The Frente’s first guerrilla action, at Rio Coco and Bocay in 1963, proved a costly failure. Its defeat coincided with a period of liberalisation under Schick which seemed, albeit briefly, to vindicate the legalist line. As Fonseca put it:
We hesitated about presenting a clear Marxist-Leninist ideology ... the result, in part, of the attitude of the traditional Marxist-Leninist sector in the popular struggle which, in practice, had openly participated in the manoeuvres of the Somocista clique. [34]
For the next two years, the FSLN worked in the student movement and through a broad electoral organisation called Republican Mobilisation. The strategy of ‘accumulating forces for the guerrilla’ was put into abeyance. In the countryside, the Sandinista organiser Rigoberto Cruz did important work in forming some of the first peasant organisations. Many of the new cadres of the FSLN came from these two sectors.
Fonseca, meanwhile, was in Cuba. He returned in 1966, convinced of the correctness of a guerrilla strategy, and began to prepare a new foco in Pancasan. At the same time, the liberalisation period ended with the massacre of January 22nd, 1967. By August, the Pancasan guerrilla, too, was destroyed. It was true that the group had included a number of peasants, and that the Frente had drawn new recruits from its mass work in the previous three years. Yet it was equally true that mass work was still seen to imply the mobilisation of peasant support, rather than its direct organised participation in the guerrilla. It was the revolutionaries, not the masses, who were regarded as the subjects of history. And the next foco, at Zinica in 1969, was founded on the same basis. Henry Ruiz, ‘Modesto’, summed up these attitudes later when he said, ‘A worker who is transferred to the mountains becomes a far greater danger to the Somocista regime than an economic strike carried out by hundreds of workers’. [35]
As the seventies began, the FSLN was therefore still a tiny organisation. It had little or no role in the series of workers’ struggles of 1970–74. Its strategy at the time was one of the ‘silent accumulation of forces’, which again took the Frente into the cities in search of new cadre; it now worked in a clandestine way. The strategy had several pivots. First, the FSLN was active (though not overtly) in the student mobilisations of the period, directing them towards campaigns for the release of Sandinista political prisoners, many of whom were suffering terrible tortures in Somoza’s jails. [36] Secondly, there was peasant work in its turn conducted under the cover of the activities of the liberation church, which had begun to move in the direction of radical social action after the Medellin Conference. The majority of today’s FSLN National Directorate, for example, came into politics through radical Christian groups. [37]
The general leadership of the movement at this time was in the hands of the bourgeois opposition – though the building strike was led by the PSN, which was also a member. In 1974, that opposition had come together with the trade unions and the PSN to form a new opposition front, the UDEL. Clearly, if it was to justify its claim to the political leadership of the mass movement, the FSLN would have to respond. So, on December 27th, 1974, the FSLN invaded the house of a prominent Somoza supporter, Chema Castillo, during a Christmas party, and held the guests under arms. The result of the action was the freeing of 18 Sandinista prisoners, the broadcasting of two FSLN communiqués, half a million dollars and safe passage for the prisoners and the commando. [38]
There followed thirty-three months of savage repression of the peasantry, and the unrelenting persecution of the FSLN in both the city and the mountains, as Somoza had declared a state of siege after the Christmas party raid. The FSLN was thus unable to follow up or build upon the attack on the Castillo house. [39]
 
The debate in the FSLN
At this point a fierce debate arose within the FSLN. The foco theory had been abandoned after Zinica, and the argument was between the advocates of a prolonged people’s war strategy, based on a slow preparation of the rural population for prolonged war (the GPP group), and a ‘Proletarian’ Tendency (TP), which argued that the central task was to organise among the working class, in both country and city, and to build a revolutionary party. While the GPP still identified with the Sandinista orthodoxy defined by Carlos Fonseca, the TP laid stress on the growth of the working class through the sixties and seventies, and on its increasing combativity. Jaime Wheelock, one of the TP leaders, pointed out in his Imperialismo y dictadura that despite the predominance of Somoza, there did exist a clearly defined bourgeoisie in Nicaragua. Thus Sandinismo should be extended, and a clear perception of anti-capitalist, class struggle added to its anti-imperialist content. The internal rift was a bitter one, and aggravated by the difficulties of communication between the two groups. When Fonseca returned to Nicaragua in 1976, it was in order to maintain a dialogue; his death in action soon afterwards made the split deeper.
For the next year and a half the groups worked in virtual isolation from one another. Yet there seemed to be a basic agreement that the overthrow of Somoza would require a long period of preparation and organisation – and that when the revolution did occur, it would mark the beginning of a transition to socialism. [40] In 1976, however, a third tendency emerged – the Terceristas, or Insurrectionists. They argued that an alliance built on a more limited anti-Somocista base could bring about the fall of Somoza sooner than expected. The formation of such an alliance, both nationally and internationally, combined with spectacular commando-type actions, would – they believed – precipitate the crisis of Somocismo. Though it is hard to describe people engaged in armed struggle as social-democrats, as Henri Weber points out, it is true that the Terceristas were fundamentally concerned with exploiting divisions within the bourgeoisie (particularly in view of the changing line of the US government), whose complement would be a mass strike or insurrection, rather than with long-term organisational work. In this sense, they could be described as Castroist. [41] By mid-1977, the Terceristas had clearly captured the leadership of the FSLN.
The Terceristas undoubtedly set aside the question of organising workers and peasants for their own liberation – which the GPP and the Proletarian Tendency had at least put on the agenda. Yet none of the three tendencies discussed the question of socialism, or saw the relationship between the construction of a revolutionary party rooted in the working class and the nature of state power after a revolutionary overthrow of the Somoza state. The transition to socialism was mentioned in the documents – but the role of the working class as the protagonist of that transition was not specifically discussed. There was no concept of workers’ power, no sense of what a workers’ state looks like, no preparation of a material base for such a state (through the prioritisation of support for the workers’ own struggles). In part, the lack of such discussion was the fruit of the particular history of the FSLN, of its emergence and growth outside the working-class movement, tiny though it was. The result was that, when the mass upsurge of 1978 did occur, and when the overthrow of Somoza ensued in July 1979, there was no political current present within the FSLN arguing for workers’ power, for the struggle for socialism, or for the centrality of the working class in that process. The unification of the tendencies in March 1979 represented, in one sense, the pressure of the external movement on the FSLN; on the other hand, it also reflected the failure to develop an alternative leadership informed with class politics. It is in this sense that the question of the revolutionary party – the expression of that alternative leadership – becomes critically important, and its absence from internal political debate within the FSLN was a key element in post-revolutionary developments.
They were right, nevertheless, to argue that the situation was explosive. Between 1960 and 1977, the rural population had fallen from 60% to 44% of the total. Those who had left the country were mainly resident in the urban barrios, devoid of even the most elementary provision. By 1977, while 5% of the population enjoyed an average per capita income of $5,409 [42], the majority of the people had an average annual income of $286. The period after the false boom of 1972–4 was marked by factory closures, massive lay-offs and rising unemployment. 60% of the rural population was literally hungry, and 70% illiterate. Yet in 1978, Somoza closed the schools in order to save money for the purchase of arms!
By September 1977, Carter’s human rights policy led to the suspension of arms sales, after the Senate had heard the report of Fernando Cardenal, a Jesuit priest, on the appalling human rights situation in Nicaragua. [43] In response, Somoza lifted the state of siege in October – and an explosion of popular protest immediately followed. The October mobilisations were led by UDEL, who saw them as a form of pressure designed to force the US to intervene and depose Somoza. At the same time, however, the Terceristas launched a series of attacks on National Guard barracks at San Carlos, Ocotal and Masaya. While not particularly successful, and not generating any immediate mass response, they did establish the military capacity of the Frente. At the political level, the Terceristas had brought together a number of influential supporters in the Group of Twelve (a group of businessmen, intellectuals and priests supporting the FSLN), who followed up the military actions with a political declaration arguing that the Frente was now a political force that could not be excluded from any political solution to the crisis of Somocismo. The FSLN undoubtedly enjoyed a moral authority based on its long and heroic history of struggle; yet it was still unconnected with an organised mass base.
 
Civil War
In January 1978, the situation changed dramatically. Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, editor of La Prensa and leader of UDEL, was murdered by Somoza. 120,000 people marched at his funeral, and UDEL called a national ‘bosses’ strike’ for January 23rd. The political objective was still an orderly removal of Somoza with US backing. At the beginning of February, however, the bourgeoisie lost the power to stem the flow of events. The initiative passed to the community of Monimbo, on the outskirts of the city of Masaya. It was an explosion of accumulated anger and resentment against a repressive state that occurred in Monimbo. For a week they held off a full scale National Guard assault. And though the TP was working in the area, the leadership of the rising was exclusively local. [44]
Although the Monimbo rising was finally crushed, and a terrible vengeance wreaked by Somoza, it was clear that it had detonated what would be the definitive military confrontation in the urban barrios. The Terceristas, who lost one of their main leaders in the battle, dissolved their rural cadres into the cities; the GPP moved its bases closer to the populated areas, and the Proletarian Tendency turned to the military and political organisation of the urban masses. Despite the repression, the mass movement was now growing at all levels. The Agricultural Workers Union was formed by Sandinista peasants in early 1978, and the Civil Defence Committees emerged as new forms of mass self-organisation in the war zone. And while the FSLN did not lead or organise all these movements, it was their slogans that appeared on the walls.
From now on, the level of mass activity hardly abated. When the Group of Twelve returned to Managua in July 1978 in defiance of Somoza’s express prohibition, they were greeted by mass demonstrations. Their return was timed to coincide with the formation of a new bourgeois front, the FAO, led by Alfonso Robelo. It was clear, though that the Frente representatives had come to lead the FAO, or to divide it.
The insurrections of September further enhanced the authority of the FSLN. They began in August, in Matagalpa, in the wake of the spectacular assault on the National Palace on August 28th [45], when the FSLN had kidnapped the entire Congress and released them only in exchange for 59 Sandinista prisoners and the publication of two political statements. Yet the Matagalpa rising was not led by the Frente – it was fundamentally spontaneous. As the risings spread, the FSLN had no choice but to assume the leadership [46] – or lose the opportunity forever. Though it was ill-prepared for an armed struggle on that scale, the FSLN did take the leadership of the risings of Leon and Esteli, that followed Matagalpa. When the risings ended, the FSLN withdrew into the mountains, with its authority reinforced and its ranks swollen with new recruits from among the street fighters.
The Guard moved in, arresting anyone who could have handled a weapon, and everyone whose youth made them potential recruits for the Frente. The violence was terrible, yet it did not seem to daunt a population that had already known so much brutality and death. The FAO, however, interpreted the moment as the end of mass activity, and confidently launched a new initiative calling for US mediation. Talks continued until January 1979. The FSLN refused to participate in any form of ‘Somocismo without Somoza’, and in January Somoza himself broke off all further negotiations.
It was now clear that victory would mean insurrection, the overthrow of the Somoza state, and the abolition of the National Guard. That was the demand coming from a mass movement that could see the cracks appearing in the edifice of the state and the prospects of its own power. And the FSLN was the only political organisation capable of interpreting and directing that demand. In November the group of Twelve walked out of the FAO together with the trade unions and the PSN; all then joined the FSLN-led United People’s Movement (MPU). In February, this became the Popular Revolutionary Front under clear Sandinista leadership, and with a perspective of taking power. The new alliance was broad in its social character, but united around its opposition to Somoza. Somoza’s refusal to yield his own power in order to save the state, had set the terms of the next and final phase of the struggle.
Only the FSLN was committed to the armed overthrow of Somoza. The unification of the tendencies enabled it to take military leadership of the mass movement, which was, in a confused way, posing the question of power, Yet, under Tercerista dominance, the FSLN channelled that feeling towards the overthrow of Somoza only. Beyond that, no section of the Sandinistas could offer a programme for the assumption of power by that mass movement itself in a post-Somocista Nicaragua.
 
The revolutionaries in power
On July 20th the new, revolutionary Nicaragua was free of Somoza, who in one incarnation or another had dominated Nicaragua for 45 years. But the process of removing him had been costly. Four of Nicaragua’s seven cities lay in ruins – Leon, Esteli, Matagalpa and Masaya, where only the twisted sign of the Masaya cinema remained amid the devastated streets surrounding the National Guard barracks.
Yet the atmosphere was exhilarating and euphoric. The urban barrios celebrated what they quite rightly saw as the exercise of their collective power [47], tearing down with their bare hands the ‘statue of Somoza outside the Somoza stadium’ which, in the words of the priest-poet Ernesto Cardenal [48], had been put there precisely because it offended the people. The bourgeoisie, meanwhile, was trying the new revolutionary language for size, while the American administration adopted a benevolent, avuncular face and promised assistance to the new regime.
The apparent acquiescence of Carter was curious; after all, every sector of Nicaraguan society agreed that Somoza’s power derived from his defence of imperialist interests. As the Americans saw it, the new regime was an alliance of forces in which the bourgeoisie was not only represented, but had also salvaged some real influence. His aim was ‘the evolution of a pluralistic society with a mixed economy, not hostile to the United States’. [49] On the face of it, the assessment was correct, for the assumption was that Nicaragua’s desperate need for external aid would make it impossible for the new government to sever the imperialist tie, and that such aid – coming mainly from the US and Western Europe – would carry implicit restraints on the further radicalisation of the process.
Ironically, the changing US line had contributed to Somoza’s overthrow. From 1977 onwards, the Carter administration adopted a ‘human rights’ policy; its aim was to create a new political space in which bourgeois opposition movements could assume power without resorting to the more radical solutions that were being advocated elsewhere in Central America. Military rule had closed the door to ‘moderate’ political alternatives, and had often forced bourgeois opposition groups into alliances with revolutionary organisations. If the repressive face of these regimes could be changed, then – it was assumed – the relationship between moderates and revolutionaries could be severed. [50]
Two factors ensured the failure of Carter’s policy – and Nicaragua illustrated both. First, the economic recession of the late seventies required a strong state that could control growing mass discontent in the face of increasing inflation and rising unemployment. Any bourgeois alternative had to rest on a promise of economic growth – yet the world economy as a whole was in process of stagnation. Secondly, the military governors of Latin America proved to be less than puppets of the US. Their long period of economic and political power had given them an independent base of strength within the system, as well as a network of relationships with similar states. (The experience provided an important corrective to those arguments which maintained that the United States was directly responsible for everything that happens on its periphery, ignoring the independent class interests within each state.) Thus, when the US stopped arms sales to Guatemala and Nicaragua, both simply turned to other suppliers – mainly Israel and South Africa [51] – and cut back on their limited social programmes to pay for them. It was largely Somoza’s refusal to give up personal power in order to preserve the state that ensured the failure of the bourgeois alternative – and created the conditions for the destruction of the state.
The economic inheritance from Somoza was a grim prospect. Only $3.5m was left in the National Bank; production in agriculture had fallen by more than 25% (and much more in the food-producing sector) and industrial activity had virtually ceased through June and July. What factories Somoza had not bombed were empty of stocks and in many cases badly damaged. Private sector investment had been negative in both 1978 and 1979.
Food, too, was a pressing problem. There was little meat, as immature cattle had been killed and whole herds smuggled across the frontier in the final weeks. There were shortages of other food – pork, chicken and eggs. Many of the urban barrios, where the final fighting had been fiercest, had been virtually dismembered by the Guard; and all this was merely additional to the already drastic state of material and social deprivation in which most of the people had lived under Somoza. Unemployment was around 38%, illiteracy over 50%; there was real hunger [52], and housing and sanitary conditions were appalling. [53]
The immediate task was economic reactivation. While it was hoped to return quickly to pre-war production levels, immediate and large-scale injections of foreign aid were required to answer the urgent needs of the people. The composition of the new Government of National Reconstruction expressed the compromise on which the possibility of economic reconstruction was founded. For while it was accepted that the property of Somoza and his allies would be expropriated, it was also clear that foreign aid was conditional on there being no further encroachment on the private sector. For the same reasons, economic reactivation would depend on the willingness of the bourgeoisie to participate. The price of that collaboration was ‘political pluralism’.
On the other hand, the FSLN had led an armed overthrow of the state, and within a month moved to the establishment of a new army which was entirely under its control. It had the support of a population that had seized power, and identified its victory with FSLN leadership – a leadership that made it clear from the outset that pluralism would not mean the restoration of the private bourgeoisie to power. In fact, the FLSN employed the concept of pluralism in two different ways; on the one hand, a sharing of power with the bourgeoisie, and a willingness to abide by the electoral rules; on the other, references to ‘popular power’ which argued that democracy was not about parliament but about grass-roots control of the political and economic process. [54] Yet the class nature of that power was left deliberately ambiguous and the issue of real control over the process by the workers and peasants unresolved.
Mass involvement in the overthrow of Somoza had pointed to the potential for developing a mass, revolutionary organisation – but only the potential. It was not an ideology of workers’ power, nor a revolutionary party setting out to build the organs of such power (workers’ councils etc.) that had unified and led that movement. The only stated objective of the insurrection was the overthrow of Somoza. That much was achieved. The manner in which he was overthrown provided the opportunity for posing the issue of socialism – had the conscious leadership of the mass movement posed the question in that way. Instead, the central issue posed by the Sandinistas was the problem of accumulation and national development – and the unity of the ‘patriotic classes’ against the traitors.
The base of the new economy were the expropriated properties of Somoza. When the total was known, 20% of agriculture, 25% of manufacturing and 95% of mining had passed into state ownership; this represented some 40% of GDP and around 22% of the productive capacity of the economy. Further, the nationalisation of banking and insurance, and the establishment of state control over imports and exports, gave the government the capacity to control finance and credit. That, however, was to be the limit of state ownership; in November 1979, the expropriation decree was withdrawn in order to stop further land takeovers and factory occupations.
The new economy, therefore, was a mixed economy. Its fundamental laws of motion would be those of capitalism – accumulation, the creation of surplus value, and subjection to the laws of the market. As the 1980 Plan made clear, the strategy behind the new economy was the development of the agro-export economy and the diversification of dependency. ‘The Plan was designed to revitalise capitalism and to set up an important area of State ownership and State production.’ [55] There is a central ambiguity in Sandinista economics – and it is one that recurs at every other level of political debate. According to Jaime Wheelock, for example, ‘there is no need to control production. In reality what we are expropriating are the surpluses’. [56]
It was true that the new structures would allow the state both to appropriate a considerable part of the surplus, and to control the direction of investment through credit, subsidies etc. Yet the bulk of production remained in the hands of the private sector, a private sector that had effectively suspended investment in the previous two years and which would continue to be unwilling to invest without guarantees of profit. The production of the surplus still depended on that sector. The withdrawal of the expropriation decree was one such guarantee, as were the extremely low interest rate credits granted by government. The priority was accumulation of capital – yet much of that would be private accumulation in the context of a capitalist world market.
The Sandinistas argue [57] that the mixed economy has a different character here. Rather than control the functions of capitalism, it controlled the surpluses produced in the economy. It was true that the old bourgeoisie no longer held state power; yet its existence as a class was guaranteed by the continuing existence of private enterprise. The immediate necessity was to generate surplus value in the economy, and social relations would have to be structured in order to realise that surplus. For the development of the productive forces still required the exploitation of labour. Although a greater proportion of profits would now pass to the state, those profits would still represent an accumulated labour power which would not be redistributed through the society.
It was the task of accumulation that determined the character of the new economy. In Wheelock’s view, the mixed economy guaranteed a continuing collaboration of private and state capital. Yet a condition of that relationship was the maintenance of private investment under state direction. Since the revolution, private investors (with one or two exceptions, like the sugar industry’s dominant sector run by the Pellas family) have been reluctant to raise the level of investment. If, as seems likely, the private owners of capital continue to show the same reluctance, the state will almost certainly assume greater control and, eventually, direct ownership. Yet it will act under the same imperatives, and realise the same tasks of capital accumulation according to the same laws. The latter development could take place under the banner of socialism. Genuine socialism, however, lies outside the parameters of the economic alternatives as they are presently argued – for it implies the conscious direction, by a working class exercising power directly, over production. Without a conscious nucleus of revolutionaries arguing and organising for workers’ power, however, that alternative was not even present within the debate, among any section of the Sandinistas.
The ambivalence was clear in the 1980 and 1981 Plans, whose basic planks were: production, austerity, national defence, self-sufficiency and a guaranteed basic living standard. Production was the first priority; the banners and posters proclaim ‘we are the citizens of struggle, in defence and in production’. The agro-export model of development recognised the historical insertion of the Nicaraguan economy into the world market. Nicaragua would continue to be an exporter of agricultural products, and would build its future industrial base on the elaboration and processing of those products. In this sense, the mixed economy simply reflected the unchanged reality of Nicaragua’s existence within a world economy dominated by the laws of the market. The other part of the original programme – the diversification of dependency – set out to sever the exclusive reliance on the US [58] and to permit Nicaragua to seek the best market conditions for its products. Its ability to do both, however, depended on both economic and political conditions. Accumulation remained the central priority. In essence, the Sandinista government faced the task of independent national development which the Nicaraguan bourgeoisie had been unable to carry through. And such a perspective required state intervention in the process of accumulation, and a general reduction in the costs of production – including labour – by reducing imports, the debt burden, inflation and the costs of reproduction of labour. The latter was to be achieved by lowering the general standard of living while still guaranteeing a social minimum, i.e. by attacking luxury or unnecessary consumption.
It was central to such a strategy to raise the productivity of labour and to win acceptance for a general policy of austerity. The working class, objectively speaking, were being asked to bear the costs of accumulation. The bourgeoisie, on the other hand, while excluded from political power, were given ample encouragement to produce. In the short run, however, the predominant nationalism of Sandinista politics could sustain the alliance of workers and ‘patriotic bourgeoisie’ against imperialism – and present the need for accumulation as part of the task of national defence and the guarantee of economic development.
The FSLN paid homage, in its internal political documents, to the class struggle, and promised a future transition to socialism. Yet the future promise was combined with a series of restraints on the development of independent class organisation (i.e. prohibitions on the right to strike). The postponement of class struggle to a future stage – after economic development had been achieved – posed the objective contradiction clearly. Though the state claimed to represent the working class, its strategy of collaboration with the bourgeoisie demanded the control and discipline of labour. The consolidation of the national state was clearly posed as the substitute for the construction of workers’ power. State regulation of production was therefore coupled with limits on consumption.
A first priority was to provide the social services that Somoza had neglected. For the first time, a system of universal education and a national health service were established, while new housing, drainage and a water scheme laid down the infrastructure for development. Food and transport were subsidised. At the same time, this ‘social wage’ was counterposed to increases in money wages which, it was argued, would simply fuel inflation.
This argument met more acceptance in the countryside and among the urban poor than among the urban workers, whose organisation and traditions had brought some material benefits even under Somoza. The policy was aimed at socialising benefits, and above all at bringing the most immediate advantage to the poorest sectors, who had provided Sandinismo with its pre-revolutionary social base. Thus, an effective freeze on money wages in the urban and state sectors was coupled with an attack on differentials and a concerted attempt to raise basic living standards at the same time as productivity, in the countryside.
The political dilemma was nowhere more clearly seen than in agriculture. Nicaraguan agriculture was an interlinked system of distinct forms of production; from modern, technological production to pre-capitalist subsistence farming. That system was the basis of the agro-export economy, and there was no time to reorganise it. Whatever changes took place in that system would have to guarantee the continuity of production. By the late seventies, 40% of rural workers were landless labourers, 30% were smallholders, 12.7% small commodity producers and 9% middle and large bourgeoisie. [59] Before the revolution, 90% of all credit went to large landowners; at the other end of the scale, only about 10% of the rural population had permanent employment. Clearly, the landless had to be given land, yet without interrupting the process of production. New land had to be brought into production, or made more efficient, while still providing guarantees to the rural bourgeoisie.
The answer to both problems were the cooperatives. During the first two years after the revolution, land was rented out cheaply, in both state and private sector, to landless peasants organised into cooperatives. At the same time Credit and Service Cooperatives were formed to draw small and middle peasants into joint organisations through which they could gain access to both credit and state finance. The cooperatives perform both a political and an economic purpose. By June 1980, 1,327 Sandinista cooperatives had been formed and the production of basic grains rose significantly; furthermore, a step had been taken towards the elimination of seasonal unemployment. Yet a problem remained, as the incorporation of many landless peasants into production left a labour shortage in the export sector. In the short term, the gap was filled with voluntary labour; in the longer term, however, that sector would have to compete for labour – and thus create a wage incentive.
The 1981 Plan restated the priorities – but the context was different and more menacing. The redistributive priorities of the first 18 months had been financed through foreign aid and loans. These policies now had to give way to the pursuit of accumulation. And the same criteria would apply in both state and private sectors; luxury consumption was further cut and the profitability criterion applied to state industries. [60] In the United States, Reagan had come to power with a new policy towards Nicaragua of economic de-stabilisation. Early aid programmes relied on the acquiescence of the Americans in the multilateral lending agencies [61]; Reagan, however, immediately cut all remaining US aid [62], and began to impede the granting of multilateral aid. [63] The likelihood, therefore, was that all sources of external aid would be affected. The new US policy was summed up by Haig: ‘although the Marxist government in Nicaragua might fall eventually of its own failures, the security of El Salvador requires the acceleration of the removal of the government in Managua.’ [64]
Further, and despite the favourable terms originally negotiated for the repayment of the foreign debt, Nicaragua spent 65% of its foreign earnings in 1980 on debt repayments and oil imports alone. Anticipated production levels in 1980 had not been reached (the shortfall in manufacturing was particularly serious) and the balance of payments was still negative. [65] At the end of 1980, the foreign debt hovered around $2 billion.
The reasons for the shortcomings in the 1980 Plan were many; in industry, industrial disputes had cost a great deal, while imports were rising in price. Production was still far short of taking up all its unused capacity, in good part because of the reluctance of the bourgeoisie to reinvest. The production priority, for all these reasons, became increasingly pressing.
As the Central American revolution developed, the international context became more difficult for Nicaragua. Western Europe (with the exception of France) and Christian Democracy in Latin America were less than happy about developments in the region, and began to share the view that Nicaragua was in part responsible for the intensification of the struggle. More centrally, the US-financed growth of counter-revolutionary organisations on the Honduran and Costa Rican frontiers made national defence an urgent priority. Military spending rose significantly (figures are not declared, but 18–20% would seem feasible) and the burden of maintaining a standing army of between 20,000 and 30,000 (50,000 by 1982) was added to the account. Further restrictions on imports were imposed, as well as controls on the export of capital.
On July 19th, 1981, Daniel Ortega (head of the government junta) announced a series of new measures, principal among them an extension in the Agrarian Reform programme. The announcement had a double purpose, one economic, the other ideological. Ortega presented the decision as a response to the refusal of sectors of the bourgeoisie to participate fully in production, and as part of the programme to make Nicaragua self-sufficient in food by 1982–3 (for most of the cooperative sector is devoted to the production of basic grains). About 350,000 acres of land were expropriated on the basis of neglect or inefficient use and given to workers’ cooperatives, with ample credit and technical assistance provided by government. In the economic sense, therefore, the Agrarian Reform was designed to bring more land into production; that was the only criterion for determining which land would be expropriated. On an ideological level, it was part of the process of mobilising the rural population behind the government’s strategy in which defence, production and austerity were intertwined in a policy for national development under hostile conditions.
The point was further emphasised in September 1981, with the Declaration of a State of National Economic and Social Emergency (converted into a Law in March 1982 and still in operation). The proportion of production still in private hands had not significantly changed in the two and a half years of revolution. According to the Report of the World Bank published in October 1981, Nicaragua’s economic recovery within a mixed economy depended on a significant increase in private investment. Yet the development of the counter-revolution had had the opposite effect. For the same reason, the emphasis on austerity, on sacrifice became more insistent – and was enshrined in the Emergency Laws. Relying on the mass organisations, and on its own political authority, the FSLN took further measures against non-essential consumption, against all threats to production (including strikes) and directed more investment into the search for alternative energy sources.
In its Report, the World Bank set out the economic priorities clearly – and claimed that the government agreed with its assessment. The urgent need, as they saw it was to intensify the rate of accumulation, to limit social spending and decrease the share of the public sector in the GDP – to maintain and deepen austerity. Logically, they argued, this economic model required further incentives to private investment, both local and multi-national. Obviously, the World Bank’s view took for granted Nicaragua’s role in the world economy, and the persistence of the mixed economy. This view was confirmed by the Nicaraguan government, in a document produced in March 1982; the document overstated the case for the mixed economy and political pluralism to the extent of comparing the role of the FSLN to that of De Gaulle, the Mexican PRI or the Italian Christian Democrats! [66]
The other side of the case was that while the new politics of austerity could only succeed on the basis of a general consensus in sacrifice and the intensification of production, the Emergency Decrees also contained clauses limiting the right to strike and the right to public criticism, and defining a series of economic crimes and threats to state security which were open to the widest interpretation. It became counter-revolutionary to threaten the continuity of production. The immediate result was the arrest of several members of COSEP and CAUS.
In his 1982 Economic Report [67], Cordoba Rivas discussed the results of the emergency. The public sector budget was nearly $100m less than anticipated; the balance of payments was $400m, and the social service budget had gone down from 17% to 15% of GDP – although the health and education services continued to develop, largely on the basis of voluntary labour.
The themes of Sandinista economics, then, were austerity, national defence and production. As international conditions worsened, and world recession was coupled with direct assaults on Nicaragua, the Sandinista government could not avoid the tasks of accumulation. The key question was what effect this combination of factors, national and international, would have on the development of the class struggle in Nicaragua. Historically, the combination of scarcity, external threat, and forced accumulation has produced regimes of a profoundly ruthless character. Yet the conditions of the Nicaraguan Revolution are significant, for a) it was a revolution made by the mass movement, b) it was conducted within a mixed economy in which c) the political leadership of the mass movement has assumed power directly and continues to exercise it. Yet it is doubtful that this new democracy can survive the assaults of austerity, external threat, and the implacable laws of accumulation. It cannot both conduct accumulation and at the same time prepare the working classes for the class conflict that will arise from that process.
 
The reaction of the old bourgeoisie
When Somoza was overthrown, the bourgeoisie found itself at a significant disadvantage. It had failed to ensure an ‘orderly transfer of power’ within the existing structures – and the state had been overthrown.
The new government represented the alliance of classes formed under FSLN leadership in the final weeks of the insurrection; in this sense it reflected clearly the political hegemony of the FSLN. Yet the old bourgeoisie was in no sense powerless. It did not control the state or the army, but it retained considerable economic power, as well as ideological influence through La Prensa, the official Church and the radio stations it still controlled. Further, it retained political influence over the middle classes, and in particular over many professionals in the state sector.
At first, the bourgeoisie judged that its economic power and influence in the international arena would allow it to resume political power. Robelo and Chamorro remained in the government for eight months before resigning. But they underestimated the FSLN’s determination to retain power in the state, just as they misjudged the extent to which mass participation in the insurrection would shape the institutions of post-revolutionary society. It was not, in any sense, a workers’ state; nonetheless, the mass organisations provided the FSLN with instruments of mobilisation and of production. And even without workers’ power, the option of the mixed economy was not the only alternative. The Sandinista control of the state clearly posed another possibility; the assumption of economic as well as political control directly by the new state, which would then carry out the tasks that the old bourgeoisie had proved unwilling to sustain the state capitalist alternative.
One of the original clauses of the Political Programme [68] referred to the establishment of an elected Council of State in which the bourgeoisie would have a majority. By October 1979, however, the FSLN made it clear that the composition of the Council would change, and that scheduled elections would be postponed until 1985. In the revised Council of State, announced four months later, the mass organisations, and thus the FSLN, would have a permanent majority. [69]
The Sandinistas had found their first base of power in the ATC and the CDSs, which represented not only the sectors most directly involved in the insurrection, but also those who benefited most directly from the redistributive measures. The other element of the worker-peasant alliance, the working class, presented more complex problems; yet the main trade union federations were all members of the bloc supporting the Frente. The professional organisations, for their part, had not yet suffered any appreciable drop in their levels of consumption, and the new state offered expanded job opportunities to professionals and technicians. In the intense ideological struggle being waged by the state, the old bourgeoisie was not in a position to consolidate its own bloc of forces; essentially, its influence lay among the bourgeoisie itself and its strength derived from its links with imperialist interests. Yet the initially tolerant attitude of the Carter administration also served to undermine any bourgeois bid for power.
This became clear in the debates around the composition of the Council of State – an argument which the bourgeoisie lost. In November 1980, COSEP members walked out of the Council of State, and in March 1981, Robelo staged a key test of bourgeois political influence. His party, the MDN, called a rally at Nandaime; as the time for the rally approached, the slogan ‘Nandaime no va’ (Nandaime won’t happen) began to appear on every wall. Without official FSLN support, the Sandinista Youth and the local Defence Committees set up barricades and stopped the rally. The walls then announced ‘Nandaime no fue’ (It didn’t happen).
The end of 1980 was a key moment in the course of the Nicaraguan revolution. With Reagan in the White House, the balance of class forces changed and the location of the class struggle shifted into the international arena. Reagan’s policies included the active encouragement and support of counter-revolutionary groups in Honduras and Costa Rica. The new economic policies, with their emphasis on austerity, were developed in anticipation of US economic assaults; they meant a cut in luxury consumption, a more aggressive policy towards unproductive private enterprise, and a new level of popular mobilisation around the slogan of national defence. Once again, it was the mass organisations that were called into action; and it was these organisations which, as far as the old bourgeoisie was concerned, expressed most clearly the definitive shift in the base of political power in the state.
By early 1981 the old bourgeoisie no longer believed in the possibility of taking power in the state; it returned to its historical strategy of calling for direct external intervention, on the grounds of the imminent collapse of the Nicaraguan economy and the inexorable shift towards communism. This was the content of a letter signed by four leading members of COSEP in September 1981, [70] and distributed among the world’s press. It was a direct challenge to the government which had just announced the State of Emergency – and it was also a response to the Anti-Interventionist Campaign within Nicaragua, organised by the FSLN as a protest against the new aggressions of the US – and in support of the State of Emergency. The COSEP members were jailed; La Prensa was closed for four days for contravening the censorship clauses in the Emergency Decree.
Clearly, the Emergency Decree was a response by the Sandinista state to a new level of aggressiveness in US policy. It also provided an instrument for the further consolidation of Sandinista hegemony, and for the restatement of the central political problem as anti-imperialist. Thus the Decree was directed against a bourgeoisie which, quite clearly, was acting as an agent for American policies towards Nicaragua; but it was also directed, as the repression of CAUS showed (see below), against those sectors who raised the question of the defence of workers’ interests, in however sectarian and opportunistic a way.
The old bourgeoisie, for its part, had developed a new international awareness. A significant section now moved behind the counter-revolution. In March, Eden Pastora, the much-lionised Comandante Cero who had led the National Palace raid in 1978 and commanded the all important Southern Front in 1979, announced that he had ‘gone over’. His argument was that the FSLN had gone Marxist and that its leaders were growing rich and excessively powerful. It was a publicity coup for the US, and a severe problem for the FSLN. Pastora was undoubtedly a popular figures, and his decision to ‘follow the smell of gunpowder’ and continue the revolution in Guatemala had echoes of Che’s farewell to Cuba. Yet Pastora, though an important military leader, was politically naive. And no doubt part of his resentment went back to the fact that he had been given no leading military or political position in the new state.
The Pastora incident was a test of FSLN political control. His picture was removed from the museums and the galleries of heroes, and his name was no longer used – he was referred to only as ‘the traitor’. People started started burning the militia cards which carried his picture, and this was then orchestrated on a national level by the Frente. Yet the repudiation seemed widespread and genuine – and a political triumph for the FSLN. In April Nicaragua was swept by a sense of imminent invasion; people began to build air-raid shelters and to hold their breath every time a plane flew overhead; the militias were in a state of permanent alert. In May, Robelo went to Costa Rica and announced that he had joined Pastora. His property was confiscated, and his uneasy coexistence with a state he had set out to capture came to an inevitable end. There was no doubt that the class struggle had intensified, and that the Frente would have to respond. Its central instrument would be the mass organisations.
 
Masses and classes in the Nicaraguan Revolution [71]
In the three years since the Revolution, the mass organisations have performed a double and contradictory function. On the one hand, they have served as the organisers of production, the watchdogs of productivity and the ideological instruments of the state. The CDSs and the Sandinista Youth, for example, have acted as local representatives of the Frente, and of government. Yet they have also been described as ‘instruments of socialist democracy’ [72] or (by the Frente itself) as ‘organs of popular power’. If the Nicaraguan Revolution is still open to further developments of the revolutionary process; if it is to become a field of class struggle [73], then the key role in such a process will fall to forms of class self-organisation developed precisely to carry that struggle forward.
When the Sandinistas seized state power, they did so as the leadership of an insurrectionary movement. The composition of that movement [74] was largely the urban poor, with a predominance of the young and the very young. [75] Although the movement had thrown up a number of new forms of organisation after February 1978, they were not, by and large, the product of any long-term tradition or accumulated experience. The only sector with such a tradition – the urban working class – did not as a class play an active, organised part in the fighting. The most solidly based were the Civil Defence Committees, which organised distribution, medical care and self-defence in the war zones. Within the barrios, elementary forms of military organisation around the barricades were expressed through the Sandinista militias. In the countryside, Sandinista cooperatives emerged in the liberated zones in an effort to maintain food production.
While the Frente, through its various tendencies, had been working in these different areas since 1975, these organisations had not existed in any real sense before 1978. The political energies of the Frente had largely been directed, in those years, towards work within broader front organisations – the women’s organisation AMPRONACS, for example, or the health workers’ and teachers’ unions. The Frente’s own cells, on the other hand, were extremely small and necessarily secret and they could not function as party organisations, since the Frente had no clear concept of the role or nature of the revolutionary party, and no programme for creating workers’ power in a post-revolutionary society.
Historically, the Frente had rejected the furtherance of workers’ material interests as ‘economism’ – and for much of its existence regarded mass work solely as a form of support action for the guerrillas. Thus it had never acquired any significant influence among organised workers. While in the seventies the FSLN had worked to organise peasants, and out of this work had built the basis of the ATC, for military reasons such work had not been sustained or consistent; in fact, in both the countryside and the urban barrios, the most enduring forms of grass-roots organisation were the radical Christian Base Communities, which the Frente worked closely with, and from which it drew many of its cadres. The decision by one section of the Frente (the Proletarian Tendency) to do systematic mass work in the urban areas had in fact led to a split in the organisation – although there was agreement among all three tendencies about the importance of student work, from which many of the FSLN’s cadres also came.
Thus these pre-revolutionary forms were above all organs of struggle, which emerged and disappeared according to the largely military needs of the insurrection. They were not Soviets, nor new forms of workers’ democracy. They did express the generalised opposition to Somocismo, and the potential for self-organisation. But the political organisations which interpreted and reflected the struggle were in fact united front organisations with sectors of the bourgeoisie. By the final days, there were thousands of people under arms – and it was they who would form the basis of the new Sandinista Army. Yet in July 1979, the Frente had no more than 500 members – and a year later, there were little more than 1,000. The task of the political organisation of the working class for the assumption of power was still to be developed. Again, the potential for mass-based revolutionary organisation was present – but no-one was arguing for it. Thus the mass organisations expressed, not the confidence and experience of a workers’ movement that had tested and tasted its own power, but rather the consolidation of the relationship between that movement and the new state.
The tension was clearly expressed in the months after the insurrection. The first organisations to be formed were the Sandinista Defence Committees (CDSs) modelled on the Cuban Committees for the Defence of the Revolution, but with the significant difference that they were rooted in a population with a direct and recent experience of struggle. [76] The CDSs were clearly designed, in the first place, to organise urban life in the immediate aftermath of Somoza’s overthrow; but they were also established with the aim of cementing the relationship between the social base of insurrection and the new state. Yet here, too, the leadership was chosen directly by the Frente, and built from the top downwards, both nationally and locally. Further, the period immediately after the victory was one of demobilisation, as raising levels of production took precedence over all other activities. [77]
The Sandinista Youth (JS-19) had a more direct political function, organising those young people who had made up the bulk of the fighting force in the final weeks, and tying them in a more permanent way to the FSLN. For the Frente’s influence among the young was overwhelming, and it was here that the new cadres would come from. Equally AMNLAE the women’s organisation was designed to build on the largely open work of the women’s organisations before the revolution, and to reflect the leading role of women within the Frente.
The key mass organisations, however, were those which, after the seizure of power, forged the political base of the Sandinista state – the worker-peasant alliance. These were the organisations of rural workers, ATC, and the Sandinista trade union federation, the CST.
The ATC was formed in April 1978, the product of work among the landless and impoverished peasants who had gained nothing from Somoza’s limited agrarian reforms and had suffered directly the weight of repression of the Somoza state. In December 1979, at its first Congress, it claimed 110,000 members. The debates at the Congress clearly reflected the dual priorities of the new state – the need to raise production and improve productivity, and the obligation to raise living standards in the countryside. And at the core was the question of land. The promise of land had more than anything else motivated the 40% of the population that was landless. Thus, when the FSLN tried to restrain land takeovers at the end of 1979, they were met with a mass demonstration of ATC members.
Fixed low rents, and the distribution of lands on state properties, answered some of the immediate demands – and the Agrarian Reform Law of 1981 further extended the amount of land available for redistribution. Yet the form of organisation through which land was redistributed reflected another tension. The long-term development of export agriculture would necessarily lead to the proletarianisation of the rural labour force – as those in the state sector had already become wage labourers for whom the ATC acted as a trade union. The agrarian reform affected the production of basic grains (maize, beans, rice); but the general policy in this area was not only to render Nicaragua self-sufficient in food, but also, by 1983, to begin the export of maize to other Central American countries. Thus this sector too had to be subject to criteria of efficiency and productivity, and to an overall direction of production. The new cooperatives (the CAS) acknowledged private ownership of land, but they also encouraged and asserted the collective exploitation of the land, simultaneously laying the basis for a future collectivisation of agriculture. The tension between ownership and socialisation later led to a separation of the CAS and the CCSs (temporary cooperatives of small and medium landowners) and the organisation of the latter into a separate organisation – the UNAG.
One plank of the worker-peasant alliance was therefore rapidly consolidated through the ATC. Improved general conditions of work, the right to participate in production decisions in the state sector, and the cooperative structure in the private sector, provided a direct link with the general economic strategy. Yet the small and medium producers also had a crucial role to play in the production of basic grains; the guarantee of sufficient food had been a central promise in the Sandinista platform. Thus production was the key, and the private sector was given easy credit facilities and guarantees of state support in order to ensure production and encourage it to raise productivity. The irony was that this served to reinforce the rural bourgeoisie and the ATC found itself arguing for restraint and productivity, both on the question of money wages and as far as land takeovers were concerned, even though this brought direct benefit to the private sector.
The other element of the alliance presented serious problems for the Sandinistas. After the seizure of power, the FSLN faced four trade union federations; and it lacked any working-class base of its own. These federations organised only a minority of the working class – yet they had traditions and roots. Further, they had been the continuous butt of FSLN criticism over the years. And while the condemnation of a repressive Somoza state had meaning for the peasantry and the urban poor, the organised working class had less experience of that direct repression. It had even won a number of concessions from Somoza, enshrined in the Labour Code and illustrated by the victory of the building workers’ strike in 1973. Of the four federations, the CNT (Social-Christian) had some strength among sugar and oil refinery workers; the CUS, formed by the AFL-CIO, had a very small membership: the CGTI, linked to the PSN, had a larger membership and some genuine roots in the urban working class. Yet the vast majority of workers were still unorganised.
In 1979, 343,000 people were employed in agriculture, 90,000 in industry, 228,000 in commerce and service industries, and 231,000 (28% of the economically active population) were unemployed. Of these, only about 4% were unionised (around 16,000 workers in all) and the bulk of these in the urban sector. The working class, then, was tiny and consisted overwhelmingly of workers in craft industries or small workshops. Yet politically, they were a crucial sector. While in its original base of support, the FSLN had had to confront, at worst, a weak bourgeois leadership, the working-class movement did contain organisations with traditions and an organised base.
Central was the PSN, whose relationship with the FSLN had always been one of open hostility. Thus, in 1977, when the failure of UDEL led the PSN to reconsider its relations with the FSLN, a small section broke away, rejecting all contact with the ‘petit bourgeois adventurists’ of the Frente. This sector formed the PCN, and its small trade union federation, the CAUS. There was another group, a pro-Chinese split from the FSLN (in 1970) called the Frente Obrero; its paper, El Pueblo, was directed at the working class – and it had also organised an armed group, the MILPAS, drawing in young workers and urban youth.
The Frente’s early dealings with the working class were far from successful. The Sandinista trade union organisation, the CST, was founded soon after the victory – but it did not emerge from any existing group, as the ATC had done. It was appointed by the new state, to organise the unorganised workers, and to challenge the leadership of the existing organisations. Yet the CST too, displayed an ambiguous role. For it was charged with organising and supervising production, and with winning the working class to the general strategy of Sandinismo. Yet part of that strategy was a lessening of differentials between country and city, a raising of the lowest wages, and a general restraint on the wage levels of the highest paid. Further, that argument was taking place in a context in which most of industry was still in private hands.
Its first actions were clumsy. The first clash came with the workers at the San Antonio Sugar Refinery, who struck for a 100% wage rise – and were encouraged in their strike by the Frente Obrero. The government closed down El Pueblo, arrested FO members, and attempted to dissuade the workers. In the end they granted a 30% wage rise and a number of other concessions. In January 1980, a strike by 4,000 building workers on a new park project in Managua brought the FSLN into direct confrontation with the entrenched PSN leadership of the union. It had already attempted to seize the leadership of the building workers union by creating a new CST organisation and arresting the PSN leader of the union when he refused to accept the manoeuvre. In early January, building workers demonstrated against the CST operation and won the release of the union leader. The strike came in response to the government’s decision to lower wages and remove the annual bonus in order to provide more jobs. Wheelock on behalf of the government, argued that the bonus was ‘a demagogic concession’ on the part of Somoza. It was pointed out to him that the bonus had been won through struggle – and that it, like the weekly wage, were the only basis for maintaining workers’ living standards. The government retracted.
January and February 1980 also brought a series of strikes over wages led by the CAUS – the most bitter of them at the FABRITEX factory in Managua. Here the CST acted to stop the strikes, and mounted an intense campaign against CAUS which led to the sacking of several of its offices in early March. [78]
The problem was illustrated when a group of workers at the El Caracol food factory took over the plant in February. The reasons for the takeover were decapitalisation by the bosses and a fall in production. This won immediate government approval – and was organised by the CST. Clearly, there were two concepts of trade union organisation in conflict – as continuing clashes with CAUS and FO throughout 1980 illustrated. The new role set out for the unions through the CST was centred on production [79]: they were to oversee the raising of production and productivity, and to win the argument for austerity and sacrifice, to translate the imperatives of national defence into the workplace. But what this meant for the working class in real terms was a reduction in their standard of living. [80] The Frente argued that this would be compensated in two ways: through the development of the social wage, social services, etc.; and through a far greater participation in production decisions. [81] The PCN and the FO, on the other hand, described the regime as ‘bourgeois nationalist’, and maintained that the role of trade unions remained the pursuit of a higher standard of living. And the argument clearly had some weight, where the bulk of production was in private or state hands, and the general politics of austerity benefited all sectors of capital equally. And while the general implication was that the working class now had a leading political role in the state, the reality did not confirm that. Industry was not central to the general plan for economic development; and the working class was not in power. Even Tomas Borge recognised that, in 1981, when he asserted that:
The Sandinista government does not want an official governmental trade union movement. What we need is a trade union organisation responsive to the interests of the workers. The working class in Nicaragua must have the right to say ‘no’ where appropriate and ... even ... the right to confront the government when it is necessary. [82]
To an extent this reflected the failure of the attempt, early in 1980, to create a unified trade union confederation; it was also a response to the continuing working-class discontent that the CAUS and the FO had capitalised on. But it would be disingenuous to accept Borge’s argument about trade union independence. On the one hand it has to be stressed that the working class was tiny and that the unionised section of the class was smaller still. In the absence of a material force arguing for and organising along class lines, it was illusory to expect class-based organisation to develop.
Furthermore, in a situation of scarcity, wage demands cannot be met. The direct benefits – according to the Sandinista vision – would not come to the workers for some time, though the general perspective was a socialisation of the economy, and a gradual expropriation of the private bourgeoisie. [83] Yet the rhythm of that Process would not be determined by the pace of internal class struggle within Nicaragua. On the contrary, the progressive limitations on the right to strike, to criticise, or to debate the general issues of socialism, for instance as posed in Poland, suggested that independent class organisation was permanently sacrificed to the immediate task of accumulation. Yet the only way in which the
FSLN could win acceptance of its general perspective of a transition to socialism was by clear progress towards democracy in the workers’ movement, and workers’ control over the economic process as a whole. In a situation of external threat, and a growing urgency in accumulation, the two were, and remain contradictory.
The militias were also a significant mass organisation, the tangible representation of the marriage of production and national defence. Formed in 1980, the militias were to provide a permanent reserve of civilian defence: yet their purpose was more directly political. The military uniform became a mark of political commitment, and the weekly training sessions were above all political education forums as well as opportunities for military preparation. The militias quickly reached a membership of 100,000 – for the threat of external aggression was very real. They were based in communities and workplaces, and centred on the existing mass organisations.
For socialists, the arming of the people is a central element in the struggle for socialism. Here apparently, the class was being provided with the capacity to defend its conquests with arms. Yet the role of the militias was deeply ambiguous. In the emergency of April 1982, the militias were charged with guarding strategic roads, bridges, etc., releasing the army for the war on the borders. Yet the arms remained under the control of the army; it was not the mass organisations who controlled and distributed them. The guns remained weapons of national defence rather than class struggle, under the control of a highly politicised but professional army.
In general terms, the role of the mass organisations has been to cement the political hegemony of the FSLN and win mass support for the initiatives and strategies of the state. It seems clear, however, that they are not mass democratic organisations. While they can mobilise large numbers around specific initiatives like the disaster of May this year or the health campaigns, they still represent a potential base for direct political participation. Yet they are firmly controlled, both directly by the Frente and indirectly by the general constraints on public debate and criticism within the National Emergency Law: for the emergency has two faces. The external threat is real enough; but it also addresses itself to the urgency of accumulation, and the sacrifices that such a process is based upon. In a country with weak political traditions, facing permanent and immediate crises and a real and enduring scarcity, the solutions to each of these problems lies outside the national frontiers. And where Nicaragua finds itself at the axis of so many other economic and political forces, which it cannot control, the development of democracy could well be seen as an open door to the multiple agencies of reaction, whose assaults have intensified in the last six months. [84] These are the conditions under which the FSLN has set out to win political hegemony.
Sandinismo has been, above all, profoundly pragmatic. Its programme of government, for example, was the product of an alliance with other social forces. The cadres of the Frente were trained in Marxism, yet it is not a revolutionary party. The Proletarian Tendency had argued that a revolutionary party had to exist before the seizure of power was possible; the Terceristas, on the other hand, held that such an organisation could be built after, and out of, the overthrow of Somoza. [85]
In the event, Somoza was overthrown and political organisation was thereafter undertaken by the state. According to various writers the tendencies were dead [86]; the Frente had unified around a single policy. The National Directorate of the FSLN certainly presents an unanimous appearance, and is undoubtedly united around the central tasks to be fulfilled. Yet there is a contradiction at the heart of Sandinismo, which must be reflected within the leadership. It is the contradiction between the defence of the national state, and accumulation, on the one hand, and the fulfilment of the material interests of the working masses – which itself requires workers’ power, socialism – on the other.
The FSLN seized power without a revolutionary organisation rooted in the masses. This was reflected in the absence of middle or rank-and-file cadres. The administration of the post-revolutionary state, therefore, rests in the hands of middle class professionals and technocrats whose commitment to workers’ power is extremely questionable. The Frente set out to build ‘popular power’ from the state downwards, and while maintaining a tight political control. Power derived from the general support of the masses; but the real power of the Frente lay in its control over the army, where the most serious and sustained political education takes place. It was the army that represented the political leadership, and in style and language the Frente’s hegemony was expressed in a permanent military metaphor. Put another way, the political model was a model of command; and the role of the mass organisations was to execute decisions and strategies evolved by the National Directorate of the Frente without debate: ‘the National Directorate will command’ (Direccion Nacional ordene) is one of the most frequent slogans at demonstrations and political events.
This structure of leadership is reinforced by several other factors. The urgency of production made the demobilisation of the people an urgent necessity in the aftermath of insurrection – and it remained the priority in a situation of constant scarcity. The language of political loyalty was rooted in the ideas of sacrifice, austerity and discipline – the fruit of a necessity which set clear frontiers on what was politically possible. The central political symbol of the FSLN, for example, are the ‘heroes and martyrs’ who ‘didn’t say they were dying for their country, but died for it’ – and Nicaragua has many murdered heroes to refer to. Struggle remains the central theme – but not class struggle. Rather it is continuously posed as national, and anti-imperialist. For the politics of the Sandinista government are determined by reasons of state – by the need to maintain, where possible, an internal political alliance with the old bourgeoisie, and an external one with the same class, not in the interests of a developing class struggle within the country, but in response to the imperatives of survival for a tiny country in a world arena.
These imperatives combine in a model of state-led politics. As scarcity becomes more pronounced under systematic US pressure and as international social democracy grows cold towards Nicaragua, the exhortation becomes more and more insistent, and the space for independent organisation narrows. The dominant politics is increasingly a version of "socialism" which identifies it with the state organising economic growth rather than with workers’ power; a version that is reinforced by the practice of Nicaragua’s Russian technical advisers. Bookshops carry almost exclusively Cuban and Eastern European volumes, all of which enthusiastically emphasise the reasons of state, accumulation and discipline.
There is, however, another current within Sandinismo which rebuts the mechanistic and nationalist emphasis of Russian politics. It is represented above all by Ernesto Cardenal and Tomas Borge. Borge refers frequently in his extremely moving speeches to the New Man of the Revolution [87], the product of new social relations, of love and cooperation. These ideas have a strength in Nicaragua, where the theology of liberation was a powerful and popular ideology among the very sectors where the FSLN laid its roots. Among the peasantry and the urban poor, the Christian Base Communities, with their philosophy of radical social action, filled the political vacuum. Hence the presence within the government of five radical priests. This idea is most powerful in the Ministry of Culture, which Ernesto Cardenal runs, and which emphasises self-expression, cooperation and creativity; and within education. Cardenal’s brother, Fernando, headed the 1980 Literacy Campaign, which set out to teach basic skills to 400,000 people. It was very successful, both in mobilising urban youth behind the campaign, and in consolidating the revolution in the countryside. [88] The campaign was imbued with idealism, and with an emphasis on the capacity of workers and peasants to seize control of their own lives.
The real world bears down on Nicaragua. It is tiny and impoverished; its old bourgeoisie is vengeful and provincial and, having abandoned the hope of taking power, is progressively abandoning the economy to its fate and the future to Ronald Reagan; and it stands at the heart of an area of the world where, in the view of US imperialism, the future is at stake. Its history hangs on it as a burden – and the idealistic language of use-value and cooperation cannot hide the implacable necessity to develop its economy out of a ‘qualitative dependency’. [89] It can attempt to juggle the forces that govern that process – but it cannot control them.
 
Contradictions of the Sandinista Revolution
As the insurrection drew closer, the FSLN found itself with some unexpected allies. West Germany supported a negotiated solution that included the FSLN. The Christian Democrats of Costa Rica and Venezuela decided in February 1979 to give material aid to the Sandinistas; Mexico, too, made its rejection of Somoza clear at an early stage. The Europeans saw it as an opening in the heart of the American empire – and as a potential field of influence and investment in what had hitherto been the territory of US capital.
Mexico and Venezuela, too, saw an economic possibility. Nicaragua, as it developed, would be a new market for their oil and their capital and manufactured goods. Further, the Central American revolution was developing, and Nicaragua could provide an entry into that, an even wider field of investment.
After the overthrow of Somoza, Nicaragua turned to massive foreign aid to pay for its redistributive policies. By 1981, 50% of that aid was coming from Latin America and the Third World, 32% from Western Europe and just over 18% from Cuba and Eastern Europe. Clearly, the West was willing to finance Sandinismo, but there were conditions – the mixed economy, and political pluralism. The United States under Carter had been benevolent at first, and most of the foreign aid during the first year came from or through the United States. [90] Most of it went to the private sector, in an attempt to maintain American influence over the Nicaraguan process. Yet at the same time, the Central American revolution was advancing. The US-backed coup in El Salvador, in October 1979, was designed to head off a Nicaraguan effect – but it served only to expose the contradictions there more sharply. The Nicaraguan effect had already made its impact – not in terms of a democratic experiment, but of the possibility of a successful seizure of power through mass insurrection. Since Chile, the tide had run firmly against radical change; Nicaragua turned the stream again.
For the Eastern bloc, Nicaragua was a problem. The USSR waited the customary few months before declaring itself, and then began to provide limited, emergency aid. Yet its position on Central America remains deeply ambiguous. The region lies within the American sphere of influence, and although it is interested in splits and divisions within the American camp, it clearly does not want another Cuba – it would be much too costly and vulnerable. Economically, Nicaragua is of little interest to Russia; it has never imported Nicaraguan products, and its investment potential is very limited. The USSR has its own economic crisis to settle, and its own internal political crisis to resolve. The major area of Russian and Cuban influence is in technical assistance – where the political concepts of the USSR are translated into forms of organisation and strategies for growth. Clearly, neither Cuba nor the USSR would benefit from the defeat of the Nicaraguan revolution, reinforcing the monolith of US imperialism under an aggressive crisis regime.
The Nicaraguans have attempted to take advantage of their focal place in a network of relationships – diplomatic and economic – to ensure support for their economic strategy. The Cubans and the Russians both advised caution in their dealings with the old bourgeoisie; the originality of Nicaragua was that a political bloc had been built around it which threatened Carter’s trilateralism and US expansion in Europe – which suited the Russians very well. Sandinista flexibility was a response to this delicate balance – for its primary need was the widest range of channels of aid. The Cubans and the Russians provided the technical know-how – the Cubans particularly in the military sphere. The Western European and Latin American social democrats provided the bulk of the finance – and Libya’s $100m aid programme opened a door to the Arab world, and possible alternative sources of oil.
With Reagan’s entry into the White House, however, the scenario changed. Trilateralism gave way to an aggressive expansionism focussed on Central America. The conflict in El Salvador was a fundamental challenge to Reagan’s strategic ambitions, and he identified it as an East-West struggle on Western soil. At the same time, Reagan named Nicaragua as the source of spreading revolution – and raised the level of economic and political pressure, not only on Central America itself, but also on Nicaragua’s supporters. The well orchestrated campaign to show that Nicaragua had abandoned pluralism was directed at these erstwhile allies.
By March 1982, the elections in El Salvador marked a difficult moment in the Salvadorian struggle – and for Nicaragua. In preceding months, thousands of highly trained troops had been brought into El Salvador. The Reagan government was moving towards restarting arms sales to Guatemala and the Rios Montt coup in March was supposed to facilitate that. The Honduran military were being rearmed, US bases were being built there, and the Hondurans were taking an increasingly direct role in El Salvador. Costa Rica was entering a profound economic crisis from which only US aid could save it. And the CIA was granted $19m for covert activities against Nicaragua, to add to the military support already being given to the counter-revolution.
In such a context, bourgeois democracy grew cooler towards Nicaragua. The crisis in the Malvinas/Falklands, however, changed the situation. Europe gave reluctant support to Britain, but in Latin America the reaction was almost unanimously in support of Argentina. Momentarily, a Latin American alliance confronted the US. The Nicaraguans, as usual, took skilful advantage of the crisis to cement and repair their relations with Latin America. France too provided $15m worth of arms, and received a visit from Daniel Ortega in July; and in his turn Herrera Campins, President of Venezuela, made an official visit to the 19th of July celebrations in Masaya.
The temporary breach in US relations with Latin America favoured Nicaragua, releasing the immediate pressure and allowing it to pay some attention to the torrential rains that caused such enormous damage in May. But the response to the disaster appeal was sluggish, and by July the pressure was on again. Counter-revolutionary armed attacks grew more intense, and Somocista groups tried to take the towns of Jalapa and Puerto Cabezas, at either extreme of the Honduran border. A battle lasting for weeks across the same frontier cost 50 Sandinista lives – and the whole military structure was mobilised in anticipation of major assaults on the 19th. On the morning of the anniversary, a small plane came perilously close to blowing up 800,0000 gallons of oil stored at the port of Corinto.
The Malvinas/Falklands conflict was over. The US administration could have adopted a conciliatory position and tried to repair its breach with Latin America. Instead, Reagan’s response was the line of force, the re-imposition of US domination by weight of arms. And one element of such a policy was a renewed economic, ideological and military assault on Nicaragua.
Since 1979, the Sandinistas have been careful to keep open the widest network of international relationships. The result has been a diplomatic caution based on national survival; the FSLN has repeated the Russian line on Poland, abstained in the UN vote on Afghanistan, given support to the Palestinian cause and refrained from comment on internal repression in Mexico. While supporting the guerrilla struggle in Central America, it has also vigorously supported peace proposals for the region, as in Ortega’s speech to the UN in March. Each set of relationships has required specific compromises.
Yet it has also meant that Nicaragua is not yet part of the Russian bloc. Aid from Eastern Europe is considerable, but still small by comparison. [91] Russian influence and the Cuban presence are visible but not overwhelming. Politically, this dependence for survival on a complex of international networks has emphasised and reinforced the nationalism within Sandinismo, the politics of anti-imperialism and broad internal security.
Clearly, the maintenance of external alliances implies a corresponding internal alliance of classes. And even were that to change, that would not mean the resumption of a ‘suspended’ class struggle. The state has its own imperatives, which have already led it to place limits on the capacity of the working classes to defend their own interests and develop their own forms of organisation to that end. The new state has already consolidated its power over economy and society, and taken on the tasks of accumulation. The development of a conscious working-class movement organised for the assumption of state power and the construction of socialism has yet to occur.
On May 1st, 1982, the CST appeared with banners demanding ‘the defence of the revolution and the transition to socialism’. In his speech on the day, Tomas Borge spoke of the new man, new social relationships, of an end to exploitation – but he did not mention socialism. [92] The FSLN insisted that it was an independent CST decision and not official Frente policy.
What did ‘socialism’ mean in this context? For some, it was a pointer to the radicalisation of the revolution, a move, perhaps, towards further expropriations. But there was no evidence of that in the weeks that followed. Nor did it mean any changes in the nature of the mass organisations, or in the role of workers’ organisations within the state. The declaration instead made specific reference to the decision to press forward certain forms of workers’ participation in production, and to consolidate other benefits, like the factory shops and the collective contracts. Beyond that, the changing international situation had, if anything, reinforced the existing character of Sandinismo.
It has been a constant theme of Sandinista politics that democracy means more than voting, that it means a genuine, conscious participation in the running of society – and above all, economic democracy. Yet that is a very different thing from workers’ power. In state capitalism – particularly in Yugoslavia for instance – and among the European reformist left, worker participation has been a a central theme. Yet that participation represents an invitation to workers’ leaders to administer capitalism and apply its laws and imperatives directly. Socialism, on the other hand, involves the direct control of production by the producers through the organs of revolutionary democracy – and in order to realise the needs of the producers as a class. Without the organised capacity of workers to continue to struggle for their own interests and against management whether private or state, the talk of a transition to socialism is little more than abstract rhetoric at best, and at worst an attempt to incorporate the working class directly into the organisation of their own exploitation. ‘Participation’ is not a half-way house to workers’ power; on the contrary it is a way of demobilising the very struggles that are needed to create it in the first place.
In Nicaragua, as long as scarcity characterises the economy, the best possible situation would be one in which the mass organisations were genuine, democratic rank-and-file organisations, with an independent capacity for political organisation and education, and the capacity to exercise increasing control over the direction of the political process. Yet today, in Nicaragua, that is not their role. Two factors have ensured that: first, the urgency of national defence, labour discipline and above all of firm state control over the institutions of society. It is not only the external threat that makes this imperative; it is also the need for continuing austerity, where scarcity cannot be equally distributed; for labour discipline and higher productivity is called for in both private and public sectors.
A new political cadre is being developed, particularly within the army and the Sandinista youth; yet to talk to leading members of either organisation is an arresting experience. A broad, if mechanistic grasp of world politics, is coupled always with an almost mystical moralism, full of terms like discipline, heroism and sacrifice, all combined in the faintly disturbing cult of the person of Carlos Fonseca, the dead founder of the FSLN. According to Ortega, there are half a million people in the mass organisations – about 20% of the population. [93] That probably reflects the best estimate of Sandinista support. Yet the pressing necessities of state, the discontents generated by deepening scarcity, are unlikely to permit a more democratic involvement of those half million – on the contrary, criticism is denounced as counter-revolutionary, and participation will more and more centre on obedience, loyalty and faith in the leadership. For in the absence of political cadres, of a political tradition, and under conditions which severely test the ability of any organisation or state to maintain consensus and hegemony, democracy becomes a dangerous luxury. Participation means executing decisions taken – and the predominant militarism in Nicaragua, the widespread military presence, reinforces the Command Model of politics. Sandinista attitudes to the party reflect the same ambiguity. For the moment, the FSLN remains a politico-military organisation, whose leaders wear uniform and carry guns. The party, and the problem of revolutionary democracy, is not discussed.
There is no possibility of restoration of power to the private bourgeoisie in Nicaragua; there are as yet no serious internal challenges to FSLN leadership. Yet there is discontent, frustration and constant talk of shortages. In the end people judge a revolution by what is on the table. Three years is a very short time to create a level of political consciousness voluntarily disposed to accepting years of sacrifice and austerity. Yet this is a country where pre-capitalist forms still exist, and where national unity is pursued against a background of different cultures and different languages. [94]
In economic terms, there seems little possibility of an end to scarcity. The balance of payments worsened in 1981–82, the price of Nicaraguan exports on the world market fell, and external aid is becoming increasingly difficult to get. In a year’s time, the grace period on earlier loans is over, and unless they can be renegotiated they will swallow almost all Nicaragua’s foreign earnings. Imports have already been reduced to a minimum, and consumer goods are growing harder to find every day. The basics are assured – but barely. And the prospect for national economic development is faced with exactly the same difficulties that ensured its frustration on two previous occasions in Nicaragua’s history. Nicaragua has not broken with the world market, only sought to renegotiate its relationship with it.
The bourgeoisie has remained until now because its profits and its economic power have been guaranteed. As the world recession deepens, and Nicaragua is further besieged, the price may become too high – and they will leave with what they can carry to make a new life with the Cuban exiles in Miami. Yet this is not 1960, when the world economy was expanding, and a gradualist alternative could be used to isolate Cuba. It is 1982, and the crisis of the world system East and West is profound. Afghanistan, Poland, and Central America, represent the need to discipline and control the system in a period of general stagnation. Nicaragua cannot escape that crisis – though it has been able to exploit some of its contradictions to its own benefit.
The future will repeat the themes of austerity and sacrifice, and the world economy inflict its brutal laws on Nicaragua. These conditions are inimical to democracy. It is likely that the state will move further towards control of the economy, as the old bourgeoisie deserts and the maintenance of production becomes increasingly the key to physical survival.
Yet Nicaragua cannot survive alone. One direction in which it may look is the Russian bloc; yet the Russian bloc has its own economic and political crisis, and even Cuba is looking to the world market and to foreign capital. Economically, then, the USSR has little to gain in Nicaragua. Politically, it is very unlikely that it will be prepared to confront the United States on Nicaraguan soil.
Yet this will not mean, and cannot mean, the restoration of the old bourgeoisie to power. As a class, it has lost control of the state, though it still controls part of the framework in which that state continues to exist. The working people of Nicaragua have tasted a personal and social freedom they have never known; they have rights, their children survive and even the poorest go to school. It is not socialism, not workers’ power – but it is a step, and an important one, in the direction of liberation. Further – and this is the key element – that element of liberation was won; and thus the talk of workers’ democracy, of popular power etc. have a meaning and a reality in the context of Nicaragua’s revolution, a reference point in a real experience. It is more than dry rhetoric.
The laws of the system press in on Nicaragua; but the example of its revolution also points outwards. In the rest of Central America, a struggle is developing, also with a mass base. These are not guerrilla focos, but mass armed movements which may also one day conquer state power. For Nicaragua, that would lessen the pressure, and widen the material base and the political foundation of its survival. None of this can solve the problems of development, or absolve Nicaragua from the obligation to develop its productive forces. But it can change the conditions under which it takes place, relieve the immediate effects of scarcity, provide a greater space for manoeuvre and perhaps lessen the extent of Russian influence. More than that, it would change the balance of class forces on a world scale again.
If the Central American revolution suffers any major defeat, however, the prospects for Nicaragua will be bleak. It would face appalling economic problems that not even the most advanced political consciousness could overcome, problems beyond the control of even a developed proletarian state if it became isolated. Thus the fate of the revolution is directly tied to the development of the revolutionary movement beyond its borders – and that is the central political dilemma. For here, reasons of state conflict with Proletarian internationalism.
There is no doubt that the direct involvement of the Nicaraguan Proletariat in the Sandinista Revolution has been at a qualitatively higher level than, say, the Cuban Revolution. Yet despite the potential for socialism expressed in that involvement, the prospect of a transition to socialism in Nicaragua remains remote. The international context is one crucial reason; more significantly, the continuing struggle for workers’ power and a workers’ state demands other conditions which are absent in Nicaragua.
The first such condition is the existence of a revolutionary party, rooted in the working class and presenting a political alternative to populism and petit bourgeois nationalism. The basis for such a party would need to have been laid prior to the revolution, so that the masses entered the revolutionary process aware of the need to create their own independent organs of class power. Yet neither within the FSLN, nor outside it, was such a Leninist strategy developed. The question was posed during the factional debates of 1975–77; the pressure of events and the political imposition of the Terceristas, however, ensured that it was not developed as a strategy. Thus the political nucleus around which the argument for turning the revolution in a socialist direction might have crystallized was absent in the revolutionary and post-revolutionary period.
The objective historical context was equally unfavourable. Revolutionary socialist ideas take root in the working class movement to the extent that there exists within it a certain level of organisation and activity – an existing struggle against the employers. Without it the confidence and consciousness which are the foundation of workers’ councils in the factories – the basic organizational form of workers’ power – are simply lacking. Yet the industrial working class formed an elite under Somoza. Only 16,000 workers even belonged to trade unions. Where such a tiny number of workers have developed trade union consciousness it would require a far greater development of the struggle before the level of mass revolutionary consciousness capable of creating workers’ councils is reached.
Without these objective and subjective conditions the high level of mass involvement will not lead the revolution towards socialism. Who, then, will be the beneficiaries? It seems unlikely that the old bourgeoisie will reassert themselves; many have already left the country and for the rest the prospects of recovery in the midst of a world recession that has brought even wealthy Mexico to the brink of disaster seem very remote.
This leaves the Sandinista state. Increasingly it will be forced to take upon itself the task of capital accumulation; the economic crisis, the need for national defence and the desertion of the bourgeoisie will ensure that. And the working class movement itself is unlikely to accept any other form of hegemony. Tragically, what this amounts to is the further consolidation of state capitalism.
Predicting the future is a dangerous and fruitless pursuit. A whole number of factors may yet intervene in Nicaragua before the new state bureaucracy is fully consolidated within the Sandinista state. Other possibilities exist: a successful US backed counter-revolution, on the one hand; or a destruction of the state under working class pressure on the other. Excluding these possibilities, however, (and the latter is sadly the least likely) the consolidation of the state-capitalist alternative becomes increasingly the likely outcome of the process.
The survival of the Sandinista state will therefore impose one set of pressures; the development of the class struggle will impose another. Yet, there is still room, and there are structures in which working class self-organisation can develop. For revolutionaries throughout the world, solidarity – raising the political costs of military intervention in Central America – is not only a moral obligation but a concrete contribution to the development of the revolutionary organisation of the working class. Only to the extent that the tide turns in favour of the Central American revolution, as a prelude to fundamental change in the rest of Latin America, will the most positive elements of the Nicaraguan revolution – its idealism, its commitment to popular power, and its identification with socialism, in however confused a form – allow the next steps to be taken on the road to workers’ power.

Notes
1. H. Weber, Nicaragua: the Sandinista revolution (London 1981), p. 49.
2. J. Wheelock, Raices indigenas de la lucha anticolonialista en Nicaragua (Mexico 1979).
3. J. Wheelock, Imperalismo y dictadura (Mexico 1980). Cf. in general on the economic history of the country.
4. See Apuntes para la historia de Nicaragua (Managua 1980), vol. I, pp. 57-59.
5. Cf. Wheelock, 1980, p. 68 and Selser, Elpequeno ejercito loco, chapter 1.
6. This is mentioned by Selser, whose Sandino general de hombres libres (Costa Rica 1979) and Elpequeno ejercito loco (Havana 1960) are the best accounts of Sandino’s life.
7. Sandino quoted in Jose Benito Escobar, Ideario Sandinista (FSLN, Managua), p. 7.
8. S. Ramirez, El pensamiento vivo de Sandino (Havana 1980) pp. 75–78. This is the best and most complete collection of Sandino’s writings.
9. Wheelock, La mosquitia en la revolucion (Managua, 1981).
10. E. Torres Rivas, Influencia de la crisis del 29 en Nicaragua, in Casanova (ed.), America Latina en los anos 30 (Mexico 1977), pp. 89–112.
11. Cf. Selser’s account of it in Apuntes sobre Nicaragua (Mexico 1978), pp. 81–94.
12. See R. Belausteguigoitia: Con Sandino en Nicaragua (Madrid 1934), p. 181.
13. H. Ortega, 50 anos de lucha sandinista (Mexico 1979), p. 30.
14. See Wheelock, 1980.
15. Weber, op. cit., p. 17.
16. see Alegria and Flakoll, Nicaragua: la revolucion sandinista (Mexico 1982), pp. 128–135. And in general on Somoza, see R. Millett, Guardians of the Dynasty (1977).
17. In fact, Vincente Lombardo Toledano, a Mexican and a key figure in the Latin America Communist movement, was invited by Somoza to form the PSN, the better to enable Somoza to control and contain the incipient working class movement.
18. Selser, Apuntes, p. 182.
19. On this period in general see O. Nunez, El somocismo y el modelo agroexportador somocista (Managua 1981). There was considerable US investment in Nicaraguan cotton, as liberation movements in Africa were threatening the supply from there.
20. See Ramirez in Las classes sociales en Nicaragua (Managua 1981), pp. 68–9.
21. See NACLA, Nicaraguan report, February 1976, pp. 9–12.
22. See Wheelock, 1980, and Nunez, 1981.
23. Nunez, 1981, p. 27.
24. This is described in Wheelock (1980), chapters 5 and 6.
25. Nunez, 1981, p. 89.
26. In Chile, for example, the Christian Democrat agrarian reform had met structural obstacles – the resistance of the landowning classes – which posed deeper questions of structural reform that the Christian Democrat Party was not willing to confront – with the result that the reform was paralysed and the Party began to split on the question.
27. See R. Millett, op. cit.
28. J.M. Blandon’s Entre Sandino y Fonseca Amador (Managua 1980) is the fullest general account of the attempts at armed struggle during the fifties and early sixties.
29. The account of his imprisonment is in Chamorro, Los Somoza: estirpe sangrienta (Mexico 1980) and Diario de unpreso (Managua 1980).
30. See Ortega, 50 anos ..., pp. 85–94.
31. See C. Fonseca, La Hora O (Managua 1981), pp. 20–23.
32. Ibid., p. 24.
33. Ibid., p. 26.
34. Ibid., p. 27.
35. H Ruiz in Sobre las crisis y las tendencias del FSLN (1977).
36. See the account by Doris Tijerino, whose case was well known and who endured terrible torture, in M. Randall, Daughters of the revolution (1981). Another prisoner, Jacinto Suarez, tells his story in Nicarauac, no. 3, Managua, December 1980, pp. 31–54.
37. On the subject of liberation theology and the role of Christians in the revolution see Nicarauac, no. 5, 1981.
38. J. Wheelock in P. Arias (ed.), Nicaragua: revolucion (Mexico 1980), p. 106.
39. See Valdivia (p. 113) and Torres (p. 117) in Arias, op. cit.
40. See NACLA 1976, pp. 31–34; H. Jung, The Fall of Somoza, in New Left Review 117, Sept/Oct 1979, pp. 69–89; G. Garcia Marquez: Los Sandinistas (Bogota 1980), pp. 169–242 and Sobre la crisis ...
41. The irony is that Nicaragua had the highest per capita income in Central America throughout the 1960s.
42. See Weber op. cit., p. 60.
43. See Selser, Apuntes, pp. 63–68.
44. The Editorial Nueva Nicaragua has just published two new books of testimonies on the Monimbo struggle, whose titles are not yet available.
45. See the account of the assault by G. Garcia Marquez in New Left Review 1978.
46. Cf. the interview with Humberto Ortega by Marta Haernecker in E Pineda, La revolucion nicaraguense (Madrid 1980) p. 182.
47. For a general account of the rising see Arias, op. cit. Alegria Flakoll op. cit. and C. Nunez, Un pueblo en armas (Managua 1981).
48. Ernesto Cardenal, a trappist, is now Minister of Culture. His community in the lake of Nicaragua, Solentiname, became a centre for the theology of liberation. The 1977 San Carlos raid was launched from there, and it was finally destroyed by Somoza’s bombs in February 1978.
49. Carmen Diana Deere, A comparative analysis of agrarian reform in El Salvador and Nicaragua, in Development and Change (London 1982), p. 28.
50. G. Selser, Apuntes.
51. Ibid., pp. 113–115.
52. Cf. the description by Nunez of the people of the barrios of Acahulainca gathering around the waste tips from the local slaughterhouse in search of food; in Arias, op. cit.
53. It was estimated that 75% of all communicable disease in Nicaragua was the direct result of the lack of drinking water and bad sanitation.
54. The concept of pluralism is developed in the government’s What the present regime does not want you to know about Nicaragua (Managua, March 1982) in the direction of bourgeois democracy; see the ‘grass roots’ concepts in C. Nunez, Las fuerzas motrices en la revolucion (Managua 1981).
55. R. Fagen, Revolution and transition in Nicaragua, in Socialist Review (New York) no 59, vol. 11 no. 5, Sept./Oct. 1981, p. 16.
56. J. Wheelock speech reported in Intercontinental Press.
57. Sobre la problematica actual (Managua 1982), p. 14.
58. In fact Somoza had diversified external trade relations through the seventies as the government acknowledges in What the present ...
59. See Deere and Marchetti, The worker-peasant alliance in the first year of the Nicaraguan Revolution, in Latin American Perspectives 29, Spring 1981, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 42.
60. See Latin American Regional Report (London), 27 Nov 1981.
61. See NACLA, Target Nicaragua, 1982.
62. Ibid.
63. As advocated by the extreme right wing Heritage foundation in its Newsletter of March 8, 1982.
64. Quoted in Deere, op. cit.
65. Cf Wheelock speech Intercontinental Press, op. cit.
66. What the present administration ..., p. 84.
67. Cordoba Rivas, Mimeo, Managua, May 1982.
68. This and other documents are reproduced in Carmejo and Murphy, The Nicaraguan Revolution (New York 1979).
69. On the general question of Sandinism and democratism see Sobre la problematica actual, pp. 118–170.
70. Cf. Report of the Centro Historic Centroamericano, Boletin (Managua) for October 1981.
71. As a general introduction see El papel de las organizacionas de masas en la revolucion (Managua 1981), G. Black, Triumph of the people (London 1982), chapter 12, and La problematica actual, pp. 144–169.
72. G. Black, op. cit., p. 203.
73. The question posed by Fagen and by Kairowitz and Havens in an unpublished paper.
74. See O. Nunez, La ideologia como fuerza material y la juventud como fuerza ideologica, Estado y closes sociales (Managua 1982).
75. Some as young as nine years old, like the militant Luis Alfonso Velasquez, whose name was given to the first park built in Managua after the revolution.
76. As James Petras so bitterly pointed out.
77. See Nunez, op. cit.; and Nuestros ninos lo van a entender (Managua 1981).
78. See G. Black, op. cit.
79. On the general role of the trade unions, see for example, the CST’s submission to the Unity Conference, 1981 debe encontrar una clase obrera unida (Managua, December 1981), the pamphlet Los trabajadores Sandinistas y las tareas del momento (Managua 1980) and the mimeoed education document from the CST (1981) called Elpapel de los sindicatos, among many others.
80. See the speech of C. Nunez in Los trabajadores Sandinistas, p. 10.
81. See Wheelock, Marco estrategico de la reforma agraria (Managua 1981).
82. T. Borge quoted in G. Black, op. cit., p. 281.
83. See Wheelock, Marco estrategico.
84. That activity ranges from constant attacks across the frontier, the murder of teachers and others in isolated communities, through a huge propaganda campaign which includes numbers of newly arisen evangelical sects all of which seem to find Reagan very close to God, to the use of the question of the indigenous peoples against the Sandinistas.
85. On the documents of the split see Garcia Marquez: Los Sandinistas (Bogota 1980).
86. Black, Weber and Hermione Harris in Two years of revolution in Nicaragua, in Race & Class, summer 1981, argue that there is constant internal debate.
87. See his speeches, which are extraordinarily moving in La revolucion sandinista (Mexico 1981).
88. The education campaign is described in detail by J. Bevan and G. Black, The Loss of Fear, WUS (London 1981).
89. J. Wheelock in Intercontinental Press, op. cit.
90. As J. Castanada shows in his Nicaragua: las contradicciones de la revolucion (Mexico 1980).
91. See the Heritage Foundation’s Newsletter quoted above and Cordoba Rivas 1982 Economic Report.
92. The May Day Speeches are reproduced in Patria Libre (Managua, June 1982).
93. Daniel Ortega in his speech at Masaya, July 19th, 1982, fully reported in Barricada, July 20th.
94. The problem of the Miskito Indians of the Atlantic Coast is a difficult one, and its history too complex to go into here. Isolated from Managua, they grew up under the tutelage of British colonialism, an influence reinforced by the Moravian church. Their national identity, their claim to some form of autonomy, posed a serious threat to national integration – and the Sandinistas by their own recognition, handled the problem badly at first. Unfortunately, this gave the US the opportunity to move and use the Miskitos against the Sandinistas. Haig’s claim of massacres of Miskitos are nonsense – but they were moved from the border to settlements fifty miles into Nicaragua. The FSLN argue, with considerable reason, that it was for their own safety. A sensitive account of the issue is in What the present administration ...
 



On 23 November 2008 Venezuela went to the polls. It was the 14th election in the ten years since the victory of Hugo Chavez in 1998. This time the vote was for state governors, mayors and representatives to Venezuela’s 24 state assemblies. Just over 65 percent of those eligible registered their choice on the new electronic voting machines. The very high turnout was a sign that the election was much more than a vote for local officials. It had become, instead, a vote of confidence in Chavez himself.
In the weeks leading up to the elections it became very clear that the figure of Chavez was to hold centre stage and that the individual candidates, particularly to the state governorships, would very much stand in his shadow. The election broadcasts always figured Chavez centrally, and in most cases the actual candidate was reduced to a supporting role. Chavez’s speeches at the great election rallies were invariably far longer than the candidate’s – and far better received.
The right wing opposition, for its part, was representing itself as fresh and new. The old parties, who for nearly 40 years had shared power and split the benefits between them, were still putting forward their candidates. But the campaign was dominated by a new, aggressive, “modern” right wing exemplified by their well educated, almost entirely white, good looking and well heeled candidates. Their slogans emphasised change – a “new time”, as one party called itself – and the defence of a constitution (passed in 1999) that they had fought against tooth and nail at the time.
The official pro-Chavez candidates all represented the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV), the government party set up by Chavez in 2006, and wore the red T-shirts and baseball caps of Chavismo. They had all been selected by delegate meetings of PSUV members, but the reality was that most of them had been imposed by the party machine, often in the teeth of fierce grassroots criticism. And the scepticism about the candidates and their manner of election covered much deeper concerns and discontents. Yet the grassroots of the PSUV turned out in considerable numbers to work for the election. It seems likely that their support was assured when the authority of Chavez became the central issue in the campaign, rather than the performance of the candidates, the government or the PSUV itself in the four years since the last gubernatorial and mayoral elections.
Map: Venezuela – election results

 
Election day
It had been raining almost every day for weeks across central Venezuela. In Caracas a few days earlier a heavy rainstorm lasting over four hours flooded much of the city and caused the customary havoc in the crowded poor barrios clinging to the hills in and around the city. Yet on election day there were long queues forming by 6am outside most polling stations. The results began to be announced by the middle of the evening of 23 November.
It became clear very quickly that the results were not likely to bring great comfort to the government of Chavez. In the few days since the announcement both sides have claimed the voting figures as a triumph. Overall the PSUV won about 57 percent of the national vote. At that level it could be represented as a vote of confidence in the Bolivarian process. The figures, however, tell only a fraction of the story.
Politically, the government won the numbers but it lost key areas of support. The right wing opposition won five of the 23 governorships to be elected. In fact this was one less than they had controlled before the election, largely because some governors had joined the PSUV in the course of their previous terms. But the five included the politically significant states of Carabobo and Miranda (which includes much of Caracas and its suburbs), and the strategically key states of Zulia and Táchira, as well as the most important mayor’s post in the country – Greater Caracas. These five areas, plus three other smaller states, together embrace 60 percent of Venezuela’s population.
Much more significantly, a glance at the map shows the wider implications of the new disposition of power. Zulia state and its capital, Maracaibo, are oil-rich and a key component in Venezuela’s oil strategy. Its neighbour, the state of Táchira, is poorer and more sparsely populated. But the two states between them cover almost the whole border region with Colombia. A number of towns and areas along that border are now entirely controlled by paramilitaries linked to drug cartels. In one small town, for example, the gunmen recently issued leaflets warning that “homosexuals, adulterers and anyone selling drugs would be murdered, and that anyone on the streets after five in the evening would be summarily executed”.
The Colombian factor is important to understand. Paramilitary gangs linked to the drug trade, which increasingly uses Venezuela as a transit point, are also interwoven with the Colombian state. Indeed, recent revelations in Colombia suggest that the drug cartels are embedded in Colombian political life at every level. At the same time, Colombia is the bridgehead for the global market and imperialist strategies for the control of the region. [1] The presence of a state within a state, what Roland Denis calls the “parastate”, is an increasingly central issue in Venezuela, where violent crime, almost invariably related to drugs, is a critical issue and where the organisations behind the paramilitary violence are intimately connected with the police and National Guard as well as a number of local political groups.
The fear of crime and violence, and the sense that the state has failed to arrest or in any way control the “parastate” were carefully and consciously manipulated by the right during the election campaign. So too was what looks and feels very much like the collapse of the material infrastructure of the society. In every major city, as well as in rural areas, rubbish sits by the roadside in massive and growing piles. The regular rains seem to flood the streets within minutes and each one brings more news of mudslides and the collapse of the precarious hillside dwellings, the barrios, where the poor live.
Of course the right wing parties, and the middle classes they represent, have no interest at all in the fate of the poor. Venezuela remains a divided society whose middle classes live in gated and heavily defended communities and maintain their patterns of consumption in imitation of what they imagine to be US culture.
The reality of the right wing’s concern with the security and living standards of the population emerged very clearly within hours of the announcement of the election results. In Aragua state three leading trade unionists were murdered in cold blood. In the state of Miranda gangs of thugs and bikers attacked Cuban doctors and nurses and the medical centres in the poor districts where they work. Employees of the state oil company were threatened with violence. Teachers, health workers and civil servants working in the town halls won by the right have been told that they will be immediately dismissed without benefits and some have been beaten up. And the threat now is that the community facilities created in recent years – the centres for the elderly, the community centres, sports facilities, etc – will be taken back and presumably sold to private enterprise.
The strategy of the right is clear and extremely aggressive; its mask of democratic concern and preoccupation with human rights has already fallen. But it is important to recognise that the election win was organised and strategically conceived. The domination of the border regions gives real territorial control, and the loss of Greater Caracas (although not Caracas City), together with Miranda, is a very serious defeat. The new mayor, Antonio Ledesma, belongs to one of the old corrupt parties (Copei) and was mayor once before. His record, a standard story of corruption and clientilism, cannot explain his victory.
And the president of the other major party of the old regime, AD, gave a press conference in which he raged that “Chavez wants to put us in loincloths and send us to live in the trees like the Indians”. He went on to argue that Chavez is provoking another 11 April, the attempt to detain Chavez and destroy his government. In other words, with their new found confidence, the right are resurrecting the threat of a direct assault on Chavez and his presidency. The stakes here remain very high, and the old bourgeoisie is still a dangerous enemy, whatever mask it wears.
 
Whose victory?
One knowledgeable and respected commentator has described the result as a “tactical victory but a strategic defeat”. [2] It is an extreme but provocative view. But the truth is very uncomfortable for the government of Chavez and for all those of us who are concerned that the revolution should continue and deepen in Venezuela.
The explanation extends into the past, specifically to the constitutional amendments voted on in a referendum on 2 December 2007. That vote was lost very narrowly. It was the first defeat Chavez had suffered. It was the view of many, including myself, that there had been significant abstentions among supporters of the Bolivarian revolution. It was partly because the amendments were never convincingly explained. More importantly, it seemed that taken as a whole the amendments to the constitution placed increasing power in the hands of the president and the executive. Given the high regard in which Chavez himself is held, the December results were perhaps more a comment on the actions – or inactions – of government than on Chávez himself.
By late 2007 many of the social programmes (the misiones) had stopped working effectively. The misiones were both an expression of and a response to the transformation of the Bolivarian revolution that began in 2002. The failure of the April coup that year was the direct result of a major shift in the balance of political power. At the time the administration headed by Chavez still included many representatives of the old regime located in key positions within government and the oil corporation. The social programmes that Chavez had promised – redirecting resources towards the poor – had already begun to take effect; the rising support for Chavez expressed in the 2000 presidential elections was evidence of that. It seemed that the traditional control of the state and of Venezuela’s oil wealth by the dominant political class was slipping away. The result was the April coup.
The coup failed when electoral support was transformed into the physical presence of the masses on the streets of Venezuela. The power to shape events passed to the mass movement that Chavez had come to symbolise and lead. While later interpretations have attributed his “rescue” to sections of the army, the reality is that most of the leading figures in the military responded to the mass mobilisations rather than invoking them. Eight months later, in early December, a bosses’ strike began with a walkout of 18,000 employees of the oil corporation, PDVSA, who took with them the computer passwords and all the key information required to maintain oil production. All the sectors hostile to Chavez joined the action, which was intended to destroy the Bolivarian project and Chavez with it. Restaurants and shops closed, supplies of most goods dried up, the mass media (then as now dominated by the right) threw their full weight behind the “strike”. Once again the defeat of the lockout was the direct result of mass mobilisation across the country. Local communities joined trade unionists in mass pickets to defend oil, gas and electricity installations, the social movements organised supplies, transport and distribution of goods across the country, and political debates raged in universities and schools. And once again a major ruling class assault was defeated by mass action.
The misiones were a response to that changing balance of forces. The Barrio Adentro programme, using Cuban doctors, would bring health care to the poor; the Robinson, Sucre and Rivas Missions would provide educational opportunities at every level for that majority of Venezuelans for whom education was completely unavailable until then. Vuelvan Caras, for its part, was launched in order to begin to address the country’s most pressing problem – the low productivity of its agriculture, despite the fertility of its land. Venezuela imported over 60 percent of its food as well as the bulk of its consumer goods. Oil, it had always been assumed, could buy everything (an issue I will return to later).
There was an ambiguity at the heart of the misiones. Were they essentially emergency welfare programmes, [3] or were they the germs of a new power, the political expression of the shift that had taken place in 2002–3? It was certainly true that a new layer of Bolivarian politicians had entered government and that the misiones did address the still unfulfilled promises made to the poor by the first Chavez government, and the rising price of oil provided the finance. Yet this was still very far from the social transformation, the arrival of a new class in power, that the right now claimed the Bolivarian revolution represented. Its agitation continued through most of 2003–4, culminating in the recall referendum of August 2004. Support for Chavez rose again, reaching close to 63 percent. It was an undisputed political defeat for the right, and doubly so because the same social forces that had taken centre stage in 2002–3 were once again central to the referendum result. The Bolivarian Circles, small local cells at street and community level, had mobilised in a consistent and highly political way to achieve that result. It was their high point, and arguably it was the moment for a new and more radical direction in Venezuelan politics.
Chavez’s famous announcement that the Bolivarian revolution was now devoted to achieving “socialism in the 21st century” seemed to represent just such a leap forward. The speech was delivered at the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre in January 2005, and, especially given this context, Chavez’s strategy was implicitly set against the compromises of Brazilian President Lula, whose radical past had dissipated in a rapid accommodation to global capital.
 
The leader, the masses and the government
Against the background of the Porto Alegre speech, it was to be assumed that the misiones would become elements of a new kind of democracy, the “participatory democracy” announced from the 1999 constitution onwards. In the context of the time, with its high level of popular organisation, a ruling class still badly wounded and profoundly disorganised after the failure of its assaults on the Chavez government, and a rising level of support for Chavez himself, this new qualitative phase in the revolution seemed possible. The rising mass struggles elsewhere in Latin America – in Bolivia, Ecuador and Mexico, for example – suggested a wider relevance and potentiality.
Yet Chavez’s speech had also pointed up some of the ambiguities in the socialism of the 21st century. He spoke movingly of “fraternity, love, solidarity, justice, liberty and equality” – but the organisational expressions that this new political moment would adopt remained very unclear. While many of the old managers of the Venezuelan state had been removed after the bosses’ strike, many of their replacements came from the notoriously corrupt Movement of the Fifth Republic (MVR), which accompanied Chavez to power in his first phase. The truth is that many of the people now charged with implementing 21st century socialism had very different views of what it meant.
In a curious anticipation of what would happen four years later, the elections for mayors and governors in 2004 had produced deep disquiet among supporters of Chavez, particularly over the way that candidates were selected. There were, after all, no clear mechanisms for the election of candidates, no methods for grassroots oversight of officials. The people responsible for the implementation of the new phase, therefore, at national government, state and local levels, were bound by no political discipline or machinery of accountability, even though it was they who were to be in charge of the implementation of a new and more radical phase of the revolution.
Yet according to Luis Tascón, a new group in power had already begun to consolidate its hold on the state and its institutions and to demobilise the popular movement:
There were already people accumulating power for themselves, doing deals, opening banks and managing exchange controls for their own benefit…while the rest of us were defending and strengthening the revolution. The (Bolivarian) process began to take a wrong turn in 2004, and the groups in power began to replace and exclude us. The revolutionaries were no longer necessary. [4]
Roland Denis substantially agrees. [5] There was, he says, “a counter_offensive by the political leadership against the revolutionary democratic spaces”. For, despite the rhetoric about participatory democracy, there was as yet no evidence of the shape that democracy would take. The misiones, for example, were rapidly integrated into the existing state machinery, despite the suggestion that Chavez himself saw them as the embryonic forms of a new state, a counterbalance to a machinery of government still in the hands of bureaucrats and self-seekers. In industry the future seemed to be taking shape in the forms of self-management and cogestión (joint worker-management control) exemplified by the Alcasa aluminium plant, and in the workers’ occupations of failing factories with the demand that they should be nationalised. In the trade union movement the old corrupt trade union federation (CTV) had supported the April coup. A new national formation, the National Union of Workers (UNT), was now engaged in a prolonged battle to wrench control of the movement from the old bureaucrats.
In other words, the picture at the beginning of 2005 might have seemed to approach the situation described by Gregory Wilpert: “Thus, while community groups, labour movement and community media push from below, Chavez is pushing from above for “deepening the revolution”. In the middle are the old state bureaucracy.” [6]
In fact the dynamic of the process was working in a very different way. For while Chavez maintained a powerful symbolic and political relationship with the grassroots movement, he was also engaged in building a new state machinery with all the defects and contradictions of the old. Powerful figures were emerging such as Jorge Rodríguez (today the new mayor of Caracas City) and Diosdado Cabello (probably the central figure in the new elite and the deeply distrusted ex-governor of Miranda state now, astonishingly, promoted to minister for the infrastructure), who joined with others in national and state government to consolidate their power. Funds and resources continued to be available to grassroots projects, but their specific allocation was determined by favouritism, the construction of local political machines and loyalty to the bureaucracy. And while it is extremely difficult to find specific data regarding allocations of funds and completion of projects, the persistent rumours of corruption on a massive scale are borne out by anecdotal evidence.
Despite several national road plans it is very obvious that very little work has actually been done on the deteriorating national highways. Public transport remains inadequate, particularly in Caracas, where traffic jams are a nightmare, and the new rail network has been postponed several times. Cooperatives report endless difficulties in gaining access to the credits that are their due, and they are often conditional on bribes and favours. The misiones are bureaucratic and paralysed by internal battles for power. Even in factories as advanced as Alcasa, management resistance has inhibited self-management. The passport agency is notorious for its endless delays and below the counter methods, as is the exchange control agency. The critical issue of housing remains unresolved and building programmes are frozen or mired in bureaucracy despite the imaginative housing developments that have been completed in some areas. According to Tascón, around 140,000 houses have been built compared with a target of 300,000 per year. And the struggle for the recognition of workers’ rights has been systematically held back by successive ministers of labour whose sole interest was in maintaining control of the movement.
Much of the funding for the social projects comes directly from oil revenues. The right complains that PDVSA, the state oil corporation, is a state within a state. Certainly the increasingly central role of PDVSA might suggest that Chavez has used the corporation as a means for sidestepping the state to implement his social programmes. And indeed PDVSA invests directly in housing, education, cooperatives, medical care, culture and social development. But this does not address the central political problem; it rather compounds it.
 
A failed promise
The promise of 21st century socialism was the development of a new radical democracy and the construction of a new kind of state, responsive to and representative of the mass base of the revolution, the working class, the poor and the indigenous peoples. Instead the relationship between the Bolivarian state and the people is one of dependency in which resources, far from providing the means to achieve an increasing level of autonomy and initiative at the grassroots, have been used to forge new networks of power within the state and to reinforce centralism. It is true that there have been occasions when Chavez has restrained the bureaucracy – the excesses of the intelligence and counter-intelligence law are one example. But by and large occasional moves against elements of the bureaucracy have had more to do with internal power politics than with any fundamental challenge to the structures themselves.
Thus the gulf between poder popular (“popular power”) and the movement from below grows ever wider. The re-election of Chavez with a still larger majority in December 2006 in a sense veiled the widening gulf between the rhetoric and the reality. And it pointed to a persistent theme in political discussions – that Chavez was a prisoner of what was now called “the endogenous right”, whose power derived from the very practices of patronage and corruption that Chavez had vowed to eliminate when he was first elected in 1998. This Chavista endogenous right, it has to be said, is not averse to working with Venezuelan capital, the very people to whom it grants the enormously lucrative state contracts which oil the wheels of bureaucracy.
The anti-Chavista right has no alternative strategy to offer, only a different slate of bureaucrats to enjoy the fruits of corruption. And while they fought a bitter war of words, for the majority of the Venezuelan population there will often have seemed to be little between them other than the colour of their T-shirts. The concentration of power in the hands of this “new political class” was the alternative to the participatory democracy promised by Chavez and the 1999 constitution. Its consequence was an increasing demobilisation and demoralisation of the grassroots. When Chavez announced the formation of the consejos comunales (community councils) early in 2006, a surge of optimism followed; perhaps this signalled a return to the promised participation and grassroots democracy. But while they were established and in many cases functioned well as conduits carrying information to local government, they were in no sense organs of popular power. Many, indeed, were not supportive of the government. And in the general context of centralised control and power administered consistently and relentlessly from above, they remained another unfulfilled promise.
The creation of a new party by Chavez, the PSUV, two weeks after his re-election caused ferocious debate within the movement. What was clear was that it was in no sense the product of debate among the rank and file, nor did it arise organically out of the movement. The party was announced, not built. Its membership grew exponentially as soon as Chavez called for everyone to join it in a new revolutionary unity. There was no longer any need, he argued, for any other parties of the left to exist – the PSUV could embrace them all. Indeed before there was any opportunity to build the base organisations or agree the programme or ideology of the new party, two appointed commissions set about writing the party’s statutes and determining its political character.
The argument within the left and the popular movement concerned whether or not the party would be genuinely democratic and allow the development of an internal political debate. While that seemed unlikely, given the pre-emptive manner of its creation, the reality was that the left could not ignore a party of six million members, many of whom came from the people – even if the Association of Patriotic Entrepreneurs was among the first groups to join and be given representation in the party’s leading organs. The notionally democratic internal structures of regional assemblies of elected delegates were in reality subject to control from above. And when the grassroots defied the national leadership, as in the case of the selection of candidates for the 2008 elections, they were overruled in the most summary way. Chavez himself had returned to the topic of corruption, as he did periodically, and his words were fervently echoed by the political class which now assumed leadership of the PSUV, many of them deeply embedded in systemic corruption and patronage.
Yet in this, as in many other areas, there was no evidence of an integrated strategy, only of separate reactions to events or to the demands of the moment. So there was no long-term vision of party building or how to develop the participatory democracy in a dynamic dialogue between leadership and base. Time and again initiatives were announced and then left hanging in the air as ministerial responsibilities shifted or immediate pressures diverted attention from the longer term. The excellent 2006 report on the creation of a new national police force, for example, commissioned by one minister of justice was shelved when he moved and then the same happened again and again. And immediately after the November elections a new minister once again announced the formation of a commission to examine the question of a national police force. Meanwhile an often corrupt, locally administered and inefficient police force oversees rising crime and violence – and sometimes participates in it.
 
Futures
Two days after the elections I attended a town meeting in the state of Miranda, whose newly elected right wing governor had led an assault on the Cuban embassy during the April 2002 coup attempt. The meeting was angry, frustrated and vocal. People were determined not to allow any of their gains to be taken from them and prepared to fight to preserve them. Everyone talked at once – until Chavez was mentioned, at which point all present chanted his name in perfect unison.
The losing candidate in Miranda, Diosdado Cabello, seemed always to appear at Chavez’s right hand. He was also the most powerful political operator in the new state. His people controlled several ministries, the customs service and a number of other institutions. He was also, it was rumoured, extremely rich. [7] When the new party was formed, Diosdado and his people were prominent. And when he stood for the 15-person leadership of the PSUV, with Chavez’s very public support, it was assumed he would win his place. In fact he came 17th – and the number of members of the committee was increased to 30 to let him in. When he presented himself as the gubernatorial candidate for a second term, members of the PSUV rejected him. In the end he was imposed by the party against the members’ will. Diosdado symbolises the new political class and the levels of patronage and dubious practices that characterise many areas of the state and the government.
In Carabobo state a similar process imposed Mario Silva, a vitriolic television journalist and favourite of Chavez, as candidate for the governorship. He lost the race. In Zulia, always a stronghold for the right, the sitting governor, Di Martino, was seen as self-serving and incompetent. The party hierarchy insisted on his candidacy, however, and he was also defeated by a right wing candidate. The case of Caracas is even more telling. Juan Barreto, the outgoing mayor, had a long history of political commitment and activity. He had been a close and courageous ally in Chavez’s rise to power. His time as mayor, however, seriously stained his reputation as family members and friends were given lucrative and influential positions in his administration. Meanwhile the crisis of the city deepened.
If it was the case that the referendum vote in 2007 was an expression of the gathering discontent and frustration of the Chavista base, the 2008 results are, it seems, the expression of similar, still unresolved, feelings. Diosdado did not convince the rank and file of the PSUV, nor did Silva. Yet those grassroots members had been unable to influence the party they had joined so enthusiastically in the preceding year and a half. The PSUV has 5.7 million members; fewer than half that number voted for the party’s candidates.
After the December referendum Chavez announced a period of rectification and revision. There is no evidence that it was carried beyond words into action. Certainly no action was taken to address corruption, nor were the structures of state or government opened to greater scrutiny or control from below. The absolutely authoritative role of Chavez was not mitigated by any internal criticism or serious debate in the National Assembly or the PSUV.
In the economy there have been important advances, most importantly the nationalisation of the Sidor steel plant in Puerto Ordaz after a long campaign by its workers and a bitter strike and mass demonstration which was fired on by state police. The telephone and electricity companies were nationalised last year, and a major milk producer was nationalised as the problem of food supplies and deliberately created shortages became more serious. In each case, however, nationalisation involved the state purchasing firms at market prices and with considerable compensation.
So while the Alcasa experiment suggested a very different kind of nationalisation, under workers’ control, the state takeovers seem more consonant with a burgeoning state capitalism. The failed constitutional amendments of 2007 contained a number of references to a state sector of the economy, but despite the screams of the right that this amounted to a full-scale assault on private property, in fact it was a guarded and cautious proposal to control key economic areas within a context of private ownership of banks and industries in which the state would be one competing actor.
At the heart of economic policy, of course, is oil. Since PDVSA became the engine of the Bolivarian project, oil revenues have financed the whole range of social programmes. But the corporation is as riven with corruption and mismanagement as the rest of the state sector, even if the rising oil prices of this year have veiled that reality. There has been no real attempt to use oil money to diversify the economy or create new industries; short-term demands have always been the priority. As 2008 ends, oil prices have fallen below $50 from a high of nearly $130 a barrel. Production has been cut by Opec at Veneuela’s insistence, and it seems likely that further cuts in production will follow. A major $4 billion credit from the Royal Bank of Scotland was withdrawn when the bank teetered on the brink of collapse. There are financial reserves spread across the world that could provide a cushion, but the reality is that Venezuela remains an economy dependent on a single export and imports some 80 percent of its food and consumer goods. PDVSA’s recently published 2009 budget shows major cuts in its contributions in every area except defence.
Chavez has diversified and broadened Venezuela’s oil trade, and dramatically lessened dependence on the US. Its new trading partners, China and Russia among others, are not exempt from the world recession and are themselves cutting back production. They are, whatever their past, aggressive players in the world capitalist market and Venezuela can expect no favours from them. It is unlikely that Venezuela can maintain the growth rates of 9 percent and more it has seen in recent years. In fact, the effects of recession, despite Chavez’s assertions that Venezuela has not been affected, are already highly visible. Inflation in real terms is far higher than the official 27 percent announced in December, and while the rising price of basic goods is in part the result of cynical manipulation by speculative distributors and producers, it is also a direct effect of the rising price of imports.
The minimum wage of just under 800 bolivars is no longer sufficient to buy the basket of basic goods; recent figure suggests that it takes double that to maintain a family. The Mercal system, which provides subsidised food for the poor, is beset by shortages and inefficiencies, as well as corruption and abuse by those who run the Mercal stores. At one such store customers were told that they could only buy subsidised products if they also bought a proportion of their goods at market prices.
There is a clear message in the election results, just as there was in the results of the 2007 referendum. The support of the mass of the people for Hugo Chavez is more than an expression of loyalty to one man. It is, at one level or another, a signal of their support for a project of social change. It also announces anger and a loss of patience with corruption and patronage. Of course, people will defend the new clinics and medical centres and the education programmes against right wing assaults. But as recession deepens the effects will be felt by those same people, and the protection of private capital and their allies within the Chavista state will fuel that anger.
In recent days Chavez has both spoken of the need for “a revolution within the revolution” and issued reassuring messages to the private sector that so long as they are productive they are safe. But the truth is that the Venezuelan private sector is not productive and its support for Chavez is conditional on the continuing protection it enjoys. Internationally Chavez has built an extraordinary network of alliances with other national capitals in an interlocking set of economic blocs. But nationally the expectation remains that the Bolivarian revolution will continue. That means strengthening the multiplicity of grassroots organisations that exist, encouraging their horizontal coordination and creating a new kind of state based on control from below and a genuine representation – the people as the subject of change, rather than the passive supporters of those individuals who have placed themselves in the leadership of the process.
The movements of Venezuela have a history of mass mobilisation and a high degree of political engagement. The level of political preparedness and education, however, is low and rhetoric has replaced genuine critical debate, as the recent election campaign so clearly and poignantly showed. The instrument of that political coordination cannot, in my view, be the PSUV. Its purpose was entirely electoral and the discourse of participation proved to be hollow. Nonetheless, it is the people who joined the party and built its base organisations who will drive the revolutionary project forward.
Chavez’s response to the elections has been to reopen the question of his re-election after 2012 (the constitution currently forbids that) and has launched a campaign to win the amendment to the constitution. At a time when there should be sober and critical discussion of the implications of the 23 November, an honest assessment of the nature of the PSUV and the beginnings
of a “revolution within the revolution”, the whole public debate will once again be centred on the character and future of Hugo Chavez. He is an extraordinary individual. But revolutions are the expression of collective liberation, of the moment when vast numbers of the excluded become the conscious shapers of their own destiny. How to achieve that, how to accelerate the redistribution of wealth and how to create the long promised democracy from below are the critical issues. The campaign for re-election will divert attention from those issues, silence criticism and harden the existing structures, which have already done so much damage to the Bolivarian revolution.
In 1992 the document produced by the military rebels led by Hugo Chavez to explain their insurrection warned against allowing “popular sovereignty expressed in elections to become reduced to a grotesque farce, deliberately emptied of all content and purpose”. That warning, levelled against the old state machine, should now be addressed to the Venezuelan state once again. The Chavismo that was carried to power time and again, and repeatedly defended by mass action, was and is a genuine mass movement for emancipation and an authentic popular democracy. The struggle to achieve those ends, to continue the social revolution, is its enduring purpose. The distortions and misrepresentations that have occurred in the name of that movement need now to be exposed and swept aside. The alternative, as one commentator describes it, is “the degeneration of the revolution into government”. The instrument of change has yet to be built – but unlike the PSUV it will be built out of real struggles and the understanding that they produce.
* * *
Notes
1. Gonzalez, 2008.
2. Roland Denis, Victoria Táctica Derrota Estratégica, Algunos Hechos Políticos, Una Foto, aporrea.org, 24 November 2008.
3. As suggested by Dick Parker, 2005.
4. Tascón, 2008, p. 60. Luis Tascón is a member of the National Assembly and an active supporter of the Bolivarian revolution. He had the distinction of being the first person expelled from the government party, the PSUV, even before it was officially constituted, for publishing on the internet a list of those who had signed the recall referendum request against Chavez. Some 800,000 of those signatures turned out to be false. His expulsion had more to do, however, with his regular exposure of corruption within the ruling group. He remains in the parliament as leader of a new organisation, Nuevo Camino Revolucionario.
5. Denis, 2008.
6. Wilpert, 2007, p. 190.
7. Tascón reports that Diosdado told him not to mention socialism in his election campaign in 2004 because it would lose him votes.
* * *
References
Denis, Roland, 2008, Mínimo Balance del Proceso Después de diez años y Construcción de la ‘Otra Política’, www.elecodelospasos.com/article–22599401.html [Note by ETOL: No longer available online]
Gonzalez, Mike, 2008,  Latin America and the Future of the Farc, International Socialism 120 (autumn 2008), www.isj.org.uk/?id=479.
Parker, Dick, 2005, Chavez and the Search for an Alternative to Neoliberalism, Latin American Perspectives, volume 32, number 2.
Tascón, Luis, 2008, Revelaciones de Luis Tascón (Caracas).
Wilpert, Gregory, 2007, Changing Venezuela by Taking Power (Verso).
 






The Mexican revolution in the early years of
this century changed the country’s whole history. Mike
Gonzalez tells the story of its best known leader,
Emiliano Zapata, through the turbulent years of struggle



Mexico in September 1910 was a society ready to explode. It had
become independent from Spanish rule 100 years earlier, yet those who
had fought the colonial armies saw little change in their conditions
of life. The capital, Mexico City, was a city of obvious wealth –
and a new class had grown rich under the protection of the president,
Porfirio Diaz. But the real beneficiaries of Mexico’s economic
growth were foreign capitalists – the owners of the mines and
factories that produced the wealth, or the railways that transported
it to the ports or the borders.
The biggest change was in agriculture. Under Diaz, the amount of
land devoted to export crops – tobacco, coffee and sugar – grew
dramatically. The plantations began to look like company towns as an
increasingly impoverished peasantry, thrown off their land, became
labourers on starvation wages. The American journalist John Kenneth
Turner, writing in 1908, found conditions there little better than slavery
In the province of Morelos, for example, one community after
another had lost its lands to the expanding commercial estates. When
Emiliano Zapata was elected mayor of the village of Anenecuilo, he
began to mark off the village lands, distribute them among the
inhabitants and defend them – arms in hand – against interlopers.
Later, other communities sought his help. It was the first act of a
long struggle against the destructive impact of an export agriculture
which absorbed food producing land and devoted it to cultivating
crops. The only beneficiaries were those who made the profits – the
new landowners and their financial backers in the city.
Diaz’s government sent his vicious rural police against Zapata.
But many of them were already busy elsewhere crushing the strikes
breaking out in the new factories of the country’s centre or in the
mines of the west, nearly all of them owned by foreign capital. An
increasingly fierce repression could not hold down the lid forever.
The resistance of the peasantry, or ex-peasants, was matched by rural
banditry against the landowners. The workers’ struggles were
encouraged by the anarcho-syndicalist ideas of the Flores Magon
brothers, and the small and medium business sectors felt excluded
from the corrupt elite that governed Mexico under Diaz.
When they demanded political reform, supporting the electoral
campaign of Francisco Madero, they unleashed a movement they could
neither foresee nor control.
In November 1910 Zapata launched his Ayala Plan. It was a
political manifesto, a declaration that the peasant rebels would not
lay down their arms until they were guaranteed their land and the
repressive apparatus was dismantled – a call for ‘land and
liberty’. Two months earlier Diaz had announced his own victory in
the presidential elections – again. It was the last straw.
Zapata’s manifesto was the first act of a seven year period of
social conflict known as the Mexican Revolution. When it ended
officially in 1917 a million people had died and countless more were
displaced. For while almost every section of Mexican society baulked
at the repressive dictatorship of Diaz (who fled in February 1911)
there was no agreement on what should follow. The frustrated middle
class wanted political reform – a bourgeois democratic national
state that could negotiate with foreign capital for better terms, and
economic growth which would benefit domestic capital equally. They
certainly did not want a social revolution that would threaten the
very basis of property itself.
With Diaz out of the country, the newly elected president called
on Zapata and the other rebels such as Pancho Villa in the north to
lay down their arms. Zapata refused until such time as a genuine
agrarian reform was carried out and the old landowning class was
removed from power in the state. Madero’s response was to send
soldiers, commanded by the old military leaders, to disarm the
peasant rebels. They failed but in the process the old ruling class
organised a counter-revolution and murdered Madero.
Once again the revolutionary armies created an alliance of hostile
brothers – united only in their desire to defeat the
counter-revolution. In the event it was the peasant armies of the
north and south who drove the new regime out as they entered Mexico
City in November 1913.
This was an extraordinary moment. It is recorded in a set of
photographs which shows how dramatic the encounter was. In one, a
group of peasants sit in an elegant teahouse waiting to be served by
young women in waitress uniforms who look very startled. They had
never seen the wide brimmed hats and white trousers in such places
before. In another, Zapata and Pancho Villa occupy the national
palace. Villa slouches in the presidential throne, his uniform
adorned with medals, a cigar in his hand and a broad grin on his
face. Next to him Zapata, in a straight backed chair, looks grim and uncomfortable.
The photos show that the peasant revolutionaries were in a real
sense in control of the capital. Their bourgeois allies – led by
Carranza – were far from the city and divided among themselves. Yet
neither Zapata nor Villa had a political vision of a future society.
Their strategies echoed the aspirations of one section of the working
classes, but not of the class as a whole. They were not prepared to
seize power in the state. Instead they waited, hesitated, and finally
withdrew. Their movement had held power in its hands and then
delivered it to their class enemies who would wreak a terrible revenge.
It was not that Mexico had no organised workers – they had
already fought important battles in the years immediately prior to
the revolution. There were revolutionary organisations too, but the
prevailing politics within them were defined by a group of
anarcho-syndicalists who were contemptuous of politics and political
organisation. Thus the revolutionaries who made a revolution found
themselves without a sense of how to bind the exploited classes into
a new kind of power. Their access to the working class movement was cut off.
The vacuum of politics could not, and did not, last. As soon as
Zapata and Villa withdrew to their own areas, Carranza assumed power
in the state (in January 1915). Not surprisingly, almost his first
act was to organise the military repression of Zapata and Villa.
Whereas his military leaders inflicted severe defeats on Villa in
April and June of that year, Zapata proved a much more difficult enemy.
This was not because Zapata was a better soldier, but because the
process of political change had continued in the area under his
control. While on 15 January Carranza had issued a decree
guaranteeing private property, Zapata’s first agrarian reform
decree was based on an idea of the collective ownership of land in
ejidos or communities. Thus Zapata’s resistance was a mass
struggle, linked to political change – and that was its strength.
Had news of the full impact of Zapata’s Morelos Commune reached
the workers’ organisations in the cities, Mexican history might
have evolved in a very different direction. As it was, Carranza
co-opted the trade union leadership, announced new laws on workers’
rights and mobilised the workers briefly against the Morelos
revolution. A year later, when Carranza turned his repressive
apparatus against striking workers, the stratagem would have become
clear – but tragically it was too late by then.
Within the walls of the Morelos Commune, by contrast, there was
intense political debate. The sugar mills were taken into public
ownership, the rights of small farmers guaranteed and the property of
the ‘enemies of the revolution’ confiscated. A minister of arts
and culture was appointed and a system of credits set in place.
But the commune existed under siege and in conditions of
increasing economic scarcity. The vision enshrined in the decrees did
represent an attempt to marry an anti-capitalist rising with the
needs of a class of small farmers. As the besieged nucleus looked
beyond its frontiers for allies, Zapata clearly began to see that the
key was to forge alliances with workers’ organisations elsewhere.
But his envoys found no resonance – for Carranza had used the
intervening period to draw around him the new leaders of the trade
unions, the radical bourgeois democrats and the nationalists. An
isolated Zapata could do very little about it.
It was particularly poignant that from his external affairs office
in Havana, late in 1917, Zapata sent a message of support and a plea
for solidarity to the new Russian Revolution. The rumour is that he
sent one of his horsemen to carry the message to Lenin. Whether or
not his message arrived, the lessons of October would have reached
the embattled and isolated Zapata too late.
Zapata fought on. In 1917 a new constitution announced the
formation of a Mexican bourgeois state cemented by an ideology of
nationalism. It united against the demands of the revolutionary
movement whose ideas and practices reflected a desire for a more
genuine and profound democracy based on collective ownership. The new
state pursued Zapata and finally murdered him in 1919.
In 1964 a group of Mexican soldiers murdered a peasant leader
called Ruben Jaramillo together with his family. His organisation
carried Zapata’s name and it was rumoured that he was the possessor
of some of Zapata’s private documents. He had grown up in Morelos
too and there were always rumours that Zapata still rode in the hills.
Sadly, there is little doubt that he was murdered. Within a few
years those who had administered the state that killed him claimed to
be his inheritors. They spent $1 million on a filmed version of his
life. But they continue to repress and murder those who draw the most
important message from Zapata’s life – that only struggle from
below and a very different society can answer the yearning for
justice and for socialist democracy.
 



In February this year the Colombian army launched a cross-border raid on a Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc) camp within Ecuador, killing 18 people. One of the victims was the organisation’s second in command, Raúl Reyes. The Colombian president, Alvaro Uribe, claimed the raid as a major victory in the 46-year war with the guerrilla organisation and announced that in the course of the attack three laptop computers had been found containing hundreds of thousands of confidential files. Uribe was unmoved by the furious protests of Ecuador’s President Correa, for whom this barefaced intrusion into Ecuador’s territory was a grim reminder of his country’s relative weakness in the face of a Colombian state whose role in the region continues to be as a stalking horse for US imperial intentions.
The raid and its murderous consequences raised a number of unanswered questions that perplexed the left across the world. Why had the second in command of this powerful guerrilla army allowed himself to be killed while he slept with no sign of armed vigilance and without his gun by his side? The raid was brief and devastating and conducted with precision electronic equipment that had clearly pinpointed the guerrilla camp and the people in it. Was it possible that laptop computers and USBs containing so much information could have been captured so easily by the Colombian state or held together and in such insecure conditions by an organisation that had so much experience of the murderous intents of successive Colombian governments? Was this really just a successful military operation or in fact the result of internal betrayals supplying a major intelligence network?
Uribe’s indifference to Correa’s protests and his obvious sense of having won a major propaganda victory over Hugo Chavez gave an inkling of the confidence he clearly felt and of the unstinting support he could expect (and got) from Washington in justifying and defending his actions. He had violated national sovereignty, raided the territory of a neighbouring state, paid civilian assassins to supplement the work of the 200,000-strong Colombian army (to murder a second Farc leader, Ivan Marquez), and enjoyed the full support of the intelligence services and counter-insurgency commands of Israel and the Pentagon as well as his own. In the aftermath of the raid it became clear too that a number of people at the highest levels of the government of Ecuador were also involved. Correa sacked his head of military intelligence, replaced his defence minister and accepted the resignation of the heads of all three armed services in the weeks that followed.
Clearly, this was no ordinary operation. Its purposes were far reaching and strategic. It was a critical moment in the Colombian state’s war with the Farc, and its impact on that organisation should not be underestimated. It was also calculated to undermine the role of Hugo Chavez in Latin America and to discredit him – serving the interests of Colombia, whose government was competing for regional hegemony as a representative of the long term interests of the US and global capital. More broadly, it was designed to change the balance of forces across Latin America at a time when the rejection of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (the FTAA) by the majority of Latin American governments, and the emergence of an independent economic block around Venezuela and Bolivia, could represent a serious challenge to the neoliberal project.
All of these ends would be served by a defeat of the Farc. And beyond that, and whatever the criticism that might be aimed at the Farc’s strategic vision, Colombia remains a country where thousands of peasant and trade union activists are murdered every year by a state ruled by drug traffickers and their satraps. Thirty congressional deputies are currently under arrest for involvement with the paramilitary death squads directly linked to the drug barons, and a senator was recently exposed for accepting bribes in exchange for votes. But that is no more than the norm. The presidential campaigns of Uribe, like many by his predecessors, were financed by drug money.
The reality of a Colombia dominated by a military financed to the tune of $7 billion over the past ten years by the United States is the clear explanation for the continuing existence of the Farc. They are persistently described in the Western media as “narcoterrorists” whose activities and 10,000 or so members under arms are thus represented as little more than another form of criminality. But the Farc were formed in the late 1940s after a savage repressive assault on what was called the Independent Republic of Marquetalia – effectively a mass seizure of land by small peasants and agricultural workers led by the Colombian Communist Party. One of its leaders, Manuel Marulanda “Tirofijo” (Sureshot), set up the Farc after the raid as an organisation of rural self-defence. Marulanda died earlier this year at the age of 80. He had led the organisation throughout but the Farc’s role had undoubtedly changed. Over the years it had suffered corruption, desertion and some level of disillusion among its supporters. The guerrillas’ increasing use of kidnapping as a political weapon caused controversy and dissent among sections of the left. It brought down vicious reprisals against the ordinary population while disarming them politically.
Yet wherever the Farc has failed to maintain its hegemony, the brutal paramilitary death squads have continued to terrorise rural populations, seize their land and control local communities with an iron hand.
The Colombian state, far from acting against the paramilitaries, incorporated them into its repressive machinery – with the explicit support and approval of Bill Clinton’s Plan Colombia of 1999. This gave their activities legitimacy, and the so-called “war on drugs” allowed large-scale military operations against a rural population. The accusations of “narcoterrorism” allowed that “war” to morph imperceptibly into the “war on terror” of the early 21st century. Against that background the Farc’s survival is explained by the necessity of some form of self-defence.
The raid on the camp in Ecuador came at a time when the release of hostages, including the high profile former presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt, was being actively negotiated through the mediation of Hugo Chavez. He had been photographed in the mountains with them and was later seen smilingly negotiating with Uribe. The main intermediary in those negotiations was Raúl Reyes, the man murdered in Ecuador.
It has been argued, convincingly I think, that the involvement of Chavez and Bernard Kouchner, the French foreign minister, as well as several other high profile European mediators, led the Farc leaders into a false sense of security, causing them to let down their guard – persuaded, perhaps, by those amiable photo opportunities, that the Colombian government had somehow changed its spots. Yet the Farc knew from bitter experience that no Colombian state would allow them to score either a political or a military victory and that peace negotiations now, as in the past, would be likely to serve that state only as a screen behind which to prepare a deadly assault.
In the late 1980s the Farc negotiated with the then government to come in from the cold. The Unión Patriótica (UP) was formed to present candidates for the elections of 1990 and won major victories at all levels. The Colombian ruling class avenged itself, unmasking the peace initiative and murdering 5,000 UP members, including all its major leaders. Ten years later the Farc again embarked on a peace initiative, holding extensive public debates and developing strategies for democratisation. Once again the initiative was suddenly removed from the Colombian presidency and the process stopped on direct instructions from Washington. The US’s alternative strategy was set out soon afterwards in Plan Colombia, which saw the Colombian state as the bridgehead for US regional hegemony as well as an important testing ground for neoliberal economic strategies. Colombia became the bulwark against a rising tide of protest at the impact of ten years of globalisation.
The new initiative brokered by Chavez had much to do in the first instance with the increasing presence within Venezuela of the paramilitaries and the deepening instability that this implied on Venezuela’s huge and porous land border with Colombia along the Andes mountains. The Farc clearly did represent a kind of buffer against that intervention, but it was uncertain and unstable, particularly destabilising in Venezuela’s economically important state of Zulia. Chavez called on the Colombians to recognise the Farc as insurgents rather than terrorists, but by the same token he echoed the Cuban government in arguing that the time for armed struggle had passed and that resistance should move into the political terrain.
In the abstract, that is a convincing position to adopt when recent years have shown that the great political leaps forward occur as a result of organised mass activity – as they have in Bolivia, Ecuador and Venezuela. In practice, however, there was absolutely no reason to believe the Colombian government’s avowed commitment to a democratic process it had corrupted, undermined and ignored, attacking and repressing social movements, trade unions and collective resistance. It would seem that Chavez fell into a trap laid for him by the Colombians and their US and Israeli advisers. The release of hostages was at an advanced stage of negotiation when the Ecuador raid happened. But when the hostages were eventually released three months later through military action it was presented as an achievement of Uribe’s government. The Farc had in fact been actively preparing their release but had always insisted that the release must be part of a prisoner exchange for some or all of the 500 Farc prisoners in Colombian jails. None, of course, have been released.
Uribe paid a visit to Caracas for discussions with Hugo Chavez some weeks ago. There were major protests outside the Miraflores presidential palace, denounced by Chavez as “counter-revolutionary”. The disbelief among many of the most active and committed supporters of the Bolivarian revolution was palpable. The Farc, after all, now described themselves as a Bolivarian revolution so how could their bitter enemy be received as a statesman in the birthplace of Bolivarianism?
The answer is diplomacy and realpolitik. The assault on the Farc and the manner of the release of Betancourt and the other hostages were political setbacks for Chavez. Venezuela’s border with Colombia is all the more vulnerable as the Farc is so severely weakened. Correa has cooled towards Chavez too and has stepped back from participating in his Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas (Alba). He has also announced, however, that the US military base at Manta in Ecuador (established, paradoxically, as part of Plan Colombia) will be closed when its contract ends. There are strong rumours that a new base will be built within Colombia, near the Venezuelan border.
In the short term, the severe setback for the Farc has forced Chavez and Correa into negotiations with a Colombian government which represents not only US military interests but is also the spearhead for neoliberalism. Over ten years Colombia, a rich agricultural country, has become a net food importer as more and more of its agricultural land is given over to export agriculture or biofuels. And despite its long coastline and fertile rivers it now imports its fish from Argentina and Vietnam. This is in addition to the impact of cocaine production. It is also rich in oil and gas. Barrack Obama’s stated intention to lessen US dependence on Middle Eastern oil is a virtual declaration of intent to control oil and gas supplies in Latin America by any means necessary. And John McCain has direct connections with supporters of the paramilitaries. Colombia is an important oil producer, as is Ecuador. The US actively engaged in the so-called autonomy movements in eastern Bolivia whose objective is to undermine Evo Morales’s nationalisation policies. And the major prize, of course, is Venezuela.
The political issue is complex but clear. The Farc will continue to exist and to fight, but from a position of extreme weakness. Venezuela and Ecuador will not support the organisation though its weakness makes both vulnerable on their borders. Uribe will drive home his advantage by every means possible while pursuing a remorseless campaign to destroy the Farc. And for the Farc, history has shown what they can expect if they listen to the pleas to come down from the mountains and join the democratic process. Colombian democracy is a blood-soaked thing.
The attack on the Farc is a setback for the revolutionary movement in Latin America as a whole. The ground will not be recovered by more hostage taking or the arming or rearming of this or that guerrilla group. Seizing the initiative back from imperialism and its servants will be the result of a shift of power to the mass organisations like those that brought down governments in Bolivia and Ecuador, and defeated a right wing coup and a bosses’ strike in Venezuela. And the forging of a common political instrument that links and increasingly coordinates those struggles is the common task of the grassroots movements across the continent.
Michelle Bachelet, the president of Chile, has called for Ingrid Betancourt to be given the Nobel Peace Prize; the Argentinian peace campaigner Pérez Esquivel, himself a Nobel peace laureate, has asked what she has done to promote peace. Betancourt’s memoirs are now in bookshops across the world, produced at dizzying speed. Her sponsors include the French, Spanish and Colombian governments. Sympathy for a long-term hostage should never blind us to how she is being used and by whom. It is not peace, freedom or democracy that they have in mind.
 



More than ten years ago, on September 11th, 1973, a military coup overthrew the Chilean government; there followed repression of extraordinary savagery which left 30,000 workers dead and countless others tortured, maimed, without work and hungry. For five years, the working class movement was dismembered and destroyed – which had been the prime objective of the coup. As the military government approached its tenth anniversary, however, the picture changed. In April 1983 [1], a miners’ conference decided to call a series of national strikes on the 11th of each month, starting in May. Although the original strike call was attenuated [2] into a National Day of Peaceful Protest, there were confrontations between workers and the army and police in the working class districts, leaving one person dead. But the barricades had reappeared in Chile’s streets, and on the 11th of the months that followed strikes and massive protest demonstrations occurred throughout the country.
The military coup of September 11th represented the victory of the political line of the right known as the ‘hard’ or ‘black’ coup. [3] The politics of reform had been attempted first under Frei (1964–70), then under Allende (1970–73); in both cases what was involved were ‘orthodox Keynesian techniques for turning a recession into a boom ... But both left intact the capitalist structure of the economy and did not even bite into the massive incomes of the rich’. [4]
It was not Allende’s economic policies which moved the bourgeoisie to act decisively in 1973, but the rising level of class struggle that occurred during his 3-year government. But to explain these events we must first look at the background to the rise to power of Allende.
 
The road to 1970
The modern history of Chile has been shaped by its mining industry, where the chains that tied it to the world economy were forged. Under Spanish colonial rule, the land supplied the bulk of the wealth, and it was the landowning class that predominated. In the 1850s, copper, silver and coal mining developed. But the definitive change came with the seizure of the northern nitrate fields in 1879, after Chile’s victory over Peru in the Pacific War. By the end of the century, 97% of the state’s tax revenue came from nitrates. And when artificial nitrates destroyed the market for Chilean exports, copper came to occupy the same key role.
The nitrate boom created a new bourgeoisie and an expanded state sector employing 50,000 people, whose political voice was the Radical Party. [5] The 53,000 nitrate workers were also Chile’s first proletariat, and provided the base for Chile’s early trade unions, and for the Communist Party founded in 1920 by Luis Emilio Recabarren. [6] The collapse of the nitrate industry virtually destroyed the working class movement, however, and radicalised a middle class which saw its privileged position disappear almost overnight. A Popular Front government followed in 1931 [7] and in the 1940s – by which time copper had replaced nitrates in the Chilean economy – the newly formed Socialist Party was to follow the CP along the Popular Frontist road.
In the 1950s both parties repeated their commitment to searching for ‘an alliance with the progressive bourgeoisie’ [8], at the very time repression against the working class organisations had been stepped up. Then, and later, it was the search for a compromise with the parties and forces of the political centre, and the attempt to form a multi-class alliance, which determined the political direction of both major parties. The various electoral fronts formed to fight the Presidential elections of 1958, 1964 and 1970, reflected the unequivocal devotion of both party leaderships to the politics of reform through the state.
These politics were reinforced under the Presidency of Jorge Alessandri (1958–64); his policy was to open Chile wide to foreign imports and investments, contracting new foreign loans to finance the infrastructural developments needed to attract foreign capital. The beneficiaries were once again the oligarchy, of which the Alessandris were prominent members; the resulting inflation hit the working class directly, but it also affected the middle classes. By the early sixties, both these sectors were becoming involved in a rising wave of mass unrest, which was spurred by the impact of the Cuban Revolution. [9]
The Alliance for Progress, formed in 1961, was the US response to the Cuban Revolution. It had a double purpose. First, to forge a common front against Cuba, ensuring Latin American support for both the economic blockade against Cuba and for the military coordination designed both to reinforce the blockade and ensure that the Cuban example would not spread. The other face of the Alliance was an alternative development strategy, bringing capitalist reforms which remained firmly within the mould of the world market as it existed. The strategy required new political instruments – bourgeois parties – to carry through these guided reforms. The Chilean version was the Christian Democratic Party under Eduardo Frei.
In 1964, Frei won 50.1% of the votes cast in the Presidential election (beating the Popular Front’s Salvador Allende). His policy was again dependent on foreign loans, enabling industrial production to expand; as employment rose, the domestic market would expand. At the same time, a land reform would intensify agricultural production and reduce Chile’s (considerable) food imports. This economic growth, it was hoped, would benefit the peasantry, the urban poor and the petty bourgeoisie, as well as create a new class of small farmers; together they would constitute the alliance which would provide Christian Democracy with its social base. Much was made of the ‘Chileanisation’ of the economy (the transfer of ownership to native capitalists). Yet this programme for growth reinforced Chile’s relationship with the world economy, since it was to be paid for through copper exports.
Frei’s ‘revolution in liberty’ very quickly proved to be neither. The determined resistance of the landed oligarchy, which Frei could not challenge, ensured that the 1967 Agrarian Reform Act remained a dead letter. [10] By 1968, the modest 2% annual growth of 1964–7 had fallen to zero, the foreign debt was spiralling upwards ($6.1m) and foreign capital was flooding in ($962m, compared with $789m in 1964). The Chileanisation of copper in fact brought a windfall for the multinational companies [11], since not only had the Chilean state bought their shares at inflated prices, but it was now directly responsible for all future investment in the copper industry (financed by further foreign borrowing), which continued to produce for a market dominated and controlled by the same multinationals. Yet 30% of Chilean workers still earned less than a living wage, consumer prices had risen by over 50%, and there were certainly more people out of work than the officially recorded 6% of the population.
Under Frei, expectations had risen and the peasants and slum dwellers had been able to organise for the first time; between 1968 and 1970, these groups were increasingly involved in mass activity. In industry, Frei’s plan for workers’ participation in exchange for no-strike undertakings moved even the trade union federation – the CUT – to call a general strike. And the failure of the agrarian reform had brought splits in the Christian Democrats, leading to the formation of MAPU. [12]
As the elections of 1970 approached, the bourgeoisie was divided. The National Party and the Landowners Organisation (SNA) had mobilised against Frei’s land reforms and presented their own candidate for President – Alessandri. The Christian Democrats were internally split, and their candidate, Tomic, represented the ‘left’ of the party. For many writers, it is that split within the bourgeoisie that is decisive in explaining the election of Allende in 1970.
In fact, the crucial element in 1970 was the progress of the class struggle itself. Whatever his differences with the oligarchy, Frei saw the fundamental threat as coming from the workers. In 1969 and 1970, as the level of strikes and land occupations rose at extraordinary speed, Frei mobilised the infamous riot police (the Grupo Movil), the carabinieros and the army against striking and demonstrating workers. The atmosphere in these last two years was tense and active. University students marched on Santiago in the climax of a university reform movement; peasants (and Indian communities) occupied lands without waiting for the law to take its tedious course, and whole communities ‘parachuted’ into empty city sites and built their shanty towns. The working class, for its part, made increasing use of strikes and occupations in pursuit of better wages and working conditions. On the land, 693 strikes in 1967 became 1,127 in 1969, and land occupations rose from 9 to 148 in the same period. In 1969, 230,275 workers were involved in 1,939 strikes – by 1970, 5,295 strikes drew in 316,280 workers. [13] This was the background to the election of Salvador Allende – candidate for the Popular Unity (UP) coalition – and the driving force that brought him to power.
 
Popular Unity in government
Popular Unity (UP) was the latest in a series of Popular Fronts involving the Communist and Socialist Parties, and this time including the Radicals, MAPU, and two other small organisations. While it gained the largest number of votes in the elections of September 1970 (36.2%), it did not receive an absolute majority – Alessandri won 34.9% and Tomic 27.8%. In order to assume the Presidency at all, Allende required the support of the Christian Democrats in Congress. And the price of that support was a document called the Statute of Guarantees, a series of concessions which were to prove of critical importance.
Since it was clear from the outset that the right wing parties would not support any radical measures, the framework of UP’s reforms was the existing legislation. Politically, the programme operated within the constraints imposed by a coalition of reformist parties including the Radicals, and a perspective announced ‘as designed to win over the middle sectors’. In many ways, the programme went little further than Frei’s; it, too, represented a programme for economic growth, based on raising the level of consumption, through a general wage rise, and thus taking up the slack in the economy. On the question of agrarian reform, it undertook to carry through the provisions of the 1967 Agrarian Reform Law. It promised attacks on the US copper companies, and its first act in government was to legislate for the nationalisation without compensation of copper – though, as we have seen, the companies had already withdrawn most of their investments from Chile during the Frei period. The programme undertook to take on the Chilean oligarchy – that 2% of the population whose wealth stemmed from the land, but whose interests now extended into industry, finance and the press. Nonetheless, compensation to expropriated landlords was to be generous. [14] And while the oligarchy was attacked, it was made clear that ‘enterprises where private ownership of the means of production will remain in force will in terms of numbers remain the majority’. [15] Overall, it was planned to nationalise 150 out of 3,500 firms (and in fact that figure was further reduced at a later stage), leaving 60% of industry outside the public sector.
Yet it was the Statute of Guarantees which established most clearly the limits of UP policy. The agreement, signed in October 1970, was an undertaking by Allende to respect the autonomy of the police, and the armed forces, and to refrain from interference with the press and mass media, education, and the Church. In effect, the price of Christian Democrat support for Allende’s assumption of the Presidency was the assurance that UP would not attempt to extend its control into any other institution of the state. The mass movement that had brought Allende to power, however, knew nothing of the Statute, and the level of class struggle increased throughout 1971. For Allende, this represented a serious problem, a threat to the politics of compromise and to the capture of the middle sectors. His early speeches, therefore, return persistently to two themes: one, the need to raise production and productivity as an urgent priority, and two, the need the restrict workers’ and peasants’ demands and actions within the limits of bourgeois legality.
It is a challenge to us to accomplish everything in legal terms ... History has broken with past patterns; our revolutionary path is the pluralist path ... It is neither an easy nor a short term task to build socialism. It is a long and difficult task in which the working class must participate with discipline, organisation and political responsibility, avoiding, above all, anarchistic decisions and irresponsible, impulsive acts. [16]
This was to be a recurrent theme in government statements, growing more insistent as the class struggle developed.
The first year brought a general wage rise of 38% for manual workers and 120% for white collar workers, unemployment fell to below 10%, 90 factories were nationalised and 1,400 estates (30% of Chile’s cultivable land) were taken into state ownership. Inflation fell and GDP rose by 8%. At the same time, the local elections of April 1971 registered a rise of 14% in the UP votes. These early; economic advances were not the result of socialist measures, however, but of orthodox Keynesian techniques whereby the state intervened to raise the general level of economic activity. Their initial impact was to raise the living standards of workers, while prices remained for the first time below the level of wage rises. But, as was to become clear by the end of the first year, none of these initial actions affected the structure of Chilean capitalism nor represented any serious inroads into the economic power of the Chilean bourgeoisie. The confidence expressed in the April vote was rapidly, to come into question. In May, Allende called in the MIR, a far-left group, for discussions concerning the growing number of occupations of urban and farm land. In June, he moved to restrain ‘illegal’ occupations, which the Communist Party simultaneously denounced as ultra-left provocations. In July, the bill for the nationalisation of copper received unanimous support in Congress. [17]
It was already becoming clear, however, that the honeymoon period would be brief. The United States, upon whose direct and indirect economic aid both Alessandri’s and Frei’s economic programmes had depended, acted rapidly to block further aid [18] and to call in Chile’s enormous debts – doing so just as falling copper prices were increasing Chile’s problems. From 1970 to 1973, virtually the only US aid to reach Chile was military assistance, which was directly administered by the armed forces. Other finance was channelled through private firms or directly to the right wing parties. [19] And while private capital was enjoying the fruits of the short-term boom, there was significant disinvestment and hoarding of goods, particularly food. [20]
This brought about two responses. From the urban middle class there were anti-government demonstrations characterised by the waving of empty pots, such as the one in November 1971 coinciding with Fidel Castro’s visit. From the workers the level of struggle rose rapidly; 1971 ended with the highest number of land occupations (1,278) and strikes (1,758) hitherto recorded.
The fundamental issue at the beginning of 1972, therefore, was not government legislation but, centrally, the intensification of the class struggle. It was this which moved the middle classes to even louder and more insistent protests. Radimiro Tomic, ‘left’ Christian Democrat, complained of
the illegal occupations of farms, smallholdings, shanty towns, rented land, commercial offices, factories, mines, schools, colleges, public buildings, roads and bridges. Illegal occupations are not only the work of the ultra-left; they are also the spontaneous actions of groups of peasants, workers and miners. [21]
In this sharpened atmosphere the tolerance of the ruling class to the Allende government became much reduced. The right used their control of Congress to impeach Jose Hoha, the Interior Minister, in January. In February they put forward a bill restricting Allende’s right to order nationalisations. In the light of this offensive two alternative strategies emerged – to encourage and strengthen the workers’ own struggles so as to create extra-parliamentary support for the government (as the left socialists were arguing), or to retreat via such stratagems as the appeal to the Constitutional Court (as the socialist right, Allende himself and the CP were arguing). [22]
At Popular Unity conferences, first at El Arrayan then at Lo Curro, the right-wing strategy won hands down (later on we shall examine why this happened). The results were immediate – the pace of nationalisation slowed down, talks designed to agree upon a joint economic strategy with the Christian Democrats began, and Socialist and Communist ministers began to take punitive action against workers in struggle: for instance on May 12th, a street demonstration in Concepcion produced clashes. The Communist mayor called in the infamous riot police, the Grupo Movil, which Allende had promised to dismantle (but could not touch because of the Statute of Guarantees). The Communist Party accused the MIR of irresponsibility, and denounced the ‘ultra-left’ for jeopardising further talks with the Christian Democrats.
The new Cabinet announced in June, in keeping with this turn to the right, was notable for the dismissal of Pedro Vuskovic, economics minister, a left independent who was closely identified with calls for further nationalisations and thus a particular target for right-wing attacks. In the press and mass media, the right had been guaranteed the largest audience through its ownership of a majority of newspapers, TV and radio stations. The Catholic University channel, Channel 9, became the province of a neo-fascist priest called Hasbun, whose constant hysterical attacks provoked a series of workers’ occupations. Here, too, the Allende government used the police to ensure the return of the station to its ‘rightful owners’. And a series of minor electoral victories for UP served only to encourage and harden the right of the coalition.
The implications of the political line adopted at El Arrayan and Lo Curro were most clearly illustrated in the government’s relationship with the army. While the assault of the right continued in the ideological arena, and in parliament itself, Allende time and again reaffirmed his commitment to the Constitution. At the conference of UNCTAD held in April in Santiago, for example, he protested that
Little weight has been carried ... by the fact that the nationalisation process, with all its implications and consequences, has been the clearest and most categorical expression of the will of its people, and has been conducted in full accordance with the exact dictates of provisions established in the nation’s Constitution. [23]
It has been argued that Allende’s constitutionalism was simply tactical – yet the repeated statements of UP spokespeople, including Allende himself, clearly indicated a complete acceptance of the notion that the army was neutral. Corvalan, Secretary of the Communist Party, argued that ‘the army is not a body alien to the nation, in the service of anti-national interests’, while Allende himself had pointed to the ‘patriotism of our armed forces, their traditional professionalism, and their submission to the civil authority’. [24] These declarations were presumably meant to legitimate the increasingly central role the army was coming to play throughout 1972. In March, the visit of General John Ryan of the US Army was followed by an announcement of increased military aid to Chile – the UP government had nothing to say. Instead, it called in the army to control events – first, in December 1971, during the March of the Empty Pots; then, in May 1972, they were called in to enforce a ban against a left-wing counter-demonstration in Concepcion. In July, members of an extreme left armed group were arrested for robbery and subjected to systematic torture at police hands. Several months earlier, the army had been called into the Chuquicamata copper mine to control a miners’ strike. Then, on August 18th, 400 armed police invaded the poor working class district of Lo Hermida in Santiago, leaving one person dead, another dying, and an unspecified number of injured. Several days later, Allende offered his apologies to the inhabitants – yet at the same time he condemned the activities of the ‘ultra-left’, thus legitimating the role of the police and the army on the one hand, and espousing the CP line of attack on the ‘violence of left and right’, on the other. And in September, in response to right-wing attacks on a radio station in Bio Bio province, Allende declared a state of emergency, thus handing effective control to the police and the army once again.
If Lo Hermida had taught Allende nothing, it served to reinforce the fears of the rank and file of the workers’ movement. The Popular Assembly of Concepcion, held in July and August 1972 with 2,000 delegates attending, called for the formation of a Popular Assembly (which was actually part of the UP programme), and, argued that the struggle for workers’ control must be stepped up at all levels. The final item in its closing statement called for the construction of a workers’ state. It was clear that the class struggle was intensifying, as October was to prove.
Early in October, Allende embarked on a new set of discussions, this time with the judiciary, aimed at ‘curbing the violence of left and right’. Then, towards the end of the month, the lorry owners’ organisation announced a national strike, ostensibly in protest at the plan to form a national transport system. The owners gathered the lorries in car parks on the city outskirts, removed key engine parts, and set up armed guards at the gates. The strike was joined by large numbers of shopkeepers, and several professional organisations – of lawyers and doctors – announced that they would also be joining the strike. The Christian Democrats refused to discuss the situation with Allende, who was clearly unable to decide what to do. In the event, it was the working class which determined the outcome of events. Forming Communal Commands and ‘cordones’, the working class took on the lorry owners and the capitalists directly. The result was defeat for the ruling class and the right, and a renewed confidence and strength among the working class. In struggle, they had forged new organs of control and had demonstrated where the power in society really lay.
For Allende, however, the central issue was to reimpose state control. Once again, he called in the army to enforce that control and ‘restore order’ – three generals now joined the Cabinet. [25] The key task was the return of the factories occupied during the bosses’ strike. And this in turn demanded the demobilisation of the workers. In that context, the entry of the military into the Cabinet was for the specific task of returning the situation to a normality which would allow the employers to take their revenge. [26] Equally, as far as UP was concerned, the immediate task was to pull back the workers’ organisations under the umbrella of the UP parties and the CUT. Thus, in the aftermath, official pronouncements attacked the cordones as ‘parallel organisations’ to the CUT. El Siglo, the Communist Party newspaper, for example, denounced them as anarchist forms of organisation; one spokesman argued that:
the task now is to find a way in which the Communal Commands can make their activities complementary to those of government organisations. In this respect it is essential that the Comuna authorities participate in the Commands. [27]
And the position of the Socialist Party was identical. [28]
The coming elections of March 1973 provided an ideal instrument, and UP activists worked hard to channel the energies of the workers into electoral activity. By January 1973, it was clear that the cordones had been effectively demobilised, though Allende attempted to cover himself by responding to some of the demands that had emerged in October. The government announced new controls over distribution, which brought vehement protests from the right. Allende then put the head of the Air Force, Bachelet, in charge of distribution. Simultaneously, the Minister of Economy, Millas, a CP member who had replaced Vuskovic, proposed the return of 123 occupied factories.
As the March elections approached, the rhetoric of UP appeared to take on a more left-wing character. Allende proposed a single chamber parliament, a more central role for the CUT and a general wage rise for lower-paid workers. Yet only three weeks earlier he had appealed to striking miners to return to work and moderate their wage demands. In the event, UP won the elections with an increased vote (43.4%). Yet when a MAPU document criticising the government for its concessions to the right was published a few days later, Allende demanded the expulsion of the MAPU members responsible. Fifteen were later expelled, and MAPU split over the issue.
It was clear that the higher level of working-class support for UP was a response to the left-wing electoral rhetoric; but it was equally an expression of a new confidence and strength gained during the struggles of October. If the working class believed that UP would carry forward the new stage of the class struggle, however, they were soon proved wrong. Within a month, Allende was responding to new attacks from the right, including threats to impeach the Cabinet for transgressions against the Constitution, by attacking the ‘ultraleft’ on television! Having failed to undermine the electoral support for UP, the right, and the Christian Democrats in particular, turned now to increasingly open attacks against the government. Street violence increased, and one confrontation followed another. Yet throughout May and June, Allende continued to denounce the left, and seek dialogue with the right.
The core of the right-wing attack was that UP had reduced the country to economic chaos. The shops were empty, the black market was rampant, and inflation was running above 400%. Real wages fell in 1973 by around 50%. [29] Clearly, the direct responsibility for the crisis could not be laid at UP’s door. The economic chaos was consciously created by the bourgeoisie, through economic sabotage, the export of capital, and the systematic hoarding of goods. The United States, too, was exercising constant economic pressure through insistence on the repayment of debts and a blockade on aid to the government. And while welfare payments, and the wages of the poorest-paid had risen during the first two years, the fact was that the area of the economy under state control was small and barely increasing.
The contradictions came most clearly to the surface over the strike of the copper miners, which began in April 1973. The issue was whether the miners should insist on an inflation-linked cost of living increase. Allende asked the miners not to press the issue, using the promise to raise the wages of the lowest-paid as a lever against them. But the miners refused to accept Allende’s arguments. They were not a privileged class, but a key sector of the working class whose relatively higher wage levels had been won through decades of bitter struggle against the copper companies. In reality, Allende was asking them to sacrifice the gains they had won in struggle in order to appease the right and encourage the bourgeoisie to reinvest. When the strike persisted, Allende denounced the miners as ‘traitors’ and ‘fascists’ and when the miners marched to Santiago, they were greeted by ranks of police who attacked them with tear gas and water cannon. The bitterness and anger of the miners was carefully exploited by the right – fuelling even more the confusions of the left – for even they attacked the miners. The MIR, for example, ‘criticised the use of force, but attacked the miners for “economism”, even though they were fighting to maintain their living standards in an economy that remained capitalist’. [30] Yet the miners had not only been the backbone of the working class movement throughout its history; they had also given their support to the UP time and again in the period since 1970.
On June 29th, the tank regiment of Santiago under Roberto Souper declared a coup. It failed before it began. Yet it served once again to demonstrate the readiness of the working class to take on the bourgeoisie and conduct its own struggle directly. The working-class organisations that had appeared briefly in October 1972 emerged again, though their documents (and above all the newspaper of the joint committee of the cordones, Tarea Urgente) showed a greater political understanding and an even more combative spirit. Once again the factories were occupied and distribution controlled directly. And this time the workers’ organisation began to organise the defence of the factories. This was too much for Allende, who now reserved his attacks exclusively for the workers. He turned again to the army, inviting them to join the Cabinet. They refused. He offered posts to two leading Christian Democrats. They also declined. Yet, despite this refusal, the major speeches from government supporters at the time referred repeatedly to the armed forces’ neutral role and effectively continued to call on them to enter the Cabinet and take responsibility for the ‘restoration of order’. [31] For the workers, the message was clear: work harder, accept more sacrifice, ‘production is also revolution’ and ‘collect signatures against civil war’. As far as Allende saw it, the key task at this point was to remove the historical initiative from the working class and restore it, by force if necessary, to the state. One month later, in August, the military entered the Cabinet of UP for the last time. What had changed their mind? Two events; the first was the government’s agreement to use the Arms Control Law. Ostensibly passed to deal with the right, the Arms Control Law was administered directly by the armed forces – and was, in the reality of the situation, an invitation to the armed forces to disarm the working class. When the lorry owners embarked on a second national strike on July 26th, it was in the knowledge that their chief enemy, the organised working class, was under systematic attack. On August 9th, the Financial Times reported:
Availing themselves of powers given them under the arms control law, the services set about searching factories and leftist enclaves. These raids, carried out with little delicacy, incurred the wrath of the left. Few arms have apparently been turned up by the searches, and while nests of weapons have been uncovered by the police in the redoubts of wealthy rightists, and the present wave of violence certainly comes from the right, the military’s attention has been focussed exclusively on the left. [32]
In the course of these ‘arms searches’, militants, union activists and members of left parties were tortured and murdered. Allende knew – the left press contained literally hundreds of stories of what was happening; Chile Hoy carried dramatic photographs and eye witness reports. But Allende and his government did nothing. They could not hear the message coming from the worker at the Vicuna McKenna cordon:
... what we want is a revolution, we don’t want reformism, we want people’s power once and for all in Chile. We don’t want generals in the new Cabinet, because we think they want to stop the revolution. [33]
 
The other path: the struggles of the working class
None of what occurred in Chile before and after September 1973 can be understood outside the context of the class struggle, which in Chile had reached new and unprecedented heights between 1970 and 1973. The vast majority of the millions of words written about Chile have presented a picture in which the protagonists were a beleaguered government on the one hand, and a rapacious imperialism on the other. Yet that picture is deliberately false. For the dynamics of the Chilean process were determined by the relationship between a working class and a bourgeoisie locked in bitter struggle. At the key moments, in October 1972, and JuIy 1973, the UP government was transfixed by the spectre of a bourgeoisie that had taken to the streets. Yet it seemed equally fearful of a working class which developed new forms of organisation in response to that threat. And there was no doubt that the UP leadership, though it was incapable of mobilising the working class, still retained political authority within it, an authority it used to hold back the struggle on each occasion. Government spokespersons harangued workers as to the irresponsibility of organising outside the existing institutions of the state, and denounced as ‘anarchistic’ any concept of an independent organisation of workers. As the tempo of class struggle quickened it was the union leaders and the UP ministers who became the most adamant defenders of the bourgeois state.
These new forms of workers’ organisation, the cordones, emerged in October 1972, in response to the bosses’ strike. But they did not arise out of thin air. They were the outcome of an upward spiral in the class struggle, the product of workers’ activity that had moved to a higher level in the last two years of the Frei regime and continued to develop after Allende’s election. In the late 1960s the level of strikes rose rapidly and during 1971 had already risen to quite unprecedented heights. It also became much more generalised: many more unemployed were drawn in to the struggles and a higher proportion of the strikes were over questions of solidarity with other workers in struggle. [34] The class struggle on the land also increased as never before, and the spontaneous occupation of the land by landless peasants spilt over into the towns as workers squatted on urban plots owned by speculators.
Faced with the rising tide of struggle, the UP government attempted to incorporate it into the state. They used several instruments to this end. One was the JAPs, committees originally set up under Frei to rationalise the distribution of goods in working class districts, and including local shopkeepers. There was certainly a problem for workers, who were dependent on speculators and middlemen for their supplies – but the JAPs could in no way take on the fundamental conflict between workers and their bosses at the point of production. Yet the JAPs served to shift the location of struggle away from production, suggesting that the key issue was distribution, and that it was there that workers could improve their lot.
Other instruments more immediately attacked workers in struggle. The CUT, for instance, set up the Committees to Supervise Production in November 1970, with the explicit aim of raising productivity and convincing workers to exercise restraint in wage demands. They were used to attack the miners when they put forward a 45% wage demand four months later. The government itself issued its Basic Norms of Participation for Workers in the Private Sector, appealing to workers to maintain production, improve productivity etc.; industrial peace was the price to be paid in the private sector for the ‘gains’ supposedly being made in the nationalised or ‘Social’ sector of the economy. It was needed to secure the cooperation of the ‘non-monopoly’ sector of the bourgeoisie which the UP government continually sought, and it ensured that the occupations by squatters and peasants were condemned by them as irresponsible and a threat to continuing dialogue. [35]
The government’s instrument of reform was still the Christian Democrat Agrarian Reform Law of 1967, which was directed at the large landowners and excluded all landholdings below 160 acres (80 hectares); the law, then, was intended to protect the agrarian capitalist class, especially those beneficiaries of earlier reforms who were now themselves employers of labour. The process of legal takeover was long and tedious, so the peasant organisations simply occupied land directly; and the pressure for lowering the size limit to 80 acres (40 hectares) became insistent, especially since many of the landlords, allowed to keep their machinery and the best 80 hectares of land, were in fact profiting from the reform, and would continue to do so as the black market expanded.
From mid-1971, the UP government began to denounce the land takeovers with increasing stridency, accusing the MIR of organising the occupations. While it was true that the MIR had turned to organising among peasants and shanty town dwellers (see next section), their influence was minimal. The high level of mobilisation was the result of two years of developing class struggle in the countryside. The accusations levelled against the ‘ultra-left’, therefore, were a deliberate attempt to ignore that reality and to cover the contradiction at the heart of UP policy between the rhetoric of the ‘transition to socialism’ and the reality of constant compromise with the bourgeoisie.
By 1972, that contradiction was to emerge in the heartland of the economy, in the urban industrial areas which involved nearly three quarters of the economically active population. Here, too, the last years of the Frei regime had witnessed a rising tempo of struggle, stemming from the general strike of 1968, organised by the CUT, and accelerating permanently from then on. It was the wave of strikes and working-class mobilisations at every level that frightened and divided the bourgeoisie in 1970, and which brought UP to power. But the class struggle could not simply be turned on and off at will. Through 1971, the number of strikes grew, as workers interpreted the UP victory as a signal to intensify the fight to raise their general living standards and working conditions. For UP, however, the core of their economic policy was higher productivity, particularly in the state sector. Small though it was (21.9% of the total) [36], the state sector of the economy was the key, since many of the benefits envisaged in the programme were to come from higher profits in this area. The 90% of the working class not involved in the state sector of the economy, however, were hostages to the alliance with the bourgeoisie, ‘so that those workers within the private sector who were disciplined Popular Unity activists found themselves under an obligation to hold back their struggles in order to allow industrialists to “develop and grow” ... and any strike or takeover could be interpreted as “causing difficulties in the process” or “trying to leapfrog stages in the process”.’ [37]
For UP, the key issue was control – control over the workers’ movement through the CUT, and the unions included in it, and the maintenance of the political hegemony of the mass reformist parties   CP and Socialist Party. While the latter was certainly sustained at least until October, the ability of the CUT to control events was much more limited; only about 30% of the industrial workforce were unionised, plants of 25 workers or less were prevented by law from organising into a union. Yet it was precisely these sectors who had begun to press their employers in the tense atmosphere of the time; and it was the more organised workers, on the other hand, who saw the attempts by the bourgeoisie to sabotage their plants. It was a period of struggle and mobilisation – and a time when sector after sector of workers entered a battle for improved wages or conditions for control of the factory itself. Until mid-1972, the, tensions were contained within the CUT, but the signs began to emerge early in 1972. At the beginning of the year, a Congress of Textile Workers rejected government proposals for participation and demanded workers’ control of the industry and accountability of officials. From then on, factory congresses took place regularly, and the idea began to spread. Then, in May, a series of confrontations in the agricultural area of Maipu over the refusal of a judge to implement the law against a local landlord brought support from the workers of the adjoining industrial area of Cerrillos, who were themselves occupying the Yarur textile factory in the area. Out of this joint action was born the first cordon, formed in June to coordinate the struggles of a range of local organisations and led by the organised workers of the area. But the cordon embraced unionised workers as well as local squatters’ organisations, committees of distribution (JAPs) and neighbourhood committees.
The first clause of the first document produced by the cordon stressed ‘We shall support President Allende’s government insofar as it interprets the struggles and mobilisations of the workers’. [38] It called for an aggressive pursuit of the policy of expropriation of industry and land, and for the creation of a range of new state institutions under direct rank and file control. It demanded ‘the repudiation of the bosses and the bourgeoisie’ and called for the creation of ‘a popular assembly to replace the bourgeois parliament’. The next step demanded a revolutionary political leadership, capable of organising and leading the struggle to overthrow the state. But there was no such leadership, and the Popular Assembly which eventually convened in Concepcion in July/August exhibited a confusion in its understanding of its relationship to the government that was never clarified. The underlying conception remained that of mobilising to press the government to act, rather than developing an independent line of action.
The October crisis exposed the contradictions. As the lorry owners struck and were joined by whole sectors of the middle class, factory owners attempted to close their gates and stop production. Allende, as usual, was ambivalent and conciliatory, calling for a restoration of order. But the working class responded directly. The cordon was spontaneously generalised, as the various base organisations came together to counter the bosses’ strike. Lorries were forcibly taken and put back on the road, factories were occupied and kept at work, distribution was organised directly and shops reopened by local distribution committees – the Communal Commands – while medical personnel on the left kept the hospitals open. The so-called leadership of the workers’ movement was left behind by this qualitative leap in the level and nature of workers’ self-organisation. When the bosses’ strike was defeated, it was clear that it was the Chilean working class that had inflicted that defeat. While there are no figures for the numbers of people involved in the cordones, the two largest cordones, Cerillos-Maipu and Vicuna McKenna involved some 600 factories between them. Tens of thousands were directly involved, judging by the range and level of the mobilisations.
Yet the cordones declined in the aftermath of October. The confusions implicit in the Concepcion Popular Assembly about the Allende government being a workers’ government, about how the task of class conscious workers was to support it and on occasions to convince it to act – all these continued right through the October events. There was no voice on the left arguing that the way ahead was through the workers’ own organisations taking the road to power [39], and warning that the new Cabinet of Allende plus the generals – which was the ‘solution’ of the UP government – would inevitably be an obstacle to achieving it.
For their part the MIR was unwilling to accept the leadership of the working class, in which it had little influence, in the broader Communal Commands; the Left Socialists and the MAPU turned to internal struggles within their party, and the Communist Party was concerned only to denounce the intensification of class struggle as ‘a manoeuvre encouraged by the imperialists and the reactionaries using elements of the ultra-left and the MIR in particular’. [40] Once again, the denunciation of the ‘ultra-left’ was a veiled attack on the independent initiatives of workers.
Although after October the cordones declined, many of their leading committees remained in existence and continued to meet. UP responded by trying to incorporate some of the demands, particularly in the area of distribution [41], while reestablishing control by the CUT of the working class movement. Given its limited nature, this effectively meant excluding many of the workers who had participated most actively in the cordones. This achieved, the political activists who had been involved in the October struggles were now called upon to work for the March elections – thus diverting their attention away from the self-activity of the working class that had occupied the centre of the historical stage for a brief moment.
UP emerged from the congressional elections of March with an increased vote. For the bourgeoisie, who had anticipated a fall in UP support, the results of the vote were the final proof that their struggle would now have to be conducted outside parliament. The working-class organisations that had emerged in October and been largely demobilised in subsequent months, were now slowly reconstituted. The initial spark, in February 1973, was the Millas Plan – the government’s decision to return the vast majority of the occupied factories to their original owners. This met with universal resistance and led to the reconstitution of several of the leading cordones and communal commands. [42] As the tone of the propaganda of the right became increasingly strident and public in its decision to move to direct confrontation, the cordones and the commands slowly re-emerged – largely despite the parties of the left, who had called upon their best militants to work around the March elections and, in the case of the Communist Party, had specifically forbidden its members from participating in cordones or comandos.
Yet even before the events of June and July, the fundamental issues posed by the course of the class struggle in Chile – and the failure to understand them on the part of the revolutionaries – were posed clearly around another, and apparently unrelated issue. In April, the copper miners struck for their full 100% wage rise. Allende refused but offered productivity bonuses instead. The strike posed key questions. Government calls for sacrifice and productivity were particularly directed at the copper miners, who were both the best paid and the best organised members of the industrial working class. Yet the miners, like all other workers, had seen their living standards and real wages fall through the second half of 1972; they had seen the government make concession after concession to the bourgeoisie, they had experienced direct repression of previous strikes by the police, and they had heard the Communist Economy Minister, Millas, call for the return of the factories, occupied by the workers ‘once the danger was over’. Against such a background, UP’s assertions that it was still a workers’ government in transition to socialism must have seemed increasingly hollow and empty. The miners persisted in their strike; and UP escalated its attacks against them, culminating in a police attack on a miners’ march to Santiago. The left of UP – MAPU and the Socialist left – and the MIR were totally unable to respond to this new situation. While MAPU, in particular, had been openly critical of the UP leadership [43] and called for the formation of a ‘revolutionary pole’ together with the Socialist left, they were still talking in terms of an internal opposition within UP. Faced with the miners, however, they simply fell in behind UP’s denunciations, though they were critical of Allende’s tactics. For the same reason, they did not use their influence within the cordones to open the question of the independent organisation of the working class. The MIR offered no alternative analysis. As a result, the disillusioned miners became susceptible to the manipulations of the right.
It was one opportunity missed. But the critical opportunity came on June 29th, with the ‘tancazo’ (the attempted coup). This time the cordon organisation existed already in skeleton, and it became flesh within a matter of hours. In the few areas where no cordones existed, they were created instantly. [44] In the weeks that followed, new bourgeois offensives, culminating in the lorry owners strike of July 26th, met with united working class resistance. And there was a qualitative change from October; spontaneously, in the struggle, the working class itself moved on from slogans calling for the defence of the government, to demands for: ‘A hard line’, ‘Fascists to the wall’ and ‘Close the National Congress’. Factories were again occupied, but the documents issuing from the cordones made it clear that this time they would not be returned under any circumstances. Militias were organised to defend the factories and the working-class areas. In one clothing factory whose workers were mainly Christian Democrats, the change had come dramatically:
Before June 29th, politics was never discussed at the El As factory. The majority of the women are supporters of the Christian Democrats, and the few women who were left wing did not discuss things any more actively. Today, a few weeks after the takeover, the workers are organised in committees and in vigilance brigades, and are discussing the CUT’s statements and disagreeing with them ...
Maria Sandoval, with the CUT statement in her hand, explained: ‘Look, this statement here is a betrayal of the working class. The CUT’s solution is to talk with the bosses and reach an agreement with them, giving them back the factories. I was never very much one for mixing in politics, we never talked very much about the process ... but if we workers want power, we shall never get it giving back factories, however small they may be.’ [45]
And the Coordinating Committee of the Cordones asserted in a major document that:
The Industrial Cordones should be based on the broadest working class participation, giving free rein to the creativity and revolutionary initiatives of the class. We must struggle against sectarianism and bureaucracy that takes decisions at a superstructural level and without reference to the masses. [46]
Although the same document rushed to assure the government and the CUT that there was no intention to set up ‘parallel organisations’, it was clear where the initiative lay; it was still not too late for revolutionaries to forge the leadership of the movement into an instrument for taking on the state. Yet the left displayed only confusion and indecision. When the rank and file sailors of Talcahuano denounced the coup preparations taking place in the Navy, the left protested at UP’s indifference to their exposures, and issued calls into the air for action against the coup. How different it would have been had the left achieved root in the working class movement which had created what was effectively the embryo of dual power, an alternative order lived out day to day in the cordones and the communal commands. Had they done so, had they moved the working class, independently of government, to mass support for the sailors, the balance of forces might have changed definitively. [47]
UP and its leadership, its control finally lost, turned again to the right and to the generals. As the official leadership of the working class retreated, and the left vacillated before the sheer force of the workers movement, the working class was left to fight that unavoidable battle under the worst possible conditions. If, as Trotsky argued in reference to Germany, the leadership retreats in the face of a rampant bourgeoisie, then the battle will not be avoided – it will merely be conducted under the worst possible conditions from the workers’ point of view, and ‘be transformed into a series of frightful, bloody and futile convulsions’. [48]
 
Where was the left?
Popular Unity was a coalition of several parties, but it was clear from the outset that political hegemony within it lay with the Communist Party, as expressed in the concept of an ‘anti-monopoly alliance’ setting out to ‘win over the middle sectors’. As Luis Corvalan, CP General Secretary, told the 14th Party Congress in 1969:
in a popular government we conceive the existence of the opposition, within the limits of the laws of the country, which will of course be inspired in the interests of the people not of the privileged few ...
We Communists consider that in a regime of popular government, and later on, in the conditions of socialism, each of the people’s political trends will retain their particular characteristics, all religious creeds will be respected, and therefore there will be ideological and political pluralism, notwithstanding the struggle of each for its own ideas. [49]
Economics Minister Vuskovic put it more succinctly:
Certain interests will be affected, but these will not include the vast majority of non-monopolist industrialists. On the contrary, they will be offered extensive possibilities not only of permanence but of growth. [50]
The coalition would be built around a programme of nationalism, gradualism and economic growth which would reassure all but the most recalcitrant sectors of the bourgeoisie. If UP could build such an alliance where Frei had failed, it would be because it could deliver the working class to the bargaining table. The CP had already demonstrated its commitment to the alliance by accepting the Statute of Guarantees; it was to repeat that commitment in the three years of UP with its attacks on the cordones and comandos as ‘parallel organisations’ or ‘anarchist forms’. In October 1972, and July 1973, it was the voice of the Communist Party that called loudest for the return of the factories, and to put all ones faith in the armed forces, denouncing:
those reactionaries who have begun to seek ways to drive a wedge between the people and the armed forces, maintaining little less than that we are intending to replace the professional army. [51]
The implications of this attitude became clear in their response to the sailors who denounced the imminent coup in August 1973. Corvalan responded by delivering them up for trial to the very people whose complicity in the coup plot they had denounced. Corvalan explained, ‘we must let the Military Office of Prosecution unroll the entire skein and the state security organs take the corresponding actions’. As the coup approached, the CP reserved most of its bile for those who threatened the alliance with the middle class (‘the tactics of the ultra-left objectively played into the hands of reaction’). [52] Thus, on the September 4th demonstration, the Communist banners proclaimed the middle way – ‘No to the violence of Left and Right; No to Civil War’.
Allende and the leadership of the Socialist Party accepted this line without question; the UP programme itself represented a victory for the ring-wing leadership of the Socialists over its own left. The first test came with the Statute of Guarantees, which the SP refused to accept at first; yet it finally joined the government that had signed it. The Socialist right accepted the CP notion of the ‘capture of a part of power’, which was explained in this curious formulation:
In Chile a situation has been created whose special feature is that, from a class point of view, dual power is expressed in the existence of a line of demarcation within the existing state apparatus itself, rather than in a confrontation between the bourgeois state apparatus and an alternative state expressing the interests of the working class and its allies. [53]
A Socialist militant, Pio Garcia, refuted this absurd idea:
The fact that in Chile the popular forces have gained control of government, or the executive branch of the state, has given rise to incorrect formulations which call into question the whole strategic orientation of the revolutionary process. For example, the simplistic formulation that ‘part of power’ has been won. The bourgeois state still exists in Chile ... The formula ‘dual power’ corresponds to a situation in which, as in Russia in 1917 when the Soviets and the provisional government confronted one another, there coexist two powers which cannot by definition exist within a single state apparatus. [54]
What this revealed was the existence within the Socialist Party of two clearly distinct currents. The battle between them has shaped the internal life of the Socialist Party since 1940. Time and again the left within the party has managed to pass resolutions of a revolutionary manner, like this one passed in 1967:
The Socialist Party, as a Marxist-Leninist organisation, declares the taking of power as the strategic goal to be achieved by this generation, to establish a revolutionary state which will liberate Chile from dependency and from economic and cultural backwardness and begin the construction of socialism.
Revolutionary violence is inevitable and legitimate. It necessarily results from the repressive and armed character of the class state. It is the only road to the capture of political and economic power and to the subsequent defence and strengthening of that power. Only by destroying the bureaucratic and military apparatus of the bourgeois state can the socialist revolution be consolidated. [55]
Even after Allende’s victory, the statements emerging from the Socialist left continued the same theme. In May 1971, for example, the transition to socialism was seen as an immediate task:
The Socialist Party sees the revolutionary process as an uninterrupted march, with neither stages nor premature consolidations within the existing capitalist system, towards full conquest of power by the workers, aiming simultaneously at fulfilment of still unrealised democratic tasks and of new socialist tasks ... Considered in isolation as a goal in themselves, reforms are no more than reformism ... They become revolutionary when inserted into an overall revolutionary strategy pointing toward replacement of one class by another in management and control of the new society ...
The UP government will have revolutionary content to the extent that it stops leaning exclusively on bourgeois institutionality and helps open the road to a new institutional order. [56]
The government, by contrast, argued that
A conscious, organised and disciplined people, together with the unequivocal loyalty of the Armed Forces and the Caribinieros, is the best defense of the Popular Government and the best guarantee of our national future. [57]
It was equally clear that the Socialist left saw that the initiative must come from below, and that this would be the driving force, ‘pushing forward the process and deepening class contradictions’. Yet this was seen as taking place within definite constitutional limits; the cordones, for example, were therefore regarded as ‘complementary organisations to the people’s government which would bring new life to the existing organisations of the working class, but under no circumstances organisations dependent on the government’. And this view was closely reflected in documents issued by the cordones themselves, whose leadership in many cases belonged to the Socialist Party: ‘In taking over factories, estates and other enterprises, and in strengthening their own organisations, they prepared for the defence and continuing advance of the popular government, and continued the struggle to initiate the building of a socialist society.’ [58]
Clearly the Socialist left did have an orientation towards the rank and file, and a concept of socialism built from below. Yet none of this led them to understand that the development of the struggle would necessarily produce a conflict between a government committed to a reconciliation of class interests, and a working class movement ‘struggling to initiate the building of a socialist society’. Nonetheless, the question of the military power of the state and how it could be dismantled was discussed internally. In May 1971, Altamirano, the party’s General Secretary, said:
Armed confrontation between classes is inevitable ... Reaction will again knock at the barracks door. Lenin’s words are pertinent to our situation: ‘It seems impossible to fight against a modern army; the army has to become revolutionary ...’ In reality, the indecision of the troops, inevitable in any truly popular movement, leads to a real struggle for the army as the revolutionary struggle intensifies. [59]
It is important to stress that these ideas were, in many cases, the official policy and programme of the Socialist Party, and it was on the basis of them that large numbers of workers joined the Socialist Party and accepted its leadership in the cordones. It was on the basis of this mass influx of members [60], of the growing influence of revolutionary ideas and of a rising working class membership attracted by the explicitly revolutionary policies of the Socialist Party, that the Socialist left approached the UP Conference at El Arrayan with confidence. After all, the party’s programme suggested that they would win the day. Instead, the El Arrayan meeting served to confirm the reformist direction of Allende’s government. Far from supporting workers’ struggles, and debating how to deepen and extend the march towards socialism, the Conference concluded:
Popular Unity recognises a legitimate place for the broad strata of small and middle proprietors to exist and develop. We have time and again repeated that the programme is not contrary to the interests of the non-monopolist private sector, which has always had and still has real contradictions with the big monopolistic enterprises in production and distribution. [61]
The Socialist left set out to defend a position that was internally contradictory and self-defeating. Its revolutionary rhetoric could not conceal the fact that it repeatedly expressed its unequivocal support for the Allende government; it saw the government as an essential component for the achievement of socialism at that point in time, irrespective of its policies or composition. For what, in the real situation, were the available alternatives? On the one hand, quite simply, the fall of Allende, and the return of power to the right; or the establishment of workers’ power on the other. As Allende took his government further and further to the right, along the road of collaboration and capitulation to the bourgeoisie, the Socialist left faced a stark choice; either they must abandon their commitment to a revolutionary strategy, or they must abandon the conception that workers’ power could be built in a complementary relationship to the UP government. The choice was of real moment; for it was clear that the Socialist left had real roots and an acknowledged leadership among the leaders of the cordones and the comandos – a far greater weight than any other organisation in the rank and file organisations. In practice, however unwillingly and unconsciously, however much it was argued in terms of immediate tactical considerations, it was the first route they chose – revolutionary rhetoric notwithstanding.
Had the Socialist left taken its own rhetoric seriously, it would have split from the Socialist Party to build a distinct, revolutionary party which would counterpose the power implicit in the cordones to that of the government and the parties of Popular Unity that supported it. Undoubtedly, that would have broken the very Socialist Party from which they had emerged. Of course, this cannot be achieved overnight, under the pressure of the moment – as many Socialists discovered at terrible cost on September 11th. You cannot both induct workers into a party committed to a version of reformism, and prepare to destroy that very party at the same time. That much has been revealed time and again in the history of the working class movement. To give but one example, consider the case of Rosa Luxemburg in 1914. For 15 years she had correctly pointed out the bureaucratic and opportunistic nature of the Kautskyite centre of the party; yet she remained a member of that party. Faced with the party’s complete surrender to the forces of the German state at the onset of war, she found herself isolated, with no organised following, and no vehicle for arguing her views. Her biographer described the consequences of her failure to build a revolutionary party early enough:
Both Rosa Luxemburg and Clara Zetkin suffered nervous prostration and were at one moment near to suicide. Together they tried on 2 and 3 August to plan an agitation against the war; they contacted 20 SPD members with known radical views, but they got the support only of Liebknecht and Mehring ... Rosa sent 300 telegrams to the local officials who were thought to be oppositional, asking their attitude to the vote [in favour of war credits by the party in the German parliament] and inviting them to Berlin for an urgent conference. The results were pitiful; Clara Zetkin was the only one who immediately and unreservedly cabled support. [62]
In Chile, as the cordones developed, their leaders, who had joined the Socialist Party because of its revolutionary ideas, found that, far from providing a political instrument to carry the struggle forward, their membership of the Socialist Party imprisoned them and tied them to the existing state apparatus. In their statements, they tried to reconcile the irreconcilable – but in the end they fell back from the brink, from the challenge for power. It was noticeable, at the key moments of struggle, in October 1972 and July 1973, that the Socialist Party adopted no position as a party, completely abdicating political leadership. But the same was true of a Socialist left whose continuing alliance to the state silenced it when that very state sent the army into the factories in July 1973.
Could it have been otherwise? Was there a general demand from the active rank and file for a revolutionary party? Clearly not, at least explicitly. Yet the practice of workers engaged in occupying factories, controlling the streets, arming themselves, albeit in a piecemeal and disorganised way, and insisting that there be no capitulation to the military or the bourgeoisie, represented just such a demand. [63] But it went unanswered.
The silence that greeted the mass struggle pointed to a deeper irresolution, an unwillingness to break with a number of the central theoretical ideas that entrapped the Socialist left. First and foremost, there was the question of the state. While recognising the need to dismantle the armed force of the state, it continued to maintain that another part of the same state apparatus, the executive, could function in an opposite way and act as a bulwark of socialism. There were two fundamental errors here. First, it assumed that there was a separation between the government and the army – in fact there was none; the generals were inside the government itself. Since the Statute of Guarantees ensured that the executive would under no circumstances invade the prerogatives of the military, it could only mean that the generals would progressively ‘invade the prerogatives’ of the government – which is, as we shall see, exactly what happened.
Yet even if this had not happened, it would still have involved a gross misunderstanding of the nature of government in capitalist societies, a misunderstanding which Marx exposed a hundred years earlier in his critique of the German socialist Lasalle. Like UP, Lasalle had argued for a socialist sector in the economy ‘in order to pave the way to a solution of the social question’ through ‘state aid, under the democratic control of the toiling people’. Marx derided this position:
Instead of arising from the revolutionary process of transformation of society, the ‘socialist organisation of the total labour’ ‘arises’ from the ‘state aid’ that the state gives ... and which the state, not the worker, calls into being. It is worthy of Lasalle’s imagination that a new society can be built with state loans just as well as a new railway. [64]
As regards demands by the workers for state intervention, Marx was clear that:
they are of value only insofar as they are the independent creations of the workers and not protégés either of the governments or of the bourgeoisie. [65]
Of course, ‘between capitalist and communist society lies the period of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other’; but, Marx argued, ‘there corresponds to this also a political transition period in which the state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat’. In other words, the transition period from capitalism to socialism can only begin after the working class has decisively smashed the bourgeois state. It is only the failure to understand this, and the conviction that the transition had already begun (which was the argument put forward by Allende) that can explain their condemnation of the striking miners of El Teniente in May 1973. For had it been otherwise, instead of supporting the state against the workers, they would have recognised the need to develop (workers’ struggles to the point where they would decisively smash it.
The precondition for such a decisive step, of course, would have been the existence within the workers’ movement of a party constantly and consistently arguing the need to smash the bourgeois state and to replace it with the instruments of direct power that the Chilean working class were creating. Yet the Socialist left did not argue this; and the reason lies, at least in part, in their very conception of the party. For they did not recognise in the cordones the potential centre of an alternative power, but saw the process developing at two different but parallel levels: the rank and file, confronting local and partial problems, on the one hand, and the government, resolving the problems of society, on the other. In reality, this led to the inevitable subordination of the rank and file to the government. A revolutionary party would have had a crucially different understanding of the relationship between the party and the working class. Even at their best, the Socialist left never rose above the notion that it was the party that would interpret the wishes of the class and itself carry through the social transformation. They remained unwilling or unable to fight for the leadership of a struggle for the self-emancipation of the class – thus they failed to provide any kind of direction at the key points of struggle; they could not judge the class struggle on the basis of the tempo of real events and the real confrontation between the classes. Instead, they interpreted these events in the aftermath, and always in the context of a political debate within or between parties rather than providing an interpretation that would yield new instruments to carry the struggle forward.
If the Socialist left represented the major pole for workers seeking revolutionary ideas, the UP leadership reserved most of its attacks on the ‘ultra-left’ for the movement of the revolutionary left, the MIR. The MIR was formed in 1965, under the impact of the Cuban Revolution. Its politics were Guevarist, devoted to the preparation of armed struggle, which would be conducted by a small group of professional revolutionaries. Insofar as it discussed mass work at all, it was in the context of a ‘rearguard’, supplying new guerrilla recruits and maintaining those already in the field. Thus the revolution could be conducted by the revolutionaries on behalf of an undistinguished mass of ‘the people’. The need to define a revolutionary class, whose self-emancipation would herald the transformation of society towards socialism, never arose. The internal structure of the party reflected this militarist concept; it was a command structure, and there were no facilities for internal discussion or political debate.
Staying out of the UP coalition, it responded to the 1970 election victory with a fiery left rhetoric but with the central tenets of its politics unchanged; socialism was not about workers’ self-emancipation and the role of revolutionaries was not to build a party out of the workers’ own struggles leading the construction of workers’ councils and the smashing of the existing state apparatus. Instead the MIR leaders found themselves drawn behind the politics of the Socialist and Communist parties. It was inevitable that they would, given their own theoretical poverty and the common ground that they shared with the major reformist parties: the belief that socialism was to be gained by an elite acting on the behalf of the ‘masses’, that it could only succeed if the ‘more privileged’ (e.g. many of the leading sectors of the Chilean working class like the miners) made sacrifices, and so on. Given these substantial points of agreement, the rise in the class struggle in the late 1960s merely propelled the MIR into the broad orbit of the Socialist left. In 1969 it suspended armed struggle in an attempt to build a mass base among slum dwellers and peasants (where the influence of the established reformist parties was minimal), but its politics prevented it from doing anything significant once it had gained a hearing. It set up front organisations of peasants and slum dwellers (its workers’ organisation, the FTR, was not set up until 1972), but when faced with the reality of workers in struggle, more often than not it responded by meekly following the line of the UP government – with disastrous results. So while the MIR was able to help in the growth of the comandos, over the really crucial question – the role of the cordones – it was completely on the wrong side, siding with the CP and the SP right wing and denouncing the cordones as parallel organisations that undermined the CUT. Even when the class struggle reached the new heights of October 1972 and July 1973, it still called for the building of a ‘left current’ in the CUT.
In short, in these crucial areas the MIR simply reflected the reformist politics of UP. It is true that in July 1973, Miguel Enriquez, the party’s General Secretary, called for an armed uprising in a famous speech. But this was empty rhetoric in the context of the attacks already being directed against the working class. It is futile to issue calls for revolution, when you have failed to offer support in the struggles that precede that giant step. Yet the MIR had condemned the El Teniente miners for ‘economism’ when they went on strike over the demand for the full indexation of wages. Such lack of support almost certainly drove many of the strikers into the hands of the right, which did give them support as a stick to beat the UP with. So, while the MIR declared itself militarily and organisationally independent of the UP government, politically it remained fatally dependent on it.
As events moved towards their final and devastating outcome, Trotsky’s comments on Germany provide a bitter summary of the key issues that faced, but were ignored by, the Chilean revolutionary left in the MIR and the Socialist Party:
The workers understand that the great battle requires firm leadership. They are not frightened by the strength of fascism nor by the necessity of a ruthless struggle; they are disturbed only by the uncertainty and wavering of the leadership, by the vacillations in the moments of greatest responsibility. Not a trace of depression ... will remain in the factories just as soon as the party raises its voice firmly, clearly and confidently. [66]
 

The denouément
On August 14th 1973, Joan Garces, one of Allende’s closest advisers, wrote him an open letter. It was a response to the inclusion of the military in the Cabinet:
If the bourgeoisie manages to provoke an economic crisis nothing could be more harmful to the popular movement than to find itself with a working class that is disorganised and incapable of acting. If today the workers are sceptical and suspicious of the government, demobilised, and with their spirit undermined, what is there to prevent the fall of our government? [67]
The question was answered on September 11th. Yet, as Garces emphasised in his letter, the preparations for the coup were already being made, quite openly, and with the active complicity of Allende’s government. Neither were they secret. Towards the end of July, the left press reported that the military and the police were using the Arms Control Law to raid the offices of unions and left-wing organisations, arresting and torturing militants. Rank and file sailors and airmen had already publicly warned the government that everything was being made ready for a coup – yet Allende ignored their warnings. In a sense, the die was already cast. At the beginning of August, the atmosphere was electric. The lorry owners were on strike, this time indefinitely (i.e. until the government fell). The right-wing terrorist organisation, Patria y Libertad, had announced publicly that it had gone underground in preparation for the final confrontation. Father Hasbun was broadcasting daily on Channel 9, promising imminent revenge against the left. The Christian Democrats announced at the end of July that they were suspending all negotiations with the government. On August 9th, Allende announced the formation of the UP-Generals Cabinet. Nine days later, General Ruiz, Minister of Transport, resigned and then called for a coup in a TV interview. On the 23rd, General Prats, Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and the constant hope of UP, who saw him as the guarantee of the ‘patriotism’ of the armed forces, resigned his post. On the 24th, his replacement, Augusto Pinochet, took his seat in the Cabinet.
On August 17th, Chile Hoy reported that Punta Arenas, in the far South, was already ‘an occupied city’:
Since June 29th, this city has been under virtual military occupation. The streets are patrolled by an impressive number of soldiers, who stop and search pedestrians and workers who happen, by some coincidence, to be all supporters of the left. Ten days before their attack on the factories on the 4th of August, the three provincial commanders of the different branches of the armed forces made a public statement, advising the working class that any attempt on their part to form industrial cordons would be stopped immediately ... [68]
The statements coming out of the cordones and mass organisations were defiant and confident; the working class responded to the bosses’ strike, for example, by forming a series of regional co-ordinating committees. Yet Allende ignored all the signs, and the leaderships of the UP parties made appeals to the armed forces, and called for calm. All, that is, except the Socialist Party, whose General Secretary Altamirano managed to combine, as usual, a fiery rhetoric with a continuing support for a government that had surrendered the initiative to the military [69], and appeared more afraid of the working class than of the military.
On September 4th 1973, a million people marched through the streets of Santiago to commemorate the third anniversary of Allende’s election. Their presence was testimony that they were ready to fight, to defend their class against an armed bourgeoisie. But there was no revolutionary leadership to grasp that historic responsibility and coordinate and arm the mass workers’ organisations. The political leadership of the workers’ movement remained in the hands of the reformists – and for them, the battle was lost. Helios Prieto recorded the strangely muted, depressed atmosphere that pervaded that mass demonstration [70] – yet those who filed through the streets were the same workers who weeks before had built new organs of struggle, the highest expression of the workers’ movement yet seen in Chile, and the embryos of a new, alternative state power. Despite the chanting, the Chilean, workers clearly felt that the final act of the class struggle was at hand – and that they were impotent to prevent it.
For the bourgeoisie, the military coup was the final, and only option that remained to them. One by one, through the previous three years, they had used the other instruments under their control; and on each occasion, the prompt and determined action of the working class had robbed them of the triumph. The initial loss of the Presidency was certainly a blow, but the right still had their majority in Congress to block legislation. [71] Yet time and again, the mass movement of workers seized the initiative and drove UP to make concessions to them – albeit minor and often temporary – and adopt a slightly more defiant attitude to the right.
The bourgeoisie then escalated its actions, turning to its second set of options – the economic strike. In October 1972, the coordinated campaign around the lorry owners strike was intended to bring the economy to the point of collapse, yet again, it was the working class which turned the tables on the bourgeoisie. The inclusion of the military in the Cabinet in November, then, has to be seen as an attempt by Allende to win back the confidence of the right wing, and to separate the government from the actions of its supporters in the working class. Certainly, in the period leading up to the Congressional elections of March 1973, the right began to debate two strategies – the ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ coup. The latter represented a combination of economic and political assaults on the UP government – what was called, with conscious irony, the ‘Russian Marshals’ strategy. [72] This involved the creation of economic chaos which would lead to a general disillusionment with Allende and an overwhelming victory for the right at the March elections. In fact March showed increased support for the UP government, a support based on the incorporation into active struggle of whole new sections of the working class through the cordones and the comandos and despite the leadership of UP.
After march, Christian Democrats, the National Party and Patria y Libertad came to recognise that from their point of view, the ‘hard’ coup – the physical destruction of the working class movement – was now the sole alternative. The bourgeoisie had played each of its cards, confident in the knowledge that Allende would retreat and compromise at every turn. If they chose, in the end, to opt for the most barbaric of all the options available to them, it was because of the qualitative advances that had been achieved by the working class movement itself. For while the executive could be neutralised by the bourgeoisie’s control over the other state institutions, the working class could not be held back so easily. In that light, the bourgeoisie (and it was the whole bourgeoisie) played its final card – the armed destruction of the government and the working class movement itself.
On the morning of September 11th, the Moneda Palace was bombed and Salvador Allende killed. At just after 9 in the morning, he made his final broadcast. On those final words, a myth has been built – a myth of a heroic leader defending his people to the last. Yet there is no room in the legend for the man who surrendered power to the bourgeoisie, who ignored the systematic assaults on the working class before the coup, who lost hope and confidence long before the coup came. Allende’s last words are symbolic and moralistic – but what is most notable about them is that they have nothing to say to the working class. It seems that the message is directed only at the hagiographers, the historians of some ill-defined future:
They have the power, they can oppress us, but social processes cannot be held back by criminal acts or force of arms. History is ours and it is made by the people ...
Workers of my country. I want to thank you for the loyalty you have always shown me, the faith you have shown in one man who was merely the interpreter of your search for justice, who gave his word to respect the Constitution and the law, and who kept his word ... [73]
It was an acknowledgement of defeat. For the working class, still ready to fight, the morning brought the bitter realisation that nothing had been prepared, that the calls to arms and defiant speeches had been nothing more than rhetoric. At one of the better organised factories one militant complained that:
When we got there (the Indumetal factory) the workers had already occupied the factory with the most rudimentary weapons. We gave out AMK guns and showed them how to use them. We had some bazookas and some machine guns. The most disturbing factor, though, was the lack of any specific plan, any direction and especially the lack of contact and coordination with other places where there was resistance. We’d no idea what was going on outside the factory. [74]
In fact they were among the very few whose small stocks of arms had not been confiscated in previous weeks by the military. The general picture was one of confusion, impotence and isolation; the working class was left to take the brunt of a coup that, by 1974, had murdered 30,000 of their number.
Yet as the torture and the terror drowned the Chilean working class in blood, reformism around the world was hard at work, drafting the explanations and the excuses that would cover over the real and terrible lessons of that ‘peaceful road to socialism’ now littered with so many dead.
 
Chile and the left
A number of explanations were offered in the aftermath of the military coup. Each of them uses Chile as an example to illustrate a political perspective at home. Yet Chile as a political theme has had a wider implication than simply to serve as a model for analysis. It has been used to cover a generalised shift to the right among Communist and Social Democratic parties worldwide, and to justify a renunciation of the very concept of the transformation of society and of a socialism that is the act of the producers of wealth themselves. In the aftermath of September 11th the very word Chile has become synonymous with the ‘historic compromise’ and that plaintive ‘farewell to the working class’.
What are the arguments?
For the Communist Party, the supine attitude of the Allende government before the bourgeoisie was correct and justified by the fact that: ‘Far from having a majority of the population, Allende got only 36% of the popular vote in 1970. The objective therefore was to win more and more people to support the government.’ [75]
Had that happened, the coup might have come earlier and might have been even more bloody than the one that did take place; certainly there is not the slightest hint in the above remarks of how the actual instruments that carried out the murder of the Chilean working class – the army and their big business backers – would be disarmed by it.
But even if we place that on one side, the question still remains: how could such a majority be obtained? The bosses’ strike, the virtual complete elimination of all western aid, the reduction of international credit to a fifth of its pre-1970 level – all strongly politically motivated [76] – meant that there was not the least chance of winning over the ‘non-monopolist bourgeoisie’ or the petty bourgeoisie to the side of Popular Unity. Quite the contrary, the government became for them more and more a government of chaos and disorder. Their acquiescence could be gained – in the absence of a viable carrot – only by the stick. Only the reality of the power of an armed and aggressive working class could hold them back from wholehearted support for the coup. But that, of course, points in exactly the opposite direction to the strategy of seeking a consensus with sections of the bourgeoisie.
What this suggests is the complete impossibility of winning over these layers given the international economic arena within which Chile was (and is) inserted. At the time this quite elementary point was strongly denied within Communist Party circles, content as they were to talk about the British, the Italian, the Chilean etc. road to socialism, as if each national road were unaffected by the dynamics of the world capitalist economy of which they were all part. Even as late as September 1973, for instance, Marxism Today was quoting CP General Secretary Luis Corvalan that ‘Always we have maintained that in the conditions existing in Chile there is a real possibility to complete the anti-imperialist and anti-oligarchical revolution, and march towards socialism without civil war, although naturally maintaining an intense class struggle’.
No sooner had the coup occurred than everything was sharply reversed. Instead of the ‘real possibility’ of the ‘march towards socialism’, we were told instead by Italian CP leader Berlinguer that ‘No one can deny the decisive role played by the presence and active intervention of US imperialism in events in Chile. [77] On the one hand then the viability of the national road to socialism is asserted; on the other it is denied, because of the international nature of the world capitalist system.
But more was at stake than the wretched logical contortions through which the CPs found themselves twisting after the September events. The purpose of the CPs’ newly-found discovery of the international nature of world capitalism, was not after all to retrospectively side with Trotsky against Stalin about ‘socialism in one country’ as opposed to international revolution in 1924, but rather to add substance to the claim that from 1970 to 1973 Chilean socialism was constitutionally viable until murdered from without by an American plot. This quite deliberately obscured the fact that it was Chilean soldiers who murdered 30,000 Chilean workers; that it was Chilean capital that prepared the conditions for the coup, and whose interests were served by it. The protagonists of the Chilean experience of 1970–73 were not nations but classes, whose struggle and conflict reached a new and unprecedented level. The solution of September was a class solution. The insistence on the external plot keeps alive the notion of a ‘national alliance’, a multi-class block joined by its opposition to imperialism. Yet under the pressure of the class struggle itself, no compromise was sufficient to keep that spurious alliance alive. UP’s insistence on continuing to make concessions to the right when it had abandoned even the pretence at constitutionalism simply served, in the reality, to strengthen and reinforce the forces ranged against the Chilean working class.
The logical conclusions of this line of thinking did not take long to be drawn:
What light does all this throw on the prospects of a transition to a socialist society under peaceful and constitutional conditions? I believe it underlines the importance of maintaining both unity and the broadest possible front of support. This may mean what the Italian Communists now call an ‘historic compromise’ – i.e. governing down the pace of social change to what is acceptable to the potential allies or the potential neutrals among the middle class. [78]
We must work to constantly increase the weight and ensure the eventual predominance of those tendencies that, with a sense of historical and political realism, recognise the necessity and maturity of a constructive dialogue and agreement among all the popular forces ... we are the first to realise that the march towards this prospect is not easy and cannot be hurried. But neither must we think that the time at our disposal is infinite ... the necessity to open at long last a sure road of economic development, social renewal and democratic progress ... make it increasingly urgent and pressing to arrive at what we call the great new ‘historical compromise’. [79]
The politics that derives from the Chilean experience the conclusion of the ‘historic compromise’ has at least the virtue of consistency. The logic of the parliamentary road to socialism, of a process whose tempo will be finally determined by sections of the bourgeoisie, must and does lead to an abandonment of socialism. What would have satisfied the Christian Democrats in Chile? What rate of progress towards socialism would the Chilean bourgeoisie have found acceptable? The answer is simple and obvious – no progress in the struggle for socialism is acceptable to capital. For the struggle for socialism is not the pursuit of negotiated benefits for workers, but a fundamental transformation of society, which sets the majority of society and its interests at the heart of all social and economic decisions. The conflict between those interests and the interests of capital are neither circumstantial nor tactical; they are permanent and necessary.
There is a second layer to this argument, that points again to the relationship between the party and the class. For it rejects the central tenet of Marxism – that socialism is the act of the working class itself. It is the producers of wealth who are the protagonists of the conquest of socialism. And that struggle cannot be turned on and off at will by the parties, though they can – as Chile shows – significantly undermine the strength of the working class in that struggle. It is capitalism itself that generates the class struggle; the issue for socialists is how they respond to that struggle. Do they bring all their forces to bear to assist, support and organise the working class to win, or do they adopt a position of neutrality which objectively abandons the working class to their fate. In Chile, between October and July, the struggle was at its height; it could not be wished away.
Finally, there is the other argument put forward by the Communist Party; ‘the tactics of the ultra-left MIR objectively played into the hands of reaction ...’ [80] That was the slogan of UP within Chile as the coup approached; it was also the argument of the bourgeoisie, expressed in El Mercurio. Yet if, as the argument suggests, violence was an inevitable result of rising struggle, then how can socialists argue that the correct response was to disarm the workers? Even had the movement totally failed in an assault on power, could the consequences have been as grave as the monstrous statistic of dead and tortured that were produced by the military junta? For it was the working class that took the full brunt of the barbarism of Pinochet. Why? Because the ruling class were permitted, in pursuit of the historic compromise, to choose their time, to select their weapons, and to disarm the working class with government approval before they made their final move. If the right did not move in October 1972 or in July 1973, there has to be some explanation – and it lies in the very strength and confidence of the working class movement, a strength that had been shattered by September 1973.
The logic of the analysis of the CPs (and that of most of the rest of the reformist left in Labour and Socialist parties) was therefore clear – even if it was seldom articulated: to abandon the struggle for socialism altogether. The only alternative to this that can reasonably be drawn is thus that there is no parliamentary road to socialism, that there is solely the road of direct, and at the crucial moments armed struggle by the working class itself. So when sections of the Fourth International chanted ‘Armed road, only road’ in the solidarity demonstrations that followed the coup, they were entirely correct to do so. [81]
The Militant Tendency too, seemed to have got it pretty much right at the time when they argued that what was needed was to ‘Arm the workers against reaction!’ [82] They were even clearer about the way in which parliamentary parties necessarily lead workers away from the only road to socialism. À propos of the Chilean coup they concluded:
History knows only two kinds of democracy. There is capitalist democracy, which (in Lenin’s words) ‘is bound to remain restricted, truncated, false and hypocritical, a paradise for the rich and a snare and a deception for the exploited, for the poor.’ And there is proletarian democracy, which must be based on workers’ councils, election of officials with the right of recall, an armed people, average skilled workers wages for all administrators, rotation of state duties and so on. [83]
Yet the politics of the Fourth International groupings did not stop them, a few years later, from joining those very same parties that in 1973 they were rejecting as examples of parliamentary cretinism. As for the Militant tendency, not only were they already deeply immersed in the Labour party at the time, but more recently they have been claiming that:
... in the pages of Militant, in pamphlets and in speeches, we have shown that the struggle to establish a socialist Britain can be carried through in Parliament, backed up by the colossal power of the labour movement outside. [84]
In short what needs explaining in all these cases is how a correct line on armed struggle vs. parliament in the Chilean case could lead to such apparently opposed politics more recently.
The realisation that the only road to socialism is the armed road is in fact only a half-truth, and a dangerous one; for the outcome of the UP period was not determined on the morning of September 11th, but long before. The distribution of arms demanded, as a prerequisite, the political organisation of the working class for the assault on state power. Yet we have seen that the revolutionaries of Chile did not prepare the working class movement in that respect, that they fell back from the responsibility of leading, of creating a revolutionary organisation. Yet they continued to call for armed risings, even though those who were doing the shouting remained within Popular Unity, refusing to break with the reformist parties, as the class struggle demanded. In those concrete circumstances, the call for arms serves to disguise the reality. It can and did lead workers to believe that Popular Unity was leading the working class into a revolutionary process, which it clearly was not. Thus, when the coup came, the most advanced workers seriously expected UP to provide arms – and were deeply perplexed when it did not. Those who called for the arming of the workers without working to create the political conditions under which the working class could challenge for power were guilty of directly generating that illusion, and of leaving the working class naked and atomised when the reckoning came. It is only legitimate to raise the slogan as part and parcel of a political position that defends the whole working class against the assaults of the capitalist state (whoever heads that state), and which sets out to break workers from reformism in order to build the revolutionary party. The Socialist left, then, made two sorts of error, each of them fatal.
Firstly they failed to support all workers in a struggle against the Allende government. Obsessed by the mistaken idea that nationalised industry was one of the building blocks out of which socialism was already being constructed in Chile, they inevitably found themselves supporting the cabinet against the workers in nationalised industry in crucial disputes (as at El Teniente for instance), and even occasionally in the private sector as well (so that the nationalised sector would not be compromised). With such a leadership the workers’ movement could not but help faltering.
Secondly they mouthed a virulently revolutionary rhetoric which drew the best elements of the working class into the Socialist party instead of out of it. They provided a left cover for the real power in the party – Allende and the right – when what they should have provided was an alternative organisation whose ultimate aim would be to smash the reformist parties altogether, in the struggle to raise the power of the cordones above that of the existing bourgeois state apparatus.
The realisation that the armed road was the only road was, therefore, quite insufficient in itself to stop the coup. Altimirano and the left in the Socialist Party, after all, as we have seen, were already arguing for exactly this and were convincing a majority within the party on this point, but only by organisationally and politically breaking from the party could this mean anything of substance.
These are the real lessons of the Chilean coup, and they are ones that those who call themselves Trotskyists within the Labour party will, of course, never draw. That is why the key passage in the Militant Tendency’s account of the 1973 coup is not the passage we have already quoted but rather the following one: ‘There is only one conclusion’, namely that, ‘the leadership and programme of the workers’ organisation was false’. They should have been:
exposing the role of the banks and the monopolies, and demonstrating to them [the workers] the enormous superiority of a planned economy. [85]
But you can only accept this if you see nationalised industry (brought into being by parliament of course) as more important than the highest achievements of the workers in struggle, such as the cordones (which don’t even get mentioned). Besides, as we have seen, the failure was not so much over having a ‘false programme’; indeed the programme of Altimirano and the Socialist left was, as we have seen, much more revolutionary than their actions – but, crucially, it served to incorporate a whole layer of revolutionary workers, via the Socialist Party, into the UP government, and therefore also into the existing bourgeois state apparatus. Given such politics it is only a short step to abandoning altogether a politics rooted in genuine revolutionary Trotskyism.
Finally, there is the argument advanced by Ralph Miliband. [86] While critical of Allende and the UP on the one hand, it argues on the other that the conditions for a qualitative advance in the workers’ struggle were simply not present. Arguing from a kind of pragmatism, Miliband suggests that the key issue is one of timing. Yet in saying ‘that the establishment of an extreme form of council (or soviet) democracy on the very morrow of a revolution as a substitute for the smashed bourgeois state ... constitutes an impossible projection which can be of no immediate relevance to any revolutionary regime’, Miliband appears to be totally ignorant of the existence of the cordones and their class character. The Soviets, or cordones, are not creations after the revolution; they are the organs of workers’ democracy generated by the class in the struggle. And in Chile, they did exist. Perhaps, Miliband suggests, the UP government could ‘at least have been able to effect very considerable changes in the personnel of the various parts of the state system’. Yet this falls into exactly the reformist error; the Statute of Guarantees ensured that UP would not intervene elsewhere in the state – and that was the condition of assuming power. Even had the personnel changed, the function of the bourgeois state would have remained the same. Allende and his allies, Miliband suggests, decided to proceed by careful observation of the law and constitution, and stick to it. ‘Yet it may well be that what was right and proper and inevitable at the beginning had become suicidal as the struggle developed. What is at issue here is not “reform versus revolution”; it is that Allende and his colleagues were wedded to a particular version of the “reformist” model.’
In the end this argument dwells on questions of timing, of tactics, of quantitative detail; yet it must, for its argument to survive, ignore the very developments that marked a qualitative shift in the level and nature of the class struggle in Chile, and which no reformist politics, by definition, could have led or understood. It was not a matter of theory; the reality of events abolished the middle way.
 
Could it have been otherwise?
Chile, between October 1972 and July 1973, entered a revolutionary crisis. The rising tempo of class struggle produced new organisations of struggle, a real, existing foundation for the alternative state power based on the cordones. Yet the left, the potential revolutionary leadership, was trapped within the bourgeois state by its allegiance to a politics of reform which it often amended but never confronted. And in the end it could do nothing in the face of that most savage of ruling class assaults. Yet there was an alternative possibility. Had the left unequivocally supported workers in struggle, independent of UP and the state and based on ‘All power to the cordones’, the real foundations of a revolutionary party might have been laid. There was much talk, especially from the MIR, about splitting the army. Yet when the cracks appeared, when the sailors exposed themselves to the wrath of their officers, and exposed the coup, where were the mass demonstrations of workers applauding their courage and supporting their action? Who called for workers to boycott all supplies to the naval base, until these men were released? If just one sailor had made his declaration and got away with it, the crack would have opened wider and wider.
In the great historical moments, it may be that the revolutionary change comes because one soldier feels the confidence to turn his gun away from the workers’ demonstration, because one cordon disarms the invading police or the boss and his thugs. It is a matter of moments. But if the moment is lost, if the working class, having fought to bring the struggle to this point, finds itself abandoned, criticised and suddenly robbed of the right to make its own history, then the consequences last for years, and are terrible.
The tragedy of Chile is that there were revolutionaries there, but they – and consequently those who acknowledged their leadership were unable to recognise the revolutionary moment, or prepare for it. As the struggle rises again, those who died should at least have their names inscribed in the annals of a movement that has learned, and learned well, from their sacrifice.

Notes
1. See Latin America Weekly Reports for February 4th, April 22nd and May 27th 1983.
2. The reasons why Seguel, the miners’ leader, drew back from the original strike call, are less than clear. What is certain is that he was interviewed at great length by the US ambassador after the April conference.
3. See below, The denouément.
4. Birchall & Harman, Chile: end of the parliamentary road, International Socialism 62, September 1973, p. 10.
5. The standard academic work on this whole period is A. Angell, Labour and politics in Chile, Oxford 1972. See too L. Vitale, Historia del movimiento obrero en Chile.
6. On the early labour movement see Recabarren, Ohras and the work of Vitale and Ramirez Nocochea.
7. The same was true of most of the Latin American Communist parties; Cuba is an example, see Binns/Gonzalez, Castro, Cuba and Socialism, in International Socialism 2:8, Spring 1980.
8. See F. Casanueva and M. Fernandez, El Partido socialista y la lucha de clases en Chile, Santiago 1973.
9. For the most detailed economic analysis of the period see, S. Ramos, Chile una economia de transition?, Cuba 1973; on the earlier period see A. Gunder Frank, Capitalism and Underdevelopment, London 1972.
10. On Christian Democracy and agrarian reform see C. Kay, Agrarian reform and the transition to socialism in P. O’Brien (ed.), Allende’s Chile, New York 1976, pp. 79–105 and Agrarian reform in Chile in D. Lehmann, Agrarian reform and agrarian reformism, London 1974.
11. The Anaconda company, for example, had 16.6% of its total operations in Chile – yet it derived 80% of its total world profits from Chile.
12. A second group, under the ex-Minister of Agriculture under Frei, Jacques Chonchol, left in 1971 to form the Christian Left, IC.
13. The figures for 1970, with a far larger number of strikes without a proportional increase in the number of workers involved, point to a very important phenomenon – the increasing involvement of workers in small factories who were outside the CUT structure because firms with less than 25 workers were not allowed a union.
14. Under the law, landlords were allowed to keep the best 160 acres of land, generally including both the land and the machinery, which the big landowners either sold or immobilised.
15. The full UP programme is in A. Zammit (ed.), The Chilean road to socialism, Brighton 1973; and S. Allende, Chile’s road to socialism, London 1973, pp. 23–51.
16. Ibid. p. 139.
17. Why should the National Party and the Christian Democrats support the nationalisation of copper? Most importantly, because it was the quid pro quo for the Statute of Guarantees; because their forces were still in slight disarray and they were anxious not to discredit themselves; and the Christian Democrats could hardly oppose a measure they themselves had set in motion.
18. See CIA memorandum from The ITT Papers, quoted in New Chile, no. 1, Sept/Oct 1972.
19. It also included doubling the number of Walt Disney products that were exported to Chile through their distributors there, the Edwards family; Edwards was also Vice-President of Pepsi Cola, a member of the oligarchy, and one of the main architects of the external assault on UP.
20. See Raul Silva, The legacy of Salvador Allende, in Evidence of the terror in Chile, London 1974, p. 115.
21. Morning Star, 7th August 1972.
22. Cf. speech by Volodia Teitelboim, quoted Birchall/Harman, p. 11.
23. Allende: op. cit., pp. 192/3.
24. Corvalan, quoted in Birchall/Harman, p. 11; Allende in op. cit., p. 141.
25. The only public repudiation of the move came from the Christian Left, who resigned from the Cabinet.
26. As they did in Arica, for example. See Socialist Worker, January 13th, 1973.
27. Jorge Insunza in Chile Hoy, no. 26, December 1972.
28. H. Del Canto, in Ibid.
29. For a detailed account of the economic situation see O’Brien et al., 1977, chapter 6, pp. 123–160.
30. Birchall/Harman, p. 12.
31. See the speech by Luis Corvalan, in Marxism Today, September 1973.
32. Birchall/Harman, quoted p. 13.
33. Chile Hoy, August 1973, quoted in O’Brien et al., 1977, pp. 180–181.
34. In 1971 there were 1,758 strikes on the land, compared with 1,580 the year before, and 1,278 land occupations compared with 456 (Kay, op. cit., p. 84).
35. Cf. Allende’s May Day speech, in Allende, op. cit.
36. A. Nore, Political economy of the Allende regime, in O’Brien (ed.), 1976, p. 57.
37. Patricia Santa Lucia, Industrial workers and the struggle for power, in O’Brien (ed.), 1976, p. 133.
38. See O’Brien et al., 1977, pp. 170–171.
39. Only one independent workers’ paper existed, La Aurora de Chile, and its central concern was the internal struggles within the Socialist Party.
40. P. Santa Lucia, op. cit., p. 141.
41. On food distribution, for example, it created an Inspectorate of the state distribution agency DIRINCO, which could expropriate businesses after inspection. But the process was long, tedious and extremely bureaucratic and the number of inspectors far too few to cope. In fact, very little was achieved in this way.
42. See Santa Lucia, op. cit., passim.
43. See the MAPU document in Chile 1973, ni reforma ni revolution, Medellin 1973 (this little volume contains some interesting documents and articles) also reproduced in MAPU, one of the collections of documents of Chilean parties published in Paris by Politique-Hebdo in 1974. See too MAPU, Octobre 1972.
44. Santa Lucia gives the most complete list of cordones, op. cit., Appendix, pp. 161–165.
45. Chile Hoy, quoted in O’Brien et al., 1977, pp. 175–176.
46. Santa Lucia, op. cit., pp. 153–155. See also Ni reforma ..., p. 85.
47. Cf. the debate reproduced from Chile Hoy in Ni reforma ..., pp. 88, 110.
48. Trotsky, Fascism, Stalinism, United Front, IS 38/39, August 1969, p. 14.
49. K. Clark, Chile, p. 83 (quoted).
50. Quoted in Santa Lucia, op. cit., p. 132.
51. Corvalan, in Marxism Today, September 1973.
52. Quoted in the British CP pamphlet, Chile: solidarity with popular unity, p. 17.
53. Quoted in Santa Lucia, op. cit., p. 134.
54. Ibid.
55. G. Smirnow, The Revolution Disarmed: Chile 1970–73, London 1974, p. 103.
56. Ibid., p. 49.
57. Allende, May Day 1971.
58. Santa Lucia, op. cit.
59. Smirnow, op. cit., pp. 14–15.
60. Though there is no documentary evidence of this mass influx, a Chilean comrade tells how by early 1972 the Socialist Party had had to abandon candidate membership, and the twice-yearly ceremony to induct members into the Party in groups given a special name – Marx group, Lenin group, etc. In early 1972, membership was given to a Marconi group, named after the theatre that had to be booked to accommodate the numbers.
61. Smirnow, op. cit., p. 22.
62. P. Nettl, Rosa Luxemburg, quoted in C. Harman, The Lost Revolution, London 1982, p. 24.
63. The Panamericana Norte cordon, for example, declared ‘NOT ONE ENTERPRISE WILL BE RETURNED. On the contrary, WE SHALL GO ON EXTENDING THE SOCIAL PROPERTY AREA. And in case anyone has any doubts WE SHALL REMAIN PERMANENTLY MOBILISED IN DEFENCE OF OUR RIGHT TO DECIDE AND TO GOVERN.’ In Santa Lucia, op. cit., p. 148.
64. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme, Selected Works, vol. 2, Moscow 1962, p. 30.
65. Ibid., p. 31.
66. Trotsky, op. cit., p. 15.
67. C. Taufic, Chile en la hoguere, Buenos Aires 1974, pp. 37–40.
68. Quoted in O’Brien et al., 1977, pp. 201–202.
69. Altamirano, SP General Secretary, for example, declared after the tancazo of June 29th, ‘Never has the unity between the people, the armed forces and the police been as great as it is now ... and this unity will grow with every new battle in the historic war we are conducting’, Le Monde, 16/17th September 1973.
70. See Helios Prieto, Chile: the gorillas are amongst us, London 1974, p. 48.
71. See M. Gonzalez, Ideology and culture under Popular Unity, in O’Brien (ed.), 1976.
72. Cf. I. Roxborough, The Chilean opposition to Allende, in Ibid.
73. Taufic, op. cit., p. 34.
74. Quoted in Chile trade unions and the resistance, Chile Fights 11, p. 3.
75. J. Woodis, Morning Star, September 17th 1973, quoted in Chile and the parliamentary roaders, International Socialism (first series) no. 63, October 1973.
76. NACLA’s Latin American & Empire Report, January 1973.
77. E. Berlinguer, Reflections on the events in Chile, Marxism Today, February 1974, p. 40.
78. E. Hobsbawm, The labour movement and military coups, Marxism Today, October 1974, p. 308.
79. Berlinguer, op. cit., p. 50.
80. See note 52.
81. See Dossier on Chile, International, Summer 1973, pp. 1–6.
82. Militant, March 1971, p. 2.
83. Chile, lessons of the coup, in Militant, 21st September 1973, p. 4.
84. Quoted in P. Goodwin, A tendency to reform, Socialist Review, no. 50, January 1983.
85. Militant, 21st September 1973, p. 4.
86. R. Miliband, The coup in Chile, Socialist Register 1973. The quotes are from pp. 467–469.
 



T.J. Clark
Farewell to an Idea: episodes from a history of Modernism
Yale University Press 1999, £30
I will not accept such fitting and fitted. William Blake
All art is an attempt to define and make unnatural the distinction between the actual and the desirable. John Berger
Tim Clark’s contribution to the remaking of art history has been extraordinary. His work on the painting of 19th century France has explored with great sensitivity the struggle that great events set off within artists. What is remarkable in his writing is the combination of an exploration of the painting itself with a microscopic eye and a powerful sense of the great historical forces that invade, in one way or another, even the most secret corners of the canvas. ‘The artists that matter come at the facts of politics sideways, unexpectedly, taking themselves by surprise,’ Clark says in the conclusion to his brilliant exploration of art and politics in France between 1848 and 1871, The Absolute Bourgeois (1973). Its companion work on Courbet, Image of the People, written in the same year, is equally as powerful.
The crucial thing about Clark’s insight is his insistence that ‘the making of a work of art is one historical process among other acts, events and structures’. Art is not autonomous. At one level it is a form of labour, shaped by the prevailing conditions of production, artistic or industrial. At another, Clark insists, it exists in the realm of ideology – it is part of a process of understanding, of making sense of the world. At times it can have a direct political role, subverting and undermining the prevailing ideas. At others it may resonate with fury or despair at its own inability to subvert, especially when, as in the modern age, that act of defiance can so quickly be sabotaged itself by the work of art’s conversion into an object of consumption.
So art movements do not have their own history but share the common experience. How they mediate or respond to that is a different issue, of course. Some 25 years after writing those two remarkable books, Clark has published a hugely ambitious overview of Modernism, an attempt to trace – in an avowedly Marxist framework – the fate of art in its conflict with the forces of history. At times, often in fact, artists have taken refuge in the work, in its ‘painterly’ quality – but was it possible to keep out the noise of the world? Clark’s answer until now has always been a definitive no – and that is what has set his work apart.
The Marxist tradition in art criticism is a search for that which is ‘fully human’ and is denied by a capitalism that fragments and atomises human experience into shards, into individual functions of a hidden machine. That is why we have always argued that capitalism is deeply inimical to art – it may transform it into commodity or consign it to the margins of reason, but it will never answer its questions.
The great art of the 19th century posed its interrogations with a brutal clarity: Delacroix gave freedom flesh and the struggle for it great drama; Courbet invested labour with a power and dignity. But perhaps the art of a confident burgeoning bourgeois society had its more representative expressions in architecture and engineering, at once heroic monuments and practical interventions in the world – bridges, dams, highways, towers. And yet there were insoluble paradoxes, so brilliantly expressed by Marx when he pointed to the monumental solidity that so quickly ‘melts into air’.
Out of that paradox, Modernism was born. It ceased to document the world, but we should not make the mistake of imagining that it stopped representing it. Representation, however, is a difficult and slippery notion – how does Jackson Pollock ‘represent’ anything in his drip paintings? How do Lissitsky’s flying wedges or Malevich’s black squares picture a real world? Even a work that can apparently be as easily read off the canvas as David’s The Death of Marat ‘represents’ a great deal more than a body in a bath.
In the course of his book T.J. Clark returns to that relationship many times and has a number of stabs at defining it. Indeed, his text is full of caveats and cautions – he has an infuriating habit of inserting brackets in the middle of sentences which contain a single word and a question mark that suggest he is hedging his bets as well as doing that very postmodernist thing of throwing a statement into doubt as soon as it is made.
In the end we can probably agree that a definition of Modernist art work is impossible, and yet most of those who attend exhibitions would feel able to point out the Modernists. They would be the paintings which could not be easily ‘read back’ into the world, whose subjects could not be traced from the painting to the street. And yet Guernica or The Scream obviously say something very important to us, just as Van Gogh’s Arles paintings said so much about the artist’s state of mind, although the subject was trees or cornfields. So there is obviously a relationship with aspects of reality – and a dramatic, deeply sceptical one at that.
 
The end of the end?
Clark’s turning point, or the last ‘episode’ in this map of what he calls Episodes from a History of Modernism, is undoubtedly 1989. His Marxism, with its powerful anarchist impulse, would not have lamented the collapse of Eastern Europe for a moment – indeed he would, at earlier times, have celebrated it as a new beginning. But now he seems to feel it has all come too late. The phrase that recurs throughout is Schiller’s: ‘the disenchantment of the world’. Art is a struggle against and with that terrible sense of loss, but, although he is ambivalent at the very end, the strong sense from Clark’s conclusion is that there is no longer a place from which to imagine the transformation of the world. The transformation of art works into commodities is so rapid, the colonisation of the languages and systems through which the world is described so absolute, that it seems there is little to be done.
It is a familiar argument, and, funnily enough, it arises out of the very thing that Clark rails against most often – ‘contingency’, adaptation to the immediate or what Raymond Williams memorably called ‘long term adjustments to short term crises’. And yet if anything gives the lie to such cultural pessimism it is the very ‘episodes’ recounted in such loving detail in this book. These seven moments in a history of Modernism begin, surprisingly perhaps, with David and The Death of Marat. Clark is an absolute master of the art of travelling into and through an art work (in particular, in my view, when he discusses Picasso and Pollock). It seems at first sight to be a very early place to start, except that the key to Modernism, as far as this writer is concerned, is its absolutely central grasp of the contradictions of economic progress under capitalism. ‘Modernity’, the development of industry, the evolution of the commodity, the forging of a fully fledged proletariat, is both a creative and a destructive process. That was at the core of Marx’s understanding of capitalism’s unfolding. Equally, art has provided a space where those contradictions have been explored. So Modernism is born with – but not out of – the construction of a modern economy. Clark finds the impulse to capitalist modernisation enough to produce the Modernist question.
There is in all of these key works of Modernism a struggle between the demands of the moment (‘contingency’) and a vision of the future, an ‘imaginative possibility of social revolution’ (as a more modern critic, Perry Anderson, put it). It is a well trodden argument that art suggests universals – moral, philosophical, religious at different times – whereas the restless materialism of the modern age dispenses with such things. ‘Modernism turns on the impossibility of transcendence,’ Clark says – and should have added, to explain the nearly 400 pages that follow, ‘but refuses to accept that impossibility.’ So, in his exploration of Marat, Clark finds a David whose dead revolutionary is caught in a moment of writing (he holds a letter). The empty upper half of the painting is full of possibility. The suggestion is that this work is not, as so many others were, designed to freeze the image of Marat into a symbol of the French Revolution (as David himself did elsewhere), but rather to disengage the qualities of a revolutionary leader from that particular life, that particular body. So even now, the argument is about what Marat represents, rather than what he was or is.
The long chapter that follows centres on Pissaro’s We Field-Women. Clark’s discussion ranges eloquently across the canvas and across the historical moment. He moves without effort through politics, music, art and architecture, and sometimes, I have to admit, loses me in the complexities of his argument. But at heart, the same issue arises in 1891 as in 1791. In ‘showing’ agricultural labour, Pissaro was raising questions of morality, of the relations between human beings and nature. The material meets the moral in the painting, and the idea seeks its expression on the canvas. The problem here, and with greater and greater intensity later, is that the work is an object, a thing in space and time, however much it might wish to be something else. Clark returns to this difficult issue again and again – that art can never throw off its ‘thing-ness’, and thus its capacity for transformation into a commodity. So, like it or not, the idea expressed in this way is always material, and the withdrawal into the painting can never be complete. That does not undermine the enterprise, but it absolutely guarantees a continuing and unresolved struggle.
In 1891, Clark suggests, a burgeoning modernity was producing a moral crisis of extraordinary depth. This was a turning point, and Pissaro’s anarchist allegiances made him, in the writer’s view, sensitive to and aware of the depth and nature of it. Van Gogh’s first major exhibition, the rediscovery of Monet, the authority of Cézanne, all pointed to a moment in which art was fleeing to the margins and expressing from there its revulsion at the impact of the modern – from Baudelaire’s poem Le Voyage to The Scream is a distance of several decades, but only a single step, I think. Simmel expressed it thus in 1902:
The modern mind has become more and more calculating. The calculative excesses of practical life which the money economy has brought about correspond to the ideal of natural science to transform the world into an arithmetic problem, to fix every part of the world by mathematical formulas ... It is decisive that city life has transformed the struggle with nature for livelihood into an inter-human struggle for gain, which here is not granted by nature but by other men.
In revolt against that ‘calculative excess’, Cézanne and Picasso provide two different forms of response. Both move away from narrative, from ‘representing the real’. It could be said that that particular task had become redundant anyway with the advent of photography, but that is far too simple an explanation. After all, we now know that even the earliest photographers used their plates in a painterly way, or played with the ‘reality effect’ to make convincing documents of, say, fairies at the bottom of the garden – so the ironising of photography is not such a postmodern business, after all. Clark’s journey through Cézanne’s various Bathers paintings (1904–1906) is confident and compelling. What emerges is how unstable or mobile the figures are. Homing in on the detail of a sexually indeterminate body in one canvas, it becomes clear that the body has both sets of sexual organs, but depicted with a kind of rush, or even an uncertainty, that makes identity a shifting and uncertain thing. In another moment of the painting, two bodies are fused into one. The landscapes, backgrounds, skies are almost flippantly artificial; all of this is a dream, a metaphor, an assertion of some other place, Cézanne struggling with the visual and symbolic language of his time. The last part of the Cézanne chapter is, I feel, evasive – at least, it is very hard to pin down. But, as I understand it through the earlier examination of the paintings, Cézanne is pursuing a picture of another, possible, world with the materials of this one. He exposes their limits, but does not and probably cannot find another vocabulary to replace it.
 
Flattening the ground
It is agreed by most critics that Cubism is at the centre of Modernist art, because it asserts a new and different kind of order. In his still brilliant essay The Moment of Cubism John Berger explains that ‘Cubism changed the nature of the relationship between the painted image and reality and by doing so expressed a new relationship between man and reality.’ Its moment was ‘a moment when the promises of the future were more substantial than the present’. Clark puts it in rather more complex ways, as ever, but there is no disagreement as to the extraordinary significance of the years from 1906 to 1910. In his immediately prior work, the Demoiselles d’Avignon, Picasso tried to repaint Velázquez, to rescue something from the classical tradition. He toyed with ‘primitive alternatives’ – African masks or the paintings of the Douanier Rousseau – perhaps in search of a metaphorical language that could speak of an imagined otherness. But while they could critically reflect on the ‘modern’, they were not of it. And then came Cubism. Faced with that ‘disenchantment’, Cubism set out to ‘re-enchant’, which meant imagining wholly different relations. Berger sees the great Cubist paintings as diagrams, sketches of a possibility. Clark travels through the spaces and lines of Picasso’s paintings of the time, but bumps each time into a surface which resists all attempts to find other depths beneath it. The language of the painting is all there is, is everything. As the Malevich circle in the Russia of 1920 would rediscover, the new art is architecture, experiment in space and form. To return to Berger, it is about relationships and possibilities. The Guitarist of 1910, for example, is analagous to the world at the top and bottom of the oval frame, but in between there is a shifting and experimentation, a playing with surface, line and volume. Is this revolutionary? Yes, because it suggests restless change, variety, possibilities still unimagined. Is it Modernist? Yes, in its severance with the past (or its overcoming of the past) and its projection of a visual utopia that prefigures different ways of living to match the different ways of seeing.
Clark is less confident, I believe, though his assumption throughout is that Modernism has an inextricable relationship with utopia and revolutionary thought. His unease, and I suppose that this anticipates his conclusion, is that reality drags the dreamer back to the horror of the present. The First World War threw horror upon horror against the dreamers. It proved beyond any doubt the savagery upon which capitalism rested, but it also engulfed everything and destroyed all morality, and the prophecy at the heart of Cubism seemed to sink without trace in Flanders’ fields.
And then came 1917. Clark chooses to address the revolution in art that accompanied the Russian Revolution from the perspective of 1920 and War Communism. Perhaps, as he suggests, it was a key moment in the work of UNOVIS, the movement led by Malevich and represented most familiarly by El Lissitsky’s ubiquitous Flying Red Wedge. But perhaps there is another reason, to do with Clark’s own resolute hostility to Leninism. Curiously this moment of what he calls ‘the absolute zero of all indices’, an unimaginable social and economic catastrophe imposed by conscious will on the nascent Soviet Republic, was a high point in the process of ‘imagining otherwise’ so central to the Modernist enterprise. It was, in Clark’s words, ‘both apocalypse and utopia’. In his view, the commitment to industrialisation and modernisation necessarily carried that ‘calculation and contingency’ which was always the enemy of dreaming. It was in a sense much simpler than that – necessity stood over Soviet Russia with dripping fangs. Clark recognises how little choice there was, but also underlines the barbarity of it. The paradox is that at this very time what was mobilised by the new republic was a new language, vital and fluid, precisely because in this time of constant convolution nothing remained standing.
What could be the relationship between a disintegrating working class, a siege on every side by well fed armies and the struggle to lift agricultural production, and these odd, sometimes whimsical encounters of squares and circles by Lissitsky, or the black square and the void within it that symbolised the Suprematist movement that Malevich led? In a sense, they picked up again from Cubism. The prophetic impulse lost in the carnage of the First World War was rediscovered with 1917. Gabo’s Constructivist manifesto said, ‘Nothing is unreal in art. Whatever is touched by art becomes reality, and we do not need to undertake remote and distant navigations in the subconscious in order to reveal a world which lies in our immediate vicinity.’ Lissitsky and Malevich called it ‘architecture’ – the geometries of this new imagined world could become speakers’ platforms or housing complexes or advertisements for galoshes. Quite rightly, Clark singles out Lissitsky’s design for a monument to Rosa Luxemburg, a familiar arrangement of squares and circles through which, barely glimpsed but pulsating through colour, is the name of Rosa Luxemburg – the future floating beneath the surfaces of the present.
For Clark there is little doubt that Jackson Pollock’s extraordinary creations are a limit-case. He represents, at a social level, the most extreme marginalisation of the artist. The many photographs of Pollock in his studio and Namuth’s film of Pollock at work show him embedded in a world entirely built of paintings in which he works with a kind of madness. He is the confirmation of how the bourgeoisie sees the artist, and the expression of the way in which that world has driven artists to the very edges of the social world – an act of rejection and refusal on their part that has become a kind of exile. Is it accidental that Pollock’s drip paintings suggest imploding dark stars, the line between the world and the void, the known and the unknown? Is it any wonder, too, that they are so obviously angry and aggressive?
For Clark, what drives Modernism is the need to explore the unknowable, with its concomitant refusal to accept that what is is all there is. There is an argument that sees the development of Modernism as a process towards formalism, towards the exploration of pure form. Malevich’s White on White paintings might, at first sight, seem to justify that conclusion, until (as Clark shows so convincingly) you approach them and see their movement, their displacement of the eye, their assertion that within an apparent one dimensional reality there are many other lines, dimensions and masses. There is certainly a journey into form as a metaphor, a search for other complex totalities. There is also perhaps an attempt to disengage that experiment from the demands of the material world, but that of course is impossible, partly because the painting is a material thing (which is why it can be commodified) and partly because it has meaning only when it is seen from a place within the world. So Pollock’s Starburst meets the edges of the canvas, and though his canvases grow bigger, they can never lose their edges.
‘There is a line of art stretching back to David and Shelley that makes no sense without its practitioners believing what they did was to resist or exceed the normal understandings of the culture, and that those understandings were their enemy. This is the line of art we call Modernist,’ writes Clark. This leads this modern art to challenge and refuse, to look inward and look outward, to reshape nature and to attempt metaphors of different systems of living and believing.
The suggestion in the title of this book and in its maddeningly ambiguous conclusion is that this charge has finally been lost in a world of immediate incorporation and the loss of utopia. And there is undoubtedly some art which is only decoration, a comfortable reaffirmation of all that is as it is. But the rage around the Turner exhibitions suggests that discomfort and offence is still provoked by what is being produced. I have heard Gilbert and George arguing against a Paisleyite vicar who wanted their exhibition banned because it would corrupt and deprave. It turned out that he had never seen a Gilbert and George exhibition – it was the fear of art he expressed. The curious thing is that whenever social struggles arise, they produce an art which is their vision of the world they are struggling for. Tim Clark himself is a product of the generation that lifted the cobbles of the Paris streets and found the beach beneath. Graffiti, like them or not, have become the utopian architecture of the inner city. And so on and on. Art remains a place of struggle, of contradiction. Of course a late capitalism will try to turn everything – even the imagery of revolution – into an object for sale and consumption. That is the manner of its appropriation of all human creativity. But if it momentarily silences the signs of contradiction, it can never hide the paradox and the conflict at its very heart. And with each discovery of that reality will come an impulse to imagine this horror otherwise.
 







Y aquí se queda la clara
la entrañable transparencia
tu querida presencia
comandante Che Guevara
(Carlos Puebla)


    


And here we see it clearly
your much loved visibility
your dear presence
commander Che Guevara



The beloved presence
Che lives, not only in the memory of those who lived through the 1960s, but in the imagination of many people who know little or nothing about his life or his politics. His present incarnation is full of ambiguities. In Cuba the return of his disinterred bones was celebrated in a carefully staged ceremonial. Che’s face is everywhere – on every public building, lit up in neon profile and on huge hoardings on the intercity highways, accompanied by slogans urging sacrifice and firmness in the face of the enemy. In almost every Cuban house garish water colour versions of Che’s face are often the only picture on blue-washed walls – sometimes he sits beside the Virgen de la Guardia, patron madonna of Cuba. At the same time his face is a commodity in a tawdry market of cheap souvenirs, gracing T-shirts and mugs, wooden mosaics and leather purses. Those who wear the pins and badges with such obvious delight have bought an image of Cuba, not a political symbol. In this latest resurrection Che is an icon taken out of his time.
Yet in other incarnations there is a political resonance embedded in the bearded face capped by a beret with a single star. The Zapatista rising in Mexico adopted Guevara as a precedent and an example. [1] In Caracas in the early 1990s Guevara reappeared among the banners carried in a series of urban riots against price rises. In Italy political demonstrations in 1995 and 1996 carried Che’s image.
What he represented for this new generation of disaffected youth was hard to establish. Whereas the resurgence of Malcolm X as a symbolic figure was reflected in Spike Lee’s film, as yet there has been no obvious media reappropriation of Che. [2] In the 1960s Guevara was associated with a wave of anti-colonial struggle, especially its most popular representatives, Vietnam and Cuba. Among Western intellectuals Che came to represent an idealised anti-imperialist, a fighter of exemplary purity. But his fate in the intervening years was uneven; he was not a constant symbol, and even his role in Cuban iconography varied greatly.
Today, when Che’s image occupies every vacant public advertising space, it is easy to forget that for a decade his memory was quite systematically underplayed by the Cuban government. Why it was reborn in the 1990s is the theme of what follows – but it can be asserted that the official rehabilitation of Che has had much to do with the ideological needs of a Cuban regime under siege. To some extent (and a limited one) his reappearance on the international scene was an echo of what was happening inside Cuba; but Cuba’s impact on the world was far more limited in the 1990s and its authority was significantly weakened. So the rediscovery of Che beyond Cuba has other origins, perhaps in the search among new movements of resistance robbed by the collapse of Stalinism for a political tradition which could provide a symbolic language of resistance.
In that political vacuum very few figures have been rediscovered who for one reason or another were not associated with that discredited past. Malcolm X was recuperated; so were ignored feminist revolutionaries from Sojourner Truth to Louise Michel. And Che Guevara emphatically returned. It is now clear from John Lee Anderson’s exhaustive biography that Che did consider himself a Marxist and place himself in a revolutionary tradition. [3] At first sight that might disqualify him from the list of uncontaminated fighters. But over time Che has been progressively disengaged in popular thinking from his role in the Cuban Revolution and from his responsibility for a failed strategy of guerrilla warfare; he has been relocated on a terrain of pure rebellion, individualistic and informed in the first instance by moral rather than political considerations. [4]
He has come to represent – albeit in a highly abstract way – a rage against a cynical imperialism prepared to oversee massacres even after the official ‘end of history’, against a capitalism that has consigned a whole generation to the social margins. Yet if the image of Che is both a symbol and a symptom of a rebellious yearning, its generality inhibits any consequent political debate on the tactics and strategies of revolutionary movements. Guevara’s image is an icon of revolution but, paradoxically, it is also a testament to the absence of a revolutionary socialist project.
Yet the resurrection of Guevara could provide an opportunity to place the political debate at the centre of things again. For that to happen, however, the argument must first move from the realms of heroes and martyrs back to the terrain of history, where the class struggle is conducted by living men and women in pursuit of conscious ends informed by a clear sense of the past and of the biography of the movement of which it is a part. And as far as Che is concerned, that means placing him again within his own real history – and demystifying the young Argentinian medical student who became a minister in a revolutionary government and died, sick and isolated, in Bolivia just eight years later. Che Guevara’s life and politics were too full of unresolved contradictions to offer a substitute for the discarded remnants of the Stalinist past. He is not a simple model but he was a revolutionary, and his internal conflicts, errors and misdirections represent an attempt to address the material questions thrown up by a commitment to the socialist transformation of the world. For that reason, an exploration of them will yield understanding that can inform the rebuilding of the revolutionary tradition.
 
A restless traveller
Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara was born on 14 May 1928 to a bourgeois family somewhat down on its luck. His formative years were spent in an Argentina dominated by Peronism (Peron came to power in 1946, though he entered the government in 1943). What is significant is how little direct impact that seems to have had on Che’s life – even though Peron’s rise to power represented, in however contradictory a way, a significant social upheaval and the entry onto the Argentinian political stage of a mass movement of workers. For those of Che’s class, Peron was a threat – and indeed the extremely right wing Communist Party of Argentina made a clear bid for the support of the middle classes on the basis of a shared hostility to Peron. Guevara’s mother, Celia, was in contact with those ideas – but there is no evidence that the young Guevara was much influenced in either direction. In fact his own class had little engagement with society, and Ernesto was restless and frustrated by that. The recently published Motorcycle Diaries show us a bohemian, an individualist and a free spirit bent on exploring Latin America with a friend on a motorbike. As travel writings go, it is light and wittily written; a desire to find here the future revolutionary guerrilla will find little satisfaction. From time to time Guevara does comment acerbically on imperialist involvement in the continent – and the passage when he visits the Inca ruins at Macchu Picchu is genuinely moving. [5] But there is no indication that the 23 year old considered himself part of a liberation struggle. Two years later, in 1954, Guevara found himself in Guatemala City at a turning point in its history and, so we are told, in his own.
Guatemala had a crucial significance for all Latin Americans at the time. [6] In the late 1940s a new regime brought a promise of democracy and progress under Rafael Arévalo; in 1952 the election of a young army officer, Jacobo Arbenz, as president marked one further step. He had promised to nationalise the huge landholdings of the US based United Fruit Company, offering compensation against its declared value, for redistribution among the landless peasantry. The peasant unions were led by the Communist Party and the right to form independent trade unions was another of Arbenz’s undertakings. For the US government at the height of the Cold War, two of whose key members (the Dulles brothers) were directors of United Fruit, this was intolerable: they financed a military coup against Arbenz, who resigned as soon as the presidential palace was strafed by aircraft. There was little resistance, but the appalling repression after Arbenz’s defeat earned Guatemala an early reputation for savagery.
Guevara was present in Guatemala with a large number of Latin American exiles – one of whom, Hilda Gadea from Peru, he was to marry. Che was not present in the capital at the time of the coup – he was actually exploring Maya ruins near the Honduran border. But when he returned to the city, he noted in his Diaries how angry he was that there had been no organised armed resistance. There is no evidence that he addressed anything other than military questions – the politics of the situation did not constitute a key element in his view. The point, of course, is not to criticise Guevara for his lack of political education, but to emphasise that many of his subsequent actions and the political strategy with which he was associated – the theory of guerrilla warfare – reveal a lack of political analysis and understanding. To claim for him an analytical perception that he did not have smacks of retrospective adjustments of reality, but also clouds the argument about that strategic programme.
 
Discovering Cuba
Like many other exiles who had taken refuge in Guatemala, Che moved on to Mexico. Many of those he had met in Guatemala later reappeared in the leadership of the guerrilla movements that arose throughout the continent after the victory of the Cuban Revolution in 1959. [7] In Mexico, Hilda introduced Che to Fidel Castro.
Castro had arrived in Mexico under an amnesty that released him from jail and into exile. Two years earlier, on 26 July 1953, he led a disastrous armed assault on the Moncada barracks. His subsequent trial is best remembered for his long and defiant tirade from the dock in which he announced, ‘History will absolve me.’ Castro’s background was in the landowning class (Anderson describes him as a ‘blueblood’); as a law student in 1948 he had already been involved in a failed attempt to mount an armed assault on the Dominican Republic. In the 1952 elections he stood as a candidate for the Ortodoxos, led by the popular radio announcer Eddy Chibas. When Chibas committed suicide, on the air, Castro swore at his graveside to avenge him, or so the story goes. The important thing is that Cuba’s ruler, Batista, sabotaged the democratic process and convinced Castro that the only way forward was an armed assault on the dictatorship.
The Cuban Communist Party had in fact collaborated and colluded with the regime for some time. Castro’s unremitting opposition to Batista included opposition to the corrupt and compromised Communists. His political influences came from the student based Directorio Revolucionario, founded in the 1930s, whose political strategy was also based on spectacular armed propaganda. [8] Thus Castro, like Guevara, spurned the Marxist working class tradition in favour of a politics of small group military action. Although there were some who saw themselves as Marxists in Castro’s small group of exiles and some still in Cuba (in particular Fidel’s older brother, Raúl, who had university connections with the Communists), it was the politics of revolutionary nationalism expressed in the Moncada trial speech, and the methods of armed confrontation that dominated the organisation. [9] Clearly, Che and Fidel had in common a political background which was as resolutely anti-imperialist as it was contemptuous of the concept of working class revolution. They thus shared a conviction that the first task was to raise a military oppositional force. [10]
Under the eye of an ex-Spanish Civil War soldier, the Cubans and Guevara began military training at an estate in Chalco, Mexico. Che himself had no military background at all, and nor did most of the others; yet from a very early stage Che was instrumental in imposing a rigid military discipline in the camp. Castro managed to buy the motor vessel Granma, and the group sailed for Cuba in November 1956. The trip was a disaster, and when the 82 men finally landed they were met by a group of Batista’s soldiers who mowed them down on the beach. Only 18 survived, among them a wounded Guevara who was also suffering a bad attack of his recurring asthma. [11] The catastrophe of the Granma landing was the result of a misunderstanding between Castro and his urban contacts within Cuba, mostly members or ex-members of the Directorio. The relationship, in any case, was a difficult one; even at that stage there was an argument over political leadership which continued and grew more intense as Castro and Guevara established themselves in the mountains of the Sierra Maestra. To the extent that a movement existed at all, it was among students; there was trade union agitation, but there is no evidence that either the 26 July Movement or the Directorio had anything more than a marginal impact on it.
What is very clear is that even at this stage the key issue for both Che and Fidel was that the guerrillas in the mountains should have the political leadership of the resistance to Batista. Both were convinced that political organisation was secondary to military considerations, and saw the task of mass organisations in the cities as essentially one of support and supply. In the sierra Che’s execution of Aristidio, a peasant recruit who had ‘misused guerrilla funds’, was arbitrarily carried out. Indeed the largely sympathetic Anderson acknowledges that ‘Che’s trail through the Sierra Maestra was littered with the bodies of chivatos (informers), deserters and delinquents whose deaths he had ordered and in some cases carried out himself’, emphasising at a very early stage the moralism and rigid internal discipline of the group, but also signalling to the city organisation that Castro would fight long and hard for the leadership. [12] The emissaries from the Communist Party (PSP) who came to the sierra were told much the same thing.
Early in 1957 the Directorio attempted to assassinate Batista in the Presidential Palace in Havana; they never reached the first floor. The group were gunned down, among them the Directorio’s leader José Antonio Echeverría, whose reputation at the time was far more solid than Castro’s. Those who survived turned to Castro in the mountains, a definitive shift in the balance of power which the 26 July Movement leaders, including Che, quickly exploited.
It is centrally significant, however, that this shift was not simply a change of location but a profound political transformation. While the Directorio was impelled by an adventurist militarism, it nevertheless did have a social base in the cities and a tentative relationship with sections of workers. Castro had neither. What support they had in the mountains tended to come from the most alienated and isolated group – the landless land workers called precaristas – who had no political expression of their own. The relationship between the leaders of the 26 July Movement and the precaristas was not organic; they were, in a sense, their self proclaimed representatives. The political generalisation of that relationship expressed itself therefore in the autonomy of the revolutionaries from any class base, and in the programmatic priority of agrarian reform, a peasant demand, over any demands that could mobilise and reflect the interests of organised workers in general. The effective demise of the Directorio ended any possibility that the guerrilla leaders might have to adjust to the discipline of an organised relationship with a revolutionary class. The failure of the 1958 general strike, and the death of Frank País, their most able urban organiser, symbolised that crucial change of orientation. [13]
This is not simply an exercise in historical verification, but the explanation of why Guevara became the key political spokesman and analyst of the Cuban Revolution – for he represented a political model, a command model whose central dynamic was military effectiveness. After the revolutionary victory in 1959 that model would provide the basis for the construction of the new state, and shape the relationship between the leadership and the supporters of that state. The source of that political method was a narrative of the experiences of the pre-revolutionary period, and in particular the two texts in which Guevara described the building of a guerrilla group or foco.
 
The rush to power
Power came unexpectedly quickly to the guerrilla fighters of the 26 July Movement. In early 1958 there seemed sometimes to be more journalists than revolutionaries in the mountains. Certainly Fidel’s interview with Herbert Matthews of Life magazine gave Fidel a reputation and a projection greater than his successes or his numbers deserved. [14] What Matthews’ fulsome portrait of the guerrillas did reflect was the growing distance between the US establishment and an increasingly corrupt and repressive Batista. It was significant that Matthews should have seen Castro as the future alternative – for Castro’s emphasis in that interview was on his anti-Communism. It would be comforting to think that Castro was being diabolically Machiavellian – a capacity he had in large degree – but it would be more accurate to note that Castro’s personal history entirely supported that position, as indeed did the response of the Communists when they denounced him as a ‘petty bourgeois putschist’. In April 1958 the general strike call was a failure; in August of that year the guerrillas could claim 500 members in all, distributed among three columns. The actual territory under guerrilla control was minimal; the first revolutionary decrees on the expropriation and redistribution of land were in that sense a statement of intent rather than an indication of what could actually be done. Yet within four months Batista had fallen and left the country, and the three columns were moving in a victorious parade towards Havana.
In reality it was a spectacular collapse of the government, as the US withdrew support and arms to Batista’s forces, though the guerrilla war did serve to precipitate matters. The role of the urban working class in the victory over Batista was minimal: after all, the 26 July Movement had neither the inclination nor the organisation to mobilise them. While Anderson suggests that the Communists were now giving Castro some degree of support, it seems unlikely to have been much more than a token reinforcement coupled with a continuing deep suspicion of the guerrillas. In any event, they had lost the decisive political battle before the revolution and were in no position to challenge the new leadership.
As the victory columns converged on Havana in early January 1959, it was Che who reached the capital first. And it was he who was given the critical role of creating a state security apparatus, G-2, and dispensing revolutionary justice through the public tribunals at the La Cabaña fortress and elsewhere. Approximately 100 people were executed in the first weeks of the revolution. Much has been said about that, but with a history of brutality and persecution like that of the Batista regime, the revolutionary tribunal can be said to have exercised some considerable restraint in its treatment of Batista’s people. And there was a process of law, and an officially constituted public trial – though Raúl Castro summarily executed another 70 people at the same time. No matter how hard the right works to prove it, this was not a reign of terror but a revenge that was largely demanded by public outcry. Furthermore, the new state in this way established a new legality. Local revolutionary tribunals were set up to administer a ‘people’s justice’, essentially a resolution of local problems by public argument. This was very good for Cuba’s international libertarian reputation, but reality was rather different. For the decisions affecting the state power and the shape and direction of the society as a whole were made by new and often secret organs which were never, at any stage, available for public scrutiny. Guevara, of course, was central to the construction of the scaffolding of a new regime – and he carried out his task with dedication and integrity, but also with considerable ruthlessness.
 
The echoes of revolution
It would be difficult to overestimate the impact of the Cuban Revolution on the rest of Latin America. Only five years earlier the United States had crushed a less radical government in Guatemala with consummate arrogance. The fall of Peron in 1955 removed one major irritant to imperialist plans; the rest of Latin America was governed by complacent allies enjoying the fruits of the commercial relationship with the north. While there was some intellectual debate about the nature of dependent development, it did not generate hostile political expressions. And the Cold War provided the ideological cement for this comfortable hemispheric alliance.
The march of the guerrillas into Havana and the ignominious collapse of a key link in the chain of compliant leaders did cause shock in the United States and elation in Latin America. The promise of shared prosperity in a world of income substitution industries was already failing; in Mexico the trade unions were becoming active and confrontational; in Argentina workers’ resistance to the new military governments was growing. And on the international economic scene, the United States was beginning to face potential challenges to its control of the world market from its erstwhile enemies in Germany and Japan. In that context, the Cuban Revolution was politically significant; the imperialist giant had lost control of one of the links in the chain closest to it just as more distant ones were beginning to show the strain. What John Gerassi called ‘the great fear’ [15] referred precisely to the effect of the Cuban Revolution in the United States, where a great debate began as to why the US had ‘lost’ Cuba and what it should now do to arrest a further erosion of its authority and influence. [16] The debate resolved itself extremely quickly; the cold warriors triumphed over the cautious liberals and, after an initial hesitation, the US government set out to destroy the new Cuba by economic and political means. It spent the next two years tying its allies down to a combined joint programme of military alliance through joint security arrangements and a compensating package of economic aid through the Alliance for Progress. The price of both was an agreement to isolate and destroy Cuba. At the same time the United States imposed a ferocious economic blockade on an island whose economic lifeblood had always flowed from the United States.
The rapid radicalisation of the Cuban regime was in many ways a response to this pressure. While the state created after 1959 was a strong machine of control, its role in the economy was not yet clear – and indeed Guevara was centrally involved in those early months in defining how it should or could intervene. The immediate popularity of the new regime within Cuba was beyond doubt, however, as it resisted every attack by the United States with new measures of consolidation. The half a million Cubans who left Cuba in the first two years of the revolution were largely those who lived from the American connection, whether businessmen, or croupiers and pimps. Others were the members of Batista’s army and police, the landowning classes responding to successive land expropriation decrees, and lawyers and doctors as well as technical staff working for American firms. The political opposition to Castro thus absented itself. The Cuban state needed a new professional class, but this was more easily said than done; it takes years to educate a doctor or a skilled engineer. The literacy crusade of 1960 both endeared the Cubans to a Latin America where rates of illiteracy were in fact far higher than Cuba, and created a direct relationship between the young urban professionals and students and the rural population. At the same time, the foundations of a health system were laid with the introduction of a series of measures of public hygiene which brought dramatic and immediate results at relatively little cost by an extensive use of voluntary labour.
Crucially, change was achieved by actions taken from the state. The new organs of social organisation were created by the state; the Committees for the Defence of the Revolution (CDRs), a key to the new apparatus, functioned as the eyes and ears of the state – their role was centrally one of vigilance, as it became clear that the United States was prepared to support counter-revolutionary guerrilla actions within Cuba to complement and reinforce the mounting pressure from without. At this stage there was no doubt of the level of popular support these new institutions enjoyed; but that is a very different thing from popular or democratic control.
The visit by Castro to Washington in April 1959 and his more dramatic attendance at the UN in September 1960 won continental attention and gave the Cuban Revolution an enormous political and moral authority. Latin America, mesmerised until then by the overpowering presence of the mighty northern neighbour, was now debating an agenda of national liberation. Young Latin Americans went to Cuba to train for the establishment of their own guerrilla focos – a training that included political education and the assimilation of the Cuban experience and its informing ideas. The consequences would be disastrous.
The Latin American revolutionaries who arrived in high euphoria in Havana after 1959 were young and deeply committed. Like the leaders of the Cuban Revolution they were largely middle class in origin and nationalist in their politics. The small group from Nicaragua, who would later form the FSLN, had a more orthodox Marxist political education; the Peruvians were mainly dissident members of nationalist youth organisations grown weary of the compromises and corruption of their own leadership; the Argentinians represented factions of a divided Peronist resistance. Very few of them had been educated politically in a proletarian tradition. [17] They went to Cuba, therefore, not just for military training, but to learn a political method, a theory and practice of revolution.
In the post-revolutionary mythology the Cuban Revolution was represented as a great military victory. In fact, the struggle had not thrown up any new mass organisations; there were no soviets or forms of new democracy born from the assault on power by a whole class. [18] Castro and Guevara moved quickly to forge the institutions of a new state, but they were created from above. Castro was still vying for political leadership with the Communists, and intent on placing the cadres of the 26 July Movement in all the key posts. In the case of the new trade union organisation, the Confederation of Cuban Workers (CTC), this meant a direct confrontation with the Communists; in the case of the peasant organisations, the field was clearer. But in any event, the newly created structures derived from the ‘guerrilla’ political model – they transmitted decisions downwards, and mobilised support.
The founding political text of the new state was, unlikely though it may seem at first sight, Che Guevara’s Guerrilla Warfare. [19] Ostensibly it is a manual on how to conduct and organise a guerrilla war – but embedded in it is a conception of revolutionary politics whose implications for the Cuban Revolution were multiple. First it presumes that guerrilla war, as the central revolutionary strategy, can be initiated and conducted by a group of revolutionaries without reference to the social or political conditions prevailing in the society [20]: ‘We have demonstrated that a small group of men supported by the people and without fear of dying were it necessary, can overcome a disciplined regular army and defeat it’. [21] Secondly, the success of a revolution becomes essentially a technical matter, a question of military skill and preparedness. Thirdly, it follows that it is the revolutionaries who make the revolution on behalf of – or indeed in place of – the classes in whose name the revolution is given legitimacy: ‘We have the rebel army and this should be our primary instrument for the struggle’. [22] The determining factor then is not the balance of power or the degree of organisation or participation of the masses, but rather the determination, consistency and integrity of the revolutionaries themselves.
 
Politics and economics
Che is repeatedly represented as the most developed Marxist-Leninist in the leadership of the revolution [23] – yet he denied the suggestion. [24] He was certainly willing to negotiate with the Communists in the sierra, and was impatient with Fidel’s open hostility and suspicion to them. Yet his attitude to Fidel as ‘the special feature of the Cuban Revolution’, added to his more general analysis of the revolution, suggested that Marxism had been overcome. For Marx, classes are the central actors in the historical process; for Guevara, they are absent from the historical stage and replaced by their representatives or substitutes – the revolutionaries. Guevara drew on two aspects of Marxism in his writing. He used Marxist categories in his discussions of the economy. His later writings, and in particular Man and Socialism in Cuba, drew on Marx’s early writings, and especially the 1844 Manuscripts, to provide his ideas with a philosophical underpinning.
What is absent is dialectical materialism – the understanding of the historical process in which the principal actors are classes locked in struggle. [25] Marxism is not simply a collection of scientific categories and analytical tools: it is a theory and practice of revolution, in which those scientific insights inform and guide the revolutionary class – the proletariat. The conscious subject of history in Che’s version is the new state, the ‘collective guerrilla’, and it approaches the construction of the new power in exactly the same spirit as the creation of a guerrilla foco or cell. In Cuba in 1959 this meant that the continuing political battle with other internal forces was conducted from the highest echelons of state power, that the organs of mass mobilisation were created from above, and that their new leadership was appointed, not elected.
There can be no doubt of the absolutely central role Guevara played in the early years of the revolution: not only was he a key figure in the political consolidation of the Cuban Revolution, and in the construction of the central organs of the new state, he was also central to the formulation of its economic strategies. Castro was a pragmatist who responded to events but had no long term objectives beyond the consolidation of his own power base within a powerful independent national state.
Guevara was uneasy about Castro’s pragmatism, and immersed himself with some desperation in the only texts that were available: Eastern European handbooks on planning. [26] He clearly knew that industrialisation and economic growth were the key to Cuba’s survival – and that the situation was not ideal for those things to occur. In his speeches on the economy between 1959 and 1965, his recurrent themes were the urgency of planning, the need to industrialise and diversify, and the consequent necessity of winning workers over to the idea that they must postpone their expectation of an immediate material improvement in their lives.
Guevara’s first major speech, Social Projections of the Rebel Army, revealed an unresolved contradiction in his thinking that recurs in subsequent speeches and articles. On the one hand, his conception of economic planning at this early stage was influenced by Soviet thinking; at the same time he was emphatic that the foundation of such a policy must be the nationalisation of basic services and resources, and an attack on the privileged sectors. The rebel army becomes the state; the encircling empire, by analogy, is the market, and the picture is of an embattled nation state defending its survival against the marauding marketeers. Yet Che was always clearly and keenly aware of the dangers of isolation, and actively pursued a version of internationalism which acknowledged the problem of Cuba’s encirclement and incapacity to escape a new relationship of dependency. But internationalism was only part of the equation. Given that Cuba existed in a global context and that the balance of forces had to be assessed on a world scale, by what political methods could that balance be altered? For Guevara, the answer was consistent with his analysis of the Cuban Revolution, and did not involve the creation of mass organs of struggle elsewhere. All that Cuba could export was its own practice, and its own model of social and political organisation.
Guevara was clearly charismatic and persuasive; his disregard for material things and his absolute dedication, despite his obvious ill health, evoked the fierce loyalty of others. At this stage his relationship with Fidel seemed close and honest. His early nomination to the Directorship of the National Bank placed him at the centre of economic policy. Later it was Guevara who organised the National Institute of Agrarian Reform (INRA), designed to be the instrument of economic transformation. Significantly, the Industrial Ministry which Che headed was a department of INRA (directed by Fidel). This implied that agrarian reform was the foundation of change and the peasants were ‘the first liberating army’. [27] From a more efficient agriculture, and the ending of unemployment, Cuba could look forward to becoming an industrialised country. Within five years, he argued, Cuba could become self sufficient in textiles, develop nickel, iron and manganese production, and have its first (Czech financed) car plant up and running. [28] Given Cuba’s real economic structure, its dependence on sugar (comprising 95 percent of its exports in the mid-1950s), its lack of spare parts, machinery and industrial plant, and the catastrophic drain of its professionals and technicians, Che’s projections were clearly wildly utopian. Politically, however, they encapsulated a clear truth – that Cuba could not function autonomously for very long, that creating an island of socialism in a hostile capitalist sea was a dream.
That was the background against which Che embarked in mid-1960 on a series of foreign trips designed to win support for Cuba’s economic take off. In Eastern Europe he argued for the opening of a market for Cuban sugar. The visit in February 1960 by a Soviet trade delegation followed the imposition of the US economic blockade in January and signalled the readiness of the Russians to sustain the Cuban Revolution, though always with reservations. After all, the youthful leaders of the revolution were declared anti-Communists (at least in Fidel’s and Camilo Cienfuegos’s cases), the Communist Party was discredited and marginalised and Che Guevara, while happy to employ Soviet planning manuals, was still far from being within the ambit of the Stalinist old guard. It was also becoming clear that Che was influenced, and would be increasingly so, by the ideas then prevailing in China, especially the notion of the ‘great leap forward out of backwardness’. [29]
In Cuba itself the US blockade was met by a hardening line and a second wave of expropriations of US property. In April 1961 US-financed mercenaries botched an invasion at the Bay of Pigs. This revealed the direction of US policy. Cuba in turn purchased arms from Russia for its defence. When Che Guevara rose to speak at the special meeting of the Organisation of American States at Punta del Este, Uruguay, however, his analysis was sharp, combative and extremely confident. [30] He predicted a 10 percent rate of growth, the production of 30 percent of the world’s nickel by 1965, of some 2,600 metric tons of cobalt, and sugar harvests of between 8 and 9 million tons. [31] It has emerged recently that Che met privately at the conference with Kennedy’s representative Richard Goodwin and offered to discuss a quid pro quo – that if the United States agreed to a modus vivendi with Cuba (essentially a suspension of its support for the Cuban counter-revolutionaries on the one hand and a relaxation of the embargo on the other) then Cuba in turn ‘would agree not to make “any political alliance with the East”.’ [32] He hinted too that Cuba might also be willing to ‘discuss the activities of the Cuban Revolution in other countries’. Che’s promises were vague, and his attitude as reported by Goodwin was defiant; this was a negotiation, not a surrender, though Goodwin took it as a sign of weakness. It was also almost certainly a sign of Che’s (and Fidel’s) suspicion of the Cuban Communists and indeed of the Soviet Union. Che’s confident predictions in his speech, on the other hand, can only have been made on the premiss that aid in many forms would flow easily from Eastern Europe to Cuba.
Che repeated his predictions in an article published in March 1962, though there was an edge of urgency and frustration in it. [33] It also introduced a concept always identified with Guevara – ‘socialist emulation’. Besides the difficulty of finding spare parts, the absence of basic technologies and the lack of raw materials, the urgent need to raise productivity could only be realised by an intensified exploitation of labour. Guevara resolved the contradiction by arguing that it could be achieved ‘in the spirit of fraternal competition [rather] than in a cold bureaucratic manner; the contest [emulation] is shared by all’. [34] He returned again and again to the issue, most comprehensively in his famous 1965 essay Man and Socialism in Cuba.
The Missile Crisis of October 1962 exposed Cuba’s vulnerability to the United States; more importantly, for the leaders of the Cuban Revolution, it exposed the shallowness of the Russian commitment. The crisis was resolved by direct contact between Khrushchev and Kennedy, while Cuba looked on. Clearly the Soviet Union would not go to the brink for Cuba. Fidel began to distance himself from the Soviet Union and the Cuban Communists; and he turned again to the question of the revolution in Latin America. Briefly, Che and Fidel shared their suspicions of the Soviet Union. But there were other influences on Fidel, particularly his brother Raúl who was close to the Communists.
For Che it was clear that an escape from sugar dependency was the indispensable precondition for political independence from the Soviet bloc, towards which his attitude was becoming increasingly critical. Against Bureaucratism (February 1963) was a thinly veiled attack on the new bureaucracy which had grown up under the patronage of the increasingly influential Soviet economic advisers. [35] When Che recalled the spirit that had prevailed during the Missile Crisis, it escaped no one that this was the time when the relationship between Castro and the Soviet Union was at its most distant.
The debate about the economy that erupted in mid-1963 was often obscure and technical – but its foundation was political. Guevara had recognised at an early stage that Cuba could not escape dependency without diversifying the economy – his confident predictions that the whole thing would take five years were both an expression of his economic naivety in the months after the revolution’s victory and a recognition of the urgency of the task. In any event, the argument took place against a background of deepening economic integration with the Eastern bloc and a consequent shift in the political balance within Cuba itself. The technical arguments about the economy must be read as a text written on two levels; the second of these was an argument about the political direction of the revolution.
Che, taking his arguments from Charles Bettelheim, argued for an internal distribution of resources according to need in managing the economy, and for a policy of ‘socialist emulation’ that would raise productivity without additional costs. In reality, of course, this was exploitation by another name; but in the early 1960s it could at least be presented in the context of revolutionary enthusiasm and against the backcloth of a continuing movement elsewhere in Latin America. [36] The emphasis on the continental revolution and on the spread of the guerrilla war in the mid-1960s only rarely reflected reality; its significance was internal, in sustaining popular enthusiasm within Cuba. Against that were set the arguments of the Soviet planners, for whom each industry and plant should render a surplus; this was a managerial model, based on incentives and penalties, and simply mimicked the Soviet economy. In Che’s view, the adoption of this model could only result in a renewed concentration on sugar production and a reinforced dependency. [37]
The argument was resolved, as always, pragmatically. Castro was uneasy about the role of the Communists in his government, and kept the flame of guerrilla warfare alive as a warning to them. But the reality was that he was becoming increasingly integrated into the Soviet orbit; he clearly acknowledged that Cuba’s survival was inescapably interwoven with Russian support, which would not be selflessly given. The maintenance of his regime had become the central priority. And this was the source of the growing rift between Che and Fidel.
 
A separation
By mid-1965 Che Guevara had resigned all his government posts and left Cuba. His decision has produced endless and continuing speculation; but the context of the time leaves no room for doubt. Che’s articles and speeches return again and again to his recognition that the revolution could only survive if Cuba could break out of its economic straitjacket. His initial hope that the Eastern bloc would assist Cuba in the enterprise turned quickly to disillusionment as it became clear that it would not play that role. Che’s last speech, in Algiers in February 1965, was an explicit and frontal attack on the Soviet Union for its lack of internationalism and its cynical manipulation of the Cuban Revolution – but it was only the last in a series of increasingly angry discussions of the same issue. Fidel Castro for his part had clearly accepted that relationship without conditions – he had become an instrument of that manipulation. Che’s letter of resignation, written in 1964, was not made public until 1967. The letter itself was valedictory. It gave no hint of disagreement. However, Che’s departure was not the culmination of a policy of party building, nor did it signal the existence of a rising revolutionary movement in Latin America. In fact Che’s conduct was in many ways bizarre. He described himself as a modern Don Quixote, riding off on his old mare Rocinante in search of giants to fight. The metaphor has a certain literary charm, but politically it smacks of despair.
The publication of Che’s Man and Socialism in Cuba coincided with his departure from Cuba. [38] In that context the essay, while it picks up on many of the ideas articulated in his articles and speeches of previous years, should be read as a kind of political testament, a visionary document rather than a practical intervention in the revolutionary process. The kind of transformation he suggests there – a society of absolute equality of responsibility where new socialist values prevailed – was in any event utopian in the context of a rising managerial class and the reintegration of the Cuban economy into an international division of labour. But it was a critique of the Cuban process too.
In a sense, Guevara’s Algiers speech severed his relationship with the Cuban government. Of course, he was still an important representative of the Cuban Revolution, to which he too remained committed. There was no public split. But he left for Africa with a clear perspective that his political role would no longer be in Cuba. In the early years of the revolution, guerrilla groups had been formed elsewhere in Latin America after training in Cuba. In Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela, young revolutionaries seized upon the optimism at the heart of Guevara’s theory and formed guerrilla focos. In almost every case they failed immediately, and a generation of political leaders died in the application of a misplaced theory. Guevara’s particular concern was Argentina, which he saw, rightly, as a key to growth of a revolutionary movement in Latin America. The reason it was so central was because of its large concentrations of workers and the combative experience of its workers’ movement. The guerrilla theory, however, did not connect with that experience. Nonetheless, Che worked to build a guerrilla group there. The attempt failed again and again – but Guevara’s explanation of that rested on the personal incompetence of those he had selected to lead the new guerrilla army. In other words, the strategy was not at fault, merely its application. To make the point, Che went to the Congo.
Che’s experience of the Congo was both tragic and revealing. Anderson gives an exhaustive account of this episode not previously very well documented. [39] It is impossible not to find the narrative sad and desperate, though Anderson himself does not seem to reach that conclusion. Che arrived with a small group of Cuban volunteers in the Congo; his reasons for going there were never very clear, except that a number of armed groups existed and that there was an uprising of sorts under way. But it is impossible not to be impressed by the Cubans’ ignorance of local conditions – they had no idea what the origin of the various groups was, nor their relationship to one another – and by the extraordinary lack of preparation. Che clearly was unable to understand either local culture or the local language, and seemed unaware of the nature of the terrain. He was delirious with fever for one month of the three they spent there, no fighting was done and the Cubans only just escaped across Lake Tanganyika after a series of misunderstandings and miscalculations.
The point was not that the enterprise failed, but the incredible arrogance and foolishness that characterised it. Yet the theory of guerrilla warfare allowed it; there was no need, according to the theory, for the revolutionaries to have social and political roots, no need to be part of the mass movement, no need to make sense of the specificities of that society at that moment of its history, no need to understand its class composition. The will to make the revolution was the only requirement. The Congo offers a stark and shattering example of the real implications of a theory of revolution which substitutes the revolutionaries themselves for the revolutionary class. [40] Yet it was a lesson that Guevara and the advocates of the guerrilla war theory of revolution simply ignored. [41] After the ignominious expErience of the Congo, Che moved on to Prague and elsewhere before returning secretly to Cuba. The confident Jacobin, disguised as a bald middle aged businessman, now returned to Cuba without an identity, political or personal, and without a purpose. [42] There was a curious aimlessness about Che’s journeyings at this time; there were contacts with the Venezuelan Communist Party, but no agreement could be reached about where and when to establish a guerrilla group there. There was talk of going to Guatemala and Peru. In retrospect, no one seems very anxious to claim responsibility for selecting Bolivia. The most convincing reasons have to do with the existence of a small group in Bolivia and Che’s continuing preoccupation with building a guerrilla army in Argentina, across the Bolivian border. The key feature of the discussions as reported is that they revolved entirely around the logistical conditions for the guerrillas, yet paid scant attention to the political realities. Fidel apparently suggested Bolivia but it seems to have been based on skeletal information. Indeed there is a suggestion that Fidel had asked Regis Debray, a philosophy graduate from the Sorbonne (of whom more later), to assess the conditions for reVolutionary organisation in Bolivia. In fact, the Bolivian experiment would expose all the weaknesses of the guerrilla strategy and prove the burial place of its most famous strategist.
While Che wandered abroad, curious things were happening in Cuba. The reason for the selection of the Congo may have had more to do with Soviet foreign policy than with any sober assessment of the conditions for revolution. In 1964–1965, the Soviet Union promoted a series of armed movements in Africa, with an eye to its expanding influence in the continent. [43] In the Congo, the Soviet Union and China were vying to win over some of the guerrilla groupings and the Soviet Union was happy for the armed struggle to grow well away from Latin America in an era when it was beginning to seek some kind of post Cold War rapprochement with the United States. [44] Whatever the reasons, it was ill advised.
Paradoxically, the Congo fiasco and its aftermath coincided with the elaboration of the ‘heroic guerrilla’ as a symbolic representative of the Cuban Revolution, particularly among the new radicals of Europe and North America. In 1965 a young French intellectual, Regis Debray, a member of the generation seeking authentic revolution outside a European working class it deemed both incorporated into the system and Stalinised, arrived in Cuba. Whatever the reasons, Fidel gave him several long interviews and charged him with the task of spreading the message of guerrilla warfare among the student radicals of Paris and beyond. The result was an essay, The Long March in Latin America [45], and a book, Revolution in the Revolution, which globalised the Cuban political method as the new alternative. [46] Debray’s role in the creation of the Guevara myth was important, since he translated Che’s theory of revolution into the language of a 1960s radicalism which sought a revolutionary method outside the tradition of working class internationalism. In the end, his journey to Bolivia in search of Che almost certainly, albeit inadvertently, helped the Bolivian army to find Guevara’s group, since Debray proved fairly easy to identify in the small Bolivian mountain village where he was arrested and jailed.
Clearly, the decision to generate the Guevara myth was made by Castro, not Debray. In the conditions of Cuba in 1965, it served several purposes. In the rise and fall of Castro’s vexed relationship with the Soviet Union, this was a period of distancing. The Latin American revolutionary movement was not particularly promising. The guerrillas in Peru were easily crushed, the Guatemalan movement was dangerously divided and the Sandinistas were merely surviving. In Brazil the left was facing an authoritarian government and in Argentina it would be several years before the workers’ rising in Córdoba signalled a new and higher level of class struggle. In reality, Cuba was drifting inexorably into the Soviet ambit but Castro was uneasy and resisting. The Guevara myth enabled him to generate a connection with a new radical left which could create a solidarity movement and perhaps pressure social democratic governments to work more actively with Cuba. Yet the reality is that even as Western intellectuals were travelling to Cuba in solidarity, and Che was becoming the icon of a new age, the Cuban economy was in crisis, production falling and industrialisation as distant as it had ever been. And further, the development of guerrilla war was itself failing badly. When Che’s famous letter calling for the creation of ‘one, two, three, many Vietnams’ was read aloud at the OLAS Solidarity Conference in February 1967, it was a principle, and an absolutely fundamental one, represented as reality. [47]
The iconography of the heroic guerrilla was not the reflection of a concrete reality; its function was ideological. And that function was as much internal as international. In 1964 Castro had signed an agreement with the Communist parties of Latin America approving the armed struggle. It ensured Cuba’s allegiance to the Soviet Union in the splits with China; but the Communist parties were hardly like to change their historical trajectory overnight. In 1965 the Soviet Union signed agreements with several Latin American governments which were themselves facing armed resistance, like Venezuela and Chile. And while Castro too signed a three year trade agreement, he was again growing suspicious of Soviet intentions. It was time to re-establish Cuba’s moral and political authority independently of the Soviet Union; at the same time any possibility of achieving a degree of autonomy would rest upon Cuba’s ability to achieve economic freedom of movement.
The return to some of Che’s economic ideas was ironic, and in 1966 it became increasingly clear that Castro was planning some ‘great leap forward’ of his own, a sugar harvest large enough to provide a surplus to finance industrialisation. For that to happen, of course, the exploitation of labour must be intensified again; Che’s theories of ‘socialist emulation’ and the ideas enshrined in Man and Socialism in Cuba were rediscovered. Cubans were called upon to give their labour, to accept the sacrifice of material benefits of all sorts, and to place their shoulder to the wheel for the nation state. Che became the living symbol of self-sacrifice and social discipline when the Cuban state required of its own people a maximum, and unpaid, effort. In return the Cuban workers were given a brief taste of direct democracy. Trade union officials could be elected (after 74 percent of the existing officials were replaced the experiment was not repeated). The promise of poder local (municipal power) was stillborn, since democracy did not extend to any of the organs of state power or their occupants.
The climax of this campaign was to be the Gran Zafra, the 10 million ton sugar harvest that would be Cuba’s take off point. In fact, the harvest reached only some 6.3 million tons, but in the course of the mobilisation of labour that it entailed, the rest of the economy suffered neglect, shortages and disorganisation, deepening the impact of the shortfall in sugar production. The rhetoric of the ‘revolutionary offensive’ was counterposed to a rapprochement with Moscow that began with Castro’s speech of support for the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia, the attack on Solidarnosc and the establishment of political relations with the military reformists Velasco in Peru and Torrijos in Panama. And indeed the ‘revolutionary offensive’ itself was not all that it seemed; the introduction of the ‘labour file’ in 1969 suggested that ‘socialist emulation’ and the idea of ‘moral incentives’ were merely masks for intensified labour discipline and political authoritarianism. The dramatic rise in absenteeism in 1970 produced a new and draconian Labour Code.
The process over those years between Che’s departure and the new line in foreign policy that began to emerge in 1968 was contradictory. Its ideology was internationalism, a critical attitude towards the Soviet Union and the creation of an independent national economy. Its reality was an early recognition by Castro that this perspective was utopian; consequently he sought a rapprochement with the Soviet Union while conserving a degree of political space within Cuba that would ensure his continuing control over the state. In that sense, the portrait of Che was the mask that Castro wore.
 
An unmarked grave in Nancahuazú
Che had placed his life and his career at the service of the Cuban Revolution; he had been its symbol and among its most popular figures. But he had insisted from the outset that one of the particular features of the Cuban Revolution was the figure and personality of Castro himself. It was, after all, consistent with his conviction that the characteristics of the individual revolutionary shaped the course and the outcome of every struggle. Che was also the ideologue of a political strategy which laid no particular store by mass organisation, except in support of the revolutionary army, and which did not understand society as a site of class struggle. He was, for all his personal commitment and integrity, the leader and instrument of a state; his key political activity was to build the apparatus whereby that state could defend itself. His evident popularity did not translate itself into any tangible organisation or social base which he represented or led. It was, after all, no part of his political vision that such a relationship needed to be built. When the political tide turned, Che’s integrity would not allow him to bend to the prevailing wind; but his opposition could only be an individual decision. Rather than draw around him those who might have supported him had he taken a public stance, he preferred to distance himself from the state in which he now no longer had a role to play and leave it unchallenged. His critical views were articulated only indirectly, and from a distance, in the Algiers speech and his essay on Man and Socialism in Cuba.
That was the backcloth to the last act in this tragedy of the revolutionary hero – a tragedy made doubly ironic by the use that was made by others of his unnecessary and sad demise.
The Bolivian venture was ill conceived, ill prepared and terribly misguided. [48] The original decision to select Bolivia came after a number of other alternatives had been proposed and rejected. While Castro supported the decision, his reasons for doing so were quite different from Che’s. Castro had established a close relationship with the Bolivian Communist Party and appeared to find its commitment to the armed struggle convincing enough. Yet no Latin American Communist party had shown any intention of changing its historical spots, and he might have surmised that the Bolivian Communists were primarily concerned with outmanoeuvring growing Trotskyist and Maoist organisations. Another and more powerful reason might have been the long history of working class struggle in the country and the rising tensions in the mines of the high Altiplano but this reason was never adduced. It looked very much as though Castro’s approval of the Bolivian guerrilla project was designed first and foremost to give credibility to the Bolivian Communists. [49] For Che the particular conditions of Bolivia seemed a matter of little concern; his vision was altogether more ambitious. Che planned a continental network of guerrilla organisations with Bolivia as its geographical centre. According to Anderson, Che told the members of his group in Bolivia that ‘Bolivia must be sacrificed so that the revolutions in the neighbouring countries may begin’. [50] Clearly he had learned nothing from the Congo.
The choice of Nancahuazú was a bad one. ‘It would have been harder to find in all Bolivia an area less well suited to the fighting of a guerrilla war, especially by the foco method’. [51] It was an area of deep ravines, hard to travel through at the best of times and offering little in the way of natural food sources. Its population was sparse and consisted largely of peasants with little sense of the wider reality of Bolivia. In fact, and with tragic irony, it was less than 200 miles away from the mining area of Siglo XX.
The guerrilla group numbered 40 at its maximum, half of them Cuban. They were discovered at an early stage and forced to move constantly across a hostile terrain; illness, betrayal and desertions dogged them; the group split in two and were never able to find one another. And the Bolivian army, with its US trained counter-guerrilla officers, threw many of its forces against the depleted guerrilla band. Che’s Bolivian Diary describes the day to day life of the guerrilla; its tone of desperation is unmistakable. The final days, when Che was so sick and undernourished that he had to be carried on the back of a young miner, are heartbreaking. A final tragic note comes in the summary for the month of June, when Che mentions the fragmentary news of a month long miners’ strike. Though he probably never knew the details, only 160 miles away the Bolivian army had perpetrated one of the most appalling massacres in the long history of its repressions of the miners on the night of San Juan, 24 June. Che was captured on 8 October at the village of La Higuera. [52] On the 9th he was dead, killed by an army sergeant under the watchful eye of several officers and a representative of the CIA, Gary Prado. The last photograph showed the haggard face and naked torso that were reproduced in so many forms for decades thereafter. Wrenched from its material context, the image became that of a martyr, passive and isolated.
 
Born out of the flames
The death of Guevara was in every sense a turning point. It marked the definitive end of the foco theory of guerrilla war. The groups that held to those ideas would soon be destroyed. [53] The armed struggle did not end of course but its vanguard was now in Argentina and Central America, where it found new and more class based forms. In Cuba itself the iconic guerrillero still appeared decorating the stage at party meetings. The irony that Che’s farewell letter had been read at the first Congress of the Cuban Communist Party had not yet struck home. That was partly because Castro used the image of Che to legitimate the harsh labour discipline and increasing centralisation of power that characterised the years of the great sugar harvest. At the same time, the face of Che concealed Castro’s increasingly close relationship with the Soviet Union internationally and the Communist Party at home – the twin guarantors of his hold on power. According to François Maspero, ‘1967 marked a rupture ... the definitive transformation, although it began much earlier, of the group led by Fidel Castro; it passed from the status of a revolutionary movement in a constant process of development to the government of a state whose priority, again by definition, was to ensure its permanent hold on power’. [54] Within a year of Guevara’s death, and while maintaining a token support for the guerrilla organisations still in existence, Castro began to establish state to state relationships in Latin America, with Velasco in Peru and Torrijos in Panama, with the new government of Ecuador in 1971 and, most importantly of all, a close rapport with the Allende government in Chile. Indeed Castro’s visit to Chile in November 1971, while it sent the Chilean bourgeoisie into paroxysms, in fact provided the opportunity to formally renounce the armed struggle and welcome the reformist strategy for change in the continent.
The figure of Che acquired a life of its own, carried in song and poster. Clearly the reality of his final years would not sustain the heroic image; thus the history faded and the personal qualities remained to inspire others to dedicate themselves to the pursuit of revolutionary change. But those who adopted the symbol often pursued very different strategies – the Tupamaros urban guerrillas in Uruguay, the mass armed organisations in Argentina in the 1970s, the Central American resistance which assimilated some of the consequences of the isolation of the revolutionaries from the exploited classes.
By then Che’s star was dimming in Cuba. As Cuba was fully integrated into the Soviet ambit, it employed its internationalist reputation to legitimise its military presence in Africa, where it served Soviet geopolitical interests erratically but faithfully. If Che represented a spirit of revolutionary internationalism, a critical attitude to the Soviet Union and the Communist parties, and the renunciation of personal ambition in favour of the greater cause, then his icon was no longer appropriate to a nation state seeking to survive in a hostile world. By 1970 it became clear that both growth and output had fallen in the previous five years, as had living standards. The rhetoric of sacrifice and the vision of a collective goal convinced fewer and fewer people when it was combined with sanctions directed at workers and where collective discipline and people’s power were reinforced by coercion and an increasingly repressive atmosphere.
By 1970 the reintroduction of material incentives signalled the end of the ‘revolutionary offensive’ and a growing material and social differentiation within the working class. Consumer goods and access to the lower levels of power were restricted to ‘advanced workers’ designated by the Communist Party according to their work discipline and ‘enthusiasm’. Unlike the 1965 trade union elections, those held in 1970 were characterised by the prohibition of public debate and candidate lists made up by the party and the government; the result was a high level of abstention. The year 1970 marked the so called ‘institutionalisation’ of the revolution – effectively a recognition that Cuba was a weak national capital whose survival in the world economy required that it resume a place in a wider economic system over which it had no control. The next five year plan was drawn up in 1970 by JUCEPLAN, the joint Cuban-Soviet Commission; in 1972 Cuba joined Comecon and by the following year 67.5 percent of its foreign trade was with the Soviet Union. It became once again a sugar producer, importing its machinery from Eastern Europe and depending on Russia for its oil and energy.
The growth of a bureaucratic managerial class reflected the emphasis on the profitability of each enterprise which Che had so vehemently opposed. [55] Those who argued a Guevarist case on wages at the CTC (Cuban Workers Confederation) congress in 1973 were dismissed as ‘petty bourgeois egalitarians’ by its general secretary, Lázaro Peña, a veteran Communist trade union leader – one of those to whom Fidel had expressed such vehement opposition just 15 years earlier. The whole process culminated in the 1976 Constitution which confirmed the extreme concentration of power in Fidel’s circle and the centrality of the Communist Party which he now headed. [56]
There was no place for the heroic guerrillero when accumulation and the integrity of the state shaped the dynamics of Cuban society. And Che virtually disappeared in Cuba, except as a historical monument, a figure at Castro’s side.
 
The selfless spirit rediscovered
And then came glasnost and perestroika. By the early 1980s there was a flourishing small scale private enterprise in Cuba and foreign capital was permitted to own up to 49 percent of Cuban joint enterprises. While a high world sugar price brought some degree of prosperity, it benefited above all a managerial and bureaucratic class, a class which had been given effective control over the economy by a 1982 law which gave them full powers of decision, including the right to dismiss workers. While the much vaunted education and health systems remained among the best in Latin America, public sector spending in general had fallen continuously in the previous decade. The immediate effect of the changes in the Soviet Union was a sudden and brutal end to the economic relationship which in one sense had kept the Cuban economy afloat but in another had locked it in the role of sugar producer and consumer of Eastern European goods, reinforcing internal and external inequalities.
Castro’s response to the changes in Eastern Europe was in some sense pre-emptive; he announced a ‘rectification campaign’, denouncing corruption, inequality, the existence of prostitution and differential access to consumer goods. Fearing the emergence of protests from below, Castro articulated, with consummate and characteristic temerity, the long standing anger of Cuban workers. Rectification was to have a twofold purpose: first, to ensure that Castro would not be swept away in some unexpected protest movement from below – instead he would lead it from above, sacrificing his erstwhile colleagues as and when necessary. [57] Secondly, ‘the national leadership turned to ideology to help to legitimate policies that it had material reasons to implement ...’ [58] Those policies looked to the survival of the Cuban state in the post-Stalinist world. Castro knew that that would involve scarcity, serious shortages, and a reversion to some level of primitive accumulation under the most isolated and unfavourable of circumstances. [59]
This was the situation in which Che Guevara was brought back again from the dead:
Che Guevara symbolised the values guiding the ‘rectification process’. Newspaper and journal articles (as well as books) appeared on Che ... In a speech marking the 20th year since Guevara’s death, Castro commented that the country was rectifying all that was a negation of Che’s ideas, Che’s style and Che’s spirit. Castro mentioned that [Cubans] were to rectify those things – and there were many – that strayed from the revolutionary spirit, revolutionary work, revolutionary virtue, revolutionary effort and revolutionary responsibility. [60]
This required an enormous suspension of disbelief on the part of his audience. Was Fidel Castro, simultaneously prime minister, commander of the armed forces and first secretary of the Communist Party, and standing at the heart of an intelligence operation created by Che and run with absolute ruthlessness ever since by Manuel Piñeiro, unaware of the corruption, the inequality, the repression in Cuban society? Could it be true that the lack of revolutionary spirit, so obvious to those who walked past the special shops where people with gold or dollars could buy everything that was unavailable to the general population, came as a surprise to the uncontested leader of this authoritarian state? In any event by 1989 that ‘revolutionary spirit’ had been translated into a new labour code, new flexibility of labour which included an end to the basic wage, and the introduction of voluntary (ie unpaid) labour to maintain the minimal social provisions. So the Cuban working class paid over and over again for their survival – through wage cuts, intensified labour discipline, shortages of all goods, and the demand that they pay with their labour for their own inadequate services.
What had this to do with Guevara’s idea of an absolute equality of sacrifice, or his recognition that the Cuban Revolution could not survive in isolation? His revolutionary internationalism was not simply idealism: at its heart was a recognition of the necessity of permanent revolution in some form. There is no evidence that Guevara had taken that notion from Trotsky – but his writings of the early 1960s leave little room for doubt that his concrete analysis of the circumstances of the Cuban Revolution led him to this conclusion, that without a far wider economic and material base, Cuba’s fate would be either a new dependency or the defence of an isolated and impoverished economy that could not be viable. And of course he was right: the Cuban state continued to exist, but the revolutionary process did not occur. Che’s analytical conclusions were manifestly proven by subsequent events, but they were enshrined in a political method which could not generate a revolutionary internationalist alternative to the theory of guerrilla warfare. Che’s insights could only be invested in a futile struggle distant from the class forces that could have transformed the Cuban experience into a revolutionary impulse, as Bolivia had so poignantly shown.
In a sense it could be argued that Che Guevara found himself once again constrained, even in this second coming, by the inheritance of the Cuban Revolution. Che was still a recognisable symbol for an earlier generation, and his relative youth and courage and his barbarous murder enabled his example to be translated for a younger generation too. But there was a further reason why the image of Guevara still had such a powerful resonance. In the conditions of economic crisis that followed the end of Stalinism his arguments about the necessity for sacrifice could be mobilised and given an extraordinary moral force by the circumstances of his life and death. More importantly, and here the ironies are multiple, his iconic impact was reinforced by the fact that he could not be tarred with the Stalinist brush; he had died before the rhetoric of revolution (whatever its reality) had faded away in Cuba, and his life and ideas plainly did not in any way represent that corrupted tradition. Indeed, much of his life seemed to have followed paths that led him away from Stalinism. To that extent he was all that could be saved from the debris of Eastern Europe.
Yet that symbol of struggle and revolutionary integrity remained attached to a political method which legitimates authoritarian bureaucratic rule by analogy with a substitutionist theory in which the revolutionary subject is the self proclaimed guerrillero. And the symbolic language of the heritage of Che Guevara is claimed as the property of a state which falsifies its own purposes by its use – bending the insights and the contradictions in Guevara’s life and ideas to its own purposes. As Habel put it ‘... this confusion between immediate needs and ideological justifications, this method of masking every twist and turn, is one of the characteristics of Fidelismo ...’ [61]
It is a deliberate confusion, whose effect is to identify Fidel with Che and thus to cleanse Fidel of his involvement with, and responsibility for, the now ‘rectified’ past.
Ideology can distort reality, but it cannot entirely replace the concrete day to day experience of Cuban workers. They hear the repeated mantra of sacrifice, yet they see a Cuba which in the late 1990s has distributed that scarcity unevenly, so that some are forced to live a life of shortages and unfulfilled needs while others – business people, taxi drivers, prostitutes, government bureaucrats – have continuous access to the life of plenty available to anyone with dollars to spend. They hear the chorus of praise to the people and the masses who are the protagonists of history, and yet they see a state in which the concentration of power is absolute and where the people are forbidden any real debate on, or involvement in, the future direction of their society. They hear the self congratulatory declarations that Cuba stands alone, untouched by the values of a capitalist society which Che so forcefully rejected, yet they live in a world governed by accumulation, power, the allocation of resources for profit and the transformation of their most precious achievements (medical research, education, culture, indeed the image of Che itself) into commodities for sale on a world market symbolised by the real circulating currency in the Cuban economy – the US dollar.
To attach the name of Che Guevara to such a reality and claim that it is one more painful step on the road to revolution is a grotesque parody that convinces few. And yet there is a picture of Che in every Cuban home. Perhaps they have invested it with another, secret, meaning – just as for centuries the saints of the Catholic church were invested in Cuba with the secret and infinitely more powerful names of the gods of popular religion (orixas). If that is so, then perhaps the image of Guevara can yet be disengaged from its unwanted identification with a powerful and repressive state.
If the revolutionary spirit is to be salvaged, it will be because the hero of an earlier struggle is reappropriated by history, his errors understood, his project judged for its insights and its failures. Religions need saints to persuade people to invest their own potential in a power outside themselves; revolutions are made by human beings of flesh and blood who take from the past the practical lessons, for good and for ill, that will enable them to understand and exercise their own collective power the better the next time around.

Notes
1. L. Selfa, Mexico after the Zapatista Uprising, International Socialism 75.
2. In the 1960s Guevara was subject to major commercial manipulation; a boutique was named after him and in 1968 three films were made about his life.
3. John Lee Anderson’s Che Guevara: a Revolutionary Life (London 1997) is certainly the most complete biography of Guevara ever written. Its political weaknesses are many but the detailed information it provides is without equal.
4. The publication in 1996 of Guevara’s Motorcycle Diaries (London 1996) represents the resurrection of Guevara in the mould of Jack Kerouac, the restless traveller of the Beat generation. This Guevara ‘on the road’ may not be the creation of a deliberate conspiracy to depoliticise him, but that is its effect. It may be testimony to the historical amnesia or the historical ignorance of those who edited these journals.
5. Motorcycle Diaries, op. cit., pp. 93–6.
6. The prehistory of the coup, and the role of United Fruit, is set out in S. Schlesinger and S. Kinzer, Bitter Fruit (New York 1983), and exhaustively analysed in J. Dunkerley’s monumental Power in the Isthmus (London 1988). On the history of US intervention in Central America, J. Pearce’s Under the Eagle (London 1981) remains the standard text.
7. See J.L. Anderson, Che Guevara: a Revolutionary Life, p. 159, and R. Rojo, My Friend Che, op. cit. (New York 1969), and T. Borge’s memoirs, La paciente impaciencia (Managua 1989).
8. On the early period of 20th century Cuban history, see J. O’Connor, The Origins of Socialism in Cuba (Ithaca 1970).
9. Raúl was and remains a shadowy but crucial figure in Cuban politics. Formally, he remains Fidel’s designated successor in all his leading posts – though it is unlikely now that he will succeed his brother.
10. It is worth noting that while Castro repeatedly claimed his inheritance from the great nationalist revolutionary José Martí, political leader of Cuban independence, Martí raised an army after decades of patient political and trade union organising among Cuban workers in exile.
11. It is a great mystery, to me at least, that in the mythology of the Cuban Revolution the 18 became 12, a more significant figure in terms of biblical precedent but with no particular resonance in the revolutionary tradition!
12. J.L. Anderson, op. cit., p. 283.
13. Anderson provides the detail for this part of the story in his Che Guevara: a Revolutionary Life, chs. 15–18, and see in particular pp. 318–319. Though Anderson provides exhaustive detail, the readers of this journal will have to analyse their significance themselves, since Anderson rarely steps outside the mental universe of his subject.
14. And earned Matthews the apoplectic rage of the US conservatives, who saw him as a representative of the ‘pinko’ conspiracy inside the State Department – a bizarre concept at any time, but particularly in the middle of the Cold War.
15. John Gerassi had been an associate editor of Newsweek in Latin America before writing this exposé of US actions in the continent. He later edited Che’s speeches and writings in Venceremos: the Speeches and Writings of Che Guevara (New York 1968).
16. See in this respect Scheer and Zeitlin, Cuba, an American Tragedy (New York 1960), C. Wright Mills, Listen Yankee (New York 1960) and Huberman and Sweezy’s Cuba: Anatomy of of a Revolution (New York 1960) among others.
17. There were exceptions, prime among them Salvador Cayetano Carpio (’Marcial’), leader of the FPL of El Salvador.
18. This is not simply an obvious reference to the soviets created in Russia in 1917: in Cuba itself the mass struggles of 1933 had thrown up just such organs of power. See D.L. Raby, The Cuban Revolution of 1933 (Glasgow 1975).
19. This has gone through hundreds of different editions. It was first published in 1963, in an edition of 50,000 copies. It was written in 1960.
20. It is interesting to note how the latest and most important of the Guevara biographies, by J.L. Anderson, employs the same method in addressing Guevara’s life, and thus confirms the theory implicitly through the life of its formulator.
21. This is set out in a very early and very important speech Guevara made, on 17 January 1959, called Social Projections of the Rebel Army. Quoted in J.L. Anderson, op. cit., p. 393.
22. Ibid., p. 392.
23. By Anderson repeatedly, and by many others including most of the Trotskyist and non-Communist left.
24. See K.S. Karol, Guerrillas in Power (London 1971), p. 45.
25. Michel Lowy addresses the political, ethical and economic components of Guevara’s thinking in his The Marxism of Che Guevara (New York 1973), which curiously doesn’t rate a mention in Anderson’s bibliography. It is an interesting piece of work, but fundamentally uncritical; significantly it fails to connect the three components of his thinking, celebrating Guevara’s readiness to revise Marx without saying in any sense what direction that revision took.
26. He told Karol that there was no alternative to using those texts and trying to adapt them to Cuban circumstances: ibid., p. 44.
27. Che Guevara, Cuba: Exception or Vanguard, in John Gerassi (ed.), op. cit., pp. 196–206.
28. Che Guevara, On Economic Planning in Cuba, a television talk reproduced in J. Gerassi (ed.), op. cit., pp. 207–224.
29. These ideas came to Guevara indirectly, through the influence particularly of Rene Dumont (who later became a bitter critic of Cuba) and Charles Bettelheim. From 1963 to 1965 the debate about alternative strategies for economic growth became public – at this stage it remained an internal discussion, and one shaped as much by political considerations as economic ones, and in particular by the shifting relationship with the Communist Party.
30. Che Guevara, On Growth and Imperialism, in J. Gerassi (ed.), op. cit., pp. 225–263.
31. This was a huge figure. When Castro attempted his own ‘Great Harvest’ (Gran Zafra) in 1967–1968, the objective was 8 million tons. Despite the mobilisation of massive human and material resources to achieve it, the results fell short of the target by nearly 2 million tons.
32. See J.L. Anderson, op. cit., p. 519.
33. Che Guevara, Our industrial tasks, in J. Gerassi (ed.), op. cit., pp. 275–293.
34. Ibid., p. 288.
35. In J. Gerassi (ed.), op. cit., pp. 314–321.
36. The distance between the reality of that revolutionary movement and the claims made for it was enormous, of course – in a way Che’s death in Bolivia was the moment when the myth met reality, and was found deeply wanting.
37. Che’s exposition of his ideas on economic planning are set out in On the Budgetary System of Financing, in J. Gerassi (ed.), op. cit., pp. 409–441.
38. The essay was not published originally in Cuba, but in the Uruguayan left wing magazine Marcha in March. It later appeared in the magazine of the Cuban armed forces, Verde Olivo.
39. See J.L. Anderson, op. cit., pp. 664–669.
40. See L. Trotsky, On Substitutionism, in Party and Class (London 1996).
41. I recently saw in Cuba a new Cuban publication entitled Che was Never Beaten in the Congo. It might have been better to ask why he did not and could not fight there at all!
42. It was the brilliant Uruguayan historian Eduardo Galeano who called Che ‘the Jacobin of the revolution’.
43. N. Miller, Soviet Relations with Latin America 1959–87 (Cambridge 1989).
44. J.L. Anderson, op. cit., p. 611, claims that Guevara saw the involvement in the Congo as the first step in the building of ‘a Cuban-led international anti-imperialist alliance’ that would eventually force the Soviet Union and China to mend their fences. If it is true – and I find the idea less than convincing – then it points to some extraordinary delusions of grandeur on the part of both Fidel and Che!
45. Published in New Left Review 33, September/October 1965; pp. 17–58.
46. R. Debray, Revolution in the Revolution (Penguin, London 1968). The book was attended by maximum advance publicity; copies were snapped up by the 1960s generation. My copy was the last of 15 bought earlier that morning by the local university bookshop – most had been stolen!
47. The impact of Cuba on Latin America and its subsequent involvement in the development of the armed struggle is discussed in ch. 3 of Jorge Castañeda’s rich analysis, Utopia Unarmed (New York 1994). See too on this period M. Gonzalez. Can Castro Survive?, in International Socialism 56.
48. On this episode see J. Dunkerley, Rebellion in the Veins (London 1984), pp. 136–153. See also Che Guevara, Bolivian Diary. J.L. Anderson (in his Che Guevara: Life of a Revolutionary), devotes the final chapter to Bolivia under the bizarre (and ultimately unexplained) title Necessary Sacrifice.
49. J. Dunkerley (op. cit., pp. 136–137) reports that Castro prevented an influential Bolivian independent left delegation from attending the OLAS conference in January 1966.
50. J.L. Anderson, op. cit., p. 701.
51. J. Dunkerley, op. cit., p. 140.
52. See J.L. Anderson,op. cit., pp. 733–739.
53. See J. Castañeda, op. cit., p. xxx.
54. F. Maspero, Introduction to J. Habel, Ruptures à Cuba (Paris, 1989), later published in English (but without Maspero’s introduction) by Verso as The Revolution in Peril (1991). Maspero, the radical publisher, was one of the many foreigners who arrived in Bolivia at the time of Che’s capture – and was immediately expelled. According to him, the book could have been called The Revolution Betrayed. Habel’s book is a careful account of developments in Cuba from the 1970s onwards from the perspective of the Fourth International (Mandel), which supported Cuba until the late 1980s.
55. See Che Guevara, On the Budgetary System of Financing, in J. Gerassi (ed.), op. cit., pp. 409–441.
56. On this period in general see J. Habel, op. cit., ch. 2, Les Réformes Économiques. See too A. Zimbalist (ed.), Cuban Political Economy (London 1988).
57. The official execution in 1989 of Arnaldo Ochoa, an Angolan veteran and a long standing friend of Castro’s, for involvement in drug running, was determined and executed in a matter of days – as a demonstration of the new purity.
58. S. Eckstein, Back from the Future (Princeton, New Jersey 1994), p. 60.
59. It is doubtful, neverthless, that Castro or his advisers could have foreseen the depth of the crisis that began to develop after 1989 in what came to be called the ‘Special Period in Time of Peace’. In 1992 people in provincial towns were cooking over wood fires in the street, an epidemic of neuritis signalled serious and widespread malnutrition, prostitution proliferated and sexual diseases reached unprecedented levels. The fall of the Berlin Wall simply exposed the reality of the Cuban economy to public view. But at another level, what was perhaps unforeseeable was the ferocity of the reaction of the American right, closely followed by the president, expressed in the Helms-Burton Amendment to the absurdly named Cuban Democracy Act. Where the original act sanctioned all acts designed to bring down Castro and reinforced the economic siege in force since 1960, Helms-Burton introduced draconian sanctions against anyone trading directly or indirectly with Cuba. The purpose, quite clearly, was to starve Cuba into submission. If the EC commissioners balked at this new US barbarism, it was only because the boycott of economic relations with Cuba had allowed a range of European enterprises and institutions to take control of the key sectors of the Cuban economy – tourism, oil exploration, nickel production etc.
60. S. Eckstein, op. cit., p. 62.
61. J. Habel, op. cit., p. 141.
 



Elections in the disaster zone
Daniel Ortega lost a presidential election for the second time in October 1996. His 38 percent of the vote was easily surpassed by the 51 percent won by the candidate of the Liberal Alliance, Arnaldo Alemán, ex-mayor of Managua and an unscrupulous right wing populist. Ortega’s subsequent claims of electoral fraud no doubt had some element of truth; yet 80 percent of the eligible population cast their ballots, and their verdict was incontestable.
In the post-mortems that follow it will be tempting to explain the result by reference to a hostile media or the appalling material reality in which people live now. That argument will defeat its own purpose: surely in such circumstances a revolutionary alternative would attract more rather than fewer people. The objective conditions would seem to be ripe once again for major and drastic change; yet the ordinary Nicaraguans who sacrificed so much in defence of their revolution through the 1980s were not convinced that Ortega and the Sandinistas could offer them any kind of solution. The gulf between the high rhetoric of the revolutionary leaders and the reality those fine words obscured has become a yawning abyss.
The material realities of today’s Nicaragua are harsh in the extreme. Some 60 percent of the population are unemployed; the majority of the rest are underemployed; the annual per capita income in the country has returned to its 1945 level. Some 50 percent of the population live in extreme poverty, and 70 percent live below an internationally acknowledged poverty line. Nicaragua’s gross domestic product (GDP) (at $425 per capita) is one of the lowest in the Western hemisphere – and stands at approximately the same level as it did in 1966. In 1992 alone the consumption of basic goods and services fell by an additional 37.5 percent. [1] That explains the roving groups of young people begging or stealing in the streets. The infrastructure is visibly collapsing: inter-city highways go unrepaired; city streets are pitted with holes. The majority of Managua’s population – some one third of whom are recent refugees from the vicious fighting of the end of the 1980s in the north – live in makeshift shacks by the roadside or on empty, dusty plots. Public health provision, which did improve through the previous decade, is now virtually non-existent. Education, which was free under the Sandinista government, is now only available at a fee – a minimum of 100 córdobas per month per child, or six days wages for a seasonal agricultural worker. Managua, which was once remarkably free of hard drugs, has now become the main distribution point in Central America for crack and cocaine. [2] On the land, the small and middle peasants who in many cases benefited from land reform policies in the early 1980s are now enslaved by debt and crippling repayment conditions. Many of them are awaiting the outcome of court cases or government decrees which could return their lands to their pre-1979 owners.
It is hard to imagine the depth of the social and economic collapse which Nicaragua suffered after 1990. The statistics are brutal enough – but the reality they coldly describe was even worse, because in addition to material distress, the workers and peasants of Nicaragua had to deal with a terrible disillusionment.
 
A calculated crisis
The essential thing to understand is that this crisis is not an accident or merely the result of incompetence or corruption. The poverty and social collapse visible to all are the results of a strategy imposed by the central financial institutions of the world market and known universally as ‘structural adjustment’. [3] Behind the cold terminology of ‘neo-liberalism’ lie decisions and agreements whose effects are devastating. In the case of Nicaragua the agreements for Emergency Economic Recovery were forged during 1990, after the defeat of the Sandinista government in February that year. There is a debate about the reasons for that defeat [4], but what is clear is that, while the sustained economic and military assault upon Nicaragua organised by the United States was continuing, the hope that this interminable and costly struggle could be won had largely disappeared. The economic siege had terrible effects. The military defence of the country absorbed almost 70 percent of the gross domestic product, while the cost in dead, wounded and displaced rose to extraordinary levels (the Contra war almost certainly cost 50,000 lives and 100,000 wounded by the end of 1989). Yet even that in itself was not explanation enough for the Sandinista defeat at the polls. Crucially, the government of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) had compromised so many of the ideals of the revolution, had conceded so much to the middle classes, that the victory came to seem hardly worth the candle:
For they gave priority to strengthening alliances with employers’ and landowners’ groups at the expense of the organisational independence of the working masses, workers and peasants, and the maintenance of their living standards. It was these sectors who bore the brunt of the war effort, both in terms of physical participation in the conflict and of paying its socio-economic costs. [5]
When, in 1990, the US-backed right wing candidate Violeta Chamorro promised aid and financial support and an end to war, a weary Nicaraguan population gave her the majority. The promised US aid, of course, was minimal and tied to the general conditions imposed by financial agencies like the IMF which finally agreed to negotiate with Nicaragua only after the 1990 elections. At the end of that year, an emergency programme was agreed – but there were no special concessions for Nicaragua: the conditions attached to financial assistance from the IMF were implacable. The Nicaraguan economy must open itself to the world market, remove all restrictions on imports, and guarantee that funds and credits would be allocated only to the private productive sector. Public spending on health, education or other forms of social reconstruction could not come out of these investment funds. And it was an explicit condition of the agreement that health and education should no longer be provided free. [6]
Translated into real decisions, this meant that by 1992 the bulk of investment in agriculture, for example, (75 percent) went to the large private estates producing export goods, 25 percent went to small and medium farms also producing mainly for the export sector, while the co-operative sector of collective farms or nationalised lands received nothing. As a result 80 percent of agricultural production occurred within a private sector increasingly devoting its lands to the production of export crops. The picture is entirely typical – the policy is universally applied, but its real effects and implications are perhaps more visible and more brutal in Nicaragua than almost anywhere else. For, in addition, subsidies on products for internal consumption were removed. This hit the poorest sectors of the population, the bulk of whose food and other needs were provided for by local production, and who had nothing whatsoever to gain from the flood of imported consumer goods that entered an almost ruined Nicaragua after 1990. The peasant co-operatives – the poorest of all – were now forced to go to private banks, whose interest rates were the highest and whose conditions for loans were the most cruel. Their standard of living collapsed and in many cases they lost their land and returned to casual and/or seasonal labour. Those that held on to their land were forced to impose upon themselves the most exploitative conditions of life. In the towns and cities all the social indices exposed the depth of the social crisis: infant mortality rates returned to the level of the early 1950s; illiteracy began to rise exponentially as the newest generation of young Nicaraguans saw their school careers abruptly curtailed. Their parents (70 percent of whom were jobless or severely underemployed) could not afford the new school fees insisted on by the IMF. The IMF Emergency Plan specifically excluded infrastructural investment or the use of available funds for purposes of creating or sustaining public services. Thus an already poor system of sewage, roads, healthcare and education now had to cope without additional funds with the influx of refugees from war. Yet health expenditure between 1989 and 1992 fell by 68 percent! What few industrial jobs there were – and these were almost entirely in Managua – disappeared as local industry was destroyed virtually in a single year (1992) as locally manufactured products were driven off the market by the arrival in bulk of cheaper imports, particularly textiles. And it is particularly revealing to look at where this increase in imports occurred. If we take the 1989 import figure as the baseline of 100, then by 1992 consumer goods had reached 299 and intermediate goods 106, while agricultural goods stood at 23.8. [7] The figure for agriculture should be set against the fact that domestic food production fell dramatically in the same year.
A pattern clearly emerges. In a period when all social indices were deteriorating dramatically for the mass of the population, when actual hunger was increasing and public health provision plummeting, some Nicaraguans were enjoying the flood of new consumer goods. For not everyone suffered equally under the impact of the Emergency Plan. Managua in 1996 is desperately poor, yet scattered about the city are prosperous middle class enclaves where new restaurants have opened and the houses betray a high level of conspicuous consumption. They also carry the signs of a new growth industry – private security. Solid new metal fences surround every house; fierce dogs bark incessantly behind their gates; alarm boxes sit high and visibly on the walls. And armed security guards patrol the streets of the well off neighbourhoods.
In Nicaragua everyone has guns. Where the most basic necessities are often hard to find, weapons and drugs seem to circulate with ease. It is indicative of the breakdown of any form of effective social organisation; testimony too, to what might be called the secularisation of the military. In a country whose population is even now only slightly over 4 million (and 45 percent of them are under 15 years old), some 200,000 people had access to arms through the 1980s, distributed among the 65,000 members of the Sandinista army, the possibly 15,000 heavily armed Contras, the 100,000 militia fighters (who had access to arms through the army), and the police. The Contras were formally demobilised after 1990, the Nicaraguan army reduced by two thirds and the militia dismantled; but young Nicaraguans are very quick to show the visitor the guns that they took with them. For many of them, on both sides of the struggle of the 1980s, Nicaragua under the government of Chamorro’s UNO has brought bitter disappointment and an ill concealed anger. One of the very few examples of public spending for welfare purposes in the last six years occurred in 1992, when Chamorro took resources from the public purse to provide compensation for unemployed soldiers. In fact they were $1,000 loans, and when the government tried to claim them back two years later, the ex-Sandinista soldiers occupied the banks in their hundreds and destroyed all records of the loans.
But there were other ex-Sandinistas who remained in the hills, still armed and still fighting a mythical enemy; these were the recompas. The soldiers who had fought for the Contras, the army maintained and supported by Ronald Reagan, President of the United States, and described by him as ‘the new Maquis’, came down from the hills in expectation of their reward. After all, their leaders had returned triumphantly from Miami and were now in government and sharing in its very selective prosperity. Many of these wealthy capitalists had their lands returned to them, or received generous compensation – but not the cannon fodder on the ground. They returned to the same conditions that were faced by those they had fought so bitterly. Some of them too returned to the hills, calling themselves the recontras. With time most of those who remained in the hills became mere bandits, preying on the very people they were still claiming to represent.
 
The abyss between the leaders and the led
In the new Nicaragua of Chamorro, the Sandinistas now became a parliamentary opposition. Their supporters waited restlessly for a sign that it was time to mount mass resistance in the streets and the factories – to use the Sandinista army in defence of the people, to set in motion the network of organisations on the ground. What they received instead were messages of caution, reassurances that Chamorro in power was good for the Sandinistas, that it was best to forge an alliance with her against the (even) more reactionary elements of her coalition. The alliance between the bourgeoisie and the FSLN forged in the years after 1984 was clearly still in operation but had now moved to the right. Strikes in several Managua factories were stopped by the army and the police, both of which contained large sections of ex-Sandinistas. The army was demobilised but the military command, held jointly by Violeta Chamorro and Humberto Ortega, offered nothing beyond rhetoric to the young men and women who had been prepared to die for a cause. The policies of structural adjustment were now biting with a vengeance; yet the leadership of the masses was still counselling caution, restraining action, and more generally accepting the ‘inescapable’ need for austerity. For the workers and peasants of Nicaragua, this can only have confirmed their deepening disillusionment. And if they asked why their leaders led them only towards disaster, there could only be one answer that real experience could confirm. In the deepening divide between the beneficiaries and the victims of the new ‘neo-liberal’ economy, the FSLN leaders were themselves among the first group. Their role in parliament merely confirmed what was already known about their lifestyles (see below).
What was clear beyond denial was that a yawning gulf separated the leadership of the FSLN from the mass base who had made the insurrection and carried them to power. The full extent of that division was not immediately obvious in 1990. Or at least, it was not clear to those who relied for their understanding of the Nicaraguan Revolution on those outside commentators who had supported the FSLN leadership uncritically through the 1980s [8], who had confidently predicted their overwhelming victory in 1990 [9], who created a new myth to explain their defeat, and who in 1996 were still presenting the FSLN to the world as the champions of revolutionary purity. [10] The persistence of the myth explains the surprise with which those same commentators have greeted the 1996 results; but it offers no real understanding of why it is that Daniel Ortega could not convince Nicaraguans of the validity of his credentials, despite the fact that he carried the banner of revolution on his campaign trail.
The Sandinistas, so the legend goes, were the organisers of the heroic struggle against the Somoza dictatorship and the authors of his overthrow in 1979. After that, the official biographies assert, the Sandinistas sustained a principled struggle throughout the 1980s for a new version of socialism, democratic and mass based, against US imperialism, and they held true to that body of revolutionary principles. How then to explain the electoral defeat? It was a combination of war weariness and imperialist lies, aided and abetted by the conspirators gathered around Oliver North and the enormous power of the US media, which could not be successfully contested by a small, weak country like Nicaragua. [11] Those left wing intellectuals in Europe and the United States who have colluded with the myth fell oddly silent during the next six years – though they allowed Daniel Ortega to resume his mythic stature when the 1996 elections came around.
 
The battle for the spoils
Between the elections of February 1990 and the transfer of power two months later, the mythology exploded in the most spectacular manner. [12] In Nicaragua they call it la piñata, after the hollow figure which is filled with sweets and presents for a child’s birthday and then gradually broken apart by determined wallopings from blindfolded children with a stick. When the figure bursts, all the kids dive onto the fallen pile of gifts and fight to gather as much as they can into their party bags. In the aftermath of the election defeat, it was the resources of the state that were the object of this sustained pillage.
State-owned properties were passed into the hands of individual Sandinistas. Every movable piece of equipment was taken. State bank accounts were transformed into personal wealth. The full extent of the pillage is not known, nor can it be measured. But what is clear is that nearly every member of the Sandinista government took what he or she could get and that many leaders of the FSLN became extremely rich. The ex-commander of the armed forces, Humberto Ortega, owns a huge estate in Managua and an unspecified private fortune. Tomás Borge, the only living representative of the original FSLN, is an extremely wealthy man with properties in Nicaragua and elsewhere. Since then Borge has gained a new notoriety in Mexico, where he was paid a fortune to write a hagiographic biography of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, whose privatisation of the Mexican economy brought unimaginable wealth to himself and his cronies. Salinas is implicated in corruption, embezzlement and murder – and now resides in Ireland, which has no extradition treaty with Mexico. His huge accumulation of wealth was his reward for imposing upon the Mexican working class the crippling demands of the neo-liberal market. Tomas Borge used his reputation to defend this international gangster. Yet Borge remains owner and editor of the Sandinista newspaper Barricada.
When the transition to the new government was completed, the plunder of the state had created, almost overnight, a new bourgeoisie of ex-bureaucrats, ex-ministers and aides, all members or supporters of the FSLN. They moved into their recently acquired properties in the fashionable (and safe) districts, where they were joined soon after by the returning members of the old bourgeoisie. These were the people who enjoyed the new imported consumer goods that flooded the Nicaraguan market. It was they who patronised the new restaurants and cafes, and who employed the private security firms.
There was not even a pretence that this would benefit the mass of Nicaraguans. On the contrary, it was barefaced and open pillage. As the Sandinistas said, they simply had not expected to lose power, or to lose the privileges that came with power. Under pressure a rattled Daniel Ortega snarled at reporters, ‘Why should the rich, the Somocistas, the pro-imperialists be the only ones to have satellite dishes ... We didn’t fight so that people could live in misery ...’ [13] There was no suggestion from him that anyone else should share the luxurious mansion once owned by a wealthy Somocista of which he was now the sole owner!
Corruption had its causes in the material reality. It was the product of the ability of individuals to act in their own interest alone, the evidence of a complete and total lack of accountability or control from below. Both before and after 1990 the FSLN had acted wholly pragmatically, without reference to any tradition or strategic project for revolutionary transformation. The piñata was not the sudden act of madness, but the rational action of those for whom personal power has become the most important determinant of their actions. The tragic irony (and the point will be addressed again) is that their ability to act in that way arose largely out of an orchestrated campaign among their supporters to conceal and deny the class nature of their politics and the confusions and contradictions which resulted from it. [14]
The explanation is to be found in the nature of the FSLN itself, in its origins and in its conduct during the latter half of the 1980s. For it was in that period that the FSLN became disengaged from its political base and began actively to construct a common front with sections of the bourgeoisie – an alliance whose imperatives flew directly in the face of the revolution and all it claimed to stand for. The commentators from the developed world, looking in on their favourite revolution, may not have seen it – but it was clearly visible to the mass of Nicaraguans.
The external signs were always there – in an impoverished Managua full of buildings still unrestored after the 1972 earthquake there were elegant living areas and suburbs where many state bureaucrats lived. Even in 1982, while I was travelling on an overcrowded bus towards Masaya, the other passengers commented loudly on the convoy of Cherokees and black Cadillacs with smoked glass windows that swept past us – ‘those are the “comandantes”, the leaders of the revolution’, they shouted. Throughout the 1980s, as the supermarket shelves emptied and most people faced deepening hardship, US dollars circulated widely and for those who had them consumer goods could easily be bought in special shops or brought back from Honduras or Costa Rica. It wasn’t far, if you had a car and a passport – if you had neither, they might as well have been on the moon. The state hospitals were deprived of even the most basic medicine and equipment. That there was a service at all was largely thanks to the selflessness and sacrifice of nurses, paramedics and volunteer doctors. Schools were absolutely basic, and depended on the same human resources for their survival, although there were model establishments in both sectors financed externally by friendly governments or non-governmental organisations (NGOs). But private medicine and private education were always available and well endowed.
The point is that resources were accessible to one class but not to another; and as the FSLN leadership devoted themselves to pursuing a front with the bourgeoisie, their exclusive availability was a condition of continuing dialogue – and the Sandinista leadership themselves, naturally enough, had access to all these facilities. One party I went to in 1982 was attended by several FSLN leaders. In the house where it was held, owned by a British FSLN supporter living in Managua, servants and cooks served the guests, while the party giver moved among us – in an olive green uniform.
As the decade wore on, the assault on Nicaragua intensified. Despite external pressure, Daniel Ortega was elected to the presidency in 1984 with a two thirds majority of the electorate. After that Ronald Reagan was determined to bring the Nicaraguan state to its knees by all and every means – political, economic and military. Honduras became a support base for a well trained, well fed and extremely well equipped Contra force whose infrastructure was hidden in the Honduran army. The aftermath of Contra attacks was always particularly horrible. They tended to mutilate their victims before or after murdering them in order to terrorise the others.
But another change of much more significance was taking place, largely unnoticed outside Nicaragua, where right wing paranoia about Nicaragua and the coming Central American revolution vied with an uncritical support from the left, for whom any criticism of the Sandinistas was tantamount to a betrayal of the people’s cause. In 1987 the Sandinista leadership embarked on a second stage of negotiation for peace, meeting with elements of the Contra leadership and continuing a peace process begun at Esquipulas under the auspices of the Costa Rican president, Oscar Arias. This was the last phase in a sequence of negotiations and compromises, but they also confirmed the central truth about the nature of the Sandinista Revolution. It was a process led from the state by a political class which combined different sectors of the bourgeoisie, the leading sectors of the FSLN and the commanders of the army. The political project was never at any point to develop a revolutionary movement of workers and peasants, but to construct a state capable of taking its place at the concert of nations. The expropriation of key sectors of the economy after 1979, for example, ceased six months after the fall of Somoza – at that point where the process might have begun to encroach upon the sectors of private capital that were not part of Somoza’s ruling clique. Immediately thereafter the Nicaraguan state distanced itself from the increasingly radical political movements in neighbouring El Salvador in order to re-establish its external links with European social democracy and Latin American Christian Democracy. Already it was clear that the issue for the Sandinistas was one of territorial integrity and the construction of a modern state. That was what was meant when the FSLN leaders spoke of a ‘revolution of a new type’ [15], for this was a ‘revolution’ in which the interests of workers and peasants were systematically subordinated to those of the bourgeoisie as a whole. Where resistance did occur – the Fabritex factory in Managua was a very good example – it was the Sandinista state which stepped in to stop the strike and eject the leading trade union activists.
The legend of the FSLN represents the Nicaraguan Revolution as the realisation of a plan evolved and carried through by the FSLN. In fact the revolution began with a mass insurrection which was spontaneous in character. At the time that it began (February 1978), in the town of Masaya, the Sandinistas were divided into three mutually hostile groupings who were not communicating with one another at all. Camilo Ortega, youngest brother of Daniel, was sent to Masaya to try and establish a relationship with the insurrectionaries, but was killed there before he could do so. The military actions for which the FSLN became known in subsequent months were evidence of a lack of organic links with the popular movement rather than the reverse – for the concept of politics on which they rested combined armed propaganda with the formation of broad alliances within and outside the country, the former expressed in the Group of Twelve, drawing together a range of political forces in support of the FSLN, the latter, for example, in the long term relationship with the Mexican governing party, the PRI. The FSLN did assume the political leadership of the movement against Somoza, and was the only organised force in a position to do so. But it is worth remembering that at the very outset the FSLN, while seeking the support and recognition of the capitalist class inside and outside Nicaragua, was ruthless with its own youthful left wing (La Milpa and El Pueblo) and quick to suppress a section of the Sandinista support (the Bolshevik faction) which, while admittedly sectarian, was asking important and incisive questions about the revolution and its political character.
The search for increasingly broad alliances with the bourgeoisie continued throughout the 1980s, culminating in Ortega’s signature of an Accord with Violeta Chamorro one month after his 1990 election defeat – which the Marxist PRT described as a form of ‘co-government’. [16] When, between 1984 and 1990, the mass of ordinary Nicaraguans lived through hunger, violence and an inflation that reached over 60,000 percent in 1988, the FSLN argued fiercely that sacrifice and scarcity were the conditions of survival. But it was certainly not the case for everyone. The FSLN’s political allies were protected from the social costs – it was the fundamental price of negotiation. The much vaunted process of reconciliation was not concerned with the mass of Nicaraguan workers and peasants, whose living standards were collapsing by the month, whose sons and daughters were dying at the front. But it did involve frequent journeys by leading Sandinistas to Mexico, Venezuela, Britain and Spain seeking allies with their repeated reassurances that the FSLN was committed to a mixed economy and was prepared to devolve property back to the private sector. As a gesture of goodwill, it even announced an amnesty for ex-Somocista National Guards, many of them fighting and murdering peasants still.
The introduction of conscription in 1989 was not merely an error, therefore. It was an indication of the relationship between the state and the social base of the revolution. The Nicaraguan state was administering an austerity programme at the expense of the masses; and it was secretly negotiating with the bourgeois opposition as it did so. It is hardly surprising that it lost the confidence of a significant section among its old supporters, who in 1990 opted for what they imagined would be some kind of economic recovery and an end to war because they were offered no political alternative. The state was run by functionaries. There was no long term political or economic project to adhere to, no principle at work in the conduct of daily life. The Sandinista leaders were nominees of a tiny group, unaccountable and without allegiances, individuals in pursuit of power and wealth. That is why they pillaged everything.
Two and three years later these were the people buying the imported luxury goods, enjoying the fruits of external credit, acting for foreign companies and agencies. One of them was Arnaldo Aleman [17], who became the UNO’s mayor of Managua. He cleaned the streets and built public works projects. It meant no improvement in the life of any inhabitant of the capital, but it was something! And he attacked both the Sandinistas and UNO, whose leader, Violeta Chamorro, he accused of being in league with the Communists (oddly, both Nicaraguan Communist parties were members of the UNO coalition).
The irony, of course, was that there was a germ of truth in what he said. The Sandinistas were arguing, against their own supporters, that the Chamorro government should be kept in power because the alternative power blocs waiting in the wings would be even more ruthless. It is hard to imagine any group imposing economic policies whose effects could have been more devastating. Yet Ortega and the majority of FSLN argued against social agitation, strikes or public demonstrations because they would ‘fuel the right’. In other words, the pre-1990 coalition continued in power, and defended what must rank as one of the most inhuman applications of economic strategy that we can point to. For six years the Sandinistas defended this Nicaraguan democracy which had wreaked such havoc amongst the majority. They argued that, if social peace were maintained, the Sandinistas would return to power in 1996.
But what could Nicaragua expect of the FSLN in power? The answer was given long before the votes were cast. Through six years they argued that the austerity plan and structural adjustment were necessary. They defended the Chamorro regime. They collaborated with it in all its phases, and oversaw the destruction of those few gains the mass of the people had made under the Sandinista government. Their leaders (with one honourable exception, ‘Modesto’, Henry Ruiz) grew rich and powerful. Ortega shed his uniform as the election campaign began for the jeans and baseball cap of the career politician. Both he and Tomás Borge were photographed in the weeks prior to the election shaking hands with Cardinal Obando y Bravo, leader throughout the 1980s of the bourgeois opposition to Sandinismo and scourge of the left wing Catholics who had played such an important role in mobilising popular opinion behind the revolution. Consensus, it seemed, would be built with such people as these, or the ex-Contras to whom the FSLN had already promised three key ministries in any future government.
 
The role of the cheerleaders
In preparation for the elections, the British Nicaragua Solidarity Campaign issued a leaflet calling for support for the Sandinistas abroad. A vote for the FSLN, it claimed, was ‘a vote for those who have the interests of the poor at heart’. The record of the Sandinistas in power shows that their primary concern was a defence of the Sandinista state rather than the interests of the poor, which they were willing to sacrifice to the political alliance with the bourgeoisie. The record of the Sandinistas out of power shows a continuation of that alliance, and a readiness to use the authority of the Nicaraguan Revolution to hold back the class struggle. Why? The principal consideration was to win the 1996 elections, even if that meant creating an even more wide ranging set of coalitions and pacifying their own working class supporters in order to present a respectable face to world opinion. Yet the Sandinistas still depended for victory on a strong and permanent base among Nicaraguans who by and large have clearly seen how little they can rely on the leadership of the FSLN.
What then could induce sincere socialists and liberals outside Nicaragua to argue in their favour? Why do they agree to suppress the truth about la piñata, the personal corruption of the Sandinista leadership, the FSLN’s collusion with Chamorro throughout the six years of her presidency, the gulf between the Sandinista leadership and its base? In February the Pope visited Nicaragua. The road he travelled was newly painted, street lighting recently installed and pavements laid. All these renovations stopped abruptly half way into the city – at the point where the Pope’s cavalcade would turn around and return to the airport. Where were the Sandinista protests, the demonstrations, the denunciations? There were none, only a handshake with the cardinal.
Despite their best intentions the activists who suppress these truths are colluding in a confidence trick. The implication is that the only alternative available for socialists is a choice between political cliques vying for power in a system whose codes of conduct and prevailing economic imperatives they accept. The fine poetic speeches of Tomás Borge produce only hollow laughter among many Mexican workers. Ortega’s expressions of Sandinista ‘orthodoxy’ mean very little when his concerns are to seek his allies among sections of the bourgeoisie. To argue that these people are the appropriate representatives of the mass of Nicaraguans is more than an expression of the most extreme historical pessimism – it is an explicit rejection of the premise that the working class is the instrument of its own liberation.
The paradox is that many of the features that have created confusion and disorientation among those Nicaraguan workers and peasants who did make the revolution have been celebrated by the FSLN’s admirers abroad. Its ideological confusion has been transformed into openness and flexibility. Its lack of any strategic direction for the revolutionary transformation of society has become an admirable pragmatism, its profoundly militaristic rhetoric allowed to hide the command vision of political organisation which has deprived the Nicaraguan workers of any democratic control over their own political destiny.
When 19 candidates presented themselves in the October 1996 presidential elections, it was not a sign of a vigorous democracy but evidence that political power was once again being fought for by small cliques battling with one another. The split within the Sandinistas, when ex-Vice-President Sergio Ramírez formed his own Sandinista Renewal Movement (MRS), did not indicate a break to the left. Ramirez was interested in creating an explicitly social democratic organisation. In the elections it achieved less than 1 percent of the vote. Daniel Ortega, on the other hand, described himself and his followers as ‘los ortodoxos’ – the orthodox Sandinistas – in the hope that he could mobilise behind his own campaign the loyalty that many people still feel towards the revolution and the aspirations still expressed, for some people, in the idea of Sandinismo.
The high percentage of Nicaraguans voting (80 percent) bears witness to a desire for involvement, a yearning for change and some improvement in people’s lives. But in every real sense the mass of ordinary Nicaraguans were mere spectators at the feast. There was very little in this electoral process to give them hope. As always, the real class struggle is conducted elsewhere. While the politicians vie for their share of the booty, the concrete reality of daily life has once again begun to generate resistance among those people who did fight the Nicaraguan Revolution of 1978–1979.
In towns like Esteli in the north, new organisations are emerging from the day to day struggles. Significantly the Movimiento Comunitario, formed about two years ago, sets out to link and lead those struggles on the ground. It embraces people who not very long ago were fighting each other in the Sandinista and the Contra armies – and who share both a common misery and a deep disillusionment with their old leaders. They are open to all sorts of ideological influences – evangelical groups are proliferating with astonishing speed in Central America for example. But they are also the soil in which revolutionary ideas can grow, if those ideas are present in their struggles. A revolutionary understanding, however, is not an abstraction, the fruit of mere theoretical purification. It grows out of a critical approach to the real history of the struggle. In Nicaragua, for example, the first step must be to honestly confront the way in which the revolutionary impulse has been distorted and misused, and to address the true history of Sandinismo. To evade the responsibility which falls on all socialists to recognise what has happened in Nicaragua may win approval from the FSLN leadership – but it will contribute nothing to the rebirth of revolution in this ‘region of storms’.

Notes
1. See Latin America Weekly Report, 28 December 1995, and A.J.A. Vogl, Nicaragua y el FMI (Managua 1993), pp. 7–12.
2. There are clear links here between the distribution of drugs and US government and CIA involvement in Central America: see Guardian Weekend, 19 November 1996, pp. 4–5.
3. See D. Green, The Silent Revolution (London 1996), especially ch. 1.
4. See M. Gonzalez, Nicaragua: What Went Wrong? (Bookmarks 1990). See also C. Vilas, Nicaragua a Revolution that Fell from Grace of the People, Socialist Register 1991 (Merlin Books 1991), pp. 303–321.
5. C. Vilas, op. cit., p. 303. Carlos Vilas wrote regularly on the development of the Nicaraguan process; for example in C. Vilas and R. Harris (eds.), Nicaragua: Revolution Under Siege (Zed Books 1985), and in articles in Socialist Register through the 1980s.
6. A. Vogl, op. cit., pp. 21–38.
7. Ibid., p. 93.
8. The bibliography in this regard is enormous. Inspired by the optimism that grew out of the overthrow of Somoza by a mass insurrectionary movement, and of a resolute and incontestable anti-imperialism, foreign commentators were largely responsible for rewriting Nicaragua’s history to locate the FSLN in a commanding central role – in retrospect – and later for colluding in a denial of the direction that was taken by the FSLN leadership itself. One example is George Black’s history of the Nicaraguan Revolution, Triumph of the People (London 1982).
9. For example, Alexander Chancellor’s article, Uncle Sam’s Dirty War, Guardian Weekend, 10–11 Feburary 1990, pp. 4–6, in which the subheading asserts Washington’s Power Brokers Face Another Humiliation at the Hands of Ortega’s Sandinistas.
10. See, for example, the leaflet issued by the British Nicaragua Solidarity Campaign for the 1996 elections.
11. The question of the media, and in particular the body of analytical writing by Noam Chomsky on the role and power of the US media in sabotaging democratic projects in Latin America, is by no means a simple one. There can be no denying the conscious use of the media as instruments of disinformation – and their willing collusion in that role. The discovery of Russian Mig fighters emblazoned across all the US media before the elections of 1984 were cheerfully acknowledged as completely spurious a year later, for example. Yet Chomsky’s assertion of their extraordinary power yields deeply pessimistic conclusions as well as providing an alibi too conveniently seized upon to mask the absence of an effective political strategy. In a word, they are powerful, but not all-powerful.
12. See J. Castañeda, La Utopía Desarmada (Mexico 1993), p. 411. Also M. Walker, Sandinistas in Search of a Fresh Role in The Guardian, 9 March 1990, p. 11.
13. Quoted in J. Castañeda, op. cit., p. 412 fn.
14. It is appropriate to point out that this is not wisdom after the event. This journal, along with other Socialist Workers Party publications, has consistently pointed to the opportunism of the FSLN, its lack of any organic or political link to the revolutionary working class tradition, and to the substitution of the leaders for the class that is so deeply embedded in the guerrilla war tradition from which the FSLN emerged. See for, example, M. Gonzalez, op. cit.
15. In Fire Over the Americas (Verso 1987) Roger Orbach and Carlos Núñez formulated the case for a politics of ‘the third way’. But, fiery rhetoric apart, it ploughed a very familiar furrow, recasting the argument for a ‘popular front’ in new forms. In any event, the publication of the book coincided precisely with new compromises with the Contras which rendered most of its ringing declarations meaningless.
16. See Latin America Weekly Report, 5 April 1990.
17. See M. Caster, The Return of Somocismo? in NACLA Report on the Americas, XXX/2, September/October 1996, pp. 6–9.
 



Reaching a crossroads
There were those who argued that the fall of the Berlin Wall would mark the beginning of a new era when a full blown capitalism, allowed to roam freely across the face of the globe, would finally be allowed to bring prosperity to every corner of the earth. The myth fell to pieces on the Basra Road, where the evidence of the methods of capitalism’s expansion was exposed to a watching instant world audience by CNN. In the period that followed the abandonment of Africa, the brutal imposition of neo-liberal economic strategies, and the disintegration of Russia ushered in a period of aggression that continued through the Balkans and beyond.
What was unclear in those early years of the 1990s was where and in what form resistance would express itself. In reality, of course, the struggle against the depredations of capitalism had not relented for a moment – the Palestinian Intifada continued unabated through the so called ‘end of history’, the landless and homeless of Brazil began their occupation of empty spaces throughout that vast country, and South Africa celebrated the overthrow of apartheid.
And yet many on the left seemed transfixed by the idea that revolution was no longer possible – as if the possibility of the mass overthrow of capitalism was inextricably linked to those brutal bureaucracies of Eastern Europe which claimed the legacy of workers’ revolution while savagely repressing any attempt by their own workers to organise in defence of their own class. The struggles against capitalism continued unabated, but they were now described as ‘new social movements’, a designation which seemed to distance them from any class content and from any general understanding – those much derided ‘grand narratives’ that sought out the laws of motion that linked and connected apparently disparate phenomena. And it was true that on the surface many of these forms of organisation appeared to arise out of local issues or to make a virtue of the fact that they had no programme for a general social transformation. They were environmentalist or ethnic or rights movements with no prescription for the reorganisation of society as a whole.
 
New Year’s Day 1994
Then, on 1 January 1994, just after midnight, the local and the global coincided in a way whose enormous symbolic power was impossible to ignore. While the presidents of Mexico and the US, and the prime minister of Canada prepared to launch the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a rising of indigenous communities in a remote part of southern Mexico – the state of Chiapas – seized the headlines. The EZLN – the Zapatista Army of National Liberation – issued its first communiqué. [1]
The celebration was almost immediate. John Berger and Roger Burbach were among those who proclaimed this ‘the first postmodern revolution’. [2] What was it that so attracted the disappointed sections of the old left to the Zapatistas? And why did an insurgent Chiapas later become such a central feature of the emerging new movement grouped around the condemnation of global capital and its destructive incursions into every corner of the world?
At one level, the particular history of Chiapas illustrated how remorseless and pervasive was the process of globalisation; on another, that same history exposed in the harshest light the actual consequences of those global programmes of economic integration and ‘rationalisation’ masked by anodyne terms like ‘structural adjustment’. Duncan Green quotes The Economist, a journal that can usually be relied on to tell the truth to its own supporters among the ruling class: ‘Stabilisation and structural adjustment have brought magnificent returns to the rich.’ [3] Those returns, of course, represented a redistribution of wealth across the world. In the specific case of Latin America, for example, ‘60 million new names were added to the roll call of those living in poverty in Latin America’, according to statistics provided by the Economic Commission for Latin America (CEPAL) between 1990 and 1993. [4] By 1997 that figure had increased to the point where 36 percent of all households lived below the poverty levels defined by UNESCO. [5]
In broad brush strokes these inelastic statistics translated into an increasingly repeated general picture. Multinational corporations encroached further and further into lands previously given to subsistence agriculture or food production, using them for the cultivation of export crops with advanced technologies. At the same time the much cheaper food imports from the United States – maize in particular – undermined that area of agriculture too. A particularly poignant example was the shift of the Salvadorean economy towards flower production at the expense of food growing lands. [6] The little land given to food production was increasingly polluted by the highly toxic fertilisers employed to accelerate the gowth of the flowers. The same process was repeated on a much larger scale throughout the continent.
Those agricultural workers or peasant farmers expelled from the land drifted towards the expanding city slums in search of casual work which, as often as not, meant joining the ghostly armies of ‘ambulantes’ – street sellers selling contraband goods or chewing gum or consumer durables, or fire-eating and tumbling in front of snarling rows of cars at traffic lights. Or they joined the roaming gangs of young muggers or drug dealers who ranged the streets of almost every Central American town after 1990. In the countryside unemployment grew even more rapidly than in the cities, and extreme poverty made its reappearance there. A resurgent tourism brought a new market for sun and sand and the multiple aspects of ‘service’ which involved Latin Americans in selling one or several of their physical attributes in exchange for the indispensable dollar – indispensable because the other aspect of structural adjustment was the systematic dismantling of public services, health and education. As each of these became privatised, they also became available to a limited dollar-earning clientele. No one escaped – not even Cuba, despite its many claims to have escaped the remorseless laws of survival in the global market. [7]
The North American Free Trade Agreement represented in some ways a second stage in that process of integration and adjustment. It was ‘the first ever regional trade agreement between a first and a third world economy’ [8] – even though Mexico was one of the largest of the non-metropolitan economies – ‘a crucible in which advanced technology, subsistence farming, global finance capital, massive underemployment, and contrasting legal and political systems are mixed for the first time’. [9] What NAFTA guaranteed was the removal of all tariff barriers and restrictions on foreign investment, even for state procurement. In agriculture all tariffs would be fully removed within 15 years, spelling the effective disappearance of all but the most large-scale sugar, maize and vegetable growing enterprises. Even Mexico’s most symbolically sacred area – oil production – was partially opened [10], and the financial industry had already opened significant areas to foreign involvement – insurance and the stock market, for example – before eliminating all and any financial barriers by 2007.
The then president Carlos Salinas de Gortari was a late but enthusiastic convert to NAFTA. The enormous personal fortune he accrued and his ubiquitous involvement in all manner of dirty tricks, including the elimination of his competitors and political opponents, may explain his conversion. Furthermore he was the president of the PRI, the Institutional Revolutionary Party which had governed Mexico in one form or another since the 1920s and which constituted effectively the political machinery of the state. It was in every sense a bureaucratic dictatorship whose six-yearly election of a new president indicated only a transfer of power between components of the governing elite. So when Salinas announced that ‘what was most satisfying at the end of the day is that we achieved a balance that is good for all three countries’ [11], he had every reason to assume that with this degree of political and economic control the victims of the new agreement would not interfere with NAFTA’s much-vaunted official launch.
He was quite extraordinarily wrong.
 
The rising of the red bandannas
The armed movement that took the town of San Cristóbal de las Casas, capital of the southern Mexican state of Chiapas, could not have been more of a contrast to the snappily-suited bevy of international businessmen and politicians (Clinton and Salinas among them) who had gathered to sign the NAFTA documents. These were indigenous people, members of the 21 or so ethnic groups who occupied the areas in and around the Lacand-n forest near the border with Guatemala. They spoke a number of languages. Their weapons were limited to rifles – and some of the insurrectionaries carried only wooden facsimiles. Their dress was often handmade – blankets made locally, rough sandals, woollen balaclavas to hide their faces. What could be more remote from the world of consumer goods and multinational capital flows that concerned the NAFTA signatories – especially since they spoke Tojolobal and Tzotzil and K’iche rather than the English of the global market? Yet in their apparently remote region the talks conducted in comfortable air-conditioned offices shaped and impacted directly on their everyday lives. The distance was only apparent. The global market’s steel grip held their lives in thrall too.
The ethnicities to which they belonged constituted some of the 10 million or so indigenous people of Mexico – people whose conditions of life and standards of living were among the very lowest on the continent. Of the 3 million or so residents of Chiapas at that time, one third were illiterate – overwhelmingly indigenous people. Half the population lived in homes without running water, again most of them members of ethnic minorities. Disease was rampant, life expectancy lower than any other section of Mexico’s 90 million population, and 39 percent of the population of the state earned less than the minimum wage, with infant mortality – at nearly 55 per 1,000 – among the highest in the country, if not in the region. [12] As the First Declaration of the Lacandón Forest put it:
We have been denied the most elemental instruction, in order thus to use us as cannon fodder and loot the wealth of our country without any care for the fact that we are dying of hunger and curable diseases; without any care for the fact that we have nothing, absolutely nothing; no roof worthy of the name, nor land nor work, nor health, nor food, nor education; without the right to elect our authories freely and democratically; without independence from foreigners, without peace or justice for ourselves or for our children.
Today we say ‘Basta! Enough!’ [13]
Yet Chiapas produced half of Mexico’s hydroelectricity, was the largest coffee exporting state and produced the second highest quantities of oil after Veracruz. It was also increasingly important as a cattle producer. The contrast speaks for itself.
The data, however, conceal a specific historical experience which lies at the roots of the Zapatista movement and to some degree explains its characteristic forms of organisation and its symbolic language.
In the mid-1930s, under the populist presidency of Lázaro Cárdenas, one of the key demands of the peasant revolutionaries led by Zapata finally began to be fulfilled – the expropriation of agricultural land and its redistribution in the form of communal holdings called ejidos. Through the 1940s the redistribution continued, though the land given over to ejidos in Chiapas tended to be marginal land, distant from roads and infrastructural services and often previously uncultivated, in the Lacandón forest and the river basins. The recipients were largely indigenous communities. As Chiapas’s agricultural economy grew through the 1960s and 1970s, cattle raising became the most important area of activity – and while the ejidos did raise some cattle they were mainly sold on as calves to the big cattle-raising estates producing for the national and international market. Indeed ejido land was itself increasingly sub-let to larger individual farmers or to the big estates – even though that was specifically forbidden by the originating legislation. By the 1970s many ejido members found themselves working as waged labourers on land of which they were the nominal collective owners. In the same decade cattle production doubled (from 2 million to nearly 4 million head), occupying more and more land, and an oil boom drew growing numbers from the land to the boom towns of north eastern Chiapas. At the same time growing demand for electricity from an expanding urban economy in a period of boom led directly to the flooding of 100,000 hectares (a quarter of a million acres) of fine farmland.
There was resistance, of course. Bishop Samuel Ruiz, nominated to his post despite the vehement objections of the conservative church, had already organised a peasant conference in October 1974 at which 527 delegates represented 327 indigenous communities. The main issues the congress addressed concerned the aggressive encroachment of the big cattle estates onto communal land, the corruption of government officials and their involvement with the big landowners, and the absence of labour rights for plantation workers. The Indian communities and farmers described how local officials controlled access to markets on the one hand and credit on the other, an exploitation reinforced by an absence of cultural rights (fundamentally the right to use their own language) and an astonishing lack of even the most basic health facilities. [14] The response of the government to the congress in practice was given with the murder by the army of six peasants shortly afterwards.
Tensions were exacerbated by the crisis of the early 1980s which began with the devaluation of 1982. The government of de la Madrid (1982–1988) marked the first steps in the move towards the full blown policies of structural adjustment introduced by the Salinas regime. So the rescue of the Mexican economy organised by the international financial institutions and private US capital not only involved incurring a massive debt, but also carried with it conditions and strings which de la Madrid enthusiastically applied. The result was a collapse in the value of wages of close to 40 percent, cuts in social spending of over 40 percent, a rise in unemployment of 15 percent (from 9 percent to 24 percent of the economically active population) and a rampant programme of privatisation. The overall outcome was a dramatic redistribution of wealth towards the rich – with labour’s share of GDP falling from 41 percent to 29 percent.
In Chiapas itself the general picture applied in extreme forms: 400 percent more cattle were exported between 1982 and 1987, yet the number of herds fell significantly – the industry was becoming concentrated in fewer and fewer hands. The abolition of the state INMECAFE agency put small coffee growers at the mercy of the intermediaries acting on behalf of the international market – the result would be the virtual collapse of small coffee production. Throughout this period the communities resisted, organised and fought back. The government, for its part, introduced occasional reforms and redistributions of land. But in no case were these intended to fundamentally alter the patterns of land ownership or income distribution. In its usual way, the state and the PRI, its political expression, used grants of land to ejidos and the provision of subsidies as instruments of patronage and methods of political control – a local client leadership was established for whom subsidies and land titles were rewards for their allegiance to the PRI. Although this often succeeded in confusing and dividing the burgeoning grass roots resistance, it could not stop the growth of independent organisations, like the Zapatistas. In 1989–1990 the PRI governor of Chiapas, Patrocinio González Garrido, himself a wealthy cattle baron, embarked on a repressive campaign against the organisations of indigenous resistance while simultaneously appropriating communal lands and small farms for absorption into the big agricultural estates. Peasant protests were broken up by armed gangs, communal rights ignored, the movement’s leaders snatched and imprisoned. [15] In 1991 a group of women from Ecatepec staged a protest sit-in in central Mexico City, and the following year the violent repression of a meeting of indigenous organisations provoked a six-week march by 400 people from Palenque to Mexico City which finally broke the conspiracy of silence.
 
The rise and rise of Zapatismo
Those who saw the Zapatista movement as a virtually spontaneous outburst against neo-liberalism and its strategies were quite simply wrong. The EZLN was a movement about whose actual founding date there still seems to be some disagreement, but which had been established at the very least five years before the rising of 1994. More importantly it drew on 20 years of virtually continuous and determined struggle on the part of a range of communities and organisations against the depredations visited upon them not so much by a particular tactical decision as by the development of Mexican capitalism itself. The fact that most of those involved in the resistance held to indigenous cultural traditions and spoke Spanish imperfectly did not absolve them from the processes of accumulation agreed and organised in profoundly different circumstances by people who had nothing in common with them. And nor did the often low level of technology they employed in a usually labour-intensive system of production, or the absence of even the most elementary social provisions signify that they stood outside the circles of reproduction of an international capitalist system. But it did serve to indicate how very remote they were from any system of representation – a political voice, of which their multiple and little understood ethnic languages came to symbolise their lack.
Yet 1992–1994 did mark a qualitative change in the character of peasant organisation and struggle in Chiapas. It is worth repeating that, while it may fit with a largely Western mythology about how the oppressed begin to resist, it is simply not true that, the transformation of indigenous struggle in the region was spontaneous or instinctive. It does not fit with a model of the rising of the innocents, a last-ditch defence of ancient and enduring forms of life. This was a population who had struggled to function within a modern economy, and in the face of the relentless assaults of the representatives of an aggressive global capitalism which had long since penetrated even into the remotest corners of the Chiapas region.
What 1992 did mark, however, was an important change in the forms of struggle and in the ideology of peasant insurrection. A key element was the decision by Salinas to revoke Article 27 of the Mexican Constitution; it was a decision of deep resonance and far-reaching significance. Article 27 referred to the promise of agrarian reform and the right of communal ownership – under the reformed article land could be bought and sold and the state’s commitment to land reform was officially ended. True, Article 27 had more often been observed in the breach – it nevertheless had remained as a defining expression of the ideal nature of the state. It was the banner of the radical wing of the Mexican Revolution of 1910–1917 whose slogan – Tierra y Libertad (Land and Liberty) – was personified by the leader of the peasant insurrectionaries, Emiliano Zapata. [16]
The subsequent survival of the post-revolutionary Mexican state, a political compromise between the new political class born of the period of military struggle and parts of the old landed oligarchy, depended in large part on its ability to maintain ideological hegemony and political control over the agricultural workers and the peasantry on the one hand, and the burgeoning working class on the other. [17] The prelude to the forging of the new state was the murder of Zapata himself, in 1919, for he would not tolerate the consensus that might draw him into a new ruling elite but would abandon forever the commitment to the socialisation of land. It has been argued that Zapata was a peasant revolutionary, whose concerns were limited to a radical agrarian reform and who was unable to break out of that limited frame of reference to address the connections between the separate areas of class struggle – and that consequently his movement was little more than a jacquerie, a peasant rising. Adolfo Gilly among others [18] provides the evidence that in the course of the armed struggle Zapata’s vision evolved, developed and was deeply transformed. But the circumstances and pace of that change, and the asymmetries between political developments elsewhere and within Zapata’s own movement, both provide the narrative structure of the history of that ‘unfinished revolution’ and suggest parallels between the experience of Zapata himself and the movement that took his name some 80 years later.
Zapata’s base was in the state of Morelos, south of Mexico City, and the neighbouring province of Puebla. Morelos was a centre of the expanding sugar industry of early 20th century Mexico; the growth of the plantations occurred at the expense of the rural communities who owned and worked the land, often communally, to produce largely food crops. As the plantations expanded their land was invaded and stolen with the active support of the notorious guardia rural, the armed rural guards commanded and controlled by Mexico’s dictator of 30 years, Porfirio Díaz. The revolutionary manifesto which Zapata produced in Februrary 1911, the Plan de Ayala, expressed the demands of his class of small farmers and their communities – for communal land rights and political freedom. In forging an alliance with sections of the old landowning class, the rulers of the new Mexican state turned against the rural movement.
In late November 1914 Zapata and Villa entered Mexico City and ended the attempt by Victoriano Huerta to restore the old regime. For a month or two they effectively held control of the government. But neither had envisaged the conquest of state power – and they withdrew to their regional strongholds. But there was no doubt that their presence in the capital had frightened the new bourgeoisie – they had expelled the counter-revolutionary threat of Huerta, but having done so they themselves now became the obstacle to the forging of a new national state. Within a month Carranza, a wealthy landowner and a state governor under the Diaz dictatorship, became the leader of the new Mexico. His national project was well defined in an early decree recognising the right to private ownership of the land. It was consistent, therefore, that he should see it as his first task to mobilise forces against Zapata and Villa, including the infamous Red Batallions of workers mobilised against Zapata. As the military assault on Zapata progressed he was driven further and further into his Morelos redoubt and to a large extent besieged there.
At the same time, however, Zapata and his advisers were enacting a series of decrees and creating a range of organisations within the besieged province which suggested that Zapata was moving rapidly in an increasingly radical direction in his social and political thinking. Under siege from a national army, Zapata began to recognise the necessity of an alliance between peasants and workers, for the socialisation of land and property, and for radical democratic forms. He was no unlettered peasant in any case – he had been aware of and in contact with anarchist ideas from an early age. Their distrust of the bourgeoisie and emphasis on mass action clearly convinced him, but their refusal to address issues of political power and the control of the state go far to explain Zapata’s decision to withdraw from Mexico City (and from the battle for the conquest of power) early in 1915. His critical reappraisal of that experience was now (tragically) taking place under siege conditions and with few possibilities of making contact with the urban working class movement.
That experience, that history, has an unmistakable resonance for the end of century inheritors of Zapata’s mantle.
 
A road less travelled
The armed action on that January day in San Cristóbal was limited and quite rapidly contained – though there were other simultaneous actions against local police stations and barracks elsewhere in the region known as Las Cañadas, roughly the Lacandón forest. In fact it was not the EZLN’s first armed action. The decision to move to armed struggle had been taken at a meeting of indigenous community leaders in 1992. The timing of that agreement responded to the decisive abandonment of Article 27 of the Constitution; the state could no longer be seen as a potential defender of indigenous land rights; nor, as the experience of the previous four years of González Garrido’s governorship had shown in particular, could any of its representatives be relied on to defend the rights or representations enshrined elsewhere in the constitution.
Yet it had remained an almost wholly secret war until 1 January 1994 – despite the impact of the protest march of 1992 which for the first time brought the rural struggle to the heart of the capital. Then the limited armed actions provoked an extraordinary and rapid response outside Chiapas, which almost certainly restrained Salinas from the repressive military response he and previous presidents had employed as their prime instrument for addressing the problems of the people of Chiapas. This time he announced on 12 January 1994 a unilateral cease fire by the government. Within six weeks, on 20 February, peace talks began in San Cristóbal under the auspices of Bishop Samuel Ruiz. It was then that the negotiating committee of ski-masked Zapatistas, wearing indigenous dress, became an internationally recognised phenomenon. And chief among them was their central spokesperson, the Spanish-speaking Subcomandante Marcos. Though he appeared to be the leader of the movement, he insisted that he was speaking on behalf of a Clandestine Revolutionary Committee whose elected membership reflected the spectrum of communities and ethnicities that made up the Zapatista National Liberation Army.
Alma Guillermoprieto ascribes the reluctance of the Mexican government to move against the Zapatistas entirely to the impact of Marcos:
The huge, and life-saving outpourings of support in favour of a group that was essentially unheard-of less than two weeks earlier, and that espoused the violent overthrow of the state, was almost as astonishing as the rebellion itself. It would have been inconceivable without the communiqués and declarations of the man who at the time professed to be merely the ‘spokesperson’ of the insurrection, Subcomandante Marcos. [19]
The role of Marcos is undoubtedly central, though the debate about his politics and his significance in the struggle has generated rather more heat than light. But Guillermoprieto herself makes the kind of assertions that would be repeated in the months after the insurrection across the world. That the movement was ‘unheard-of’. By that she means that it was not known outside Chiapas – and the temptation is therefore to assume that it had not existed at all before a variety of external enthusiasts seized hold of the Zapatista cause. As I tried to show earlier, both Zapatismo and its component communities in struggle had quite a long history. Secondly she asserts that the EZLN ‘advocated the violent overthrow of society’; yet other enthusiastic supporters proclaim that ‘unlike almost all previous revolutions, the Zapatista revolution does not aim to take power’. [20] The contradiction is fundamental.
Marcos learned his politics during the Mexican student movement of 1968 which ended in savage repression on the eve of the Olympic Games of that year, when 500 or more students were gunned down in cold blood during a public meeting at Three Cultures Square, Taletelolco, in Mexico City on 2 October. Those leaders of the movement who were not killed or imprisoned and tortured often went into hiding to escape their government persecutors. The 1968 student movement was beset by political argument. The new generation of student leaders, clearly influenced by some of the anti-Stalinist notions filtering through from Europe and in particular from the US, were clearly deeply suspicious of the corrupt authoritarian regimes personified by Mexico’s current president, Díaz Ordaz. The Communist Party, for its part, had long been compromised for its complicity with elements of the ruling group and its collusion with the extraordinarily corrupt Mexican trade union leadership. The revolutionary socialist tradition, for its part, had few advocates in Mexico. [21] If there was a beacon of revolutionary hope it was Cuba, nourished by a Mexican national revolutionary mythology enshrined above all in Zapata – the symbol of an uncorrupted revolutionary ideal.
It was logical, therefore, that Maoism should take root among the generation of student revolutionaries seeking an international ideology embedded in a nationalist tradition and adapted to the withdrawal into the countryside that followed the repression of 1968. A document produced in mid-1968 in the course of the student movement in the capital presaged that future direction. It was called Hacia una Política Popular (Towards a Popular Politics), written by Adolfo Orive, a university lecturer at Mexico City’s UNAM and the group’s acknowledged leader. The ‘people’ to which it referred reflected a politics of alliances based on a bloc of several classes defined by their common exclusion from the state. [22]
The organisation’s ‘mass line’ was bitterly critical of the existing organisations of the left, which it saw as having only tenuous roots in the mass movement and of being locked into an antagonistic but permanent relationship with the PRI.
After the crushing of the student movement some student activists attempted – unsuccessfully – to create guerrilla groups in Chihuahua in the north and Guerrero (where there already existed an armed local resistance movement led by Genaro Vázquez) in the south. Those influenced by PP (Política Popular), however, moved into other areas, to work particularly with peasant groups, squatters and student groups. Their general political strategy – the ‘mass line’ mentioned earlier – was critical of armed struggle and profoundly sceptical of the Leninist conception of the party. Their ‘política de dos caras’ (politics on two fronts), was directed at a kind of political organisation on the margins, away from the threat of state repression and immersed within the mass movements. The method of organisation – deriving in part from the experience of 1968 – was what was called ‘una política asambleísta’ – direct democracy through mass meetings. René Gómez and Marta Orantes, for example, were two young Maoist agronomists who went to Chiapas around 1974 to help to prepare the Indigenous Congress organised by Bishop Ruiz. [23] Some eight years later another activist from the same political tradition would arrive in the area and begin the construction of the EZLN – Marcos.
The alliance between Maoist activists and representatives of liberation theology like Samuel Ruiz may at first glance seem a curious one. But it is certainly my view that these two disparate political currents shaped the political rhetoric which would later become such an object of fascination for the supporters of the Zapatistas around the world. What the two perspectives shared was an insistence on direct democracy and self activity, and a clear reaction against the Stalinist variants of Communism whose sorry history of compromise with dictatorships and state bureaucracy was particularly striking in Mexico, though it was a phenomenon repeated throughout the continent. That anti-Stalinism expressed itself as a deep hostility to the concept of the revolutionary party, or the caricatures of a Leninist model which had proliferated in Latin America’s more recent history. For the Maoist currents, too, Cuba’s absorption into the Soviet bloc ensured that neither Cuba itself, nor the kind of guerrilla politics which it had espoused up to 1968 could offer an alternative. [24] That suspicion of authoritarianism and emphasis on self activity, together with a strong sense of moral purpose, also characterised the ideas of ‘liberation theology’ – a current of thought that emerged out of a savage critique of the role of the Catholic church in defending dictatorship and legitimating oppression. Expressed at two Bishops’ Conferences at Medellin, Colombia (1967), and Puebla, Mexico (1969), the new theology was perhaps personified by Camilo Torres, the young Colombian priest who ‘opted to struggle with the poor’, joined the guerrillas, and was killed in 1965. Priests now emerged in the leadership of mass organisations of struggle throughout Latin America – and defended their use of arms where the repression was most bitter, as in Guatemala, El Salvador and Colombia.
In fact, the struggles of the 1980s produced a series of internal conflicts between organisations and their leaders. Separate Maoist factions within Chiapas each accused the other of factionalism and authoritarianism. Marcos and the EZLN had begun military training for ‘self defence’, of which many sectors of the church were deeply suspicious. On the other hand, and paradoxically, it was the liberation priests who were most suspicious of the contact with official agencies (for credit, land negotiations, services, etc.) which many of the Maoist cadres advocated – as part of their ‘politics on two fronts’ strategy. As the strains and tensions developed through the 1980s, a new factor entered the equation. An aggressive Protestant evangelism was particularly active in Guatemala, where military ruler Rios Montt was a born again Christian, and in Nicaragua, where over 100 sects organised opposition to the Sandinistas. They began to organise in Chiapas in the same period, exploiting suspicions of a radical church among some of the better off peasants, raising issues of gender discrimination and particularly of contraception among women who had become increasingly self confident precisely because of their role in the struggles of those years.
And yet, despite the spreading influence of Protestant fundamentalism and liberation theology’s profound suspicion of the Mexican state on the one hand, and resistance to armed struggle on the other, by 1993 the majority of Chiapas’s indigenous population were ready for war – and the EZLN would lead it, as the manifestation of the democratic determination of the communities themselves.
 
But what kind of war?
What began as a violent insurgency in an isolated region mutated into a non-violent though no less disruptive ‘social netwar’ that engaged the attention of activists from far and wide and had nationwide and foreign repercussions for Mexico. [25]
The term ‘social netwar’ is certainly not one with which I was familiar. But it points to that element of Zapatismo that has so fascinated those beyond Mexico. While wearing Indian dress and presenting themselves to the world through the multiple languages of indigenous Mexico, the Zapatistas – and Marcos in particular – have used the internet as a free communications highway. The paradox is moving and in some curious way quite beautiful. The US military who generated this many-branched information superhighway to facilitate internal communication can hardly have intended it to be used to generate solidarity for an armed struggle in an isolated redoubt in southern Mexico. There was also something about the nature of the messages that Marcos sent that caught the imagination. The language of Zapatismo was a curious mixture of registers; it was clearly familiar with the categories of political debate and modern economics, yet the communiqués were also full of a visionary language more usually associated with religious rhetoric as well as myths and parables which clearly originated in the oral cultures of the region.
Above all it had a powerful moral charge. Here were the very poorest addressing the wealthiest and most powerful directly. The messages from Marcos were able to leap the encircling troops (some 12,000 of them) that Salinas immediately sent to Chiapas. If Salinas agreed to a ceasefire just 12 days after the rising, we can assume that he did so believing that the Zapatistas, who had by now returned to their communities, could be besieged, strangled and eventually overrun. The fact that they were not undoubtedly has to do with their ability to speak to a listening world, and to the almost instantaneous movement of solidarity and support that they generated, particularly among students and workers in Mexico City.
For Salinas, moving into an election year and with the eyes of the world focused on Mexico, Chiapas was a problem. His chosen candidate, Colosio, was murdered in March by assassins and for reasons still unknown. The head of the PRI, Ruiz Massieu, was murdered three months later. In Chiapas the negotiations in San Cristóbal beginning on 21 February attracted massive media attention and a growing stream of tourists curious to see these ‘rebels down from the hills’. The industry in Marcos dolls and memorabilia began very quickly.
The armed confrontation between the Zapatistas and the Mexican state had already ceased. In the nearly seven years since the rising the number of Mexican armed personnel in the area has quadrupled, the encirclement of the Zapatistas is now almost complete, their area of control has been reduced and continual inroads into their communities have left many dead and those left alive deprived of water, electricity and physical access to the outside world. Yet there has been no resumption of war (other than the ‘netwar’).
When Marcos and the negotiators returned to the communities with a peace agreement at the end of March 1994, the supporters of the EZLN rejected the agreements. The timing was highly significant, coming as it did some three months before voting began for the national presidential elections. Ernesto Zedillo, Salinas’s nominee to replace the murdered Colosio, was the PRI’s candidate – a virtual guarantee, at least up till then, of an overwhelming victory. The other candidates were Vicente Fox, a right wing businessman and candidate of the Catholic party, PAN; and Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, son of the president who had distributed land for the first time, and candidate for the PRD (Revolutionary Democratic Party), a coalition organisation embracing social democrats, some left nationalists, and a number of ex-members of the PRI who had followed Cárdenas out in 1987. In the 1988 election Cárdenas was seen as the great hope of the left – a champion of reform, democratisation and change. Although the candidate was anything but inspiring in his public appearances, he did manage to gather the support of wide sections of Mexican society seeking change; had the vote-counting computer system not inexplicably crashed just as the final votes were in, he would almost certainly have won.
In the intervening six years he had lost much of his symbolic significance. He was a reformer, perhaps, but within the system rather than outside it. Time and again the PRD had negotiated with Salinas rather than opposed him, and the wide range of struggles against Salinas’s economic policy had not always been able to count on his support. For Cárdenas, the Zapatistas presented him with a golden opportunity to re-establish his oppositional credentials. As the elections approached, the PRD opportunistically identified with the widespread popular support for the Zapatistas throughout the country. From the point of view of a besieged Zapatista enclave in Chiapas, speaking across the airwaves to a massive audience but unconnected in any organisational way to them, the PRD was offering a network of contacts beyond Chiapas. At the same time, Marcos was not blind to the fact that the PRD was using the movement for electoral purposes, and he tried to elicit undertakings from Cárdenas that he would carry through the 32 original demands that the EZLN had placed before government negotiators in February. In the event, Cárdenas lost the election again and then turned his attention to the powerful post of mayor of Mexico City, which he did win three years later. By the year 2000 his support had declined and Fox, candidate of the PAN, won a largely democratic election.
Much has been written about the frequently paradoxical nature of Marcos’s lengthy bulletins to the world. Often poetic, personal, analytical and mythic at the same time, their curious and lyrical language has often been celebrated as a new political language for a postmodern revolution. The origins of the movement marry a sense of the economic and political realities of globalisation with a visionary quality of high moral content that echoes with the metaphors of religious language. Marcos’s occasional excursions into fable or children’s stories are charming and often powerful in their simplicity. But the paradoxes and internal contradictions also suggest a pluralistic vision, a notion of a political and imaginative space in which different views, visions and strategies for change can coexist without resolution. Aesthetically, it is pleasing and complex. Politically, it is paralysing.
The concepts derived from the struggles of previous decades persist here – centrally in the evasion of the question of power. It is a curious ‘quality’ in a revolutionary organisation that it does not seek power. What then is the nature of the revolution they advocate? At one level, the demands are absolutely clear and correspond to the needs and interests of many of the individuals and communities of the region – particularly as far as land on the one hand, and the recognition of indigenous political and cultural rights on the other are concerned. At the same time, the experience of recent times has led them to a profound distrust of the intentions and integrity of the Mexican state – an extremely well founded suspicion. That would explain the rejection of the March 1994 agreements and subsequent accords.
But if one thing has become incontestably clear as a result, in part, of the Zapatista rising itself, it is that there is no space outside the system – globalisation does not tolerate free territories. [26] Like every major struggle, the origins of Zapatismo lie in specific local conditions, but the movement’s claim is that it is part of a global process and a global resistance. If at first, and in the hope that Cárdenas might occupy the presidential palace in Mexico City, the EZLN placed its demands upon the Mexican state, there could be little hope that a Zedillo presidency would not pursue objectives in any way different from those of his predecessor.
It was presumably with that in mind that the Zapatistas convoked the Convention of August 1994 in the Lacandón forest. The meeting attracted many supporters to the specially built grass amphitheatre deep in Zapatista territory. For many of them the long walk through the jungle carrying their own plate, fork and spoon will certainly have been a novel experience. Equally it raised the national profile of the Zapatistas. But the movement was already at an impasse in many ways. The PRD was demonstrably an electoral organisation whose sole concern was winning elections. Their commitment to Zapatismo was not a principled one. Equally, it was clear that the confrontation between the Zapatistas and the Mexican state had already reached stalemate. The level of popular support and sympathy the EZLN enjoyed could hardly be higher, yet it was physically trapped inside Chiapas. More importantly it was ideologically enclosed too. Its local roots were firm, its representativity unquestioned and its claim for rights just by any standards. Morally, it dominated the high ground – especially in contrast to a government, now run by Zedillo, which was as corrupt as its predecessors and as committed to a full neo-liberal agenda of rising unemployment, falling living standards, full and rapid privatisation, cuts in public spending and a free market in all commodities including land.
There is little doubt that the balance of political elements within the Zapatista message began to change by late 1994 – the emphasis on the issue of indigenous rights was combined with the increasingly central demand for autonomy. As George Collier put it, the Zapatistas were beginning to negotiate with the government as a parallel national movement. [27]
In some sense, as the encirclement tightened around Chiapas, the Zapatistas were moving towards the opposite conclusion from the one that Zapata himself had begun to reach during the siege of Morelos. Any encounter between the Mexican state, nearly 50,000 of whose troops are currently in Chiapas, and the Zapatista enclave would be an absurdly unequal one. The state’s concern was not necessarily with the Zapatistas themselves, but rather with the resonance they might have beyond the state of Chiapas. As Zedillo’s economic policies began to bite, there was growing discontent and pockets of fierce resistance began to emerge. Yet there was also a collapse in levels of union membership – a result of a long history of manipulation of trade unions by the PRI and the presidency. The regular Consultas – popular plebiscites – organised by the supporters of the Zapatistas confirmed again and again the enormous level of support for Chiapas. But if, as John Ross suggests, the Zapatistas’s original appeal to the PRD had been intended to address the mass of its working class supporters directly, that had manifestly failed to develop into any form of national organisation.
Defined as a class movement, the Zapatistas could develop joint actions of class defence and co-ordinated struggles. Defined as a national movement, in however direct a way, the Zapatistas were constrained to calling for support for their actions at the very time when a vicious official siege was making it virtually impossible for them to move at all. And massacres like Acteal, where 45 people were murdered by the army and/or pro-government peasant activists, were signals that the army could encroach whenever it wished – although it was clear that the government favoured a slow but silent campaign of attrition, cutting off or polluting water supplies, making movement through or into the Zapatista areas virtually impossible, cutting electricity, denying medical services and so on. The symbolic power of the Zapatistas was unabated, their actual ability to act increasingly contained.
In the rest of the country structural adjustment and NAFTA are producing exactly the results its instigators anticipated. As the Mexican economy grows and plays host to foreign investors in growing numbers, 50 percent of the population live in poverty and 15 percent beneath the extreme poverty line. Forty million Mexicans are undernourished – 10 million have no access to health whatsoever.
This points up the central dilemma in the Zapatista experience. If the early alliance with the PRD suggested a hope of a reform of the state, then that hope now lies in ruins. As the rest of Latin America has discovered, social democrats or nationalist revolutionaries who find themselves administering programmes of austerity and structural adjustment become neo-liberals with unnerving speed. Zedillo, of course, had no such credentials – but Cárdenas presented his candidacy for the 2000 elections on the basis of his ability to carry through exactly such programmes – hence his early willingness to present a joint platform with the candidate of the PAN, Vicente Fox, an erstwhile executive of Coca Cola and the candidate of the industrial and manufacturing business sector. In the event, Fox won the election and Cárdenas remains as leader of a loyal opposition – still proposing occasional joint projects.
The language of rights, which has increasingly dominated Zapatista rhetoric, also presumes an intermediary state, or the existence of neutral agencies. The role has been filled at the level of political debate by NGOs, which have also attempted to plug some of the holes left by the abandonment of public services by the new alliance of state and private capital. But they are by definition unable to propose an alternative project for the state. Thus all the lobbying in the end comes down to whether those who walk hand in glove with global capital are willing from time to time to offer a crumb or two of justice. But it is a contradiction in terms to expect redistributionist policies or social justice from governments whose very survival depends on administering programmes designed to accumulate an increasing proportion of wealth in the hands of powerful international economic actors.
 
Wishing and hoping
The Zapatista movement has generated movements of solidarity across the world. At one level it has coalesced around a defence of the oppressed – the exemplary victims of neo-liberalism and corporate greed. That is their symbolic power. An anarchist friend of mine suggested to me after Seattle that ‘this was all because of the Zapatistas’. Did he mean their example? In part that is what he meant – but beyond that he saw them as representatives of a new politics. Zapatismo does not seek power, only justice; Zapatismo does not acknowledge leaders, but it is democratic in the extreme; Zapatismo is not a party, but a living and changing movement; Zapatismo has used the internet to create an international connection between all those who reject a capitalism red in tooth and claw.
The moral authority of Marcos is, of course, enormous. But it also has political implications. Where does solidarity with Zapatismo lead its supporters politically? In Mexico itself there are some 29 sites of armed struggle now, with the state of Guerrero – as poor and brutalised as its southern neighbour – chief among them. The magnificent student strike at UNAM in Mexico City (1999–2000) lasted for nearly a year in its struggle against the destruction of free education. It raised Zapatista slogans in its frequent assemblies. Yet throughout that year there was no suggestion of co-ordinated action. Solidarity – sympathy – replaced organisation.
’New social movements’ have been defined as ‘popular movements’ which see the people as the central actors and have ‘institutional demands’ which they address to the existing power. [28] This may well characterise Zapatismo, but it is also clear that their demands have been ignored. As Vicente Fox prepares to take power as the first non-PRI president in 60 years, it is absolutely clear that he will not in any sense change the political arrangements in Mexico – or listen to Chiapas.
For the EZLN and its supporters, December will be a crunch moment. It is then that Vicente Fox will take power, and then that his evasive response to questions about his intentions in Chiapas will no longer work. At one point he said that he would ‘resolve the Chiapas question in 15 minutes’ but it remains to be seen what kind of solution he had in mind. Nevertheless, it would be a reasonably secure guess that his agenda will not include agrarian reform, a redistribution of wealth to the poorest, increased public spending, a solution to the problems of Mexico’s poor, full employment or a state of rights.
It is inconceivable that the communities of Chiapas should be asked to continue to resist the silent war of attrition to which they have been subject for years. They remain an example of heroic resistance to oppression which has quite rightly inspired all those who are united against global capitalism. What has to be acknowledged, however, is that they are not in a position to provide political leadership for the movement that has celebrated their example.
Zapatismo has raised important questions that must concern the left. The issue of authentic democracy and the accountability of leaders to those on whose behalf they speak is a principle that has been at the heart of the socialist movement since the Paris Commune and the organisation of the soviets in 1917. That proletarian democracy was proclaimed by regimes which created grotesque caricatures of it is a historical distortion we have to deal with and acknowledge, patiently explaining why authoritarian bureaucratic rule was the absolute contrary of all that revolutionary socialists stand for. Suspicion of party organisation derives from the same source – yet without co-ordinated and disciplined organisation to match the self awareness of a capitalist class fighting for its interests on every front simultaneously, the producers cannot use the enormous power they have as a collective. For in the end, the issue is power – the control of society by the producers. The renunciation before the fact of any claim to lead society in new and different directions is an entirely moral (if not moralistic) posture, and one that will under no circumstances draw a similar response from the ruling classes across the world. There is not a choice between power or its absence. The only choice available is on the question of which class holds power.
The decade that produced the Zapatistas unmasked the real workings of the capitalist system; it exposed the limits of nationalism where capitalism is resolved to act globally, and it made manifest that capitalism by its nature is driven solely by the impulse to accumulate. Underpinning much of the Zapatistas’ political language is a rhetoric of rights, but that is posited on the assumption that a capitalist state is governed by principles and laws rather than class interests. Since 1990 Latin America has seen regime after regime come to power, led by ex-revolutionaries or social democrats, and bearing aloft a banner promising democratisation, social justice and truth. The decade ends with those slogans still unfulfilled and the democrats who replaced the military regimes hopelessly compromised with the imperatives of capitalism. It is time to revisit the theory of permanent revolution, which acknowledged the international character of class struggle while recognising that it would erupt in every case in local or national contexts, and confronted the fact that only a revolutionary proletariat can fulfil the democratic tasks and create the egalitarian future that Marcos describes so movingly in his speeches and stories.

Notes
1. This was the Declaración de la Selva Lacandona, dated 1 December 1993. See I. Arvide, Crónica de una Guerra Anunciada (Mexico City 1994).
2. See R. Burbach, Roots of Postmodern Rebellion in Chiapas, New Left Review 205 (May/June 1994), pp. 113–124.
3. D. Green, Silent Revolution: The Rise of Market Economics in Latin America (London 1995), p. 92.
4. Ibid., p. 91.
5. ECLAC 1998 figures quoted by Lance Selfa in his Latin America: Rebirth of Resistance, International Socialist Review 10 (Winter 2000), p. 8.
6. See J. Dunkerley, The Pacification of Central America (London 1993).
7. M. Gonzalez, Can Castro Survive?, International Socialism 56 (Autumn 1992).
8. D. Green, op. cit., p. 146.
9. H. Browne, For Richer For Poorer: Shaping US-Mexican Integration (London 1994), p. 3.
10. Oil production had been entirely controlled by foreign companies before the Mexican Revolution of 1910, and was only nationalised in 1938 by the populist President Cárdenas, despite the fact that the post-revolutionary constitution of 1917 made the subsoil an inalienable national resource. In theory that remains at least partly in force as the national oil corporation PEMEX still monitors exploration – but all secondary production, including refining, is open to private (including foreign) investment.
11. In The Observer’s special supplement, Mexico: The Making of an Economic Miracle, 12 September 1993, which reads as though it was written by Salinas’s PR agent. For an alternative view of the impact and significance of neo-liberalism see R. Grinspun and M. Cameron, Mexico: The Wages of Trade, NACLA Report on the Americas XXVI/4 (February 1993), pp. 32–37.
12. R. Burbach, op. cit., pp. 115–116.
13. Quoted in A. Guillermoprieto’s The Shadow War in New York Review of Books, 2 March 1995, pp. 34–43.
14. See N. Harvey, The Chiapas Rebellion: The Struggle for Land and Democracy (Durham/London 1998), pp. 77–78. See also G.A. Collier’s useful and clear Basta: Land and the Zapatista Rebellion in Chiapas (Oakland 1999).
15. See N. Harvey, op. cit., pp. 171–173.
16. Frank McLynn’s recent account of that movement, Villa and Zapata: a Biography of the Mexican Revolution (London 2000), is a perceptive and extremely readable and refreshingly non-academic account of the role of the peasant armies in the events of 1910–1917. Useful general histories of the movement are Adolfo Gilly’s La Revolución Interrumpida (Mexico City 1971) the title means The Interrupted Revolution, but the English translation, published by Verso, is simply called The Mexican Revolution. Beyond that there is a huge bibliography on the Mexican Revolution, comprehensively reviewed in the bibliographical essay at the end of McLynn’s book.
17. Carlos Fuentes’s novel The Death of Artemio Cruz (Mexico City 1962) is a powerful account of the construction of that compromise.
18. See G.A. Gilly’s op. cit., but also John Womack’s absolutely exhaustive biography Zapata and the Mexican Revolution (New York 1969), published in 1969 but still unrivalled.
19. A. Guillermoprieto, op. cit., p. 35.
20. From J. Holloway and E. Peláez’s Introduction to their edited volume, Zapatistas (London 1998), p. 4. This truly terrible collection is illustrative, in a wholly negative way, of some of the confusions that Zapatismo generates. Let me make it clear that I don’t make this judgment because I disagree with its political viewpoint, but because it has no viewpoint at all. It is an attempt to imitate the idiosyncratic eclectic style of Marcos himself – which I suspect is inimitable – and to make a virtue of imprecision, moralistic rhetoric and political ambivalence. And on the way it does Zapatismo itself a disservice even in its own terms.
21. The writer and revolutionary José Revueltas was a single exception, yet he was largely marginalised having exhausted his political energies in endless struggles with the Mexican Communists.
22. The history of the Zapatistas’ political origins can be found in N. Harvey, op. cit., and in J. Ross, Rebellion from the Roots: Indian Uprising in Chiapas (1995). See also J. Womack (ed.), Rebellion in Chiapas: An Historical Reader (New York, 1999).
23. See N. Harvey, op. cit., p. 82.
24. For Cuba’s changing attitudes to guerrilla strategies on the one hand and the Soviets on the other, see M. Gonzalez, op. cit.
25. From the abstract of the Rand Organisation study, The Zapatista Social Netwar in Mexico (New York 1998).
26. Two examples to reinforce the point. For nearly ten years the resistance of El Salvador fought a heroic struggle against massive US-provided military material, creating free territories in various places, particularly Morazán, in the process. Since the peace accords of 1990 there are no more free territories and El Salvador is fully integrated into the global economy. In Colombia, where such territories do exist under FARC and ELN control, they are the object of a rising military siege abetted and funded by the US.
27. G.A. Collier, op. cit., pp. 162–163.
28. By J. Foweraker and A. Craig in Popular Movements and Political Change in Mexico (London 1990).
 



The tone of media reports of the events in Honduras has been generally tongue in cheek, as if this were simply another episode in the ongoing tale of banana republics and their regular coups. On 29 October, for example, Sophie Nicholson reported from Tegucigalpa, the country’s capital, on the difficulties that journalists have in sleeping on hard floors. [1] For some weeks journalists were locked inside the Brazilian embassy in Honduras together with President Manuel Zelaya, deposed on 28 June in a military-civilian coup. Outside the embassy demonstrators and protesters have been attacked, shot at, tear-gassed and in some cases killed by riot police and soldiers. Opponents of the new regime (the “de facto” government, as everyone now calls it) have been arrested, their bank accounts frozen, their relatives persecuted. The peasant movement, which mobilised as soon as the coup happened and has remained on a war footing ever since, has faced weapons in the capital and gunmen on the estates of the landowners who vigorously supported the coup. In Honduras’s universities student resistance has met with a similar level of repression.
This is not comic opera.
In fact it is a deeply serious and significant moment in the history of Latin America. In the first months of a post-Bush foreign policy Honduras offers two conundrums for solution. The first is how a coup of this ferocity was not only permitted by a new US administration ostensibly committed to diplomatic solutions in the region; the coup makers were actively encouraged and protected from universal criticism by Washington. The second is how it was that in a society as unequal as Honduras, and with a recent history of such oppression, its people have sustained a level of mass popular resistance unprecedented in its determination and its level of organisation.
 
A kidnapping
When the president of Honduras, Manuel Zelaya, was kidnapped in his pyjamas and dumped on the tarmac of an airfield in Costa Rica, the immediate response was a massive protest movement in the city and the countryside. Huge demonstrations demanding the return of Zelaya were violently suppressed, and demonstrators killed and injured. TV and radio were censored and two popular radio stations (Globo and Progreso) immediately shut down. A curfew was imposed and the government later announced it would appropriate the bank accounts of anyone involved in demonstrations, particularly the highway blockades organised by trade unions and mass organisations.
At first sight, Manuel Zelaya was not an obvious candidate for this level of mass support. A conservative and Liberal Party member, he was elected in 2005. He had put forward no radical programmes or policies at that time. His removal from power in June 2009 was the response of Honduras’s ruling class to specific recent policy changes, especially on the question of the minimum wage, and to Zelaya’s decision to hold a consultative referendum on 28 June to call a constituent assembly to change the constitution. This decision was bitterly opposed by Honduras’s ruling class, parliament, army and Supreme Court – and there were dark hints that he was trying to imitate Hugo Chávez’s recent referendum proposals on extending the number of presidential terms. That was, of course, a pretext – though Venezuela was a significant element, for Zelaya had taken Honduras into the Latin American Bolivarian Alternative (ALBA), the Latin American regional organisation set up by Chávez. As a consequence Honduras became eligible for cheap oil from Venezuela as well as loans and other benefits. Zelaya’s newly emerging enthusiasm for the Bolivarian project was never very convincing, at least for this writer; but as in the case of his equivalent in Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega, there was much to be gained from the relationship with a powerful and generous Venezuela, especially by small Central American and Caribbean countries with no access to oil.
 
Latin America’s decade of resistance
Zelaya’s association with Chávez was certainly an important factor in explaining the coup. Yet Bush’s administration, already embroiled militarily in Iraq and Afghanistan, had generally moved away from supporting direct military intervention in Latin America. This is not to say that the strategy of political control and economic domination had changed in any way – only the tactics for achieving it. US policy had centred on Colombia in particular, as the bridgehead for its military oversight of the region. Plan Colombia, drafted under Bill Clinton’s regime, was ostensibly about social and economic development – but something like 90 percent of its $1.3 billion allocation was actually spent on military operations disguised under headings like “the war on drugs” and later “the war on terror”, resources administered by an increasingly militarised Colombian state. [2] In Venezuela the US has openly supported a sustained right wing assault on the Chávez government. It was clearly directly implicated in the failed coup against Chávez in April 2002 and equally in the savage bosses’ lockout of December 2002 to February 2003 which was intended to destroy Venezuela’s oil production and create an economic crisis so profound that the population would turn against the Bolivarian revolution. In fact the effect was the reverse, as the masses mobilised to challenge and eventually defeat the bosses’ strike.
In Bolivia the election of Evo Morales in 2005 marked the high point of a six-year wave of mass popular resistance. Here again, the response of Washington was to support the right wing opposition – in this case the powerful forces of the Media Luna, the six non-Andean provinces where much of Bolivia’s oil, gas and agricultural wealth lies. Under the wing of Philip Goldberg, the US ambassador (until 2008) whose particular expertise had been gained in Belgrade, where he oversaw the break-up of Yugoslavia, the political campaign for the “self-determination” of the Media Luna laid the basis for a sustained, vicious and openly racist assault on the Morales government. Even in Ecuador, where the government of Rafael Correa was elected on a progressive and independent programme (he has since closed down the US base at Manta, whose construction was legitimised by Plan Colombia), the wealthy landed interests around Guayaquil have begun to echo the demands of their Bolivian class allies. In Venezuela, the municipal and gubernatorial elections of 2008 provided a context in which similar demands began to be insistently heard in the states that bordered on Colombia. [3] The strategy of fragmentation and the encouragement of internal conflict became more intense after the flat rejection in 2007 of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) proposals put forward by Bush, and Chávez’s claim that ALBA represented the only viable independent regional alternative. [4]
Honduras could not claim to have the same strategic, economic or political significance as Venezuela (60 percent of whose oil still goes to the US and whose anti-imperialist discourse stung the Bush regime so deeply) or Colombia (the US’s wealthy and powerful ally and its key weapon in “the war on terror”, if not its war against the drugs barons!), or Ecuador or Bolivia with their major untapped gas and oil resources. In economic terms, Honduras has not advanced very far from its dependence on and subordination to the interests of the US banana companies which led the great American short story writer O Henry to coin the term “banana republic” at the beginning of the 20th century. Its seven and half million inhabitants still depend on export agriculture, two thirds of which goes directly to the US. Some 50 percent of its people live below poverty levels. It sits at number 149 in the world for per capita income, and one third of its GDP comes from the remittances sent by Hondurans working, mostly illegally, in the US; 40 percent of its population work in agriculture (which produces just 13 percent of the national income) and 30 percent in the maquiladoras, or assembly plants, owned by multinational companies which have transferred their operations to Honduras because of its cheap labour. In the words of the CIA’s World Factbook, “Honduras, the second poorest country in Central America, has an extraordinarily unequal distribution of income and high unemployment”. [5]
There are specific issues that might explain the timing of the coup. Zelaya had resisted attempts to privatise Honduras’s mass media, which would have delivered its main television channels into the hands of a consortium whose leaders included John McCain, Obama’s failed Republican presidential opponent. The deeper explanation, however, goes back to the early 1980s and the war mounted by the US against the Sandinista Revolution in Nicaragua. The Contra War was organised by the US; its “advisers” armed and trained 15,000 anti-Sandinista fighters who operated from Honduras across the long and poorly defended frontier with Nicaragua. The war cost 50,000 Nicaraguan lives and effectively destroyed its economy, bringing down the Sandinista government in February 1990. It was a war waged with exemplary savagery. Victims of the contras were tortured before death, and many of their corpses were left to terrorise the communities from which they had come to defend the revolution. Back-up and logistical support came from the massive US base near San Pedro Sula.
The person who oversaw Honduras’s transformation into a US military base was a sinister individual called John Negroponte, ambassador to the Honduran capital Tegucigalpa for four years, during which the US military aid budget to the country rose from $4 million to $78 million annually. Negroponte would go on to distinguish himself as a high representative of imperialism at the UN and later in Baghdad before becoming national security adviser to Bush and later an adviser to current secretary of state Hillary Clinton. It should be noted that Honduras’s current constitution, which Zelaya contemplated changing, was drafted under Negroponte’s watchful eye. His right hand man, Otto Reich, is notorious in Latin America as the head of the State Department’s Latin America desk for much of the last 25 years and a ruthless cold warrior, as well as ambassador to Venezuela for several years. Like McCain, he also speaks for the interests of media corporation AT&T.
 
Honduras in a wider world
The 28 June coup was not entirely unexpected within Honduras. Zelaya had dismissed the army high command three days earlier, before the parliament and the Supreme Court restored them to their former posts. Business leaders, among them Micheletti who later became “de facto” president, had made their hostility very clear, as had the Supreme Court and the judiciary. They argued that the consultative referendum proposed by Zelaya was unconstitutional, a claim with no basis in fact or in the document itself.
Given Honduras’s history, and its absolute dependence on the US economically, militarily and politically, the coup would have been inconceivable without support from inside the US, including close advisers to Clinton. The coup was immediately denounced by the Organisation of American States and every Latin American president. President Obama’s response was oddly ambiguous, however, calling for a “resolution through dialogue and negotiation”. The UN even added its voice of condemnation 24 hours later. While Obama hesitated, Clinton’s response was to tacitly recognise the government installed by force as a legitimate interlocutor. Within days a delegation from the Honduran regime arrived in Washington and met with McCain and Clinton. The meeting was organised by her close associate Lanny Davis, who represents the Honduran chamber of commerce, and Venezuelan lawyer Carmona Borjas, now resident in the US, who was a key player in the attempted coup against Chávez.
Had Washington whispered, the coup makers of Tegucigalpa would have had no choice but to fall to their knees. Instead, while Zelaya waited in Costa Rica, there was a resounding silence from Obama and Clinton. The new regime acted quickly and violently against the mass protests that exploded as soon as news of Zelaya’s abduction began to spread. The National Resistance Front against the coup was formed and drew together every section of Honduran society.
Yet no decisions were taken in those first few days. The diplomatic silence was broken only four days later, when the delegation from the new “de facto” Honduran government was received with full pomp in Washington. Empty phrases abounded, but this was clearly going to be Clinton’s (and Negroponte’s and Reich’s) province and Obama was left disarmed. Much time and print has been spent wondering whether he knew the coup was coming. My sense is that he did not, but, more importantly, he had no resources to change the situation, withdraw US economic support or otherwise demonstrate his democratic credentials or his independence from the Honduras lobby.
Those who were vocally arguing the case for Honduras’s new rulers in Congress represented a continuity of policy from Bill Clinton through Bush. While Obama’s policy towards Latin America at this early stage was as yet unclear, there was no evidence that this would be a new dawn for the Americas. The discourse of hostility towards Hugo Chávez was unabated, plans were announced for the building of three new US bases in Colombia, and the thawing of relations with Cuba seemed slow and reluctant. Furthermore, there was Obama’s election campaign comment that “we seem to be losing Latin America”. Against that background, the Honduras coup and the response to it from the administration and particularly from Hillary Clinton strongly suggest that this was a pre-emptive move from a hard right Latin America lobby to hold back any softening of relations with the more radical Latin American governments. There are still troops in Haiti, for example, swollen by a Brazilian contingent, and the Colombian government’s role in the region remains as before and is being actively reinforced.
It seems clear that Washington’s strategy was to prolong matters as much as possible, and undermine Zelaya’s credibility and his popular support through interminable negotiations. Elections in November would thus take place but Zelaya would not be able to stand again. It was with this in mind that Clinton called in President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica, who has considerable experience of sabotaging revolutionary movements. The Contadora process in the early 1980s functioned in that way, drawing the revolutionary Sandinista government of Nicaragua into negotiations which isolated it from the revolutionary movements of Central America and sapped its will in endless negotiations which continued even as the US fuelled $77 million of military aid to fund the contra war mounted from Honduras. Arias’s new intervention served exactly the same purpose, keeping Zelaya waiting in Costa Rica while the “de facto” government won “de facto” legitimacy in negotiations in which it was regarded, at US insistence, as a legitimate partner. Somehow, by sleight of hand, Zelaya and Micheletti had become equals in this sponsored dialogue.
 
The persistence of the people’s movement
No one had reckoned, however, with the absolute determination of the resistance. Despite ferocious repression, peasant organisations moved quickly to occupy lands and to block highways, before marching to the capital to join the protests. There were violent confrontations on the university campus in the capital. The teachers’ unions were active from the beginning and two of their leading members were killed at an early stage. Yet when Zelaya announced on 6 July that he was returning to Honduras there were up to 50,000 people gathered at Toncontin airport to welcome him back. His plane, needless to say, was never allowed to land. One month later only Israel had recognised Micheletti’s regime! His finance minister had declared that the economy would not be able to survive six months when the World Bank and the Interamerican Development Bank announced a freeze on loans. Yet what was most striking was the confidence of Micheletti and his cronies. They were cocksure and unmoved by the hostility of Latin American governments. They clearly knew that, whatever cautious criticism might be advanced in public, Washington – and the State Department in particular – would protect them.
But the mass movement of resistance had put a new piece on the board and complicated matters. The return of Zelaya under “negotiated” conditions was a real possibility at this stage – though he would be unlikely to be allowed to see out the remaining six months of his presidential term. But he might be allowed to return on condition that the proposals for a constituent assembly and constitutional reform were abandoned. Now, however, Washington (and indeed the OAS) was faced with a different problem. Zelaya’s return would inevitably be seen as a victory for the resistance movement, and the political repercussions of that could be very serious.
The coup always had to be located in the context of a Central America that seemed to be slipping out of Washington’s control. Daniel Ortega’s return to the presidency of Nicaragua could be seen as a radical shift, although Ortega’s willingness to negotiate with his Sandinismo organisation’s bitterest enemies to get himself into power, accepting Latin America’s most reactionary abortion laws as the price to be paid, suggests a different interpretation. In fact Ortega is a living caricature of the Sandinismo that overthrew the 30-year Somoza dictatorship in 1979 in the name of popular revolution. His Sandinismo is a corrupt political apparatus entirely concerned with maintaining him in power. Yet he has identified himself with Venezuela (for similar reasons to Zelaya). In El Salvador an ex guerrilla leader was recently elected to the presidency, albeit with an economic programme that seemed very close to neoliberalism. And Mexico, while currently “safe” in the hands of neoliberal Fernando Calderon, has witnessed extraordinary levels of mass mobilisation – first around the alternative candidacy of Lopez Obradors and later in the profound challenges set out by the struggles in Oaxaca.
Against that background the resistance could not be seen to win, especially if the whole Honduran process was seen as an opportunity to place the US at the centre of Latin American politics once again. The key was Zelaya himself. He returned to Honduras in early October in odd circumstances and took up residence in the Brazilian embassy. Despite threats by the regime to burn him out, and the cutting off of electricity and water supplies briefly to the embassy, Zelaya remained inside the embassy and it became increasingly clear that he was negotiating from there.
The agreement of 30 October, supervised by the former US assistant secretary of state Thomas Shannon, who was also in Honduras in the days before the coup, was in every sense a defeat for Zelaya. It allowed him back subject to a vote by the parliament and the Supreme Court, who backed and organised the coup, on whether he could legitimately return as president for the 29 November elections. He was blocked and the elections went ahead under the supervision of a committee that included right wing ex-president of Chile Ricardo Lagos and the ex secretary of labour of the US. In effect Zelaya accepted the conditions imposed by the US, including the abandonment of any plan to reform the constitution.
 
The election: an end or a beginning?
On 29 November Zelaya was still trapped inside the Brazilian embassy from where he issued often contradictory calls to those who for so long had defended his right to resume his presidency. But the reality was that the battle had moved on to a different terrain. Symbolically, Zelaya remained a focus for the resistance movement; but the ex-president had made too many compromises to continue to claim leadership of the protests. He had participated in the dialogues promoted by the US government, despite the obvious contempt of Micheletti and his people. As the elections drew nearer, repression intensified and the attacks on demonstrators and protesters multiplied, and it did their cause no good at all that from his enclosure in the embassy Zelaya set aside his promise to reform the constitution, only to find that his compromises carried no weight with those who had thrown him out of power.
The attitude of the United States also changed a number of times. But while what had happened in Honduras was a matter of concern to all Latin American governments, beyond the denunciations of Hugo Chávez there was little in the way of concerted action against the regime. And it is quite clear that Clinton has achieved her objectives – placing herself centrally in the political negotiations and raising her profile in Washington. It was obvious that Obama’s administration would recognise whatever new government was elected, so long as it restored the relationship with Washington that had existed before.
Voting is compulsory in Honduras – though abstention is always quite high. On this occasion, faced with an election with no external observers and polling places supervised by the army and the police, who had conducted the June coup, the National Front for Resistance called on the people to observe a voluntary curfew and remain in their homes – a poignant reference to the curfew imposed across Honduras after 28 June. An unprecedented number of Hondurans – at least 50 percent and probably close to 70 percent – answered the call. Those who voted elected Lobo, a wealthy conservative who will faithfully represent the political class and its intimate relationship with the US.
Zelaya is no longer an actor in the Honduran process. But what of the movement that sustained the flame of resistance, that now mourns its many victims who died in the course of their extraordinary struggle? The movement has vowed to continue. If Honduras has shown that imperialism’s objectives have not changed, the lesson of these months is that Honduras’s working population have become the protagonists of their own history. Their resistance has been extraordinary, heroic, and their level of organisation and coordination impressive. Those organisations will be needed in the months to come, to fight the high levels of unemployment and the inequality that the coup makers resolved to defend. The important thing now is that the National Resistance Front neither forgives nor forgets what it has learned since 28 June – that the independent organisations of the masses can take on the ruling class.
* * *
Notes
1. Available online at http://bit.ly/hondurascoup.
2. See Gonzalez, 2003.
3. See Gonzalez, 2009.
4. In fact ALBA is still far from offering any kind of alternative to the pre-existing regional economic block, Mercosur, which Venezuela has also joined.
5. Ironically enough, the best source of these and other data is the CIA’s World Factbook. Available online at www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ho.html.
* * *
References
Gonzalez, Mike, 2003, Colombia, in Farah Reza (ed.), Anti-Imperialism: A Guide for the Movement (Bookmarks).
Gonzalez, Mike, 2009, Chávez Ten Years On, International Socialism 121 (Winter 2009).
 



Since Seattle in 1999, and the explosive growth of the
anti-capitalist movement, all of us in the international socialist
movement have been sailing in uncharted waters. The one thing that we
have almost all agreed on is that the left must develop new forms of
organisation that can both reflect and engage with this new and
growing radical shift. After 9/11 the explosion of anti-war protests
opened new directions and possibilities. For the revolutionary left,
the potential was enormous provided that we were governed above all
by the commitment to become socialists within the movement, working
with a broader spectrum of forces than we had perhaps been used to in
the previous two decades. That was the challenge.
In Scotland the Scottish Socialist Party offered an exciting
possibility of responding to that challenge. Founded in 1998, with
comrades from the Militant Tendency playing a central role, it was
committed to a project of left unity expressed in a party which could
act in an agreed and united way while acknowledging that political
debate was the lifeblood of any socialist organisation. In that
spirit, the Socialist Workers Party in Scotland was invited to join
the SSP as a platform – an opportunity we grasped with the
overwhelming agreement of our membership.
The signs were extremely promising, and the party’s electoral
success in 2003 confirmed that there was widespread support for a
principled socialist anti-war party. It is a matter of great regret,
therefore, that just three years after that major electoral advance
the Scottish Socialist Party has reached a point of insoluble crisis.
The project, however, remains as urgent and as hopeful as it was when
we joined just five years ago. The deepening crisis of New Labour,
the public revulsion against the war in Iraq and Afghanistan and the
assault on Lebanon, the aggressive privatisation of public services
confirm the objective necessity for an open, democratic, mass-based
socialist party. It will not now be the SSP; but it is our hope that
the new formation that we have helped to found, provisionally called
Solidarity, and which includes Tommy Sheridan, perhaps the key
individual on the left of Scottish politics, the majority of previous
members of the SSP, and a number of other elements of the wider
social movement, will draw towards it the widest range of anti-capitalists.
What follows is an account of the crisis and collapse of the SSP.
Its purpose is not to win some abstract moral contest, but to show
that the events which brought about the crisis, while apparently
personal, were in fact profoundly political. They demonstrate that
what was exposed in the course of recent months was a faultline in a
particular model of socialist organisation. The point of this
narrative, therefore, is to identify that weakness as a warning and a
lesson for the next chapter.
 
1: The catalyst
The immediate cause of the collapse of the SSP was a consequence
of a decision by perhaps its best known leading member, Tommy
Sheridan, to sue the News of the World, owned by Rupert
Murdoch’s News International corporation, over a story concerning
his private life. For socialists, matters of private morality are not
our concern; consensual sexual relations concern only those engaged
in them. We judge our comrades by their political conduct, not their
personal life. The News of the World is a newspaper which
publishes scandalous reports of sexual behaviour – but more
importantly, it is a consistent enemy of the working class movement,
using its pages and those of its sister papers to systematically
attack trade unionists, socialists, and all those who fight
oppression, whether their own or that of others. This is common
knowledge, even among many of those who buy the paper for its
titillating content. And that is why Sheridan’s victory, when a
jury found by a majority against the paper, was widely celebrated by
working class people in Scotland and beyond.
What caused the internal crisis within the SSP, however, was the
astonishing fact that a number of members of the Executive Committee
[1] of the SSP came to court to testify for the News of the World.
Their presence in the court was not just the result of legal
compulsion, as they claimed: it was a consequence of a series of
actions and decisions taken over previous months which were not only
wrong in themselves, but which revealed a much deeper malaise within
the party. When the newspaper reports originally emerged, Sheridan
asked the executive at a long, fraught meeting to recognise his right
to individually pursue his libel case; instead he was pressured to
resign. An extremely detailed account of that critical meeting was
kept, without informing other executive committee members (including
myself) of its content – and this account later became the
substance of the News of the World’s case. In the days that
followed several executive committee members distanced the party from
him in a very public way, and leaked rumours and suggestions about
him to the press.
The position of the Socialist Worker Platform at the time was well
known and repeated on a number of occasions – that we supported
Sheridan’s right to pursue the case and condemned the mounting
campaign against him. For it seemed to us very clear from the outset
that there was a coordinated and consistent campaign to remove
Sheridan from his leading position in the SSP. The extraordinary
bitterness and ferocity of the continuing attacks on him and all of
those who supported him from within the SSP after the conclusion of
the court case have shocked even the most seasoned socialists – and
ensured the collapse of the SSP as we knew it.
What matters here, of course, is not anecdotal accounts – though
the response of the SSP executive committee immediately after the
trial ended was to produce a 12-page document consisting entirely of
personal vituperation and accusations against Sheridan. Its effect
was to convince the majority of party activists that they could no
longer work in a party led by people who could produce such a document.
The question that will be asked is why this happened.
It is my view that the crisis in the SSP has its origins in the
central question of the relationship between socialists and the
movement. Our original optimistic assessment of the SSP, and our
decision to join, reflected its declared commitment to building a
broad, open, mass socialist party. The authority and recognition that
had been won by Tommy Sheridan in the campaign against the poll tax
and his subsequent actions as the sole SSP member of the Scottish
Parliament, were a key contributor to that assessment. And the most
resounding confirmation of the SSP’s potential came with the
Scottish parliamentary elections in May 2003, when the party won 6
percent of the national vote, a total of 130,000, and sent six
members to the Scottish Parliament.
It was a historic moment – and it was a victory, in our view,
that arose directly out of the public perception of the party’s
leading role in the anti-war movement: 100,000 marched through
Glasgow on 15 February that year. It is no coincidence that that
figure so closely reflected the numbers in the election.
The conflicts within the party, although as yet unstated, began at
that very moment of success. The large numbers voting for the SSP
suggested a real possibility of ‘opening the gates of the party’
to them, laying the foundations for a genuine mass organisation. Yet
it was clear even then that there was resistance to embracing the
wider movement, and a continuing insistence on SSP-led and
SSP-controlled campaigns. There had already been considerable debate
between the Socialist Worker Platform and the executive committee
majority regarding the anti-war movement. While we had argued that we
should set out to replicate the best experiences of the Stop the War
campaign and build a broad anti-war movement in alliance with Muslim
organisations, the majority of the leadership rejected that view and
insisted instead on allying with some very backward Stalinist
elements in a recently created bureaucracy which consistently blocked
any grassroots activity from that point on.
That suspicion of the wider forces that had entered the historical
scene after Seattle reflected a sectarian response which was to
characterise the relationship between the SSP and every and any
social movement. Curiously, the election result led not, as we had
argued, to a more open and dynamic relationship with the wider
movement, but to its opposite – an over-emphasis on parliamentary
activity at the expense of grassroots activity. Parliaments can be a
useful propaganda platform in the building of socialist organisation
– as Tommy Sheridan had shown so emphatically when he was the sole
member between 1999 and 2003. With six members in the parliament the
party became entitled to a number of full-time research and case
workers, and the commitment to the MSPs remitting half their
parliamentary salary to the party added to the party’s resources.
But it also reinforced the party’s bureaucratic character, and
focused its attention on a parliamentary role which could not but be
limited and constrained.
The rhetoric, of course, endlessly reasserted the party’s
commitment to the working class and the purity of its socialist
credentials. But it was a serious misrepresentation if this was
intended to indicate a concentration on issues in the trade union
movement, for example, or a commitment to building the resistance in
working class areas around issues like health or housing. Trade union
work was limited in reality to seeking relationships with leading
trade union officials with a view to affiliation. The Socialist
Worker Platform has always argued that we should build links with and
between the rank and file; this was questioned time and again because
it threatened an often asserted but rarely visible sympathetic
relationship with union officials. When the party did move on trade
union questions, it was invariably at the last moment, generally
tokenistic, and often sectarian in the tone of its interventions.
One consequence of what we regard as a squandered opportunity was
that party membership began to decline, as did sales of the party’s
newspaper Scottish Socialist Voice. The paper itself was weak
and inward looking and very consciously controlled by the executive
committee majority faction. While occasional articles were printed
from other positions within the party, they were few and did not
reflect any opening of the paper to debate – still less any attempt
to make it reflect the wider movement that had carried six comrades
into the parliament. The internal atmosphere grew increasingly
fractious, and criticisms of Sheridan from a supposedly feminist
perspective became increasingly vocal at executive meetings.This was
the background to the events of the executive committee meeting
November 9th 2004 which forced Sheridan’s resignation.
But it was the G8 meeting at Gleneagles in Scotland in July 2005
which would provide the proof of the two perspectives that were in a
bitter but undeclared conflict within the SSP. In January 2005, at
the regular executive meeting, Socialist Worker Platform members
called for a discussion of our preparations for G8. At that meeting
and at every subsequent one the SSP’s leadership refused to address
the question. The people who would attend the Make Poverty History
demonstration, it was argued, were middle class liberals; working
class people were not interested in such issues, any more than they
were concerned with the war in Iraq. Workers were interested only in
‘bread and butter questions’.
In the meantime Socialist Worker Platform members within the SSP
together with a broad range of other groups and organisations had
taken the initiative in setting up a committee to prepare for the
Gleneagles protest on the first day of the G8, and the organisation
of a counter-conference in Edinburgh on the previous Sunday. The
meetings were regular, large and enthusiastic as well as very broad
in character. One MSP, Frances Curran, was assigned to link up with
that organising group, together with a platform member who had been
deeply involved from the outset. The role of the SSP leadership in
that activity was a disgrace: time and again their interventions were
simply designed to block or spoil what was a broad and democratic
initiative, while offering no real practical or political support to
the organisers. Refusing to contribute to the Alternative Summit,
beyond accepting the opportunity to speak on its platforms, those
comrades stuck to the tried and well-worn formula that this was not
of interest to workers and the abstention continued. On the Friday
before the demonstration four of the six MSPs staged an absurd and
pointless stunt in the parliament to veil their ineffectiveness and
distance from the movement. The cost was Â£30,000 in fines and other
expenses and the general scorn of the public.
As we expected, the Make Poverty History demonstration was
enormous (around 300,000) and as varied, diverse and dynamic as such
demonstrations always are. The SSP leadership’s main concern,
however, was not how party members could best connect with this new
movement but rather how we could differentiate ourselves from other
marchers. Thus SSP members wore red T-shirts (not white, like
everyone else) and organised a tight, closed contingent rather than
participating throughout the march in the delegations of trade
unionists, students, anti-capitalist protesters and the like.
The Sunday Alternatives Summit was an extraordinary success, with
5,000 people attending a vibrant, open and exciting event full of
political ideas and debate. It was sad, then, to see the SSP
leadership standing outside the main hall throughout the day
collecting signatures for a petition to defend the MSPs who had been
expelled from the parliament. Most significantly, Frances Curran
speaking at the final rally went to considerable pains to emphasise
the differences between the SSP and the movement, and the distance
separating the SSP from the major international figures with whom she
was sharing a platform, including Trevor Ngwane from South Africa,
Susan George, Caroline Lucas and George Galloway.
Several members of the executive committee complained bitterly in
the subsequent meeting about the conduct of the SSP at this great
event, with a supporter of the leadership group publishing a frank
and withering assessment of the party’s performance in the next
issue of Frontline, the magazine of the leadership’s ISM
platform within the SSP. As a party, the SSP had deliberately and
explicitly refused to engage with the movement, though the Socialist
Worker Platform together with other rank and file members of the SSP,
as well as many others outside the party, had worked tirelessly for
months to build the event.
It might have been asserted, of course, that this was a political
error and lessons could be drawn from it. Instead it was argued in
the immediate aftermath that this was an event somehow ‘staged’
by the SWP. What was not addressed was the paradox that, at a time of
intense political debate among growing numbers of working class
people, not only had the SSP abstained as an organisation, but its
numbers were continuing to decline, as were the sales of its paper,
in what was an extraordinarily favourable atmosphere.
Two months after these massive events, the policy coordinator of
the party, Alan McCombes, presented a paper to the executive
committee which argued that the party’s main audience lay not in
those who were disaffected by New Labour or those involved in the
anti-war or anti-capitalist movement but rather in the poor and
dispossessed in the housing schemes:
The biggest potential reservoir of support for the SSP is
not to be found among Labour voters, SNP voters, Lib Dem voters or
even Green Party voters, but among the 50 percent of the population
who do not participate in elections. Well over 1 million people did
not bother to vote in the 2003 Scottish election or in the 2005
general election.
Of course the poor and dispossessed must be part of the SSP’s
potential audience and it is right that a socialist party should be
trying to encourage their entry into political life, while
recognising the difficulties involved in doing so. McCombes’s
mistake, however, is to imagine that the dispossessed can be the main
or leading component in our social base (one reason, along with his
suggestion that party organisation in future be based on a series of
interest groups or ‘networks’ rather than geographical branches,
that his paper was not supported by the executive committee).
 
2: The parting of the ways
If much of the leadership seemed unaffected by the events at
Gleneagles, the same cannot be said of the membership of the SSP. The
national conference of the SSP in March of this year (2006) was
notable for its changed atmosphere. Around issues of war, racism and
climate change, delegates consistently rejected sectarian motions
which argued for an ‘ourselves alone’ approach, in favour of
working with other activist and campaigners. When Rosie Kane MSP, for
example, spoke in a debate on environmental issues (she is, it should
be remembered, the party’s most prominent environmental
spokesperson) on behalf of the executive committee, she specifically
rejected the motion that the party should become involved in the
broad Campaign Against Climate Change, arguing instead that ‘we
don’t need to work with anyone else – we can do it by ourselves’.
Her position was decisively rejected by the delegates.
The conference delegations included a number of new people who had
come towards the SSP through the work around G8 and anti-war
activities – the very activities that had been repeatedly rejected
as irrelevant and marginal by the leadership of the organisation. It
was largely through contact with members of the Socialist Worker
Platform that they had joined the SSP; they were mostly young and
non-sectarian. But they saw little of their spirit reflected in the
party’s paper or in the branch meetings. Indeed what they had
entered felt like a party in decline, controlled by a bureaucratic
layer which saw growth through the movement as a ‘dilution’.
The spirit of the conference made no impact on the executive
committee. The reality was that our support in the country was ebbing
away – a series of local and parliamentary by-elections in 2006 had
shown how slender that support now was, slipping in some cases below
2 percent of the votes cast. The process of preparing for the
Scottish elections in May 2007 should already have begun, with
candidates being selected and campaigns begun at a local level.
Instead the party leadership remained totally absorbed in the
continuing question of Tommy Sheridan’s libel action, and
intensified its factional activity, continuing the arguments which
had first surfaced nearly two years earlier. Sheridan had been
elected chair of the party by conference. But the party’s
leadership was not prepared to accept the declared will of the party.
Instead it counter-attacked, launching yet another whispering
campaign intended to force Sheridan to drop the case, and effectively
withdrawing the political support of the party from him at a critical moment.
There is a clear pattern of behaviour on the part of the SSP
leadership throughout the last three years, whose roots lie still
further back in the SSP’s history. When put to the test, on every
occasion those in control of the party have shown that the declared
intention to move towards a new kind of open, mass-based political
formation was worth little more than the paper it was written on. The
existing membership of the party, declining day by day, neither
controlled nor understood what was happening at the top. The
prevailing method remained sectarian in relation to the class and
bureaucratic in relation to the membership. Far from engaging with
and winning the leadership of the movement in Scotland, the SSP stood
back from the movement, refused to work to win the leadership of it,
and more often than not condemned it for its political limitations.
Sheridan himself was a member of the ISM platform; those who
turned against him were almost all his close political allies until
very recently. They have now turned against him for reasons that are
far more profoundly political than personal. While Sheridan shares
his political roots with the SSP leadership, he has had a major
influence in winning support for the party in the class with his
consistent record of political activism around war, asylum seekers
and anti-capitalism. In 2003 his name was on the ballot paper beside
the party logo. The project for which people voted was inescapably
associated in the public mind with Tommy Sheridan. That is why the
majority of party members represented at a party national council in
June gave their full support to Sheridan and rejected the convoluted
arguments presented by the executive committee majority to justify
what was seen as a public betrayal of a leading socialist and the
project he represented.
One argument offered by the leadership was that the principal
issue was gender rather than class. Sheridan himself has suggested
that the conflict is between what he characterises as ‘gender
politics’ and ‘class politics’. This is not necessarily a
characterisation that we would accept, not least since we see the
struggle against class exploitation and for women’s liberation as
intimately linked. Nevertheless, the dominance of feminist ideas
among a section of the party has led them to see the central issue as
being Sheridan’s alleged personal behaviour rather than News
International’s attacks on a leading socialist.
The SWP was able to clarify its understanding of the real Marxist
tradition on women’s liberation through a lengthy and sometimes
bitter faction fight in the early 1980s around the question of
‘autonomous’ women’s organisation. By contrast no such debate
took place within Militant, which was in fact notorious on the left
in the 1970s and 1980s for its denunciation of the women’s
liberation movement as ‘petty bourgeois’. Perhaps as a
consequence of that experience, leading SSP members who are former
Militant supporters have now ‘flip-flopped’ into an
uncritical acceptance of many feminist ideas. As an example of where
such positions can lead, in an article in the Sunday Herald
MSP Carolyn Leckie (who was not previously in Militant) claimed that
the SSP took the nursery nurses’ dispute less seriously than other
disputes because it involved women workers. This was an outrageous
slander against the many SSP comrades, male and female, who visited
picket lines on a daily basis but is particularly inaccurate in that
an important source of support for Sheridan comes from nursery nurses
who joined the party because of his support for their strike!
For the majority of party members it was clear that the court case
would never have gone ahead had some executive committee members not
attempted to use the case to oust Sheridan from his leadership role.
The reasons were always political – at root, a conflict between two
different visions of the party. Tommy Sheridan did not argue the case
for a wider involvement in the movement against his own colleagues,
and until relatively recently he did not openly criticise the
intensifying sectarianism within the party. Yet for significant
numbers of party members, and many more outside the party, because of
his consistent activity and his public association with the anti-war
campaign at several levels he has come to represent the kind of
broad, activist party the SSP should have become.
The decision by party members at a further delegate meeting was
that a national conference of the SSP should be held as soon as
possible after the ending of the libel case. Motions proposed for
that meeting made it very clear that the purpose of that conference
would be to force out the old leadership and elect a new and
different one. We in the Socialist Worker Platform began to prepare
actively for what could have been an important opportunity to change
the direction of the party.
In the weeks that followed, however, it became obvious to us all
that those controlling the SSP would never allow the change to
happen. The campaign of vilification was conducted through the press
and the media; so poisonous was it that a number of normally
unsympathetic commentators began to offer support to Sheridan. Party
members opposed to the present leadership were sent anonymous notes
in their party mailing, while others were physically assaulted during
branch meetings. It was a clear indication that the sectarian faction
still controlling the party would destroy it rather than release
their control.
There was still a clear majority of SSP members committed to the
project that had brought us together five years ago; our loyalty was
to that project, and not to a party which now offered only a
sectarian model isolated from the movements and buried in
abstraction, a party which continued its slanders against Tommy
Sheridan throughout the period when Lebanon was being destroyed by
Israeli arms. This was not a minor dispute but a fundamental parting
of the ways.
We hope that those forces committed to building a mass-based
socialist alternative to New Labour, an anti-capitalist formation
open to all those opposed to global capital and war, can now work
together to build the newly formed Solidarity organisation. This was
the basis of the decision of the members of the Socialist Worker
Platform to throw our weight and our commitment behind this new organisation:
The Socialist Worker Platform recognises with some
sadness that the SSP is no longer the broad and open mass party of
the left we committed ourselves to building when we joined it some
five years ago. While the imperialist war intensifies and spreads
into Lebanon, and the level of public anger and opposition grows, the
SSP has proved unable to respond to that anger or provide any
direction for it.
The potential for building a broad and inclusive
organisation of the Scottish left is as great as ever. It is the duty
of socialists to respond to and build on that potential. We welcome
the initiative of calling an open public meeting of the Scottish left
on 3 September in Glasgow to launch Solidarity and will actively work
to build it, in the belief that it could represent the first stage in
building a new political formation that can answer the needs of the
many socialists and activists in Scotland, a launching pad for a new
Scottish left that will be open, democratic, internationalist and
committed to the building of a new and better world.

Note
1. The overwhelming majority of the EC had been members of the
Militant Tendency. Three were members of the Socialist Worker
platform, including myself. The one member of our platform present at
the meeting in November 2004 voted for the decision calling on
Sheridan to resign but immediately and publicly acknowledged that she
had been wrong.
 



Death and the Maiden
Dir: Roman Polanski
It’s a reasonable assumption to make that Death and the Maiden will be a successful film. As a play it was widely acclaimed and its Chilean author Ariel Dorfman became a literary celebrity across the world – except in Chile itself.
What is strange about that is the fact that the play/film deals with an experience that is familiar to tens of thousands of Chileans. Its protagonist is a woman who was tortured after the military overthrow of the reformist government of Salvador Allende in September 1973. It is hard to imagine, let alone explain, the savagery with which the new military rulers took their revenge against socialists, trade unionists or anyone who had been active in the movements from below that grew up during the Allende period. Tens of thousands were tortured, murdered or disappeared.
For the next 17 years – until 1990 – Chile was governed by the same repressive regime headed by Augusto Pinochet. When an elected government finally returned to Chile, it was led by a man who had helped to engineer the 1973 coup.
The point of giving the background to Death and the Maiden is to emphasise that moral dilemmas cannot be discussed in the abstract. When the woman protagonist recognises her torturer, her reaction is to take revenge and extract from him the confession he tried to tear out of her. Her rage is entirely justified; she does not and cannot forgive. Her husband, a lawyer, counsels her to look at the great ethical and moral issues. Worse, he becomes an accomplice of the doctor/torturer. The key thing, he says, is reconciliation. Her emotion, in his view, is an obstacle to a greater moral purpose – forgiveness, which is a prelude to progress. Small wonder that in Chile these empty abstractions found no resonance.
The play ends as a mirror comes down from the ceiling to allow the audience to look at itself. It’s a clever theatrical device, but it has already taken the discussion away from the ground of history and into the realm of individual morality. It is not true that in some general sense we are all guilty for allowing it to happen; Chileans know that. Some did allow it to happen, some colluded in the torture – and some fought back, resisted, or at the very least hated what they saw.
Until 1973 Ariel Dorfman worked in Chile with a team of writers looking at the way in which popular culture shaped attitudes and values. But when he left Chile and went into exile, something curious happened. He continued to write in the US and became something of a spokesman for the Chilean exiles – in fact he became a sort of professional exile. He is an academic, speaks perfect English, is cultured and educated. His novels and writings took the issues of torture, repression and responsibility into an arena of abstractions, of dilemmas resolved in an unidentifiable setting. Widows, a novel, rehearses the confrontation between the torturer and the victim’s wife. But it is set in Greece – or somewhere in the region. His latest novel Konfidenz is written for a foreign audience, and set in Europe in 1939. But its occasional references to historical events can’t alter the fact that the dialogue is written in a kind of international speak. The result is that the words are just abstractions and all the moral dilemmas posed just experiments in word play.
Dorfman has provided his audience with a safe way to appear to address real moral questions without confronting the bitter and brutal experience that underlines such dilemmas. His credentials as an exile are impeccable and so the catharsis, the harmless and controlled release of emotion, is legitimate and it has no consequences. You don’t have to do anything, just glance at yourself briefly in a mirror and go out into the night. And if you did feel emotionally involved at first, you will emerge from Death and the Maiden reassured that all conflict can be reconciled. In the reality of 1995, Hollywood’s discovery of Death and the Maiden is deeply suspect. Its message – that reconciliation is the highest moral achievement – is not an abstract question; when the torturers go free, they provide a guarantee to persecutors everywhere that in the end the society will paper over their crimes for fear that the real responsibility of others will be exposed.
 



The year ended badly for Mexico’s rulers. The money markets fell, the peso was devalued, the Zapatista rebels in Chiapas mobilised again. As the Los Angeles Times put it, ‘at the heart of those crises is Chiapas.’
A year ago the Zapatista National Liberation Army erupted on to a world stage all set for a grey suit gathering to launch the North American Free Trade Agreement, a new step towards world economic integration.
One year on, Chiapas remains occupied by the Mexican army – as it was before January 1994. A new president, Ernesto Zedillo, has taken office with promises of ‘political dialogue with the opposition’. But he still represents the PRI, the political apparatus that has controlled Mexico’s political life for decades.
Much was made of how clean the elections in August were. Yet the original presidential candidate, Colosio, was shot dead at an election rally, and in September the general secretary of the PRI, Ruiz Massieu, was murdered.
The Chiapas rising was, in the first place, a response to local conditions. The poverty of most of its inhabitants was growing deeper as the profitable cattle lands and the coffee estates absorbed more and more of the plots on which the Indian communities grew their food.
In one sense Chiapas was remote; in another it was at the centre of the government’s economic strategy. Its land could be turned to private profit by exporting cattle and producing corn on big farms and the farms could be cheaply bought by the food multinationals. Its oil and hydroelectricity could keep the factories of the Valley of Mexico running.
The governor of Chiapas (who later became interior minister and sent the troops against the Zapatistas) was himself a major landowner and used his power to suppress Indian resistance. The bishop for the area, Samuel Ruiz, was constantly protesting at the repression and abuses that were perpetrated. That governor has long since departed, but the new man, Eduardo Robledo, still represents the PRI. He took office in December despite very well founded claims that his opponent had won the election. The Zapatistas promised to renew the armed struggle if he was installed – but it did not happen.
Recent events show economic crisis dogs Mexico. The Chiapas rising was a serious threat to the worldwide strategy of the most powerful actors in the world economy. Its containment had costs for the ruling classes of Mexico and the US in Mexico itself. The US is calling in its debts and its debtors.
The old military dictators have been sent into comfortable retirement – from Central America to Chile and Argentina. All this was part of the preparation for the creation of a world system without economic frontiers.
Now Clinton is calling for Chile to be admitted into the Free Trade Agreement – and Argentina and Colombia will undoubtedly be next. What are Chile’s qualifications? In 1969 28.5 percent of Chileans lived below the official poverty line. After the US supported the military coup of September 1973, those figures grew worse. By 1989 42 percent of the population were living in poverty while the wealthiest fifth of the population had increased its share of the national wealth from 44.5 to 54.6 percent.
These figures are typical. In Mexico by 1987 real wages were worth just over half of their value seven years earlier. Welfare spending fell from 17 percent of GDP to 13 percent by the mid-1980s. At the same time, public spending on rural development fell from 12 percent of the total in 1980 to 7.5 percent in 1988.
In the 1980s the strategy was to drive down living standards, to concentrate economic power, to destroy the central economic role of the state, to allow banks, financial agencies and the great corporations to discipline and control the market directly. There was resistance – in Central America particularly – and the system protected the military regimes who set out to crush that resistance mercilessly.
Then there was the ‘return to democracy’! In Central America today many of those who participated in the resistance are collaborating in governments with the people who tortured and killed their comrades a few years ago. Those who have claimed to lead the struggles of the masses have become partners in government with the enemies of the working class. Is it just a case of corruption – or stupidity?
Everything centres on the notion of ‘democracy’. The Sandinistas, for example, have staked everything on winning the next presidential elections in Nicaragua. It seems unlikely, but even if they do, they will run a state with no economic power and which has lost the mass popular support it had when it was seen as a protection against the world market. Where there is less and less economic democracy, control of the state is no guarantee at all of political freedom or democracy.
And so back to Chiapas. One commentator described it as ‘the first postmodern rebellion’ – abandoning the traditional language of the left and ‘not bent on taking power’. Events have proved how double edged a quality this was.
The Zapatista National Liberation Army called a Democratic National Convention in Chiapas in August, just before the elections. It was chaired by Rosario Ibarra, leader of an organisation of mothers of disappeared political prisoners.
The convention called for gathering resistance across the country against corruption, exploitation and injustice. Without a strategy, however, this movement from below turned to the old left gathered around Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, who took upon themselves the role of political leadership.
The democracy for which the Zapatistas and their supporters still yearn was used as a bargaining counter by yesterday’s leaders. Today, now that they have a place in government, they want nothing to do with it. In November, the EZLN leadership issued a document of self-criticism, but there is no criticism in it of those who used the genuine courage and anger of the peasant fighters of Chiapas to their own limited advantage.
A new leadership must begin from the understanding that the state is a deadly enemy of genuine socialist democracy – and must be overthrown.
 



Even dead, Picasso provokes controversy. The public argument about the recent exhibition of drawing and paintings from Picasso’s last twenty years, has driven some critics to near apoplexy. One writer, for example, described the collection as ‘incoherent doodles done by a frenetic dotard in the anteroom of death’. [1] Why such frenzy? In the comments that follow, John Berger offers an incisive insight into Picasso’s work – a sort of postscript to his fine longer study Success and failure of Picasso. [2] And indirectly, it might explain some of the reactions the exhibition has provoked. Perhaps it is no accident that Berger’s own work has drawn only slightly less venomous denunciations from some quarters in recent times. [3]
 
Berger and the critics
Picasso embodies some of the contradictions that have been the constant themes of John Berger’s work. [4] For Berger has been centrally concerned with the way in which art is transformed into a commodity; the painting both represents a propertied class to itself and is itself property. What start as creative products of an individual imagination are given their social meaning, their status as ‘art’ under capitalism, at the moment when they are priced, given market value. The same process makes the artist a commodity too, and his or her lifestyle the object of a different but connected network of commercial institutions – publishers of memoirs, sellers of objects magically transformed by the artist’s touch.
This is the other face of that general process whereby human beings under capitalism confront the fruits of their own labour as alien external things. This creativity that art contains, this exercise of the imagination, is turned into a mystery, an abnormal response on the part of a small and isolated group of peculiar and unreal people. The liberating potential of the combination of consciousness and practice is caricatured in the figure of the artist as a kind of bizarre outcast.
These are some of the processes that John Berger explored in an incisive body of work which reworked and ‘made new’ a complex Marxist theory of art. In the sixties and seventies many people took up those ideas, though often distorting or abusing them in imitation. For Berger never fell into the trap that many of his disciples fell foul of, whereby the theory of art became a separate discipline from dialectical materialism, so that there came to be a kind of class struggle in art that bore no relation to the class struggle in the material world.
In the eighties, of course, many of those fairweather friends have disappeared, as Marxism has suddenly ceased to be the vehicle for an alternative academic career. Peter Fuller, for example, Berger’s erstwhile acolyte, has now become his most bitter critic. Fuller argues that the analysis that sees art in its complex relationship with society ‘reduces’ art and denies ‘artistic’ value – that ineffable something which is intrinsic to the work and makes art timeless and ‘true’. Fuller acknowledges that the search for that essential ‘aesthetic’ core of art arose from a deep discomfort with an art of political commentary, and from a kind of yearning for eternal truth. Because he has a background, or rather a past, on the left, Fuller attempts a sleight of hand to show that Tories and Marxists are equally reductionist and that only he is willing to defend ‘connoisseurship and spirituality in art’ (whatever they might be!)
The slander on Berger has a deeper core. Fuller corresponds to the Thatcher era, however vehemently he insists on his voting record as a Labour supporter. For it is the characteristic assertion of the intellectuals of Thatcherism that there is no connection between the different areas of human activity; that the perception of totality is a left-wing myth; and that the prevailing values are natural, given and inescapable. Here there is certainly a curious coincidence between the right and those left theorists whose obsession with ‘Thatcherism’ has led to similar despairing and desperate conclusions. [5] If change cannot result from conscious transforming activity, then there can of course, be no imagination, no exposing of contradictions nor dreaming of an alternative society.
What role can art have in the face of such global pessimism? It can become again a refuge from reality – a ‘place’ free from the awful but inescapable ravages of reality. It is incorruptible because it says nothing, it offers no response, it simply exists in its own time and space. Berger insists on the connectedness of things, locates art within the double realm of ideology and property relations, and sees in it a liberating potential. But he also explores, especially in Ways of Seeing, the mechanisms whereby the elaboration of ‘eternal truths’ about art corresponds in turn to the need to confirm existing social relations and to inhibit and colonise imagination itself. Fuller’s is only the latest version of a determination to cast a veil over the world.
 
Picasso and the critics
The history of Picasso the painter is an exemplary one. As a young highly skilled artist in the Paris of the first decade of the 20th century, he was a key participant in an artistic revolution – an ‘art of dynamic liberation from all static categories’. [6] There is no evidence that he saw any connection between avant-garde art and the political vanguard, no evidence of any political involvement at all. He seemed unable to link the particular experience to any collective reality. Yet his challenge to the bourgeois world was encapsulated in a manner of painting – Cubism. It responded to Engels’ appeal for an art that ‘shatters the optimism of the bourgeois world and instils doubt as to the eternal character of the existing order’. [7] The landscapes and portraits of late 19th century Europe oozed the optimism of a once-revolutionary class now become master in its own house. The ordered world of those paintings offered the required image of a controlled and organised society where technology discipline and order were partners in an inexorably progress whose fulfilment required no human agency.
Cubism was part of a wider artistic and philosophical movement that frontally challenged that complacency at many levels. It re-introduced the idea that the world was dynamic, tense, a battlefield between conflicting forces where reality was dissonance, confusion and struggle. And at the centre of that clash there was a human core, the seer who actively shaped the world.
Picasso’s pre-1914 work, therefore, asked critical questions of the world and asserted a proud creativity against the uniformity and narrowness of the market. Of course, the paradox is that those statements of creative independence became in their turn hugely expensive commodities. In a way, it is hardly surprising that, after the containment of the revolutionary upheavals after World War One, capitalism should successfully incorporate expressions of individual radicalism into commerce. And Picasso in particular acknowledged no responsibility or relationship to the revolutionary class.
As the paintings themselves became commodities, so too did the artist himself. His life, from the 1920s onwards, became saleable. In the whirl of the ‘lost generation’ of the twenties, Picasso’s art was progressively separated from its historical moment. In the thirties the self-absorption that was the central feature of his work produced a series of joyful sensual paintings and drawings of Marie-Therese Walter [8], a celebration of sexuality and a joyful assumption of a kind of isolated individuality.
But individuality is not a continuously self-generating thing, complete and self-contained. Our individuality is the complex produce of an interaction with and response to shared social experience in specific material circumstances. We are individual because we are social; even our most intimate desires are shaped in history. [9] Picasso’s own life is the proof. Cut off and insulated from the social reality, worshipped and trapped in a marketable individuality, Picasso simply drained his inner world of all its possibilities he ‘ran out of subjects for his painting’, as Berger said. Outside, as the world lived through the decade of the forties, massive transformations were taking place, and both destructive and creative possibilities were worked out on the stage of real history. Yet Picasso kept on looking into his mirror (even Guernica is an expression of personal anguish rather than a recognition of the social forces in struggle in the Spanish Civil War). But the mirror told him nothing. Emptied of content and social experience, Picasso himself had become just another object, a property to be traded.
From then on, Picasso sought to rediscover something called ‘the artistic experience’, something that could be isolated in art itself. He looked for it in the paintings of others [10] (as distinct from other people, other lives). He began to repaint other painters’ work. It was skilful, but only in a technical sense; it was without imagination.
 
‘A sad entreaty’
This is how John Berger describes the drawings and paintings of Picasso’s late phase. For one critic they are ‘sad, crude, tedious and obsessive’. [11] For the reactionary Ms Huffington they are exhibits in the prosecution of Picasso for misogyny, sexual tyranny and systematic exploitation of everyone who shared his life. [12] There is no particular reason to doubt his less than exemplary conduct in these areas. But if we judge the paintings in this way then we have accepted that all art is merely self-expression and has no social content at all, even a social content mediated through individual experience.
In these final works, in their imagery of a lost or distorted sexuality and their terror of impotence, there is much more than a kind of sad pornography. They are about women and about sex. But they seem also to have a real sense of irony, stabbing at that paradox which turns the liberating imagination into a prison, and offers a kind of feme and recognition which promises to indulge every desire. And yet to be an artist is to be a creature of a system that must destroy desire and flatten creativity. So in the drawings in particular the painting or the easel becoming both a way of expressing desire and an insuperable obstacle between the artist and the object of his desire. He becomes the spectator to human experience, but incapable of participating in it.
But why are those once so anxious to raise Picasso now so angry with him? Could it be that this confession of weakness and indecision has no place in this society which, even for the Labour Party, exists to ‘reward achievement’? Thatcher’s Britain is a pitiless place in every sense – and it easily discards those heroes who prove to have feet of clay. The more so when Picasso, that living example of a self-contained individualism, has found it to be such a lonely and sad place to be.
The emancipation of the self in isolation has returned in new clothes in recent years. We can read Picasso’s last poignant yearnings as evidence that the self can only be realised in the act of collective revolutionary transformation.

Notes
1. Quoted in Brian Sewell’s vitriolic review Doodles of a voyeur in decline, in the Standard, 30 June 1988, p. 36.
2. Success and failure of Picasso, Writers and Readers (London 1980, first published in 1965).
3. See for example Peter Fuller’s Seeing Berger, Writers and Readers (London 1980). Fuller is now the increasingly influential editor of a journal called Modem Painters.
4. Berger’s work includes Permanent Red, Selected essays and articles (including his marvellous essay ‘the moment of cubism’), Art and Revolution, his most influential work Ways of Seeing, and About looking. Significant too is his novel A painter of our time.
5. As exemplified by the writings of Stuart Hall in Marxism Today, and in particular the work of Ernesto Laclau who has recently announced that ‘society is impossible’.
6. Picasso, see pages 59-60
7. Engels quoted in Slaughter, Marxism, ideology and literature (London 1980), p. 84.
8. A series which has its counterpart and negation in Picasso’s late works.
9. ‘... in present-day society, man has lost his ideology, but at the same time he has not only acquired the theoretical consciousness of his loss, he has been driven by a distress no longer to be evaded, utterly imperious to revolt against this inhumanity – therefore the proletariat can and must free itself.’ Marx, The Holy Family (Moscow 1956), p. 52.
10. For example, Picasso painted at least 52 versions of Velazquez’ Las meninas.
11. Sewell, see note 1.
12. Arianna Stassinopolous Huffington’s Picasso; creator and destroyer is published by Weidenfeld.
 



At 4 a.m. on Monday the Electoral Commission
announced the results; 4,991,483 (58.25 percent) voted no and
3,576,517 (41.74 percent) voted yes. It was obvious where the votes
had come from, even before the results were announced. You could
measure it by skin colour, what people wore and where they lived. The
majority of well-dressed white people from the wealthier suburbs
angrily voted yes, claiming that Chávez has divided Venezuela. The
dark-skinned poor of the hillside shanties reply that Venezuela was
always divided. The difference now is that the people without a voice
can now make themselves heard. [1]
The referendum was certainly not the terrain that Hugo Chávez,
Venezuela’s president, would have chosen as the testing ground to
measure the progress of the Bolivarian revolution. The Venezuelan
right, bitterly hostile to the government of Hugo Chávez, had
exploited an important clause in the new constitution of 1999 which
allowed elected politicians, and especially the national president,
to be recalled after serving half of the six-year presidential term.
This required the collection of some 2.3 million signatures – a
process that had taken months of collection, checking, challenge and
proof. Once the numbers were found, the total voting for the recall
(a yes vote) would need to be greater than the majority who supported
Chávez in the presidential elections of 2000.
There were many in the Chávez camp who argued that the referendum
was a ploy – a stratagem particularly unfavourable to the
Venezuelan poor, a majority of whom would not possess the necessary
registration documents to allow them to vote in the peculiarly
bureaucratic Venezuelan system. On 15 August each elector would
present a credential, have a fingerprint taken both manually and
electronically, wait for confirmation and then vote. The enormous
queues that formed at every polling centre from 4 a.m. on the
morning of that day were just one more gauntlet thrown down to the
supporters of Chávez.
In the event, the arguments for abstention did not convince.
Instead Chávez called the referendum the Battle of Santa Inés – a
reference to a battle fought in 1859 by Ezequiel Zamora, at the head
of a largely peasant army, during a period of civil war. Zamora
pretended to retreat and then surrounded and destroyed the armies of
the ruling class on a terrain more favourable to his soldiers. Chávez
presented the referendum of 15 August 2004 in similar terms. While it
appeared to be a political retreat, it would in fact, he said, be the
prelude to an advance in Venezuela’s developing Bolivarian revolution.
From the United States and all those who had steadfastly supported
the opposition to Chávez, the demands and denunciations rained down
relentlessly on the national palace in Caracas. The opposition
accused the government of a failure to observe democratic procedures,
describing Chávez’s rule as a dictatorship, despite the fact that
he had been elected in untainted presidential elections. This was
deeply ironic, of course, given the events of the previous three and
a half years. But Chávez’s answer was to accept the challenge.
Those who saw the referendum as a backward step were right. The
advance of a revolutionary process could and should be measured by
the pace with which power passes directly into the hands of working
people and the degree to which it is the interests of the majority
that increasingly shape the distribution of resources. In that sense,
a referendum drags politics back onto the terrain of formal
democracy, to the matter of institutional arrangements within the
system and away from the deepening control from below whose progress,
or otherwise, is the key issue for revolution.
In that sense too, the referendum was a small victory for the
right. In the event, a high degree of mass mobilisation in the
heartlands of Chávez’s support produced a result which confounded
the opposition and cleared the way for a deepening radicalisation.
The consequences and impact of that result have resonated well beyond
Venezuela, and have important implications for the revolutionary left
internationally – matters to which we will return in the final
section of this account.
The ferocity of the Venezuelan ruling class assault on the Chávez
government – of which the referendum is simply the latest chapter –
is not some peculiar feature of Latin American politics. It is worth
remembering that the Chilean coup of 1973 was sustained and supported
by a bourgeoisie which had always proclaimed its devotion to
parliamentary democracy. That same class stood by and applauded
levels of repression which have made the very word Chile a watchword
for state violence. In Venezuela too the procedures of parliamentary
order were obeyed in the letter but not in the spirit. Instead
Venezuelan political life was shaped by manipulation and a corruption
fuelled by the single most important source of Venezuelan wealth – oil.
 
Black gold
Perhaps the most important thing to know about Venezuela
is that it is an oil exporting country, the fifth largest in the
world, with the largest reserves of conventional oil (light and heavy
crude) in the western hemisphere and the largest reserves of
non-conventional oil (extra-heavy crude) in the world. [2]
Oil production in Venezuela began in the early 1920s, during the
brutal dictatorship of Juan Vicente Gómez. [3] Gómez was much given
to spectacular and ostentatious public works projects – a luxury he
could allow himself because oil revenues were constantly rising,
though by the late 1930s that revenue largely flowed into the coffers
of Shell and Standard Oil. In that period oil had come to represent
over 90 percent of the country’s income (from 1.9 percent in
1920!). Production levels rose again in the 1950s – between 1958
and 1998 Venezuela’s total income from oil was over $300 billion.
The global figures conceal peaks and troughs which produced both
economic and political crises, yet throughout the country’s
dependence on oil revenues became more and more pronounced. In 1960,
for example, Venezuela promoted the formation of OPEC as the
expansion of Middle Eastern oil threatened the high prices of the
early 1950s. At the same time, the Venezuelan Oil Corporation was
created in an attempt to force the foreign corporations who extracted
the oil to pay more to the state. But the first great oil boom had
passed and the military ruler who had overseen it, Pérez Jiménez,
had fled to Miami with several hundred million dollars safely
ensconced in US banks. Caracas itself was the clearest testimony to
the massive speculation and graft of those years. Its modern centre
of modernist concrete buildings was aesthetically exciting, but
represented the squandering of oil revenues. The shanties clinging to
the hills around the city said all that needed to be said about who
had been the beneficiaries of the boom. While production rose
steadily between 1960 and 1964, it was significant that only 8
million cubic metres were consumed within Venezuela (in 1964) and
nearly 187 million exported. Those who gained from the boom bought
their imported goods and services at a high price – and the cost of
living rose to the point where it was said that Caracas was a more
expensive city than Chicago – and had more Cadillacs per head of
population. [4]
The expansion took place under the government of Rómulo
Betancourt, whose brief flirtation with Fidel Castro before and
immediately after the Cuban Revolution of 1959 had contributed to his
reputation as a reformer. His promises to raise the levels of income
of all poor Venezuelans, however, very quickly dissolved; under
pressure from a US government anxious to isolate Cuba and protect its
economic interests in Venezuela and the rest of the continent,
Betancourt’s government countered street demonstrations and the
subsequent occupation of the Central University with repression. At
the same time, the new Venezuelan system was forming on the basis of
an alliance of the parties of the right, the Punto Fijo Pact, which
effectively ensured a system of power sharing between the two major
bourgeois parties – Betancourt’s Acción Democrática (AD) and
the Christian Democrats of COPEI.
The pact, signed in October 1958, created a consensus
system to ensure democratic stability. There would be a common
economic programme and a ‘spoils’ system that provided for party
control of appointments to state bodies ... The central role of
private enterprise was written in to the government’s plans. [5]
The pact held for the next 30 years, until the Caracazo of 1989.
And the key to that economic ‘stability’ was the judicious use of
oil revenues. The 2 percent of Venezuelans involved in oil production
were given highly privileged working conditions and protected status.
The oil bureaucrats and all those involved in the trade lived
extraordinarily well (they were the Cadillac owners!). The system
maintained itself after the repression of the early protest movement
through a combination of patronage, repression and occasional
investments in social programmes like education and health –
particularly during the boom years of the 1970s, when oil prices rose
again with the deepening crisis in the Middle East. Venezuelan oil
revenues quadrupled between 1972 and 1974. Like Betancourt a decade
earlier, Carlos Andrés Pérez, the newly elected Christian
Democratic president, promised protective economic policies,
diversification and an end to poverty. Part of this ‘Great
Venezuela’ programme was the nationalisation of oil in 1976.
The fact that Venezuela’s oil is run by a nationalised
corporation has created much confusion – a confusion cynically and
deliberately manipulated for foreign consumption after 2000.The new
Venezuelan State Oil Corporation, PDVSA, inherited an industry
dominated by a series of foreign oil companies. Nationalisation
created 14 Venezuelan companies – but they were not only the mirror
of the former companies. The new managers were recruited from the old
private industry, maintained a private enterprise attitude to
production and continued their ties and allegiances to their former
masters. PDVSA was, as one observer put it, a ‘Trojan horse’. [6]
The oil workers were locked into the same structures and remained, as
they had before, a highly privileged layer of workers, earning their
salaries in dollars and enjoying all sorts of privileges. Their union
was part of the Venezuelan Workers Congress (CTV) which was an
integral component of the Punto Fijo constitutional arrangements.
PDVSA maintained a kind of autonomy which led analysts to describe
it as ‘a state within a state’ through the period of high oil
prices from the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s. The proportion of its
revenues consumed by expenses grew dramatically, and, despite its
size and economic weight, it paid less to the government per barrel
than did Pemex, the nationalised Mexican oil corporation notorious
for its corruption. In fact, the PDVSA management continued to
operate in conjunction with multinational corporations and the
international oil market, creating its own offshore companies which
absorbed the corporate profits in a series of dubious reselling deals
and service contracts. For example, it purchased a number of foreign
refineries – but for the most part they were unprofitable and PDVSA
often found itself providing oil at below market prices to keep them
running. ‘Currently it costs PDVSA about three times as much to
extract one barrel of oil as it costs other major oil corporations,
such as ExxonMobil, Shell or Chevron Texaco.’ [7]
The 1980s were a time, then, when a small elite made millions from
oil, when capital fled the country to seek profits abroad and when,
despite oil wealth, the Venezuelan GDP fell consistently. This
concentration of wealth and deepening social divide were veiled by
the complicity of politicians, bureaucrats and business who passed
the spoils from hand to hand and controlled a political system which
was little more than a network of patronage and corruption. In the
latter part of the decade falling oil prices produced new crises. The
Venezuelan government turned to the IMF and the institutions of
global capital. This was the era of Thatcher and Reagan, of ‘free
market’ economics and the euphemistic ‘structural adjustments’
that withdrew the pitiful subsidies on basic goods, transport and
social provision and demanded a return on investment disguised as aid.
The Venezuelan social pact was based on control by a capitalist
minority of the Venezuelan state in order to protect a virtually
autonomous oil industry which, while ostensibly nationalised, was
becoming more and more integrated into the structures of global oil
production. Within the country the concentration of wealth proceeded
at spectacular pace. Four mass media conglomerates controlled the
bulk of communication. They were popularly known as ‘the horsemen
of the apocalypse’, with the most prominent, Gustavo Cisnero of
Venevisión, involved in a dozen other industries and subsidiaries
across South America. At the same time, the pact depended for its
ideological impact on an appearance of redistribution, the
expenditure of some of the crumbs from the financial banquet on
social projects and programmes.
 
Caracazo: the poor come down from the hills
In 1989 Carlos Andrés Pérez’s government adopted the full
neo-liberal agenda. By then the slow development of the Venezuelan
economy had already gone into reverse:
The proportion of the population living below the poverty
line soared from 36 percent in 1984 to 66 percent in 1995, and the
number of those living in extreme poverty trebled, rising from 11 to
35 percent. Over the same period, urban unemployment more than
doubled, topping the league for the continent. Yet while the share in
national income of the poorest two-fifths of the population fell from
19.1 percent to 14.7 percent between 1981 and 1997, that of the
richest tenth jumped from 21.8 percent to 32.8 percent. [8]
Thus oil-rich Venezuela was also the country of the desperately
poor shanty towns clinging to the muddy cliffs around the capital.
For them, Pérez’s attempt to impose the politics of economic shock
in 1989 was the last straw. They poured down into the streets in what
became known as the Caracazo. Pérez had hinted in his recently
successful presidential campaign that he would not accept the
instructions of the IMF. Once in office he changed his position –
and his political reforms, including direct election of many mayors
and state governors, did nothing to persuade the mass of Venezuelans
of his good intentions. And their scepticism was well founded.
In late February a rise in the price of petrol, followed by
increased fares on public transport, produced protests and
occupations. It began with a student bus boycott. It spread like a
forest fire throughout the country – but it was most powerful in
Caracas. Pérez’s response was swift. His so-called Plan Avila
prepared an overwhelming military response. Troops returned from the
provinces. Next day the shooting began. The official figures for the
dead were around 100. Although the true number of victims remains
uncertain, it is unlikely that fewer than 2,000 were killed in the
government’s violent response. More significant still, however, was
where the dead were discovered – Petare, 23 de enero, the
ramshackle settlements of the urban poor. They, after all, were the
most vulnerable of the intended victims of the new economics.
The Caracazo, in some ways, should not be seen as a single event,
but rather as the beginning of continuous process of popular
resistance. [9] From then on, as López-Maya argues, demonstrations,
protests and street actions became a regular feature of Venezuelan
public life. 1989 also marked a crossroads in the history of
Venezuela’s ruling class – for the crisis that began then
continued and deepened through the 1990s. The old ruling class, in
some senses, went to war in those late February days against the
working class and the poor of Venezuela. As the crisis developed, the
wealthy elite grew richer, the executives of PDVSA feathered their
offshore nests with a greater and greater sense of urgency – and
the situation of the poor grew more and more desperate.
In many ways, the failed military coup led by Hugo Chávez in 1992
and the process that it initiated should also be seen as a slow
unfolding of the political implications of the Caracazo. Municipal
elections late in 1989 had given a new prominence to the MAS
(Movement towards Socialism), a split from the Venezuelan Communist
Party. MAS, while radical in its rhetoric, was always an electoral
organisation and its leader, Teodoro Petkoff, was careful to distance
himself from the insurrectionary implications of the mass
mobilisations that began in 1989. The defeat of the guerrilla
movements in the mid-1960s had largely removed the armed alternative
from the political scenario, although Venezuela’s best known
guerrilla leader, Douglas Bravo, continued (and continues) to have a
significant role. But MAS and organisations like it were the
beneficiaries of a deep and enduring rejection of the traditional
adherents to the pact of Punto Fijo, and enjoyed much support among
some of those who had participated in the Caracazo. MAS’s political
rival, Causa R, also an earlier split from the Communist Party,
identified more clearly with the street. And it was to those
demonstrators that Hugo Chávez was to make his most direct appeal.
 
Enter Hugo Chávez [10]
Hugo Chávez erupted onto the international political scene on 4
February 1992 when he led an attempted coup which was very rapidly
suppressed. Yet it had enjoyed the vocal support of most of
Venezuela’s urban poor. They, after all, were still living through
the neo-liberal economic strategies imposed by Pérez, and observing
with mounting rage the trading in lucrative jobs and the overt
corruption of a bankrupt political arrangement.
Chávez was born in 1954 into a lower middle class family – his
parents were both teachers. There were some notables in his family
line – his great great grandfather had fought with Zamora, the
strategist of Santa Inés! The next generation produced the legendary
Maisanta, who had famously resisted the dictatorship of Gómez.
Enlisting in 1971, Chávez rose rapidly in the ranks of the military.
By the early 1980s he was a popular and charismatic lecturer at the
Caracas Military Academy. But he saw himself very differently from
the officer class that had benefited from and replicated the cronyism
and graft that characterised the state as a whole. Chávez’s
conception of the role of the military had its reference point in the
military reformists like Presidents Torrijos in Panama and Velasco in
Peru (which he visited in 1974), both of whom had initiated social
reforms after taking power by military coup. They were nationalists
who saw the creation of a strong national state as a prerequisite for
economic and social development. But they also saw themselves as very
separate from political traditions based on mass action. The idea of
reform from above merged with the command model of the structures of
the military. In both these cases the conquest of the state followed
a failed process of political reform, often betrayed by politicians
who, at the level of rhetoric at least, proclaimed a commitment to
social justice and democracy.
In the mid-1970s Chávez was sent to help the suppression of a
guerrilla group. In his own words, he felt growing sympathy for the
guerrillas and gathered around him a small group of officers who
wanted to discuss the possibility of radical transformations, an end
to graft and a programme of national development. The group of
dissidents called themselves the Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement
(MRB 2000), to commemorate the leader of the 19th century Latin
American liberation movement, Simón Bolívar. It was at that time
that Chávez made contact with Douglas Bravo and with the dissenting
communists of Causa R.
Chávez summed up the ideology of the Bolivarian movement in a
lengthy interview he gave in 1996:
The Bolivarian movement was born in the barracks 15 years
ago when a group of soldiers came to the conclusion that the enemy
was not communism, but imperialism. For many years we worked
carefully and gradually to develop a nationalist, patriotic movement
with one hand in the barracks and the other in the street ... The
current political model is mortally wounded and no viable alternative
can exist without breaking the bourgeois, neo-liberal system that has
operated in Venezuela since 1945. In our model of democracy ... there
has to be direct democracy, people’s government with popular
assemblies and congresses where the people retain the right to
remove, nominate, sanction and recall their elected delegates. [11]
Even in this short extract there are signs that seem to point in
several different directions. For socialists there is a promise of
direct democracy. For nationalists, there is the assertion of a
patriotic anti-imperialism. But the heart of the matter is in the
specific reference to the collapse of the Venezuelan political system.
The Bolivarian circle drew together a number of currents which
shared Chávez’s disgust with corruption and the abuse of national
resources. Yet it seems clear that the Caracazo caught Chávez by
surprise – at least in the astonishingly rapid spread of popular
protest and the ferocity of the state’s response. More tellingly,
the traditional political organisations benefited from the growing
political dissidence, yet – at least in the case of MAS – seemed
willing to compromise with elements of the very system they denounced.
Late in 1991 Chávez informed his political allies of the imminent
coup and called for support. When the coup attempt was launched in
February 1992, thousands of troops joined the call issued by Chávez,
his close friend and later political opponent Francisco Arias, and
the Bolivarian movement. The organised civilian support did not
materialise, although the ranchos (as the poor marginal
communities were called) were vocally behind him. After fierce
fighting and a number of deaths, the coup was defeated. Curiously,
Pérez allowed Chávez a minute to call on his supporters to
surrender. Instead Chávez used his minute to present his case, and
to make an indelible mark on Venezuelan society. The carnival
processions that year boasted lots of youngsters wearing Chávez’s
characteristic red beret. [12]
Chávez spent the next two years in jail – but outside the
prison the crisis in Venezuela was intensifying. In 1993 an
over-confident Pérez was finally impeached for fraud and corruption.
The Venezuelan Oil Corporation, meanwhile, signed a new contract for
the Christopher Columbus Natural Gas Project with a consortium of
multinational corporations – and conceded two thirds of the
ownership of the project to them. The administrative costs were
escalating at a dramatic rate, so that little over a third of
Venezuelan oil revenues found their way into the national economy.
Those administrative costs, of course, concealed the export of
capital and an effective transference of funds and assets to
interests outside Venezuela, many of them run in part or in whole by
PDVSA executives. Poverty was increasing and unemployment rising inexorably.
The 1993 presidential elections brought to power Rafael Caldera,
an elderly politician with a relatively unsullied reputation. His
government, however, ‘lurched from one crisis to the next; a
banking collapse led to a state takeover of the banking system at a
cost of $8.5 billion or 75 percent of the national budget for 1994’.
[13] He turned to the IMF in both 1994 and 1996 – its loans carried
the usual conditions. Petkoff, as economics minister, imposed the conditions.
In the 1993 election Causa R made considerable gains. But within
months it was seeking alliances and coalitions with the very parties
that had run the old system. Chávez’s call from jail for an active
abstention had convinced some 40 percent of the electorate.
Subsequent events must have convinced many more. By 1995 Causa R’s
support had collapsed – it split into two warring factions, one of
which approached the 1998 presidential elections in support of the
reactionary ex-beauty queen Irene Sáez. Her candidacy was in many
ways evidence of the bankruptcy of Venezuelan politics. The other
faction formed Patria Para Todos and entered a long period of debate
over who to support in the coming elections. In the end a narrow
majority opted to support the candidacy of Hugo Chávez and his Fifth
Republic Movement (MVR). The forces that eventually gathered around
Chávez were testimony to the breadth and to the ambiguity of his
patriotic programme.
On 8 December 1998 Chávez emerged as the elected president of
Venezuela with some 56 percent of the vote. The right was stunned,
Washington deeply disturbed. His election victory reflected a series
of different factors. The Venezuelan bourgeoisie had been unable to
come up with a credible presidential candidate other than the beauty
queen and the right wing economist Henrique Salas, neither of whom
could make any credible claim to represent the interests of the
majority of Venezuelans. They were the inheritors and representatives
of a political system that was bankrupt and exposed – a system
whose public face was the arrogant fraudster Carlos Andrés Pérez.
Much of the left, for its part, had colluded with that very same
system as the crisis of the 1990s deepened, and had experienced
popular rejection as a result. Douglas Bravo, who knew Chávez well
and was certainly influential in his political development, was now
largely involved with direct action movements on the land.
There was both a power vacuum, and the continuing crisis among the
organisations of the left – the ongoing echo of the post-1989
crisis of Stalinism – made them incapable of connecting with, let
alone organising or leading, the mass protest movement. Chávez
filled that vacuum with a political ideology which was nationalist
and anti-imperialist, and identified with the excluded and
marginalised sectors of Venezuelan society. His rejection of
neo-liberal economic strategies and his relentless attacks on the
corruption of the old system resonated with the deeply impoverished
majority. And his scepticism about political parties, of the left as
much as of the right, seemed to fit with the experience, and the
disillusionment, of that same majority.
His persona was a subtle expression of his politics. He clearly
did not belong to the white-skinned, soft-featured elite of
Venezuela. Irene Sáez, the blonde Miss Venezuela, expressed that
bourgeoisie’s ideals perfectly – and it was ironic that when she
allowed her hair to return to its normal brown colour in the course
of the election campaign she began to lose favour. Chávez’s dark
skin, chiselled features and street-wise way of speaking were
powerful signs in a country where class and ethnicity had always been
so closely interwoven. And his scepticism about traditional political
organisation – and not only the discredited bourgeois parties –
also found an echo with his base of support among the poor and the
marginalised. Bolivarismo was, by its nature, a studiedly ambiguous
idea, a mix of nationalism, populism, the language of radical
democracy and popular wisdom. And while the historical reference to
Bolívar connects directly with an anti-imperialist perspective, it
is also an ideology of authoritarian leadership. [14]
The essential question to be asked is not to interrogate the
leader’s face for signs of sincerity or his words for internal
contradictions, but rather to ask who, in this vision of political
change, is the protagonist of the process, the engine of
transformation and the central actor in the building of a new
society. For Marxists, the revolution is the act of a whole class, in
all its diversity and difference – the working class acting to
achieve its own liberation. In the ideology of Bolivarismo/Chavismo,
who occupies that role?
It is my view that the question is not easily answered –
precisely because there are unresolved contradictions at the heart of
Chavismo . In the 1996 interview quoted earlier, for example, Chávez
commits himself to advanced forms of rank and file democracy. Yet, as
will become clear, the organisational expressions of the Bolivarian
revolution in power were very far from the ‘popular assemblies and
congresses’ he alluded to there.
In the end, of course, it would be paradoxical to argue that the
emergence of organs of workers’ democracy should depend on a
decision by Chávez – they should, by their very nature, arise in
the context of class struggle. Yet the influence and authority of
Chávez are beyond question – and therefore the exercise of that
influence is a material factor, especially in the context of an
absence of left alternatives rooted in the movement and capable of
challenging and questioning the president. His weekly intimate
conversations with the Venezuelan people – his Aló Presidente
programmes – are brilliant exercises in political communication,
but they are monologues.
These are not abstract questions. In the concrete circumstances of
escalating class confrontation, they are strategic questions that
shape and direct the interventions and actions of the mass
movement.
 
The Bolivarian revolution
In the year of Chávez’s election 67 percent of the population
of the country earned less than $2 a day, and 36 percent less than
$1.50. Within two months he had proposed a referendum for a
constituent assembly to draw up a new constitution. [15] Of the 131
delegates to the assembly 125 were Chávez supporters – among the
losing candidates was the ever-present Carlos Andrés Pérez. The new
document was approved in December 1999. Its main provisions were
directed at rebuilding the discredited political system and making
elected officials accountable and open to recall (the clause that was
used against Chávez in 2004). It set out the obligation of the mass
media to be ‘truthful’, which evoked howls of protest before such
‘unjustified intervention in the democratic press’ from the
monopoly owner of the Venevisión Corporation and his ilk. The church
turned its large guns against the promise to raise subsidies to state
schools at the church’s expense and the threat to introduce
abortion rights. But it was the plans for the reorganisation of the
oil industry that provoked the most vehement hostility. The new
constitution introduced a right to health and an entitlement to land
for landless peasants, as well as basic trade union rights.
Unsurprisingly it was ratified by 71 percent of those who voted in
the referendum of December.
The numbers voting might certainly have been higher (56 percent of
electors did not vote) had the skies not opened and visited upon
Venezuela days of torrential rain. The precarious and fragile houses
around Caracas began to fall into the gigantic mudslides the rain
produced. Some on the right were cynical enough to claim this as the
wrath of god as the second flood claimed somewhere between 30,000 and
50,000 lives. It certainly set back Chávez’s economic and social
programmes, as unemployment and poverty figures continued to rise
through the first year of his presidency.
The level of popular support for Chávez’s project was beyond
question – as was the growing hostility of the Venezuelan
bourgeoisie and its allies in Washington. Yet there was some unease
even among Chávez’s allies about the character of his organisation:
The MRB2000 itself, founded by Chávez in the 1980s, had
a very small group of members; and the MVR, founded just to
participate in the 1998 presidential elections, is an electoral party
that grew like an avalanche bringing with it many opportunists who
knew that they would be elected only if associated with Chávez. Nor
does the country have any strong social movement: neither the
neighbourhood popular movement nor the trade union movement have been
able to become autonomous ... [16]
There was no sense that the MVR or the Bolivarian movement existed
in any real sense as a grassroots organisation. The lists of
candidates for the 1998 elections, and indeed for subsequent
elections in 2000, included a wide range of individuals from a
spectrum of organisations, not all of whom had a proven record of
support for mass struggles. The core of Chávez’s organisation was
clearly the military group he had formed in the academy who now
occupied most of the key posts in and around government. As McCaughan
puts it, ‘It appeared that individual loyalty rather than
individual merit was the key factor in distributing posts’. [17]
Chávez’s partners in the electoral coalition of 1998 – including
MAS and the Communist Party – now grew impatient with his
unwillingness to distribute power. The distrust of political
organisation ran deeper, perhaps, than any of his erstwhile partners
realised. Certainly Chávez was happy to deploy the mass support he
enjoyed – but at this stage there was no evidence of any commitment
to converting that support into the forms of popular democracy he
repeatedly referred to in his speeches and articles.
The bourgeois opposition had by now renounced its attempts to
court the new president and had begun to form an organised
opposition. It campaigned against the scheduled presidential
elections of May 2000, on the grounds of flaws in the electoral
machinery, and succeeded in postponing them until July. Nonetheless,
Chávez won again – with 59 percent and a clear congressional
majority.
He now moved to pass the laws which would allow him to set in
motion his planned changes to the economy and the political system –
legislation which was finally passed in November 2001. This was the
Rubicon that the bourgeoisie could not allow the new government to
cross – and it began to put into effect its plan to undermine the
Bolivarian project.
 
Echoes beyond the frontier
As events unfolded in Venezuela they resonated well beyond the
national frontiers. The strategies of global capital within Latin
America were producing resistance on many fronts. In 2000 the little
known but hugely significant resistance of indigenous organisations
and trade unions overthrew the deeply unpopular government of Mahuad
in Ecuador when he attempted to impose the neo-liberal agenda by
dollarising the national economy. The Zapatista resistance in Mexico
had emerged in 1994, coinciding with the creation of the North
American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) and signalling the emergence of a
continent-wide resistance to neo-liberalism which would find
expression in the World Social Forums in Porto Alegre, Brazil. In
Brazil the aggressive neo-liberal strategies of Fernando Henrique
Cardoso were countered by a combative Landless Workers Movement
(MST), and the PT (Workers Party) of Lula, while not yet occupying
the presidency, had created a network of local and regional
structures which attempted to oppose or at least to moderate the
impact of those strategies. The so called Argentinazo uprising in
December 2001 [18] came just a month after the passing of Chávez’s
enabling laws. Mass struggles were beginning to occupy the political
terrain – and no electoral alternative that sought mass support
could afford to ignore the depredations that global capital was
inflicting on the mass of workers. Venezuela was not, as Harnecker
would have it, ‘sui generis’. Its experience was typical
of a Latin America facing the impact of globalisation everywhere.
The Venezuelan bourgeoisie’s response to the November laws was
predictable from the point of view of its own class interests. There
were two particular elements which provoked its fury and struck at
the very heart of its class interests. The first was a new oil law
which set limits on the involvement of foreign companies and doubled
the royalties to be paid to the state; the increased oil income since
1999 had gone to raise spending on education (from 3.3 percent to 5.2
percent of GDP) and health (from 1.1 percent to 1.4 percent). The
second spark was Chávez’s Ley de Tierras, which limited the
size of landholdings and permitted the redistribution of certain
lands, particularly underused areas, to landless peasants. Bearing in
mind that around 13 percent of Venezuela’s people live in rural
areas and that agriculture’s share of GDP stood in 1999 at around 6
percent, the purpose of this reform was fundamentally to raise
agricultural production and productivity.
Whatever the limitations of these reforms, the Venezuelan ruling
class responded with its first general strike against the government.
The strike was led by the management of PDVSA, the employers’
federation Fedecámaras and – confusingly – the Venezuelan
Workers Congress (CTV). The employers, especially in their
communications with the outside world, consciously exploited this
paradox. The reality, of course, is that CTV was a notoriously
corrupt organisation whose leadership was integrated into the system
of graft and cronyism that characterised the old regime. Its reason
for resisting the land redistribution, for example, was that ‘it
would impinge on employers ability to do business’. [19]
The one-day strike of the opposition, in December, was a
muscle-flexing exercise, but it pointed to the shape of things to
come. Chávez responded on 17 December with a call for the formation
of the Círculos Bolivarianos, the Bolivarian Circles – some
one and a half million people signed up for them in the months that
followed. The right wing opposition, now embarking on a permanent
campaign of threats and mobilisations, argued that the circles were
preparing for armed insurrection. Chávez, by contrast, saw them as
community organisations and instruments of consciousness. Put
differently, they were organs whose primary purpose was to mobilise
support for his government. What was very clear, however, was that
they would remain tightly controlled from above in a regime that
remained highly centralised in Chávez himself. There was no question
that they might represent the development of a power from below
preparing to take on the ruling class offensive directly.
In January 2002 a massive right wing demonstration confronted
Chavista counter-demonstrations and tensions rose. In February a
senior military officer called on Chávez to resign, a timely
reminder that the army was as divided along class lines as was the
society as a whole. In March the CTV union federation signed an
agreement with the employers’ organisation, a clear response to
Chávez’s decision to remove a number of PDVSA executives. MAS and
a number of deputies belonging to Chávez’s MVR party went over to
the opposition. The mass media, meanwhile, were deliberately and
daily raising the level of tension. The cacerolazos, banging empty
pots as an act of protest, rang out almost daily in the middle class
districts. Chávez responded by new appeals to the population to look
out for speculation and to lengthy TV celebrations of his defence of
the right of free speech – which had benefited the bourgeoisie
above all.
The opposition launched a general strike on 9 and 10 April.
 
The coup that failed – a victory for the masses
The bourgeoisie had drawn up its battle lines. The question was,
how would the Venezuelan working class, the poor and the peasantry
organise their mass response to this assault by the ruling class?
What organs of struggle and direct action would emerge in the course
of struggle?
The masses were clearly on the alert – but there was no
alternative political impulse to drive or shape their response to
events other than the instructions coming from the Miraflores
presidential palace. And its incumbent saw himself, and the small
circle of trusted military men around him as the actors in the
situation with the masses in the role of support. On 11 April the
strike was declared indefinite. The calls came for Chávez’s
resignation, and were backed by a number of senior military men. Some
200,000 marched on the presidential palace but were met at the Puente
Llaguna bridge over the road by a pro-Chávez demonstration. The
shots that rang out at 2.30 that afternoon echoed around the world,
as the opposition accused Chávez supporters of opening fire.
Subsequent film footage leaves little doubt that opposition snipers
were responsible – equally it shows that the city police under the
control of Caracas’s mayor, a public opponent of Chávez, stood
back. In the palace, Chávez waited – until it became clear that
the army was split. When opposition members entered the palace and
demanded his resignation he agreed to leave under arrest – though
he insisted that he never resigned. [20]
Chávez was taken to the island military base of La Orchila and
detained there, accused of responsibility for the deaths of civilians
on the Caracas demonstration. In the National Palace the opposition
leaders celebrated the easy removal of Chávez with champagne. Pedro
Carmona, head of the business organisation Fedecámaras, took out the
presidential sash that he had had made for himself some weeks
previously. Carlos Ortega, head of the Venezuelan Trade Union
Federation (CTV), was there together with several of the oil company
executives. Cisneros, the owner of Venevisión, was certainly
celebrating the victory of his sustained campaign of vilification.
The European Union and Washington rushed to celebrate the restoration
of the previous order! Carlos Andrés Pérez, the eminence grise
of the old Venezuela, must have looked on with satisfaction from his
home in Miami – he had met Carmona just a couple of weeks earlier,
no doubt to organise his own triumphant return.
But how quickly a tide can turn!
The Irish television team accidentally holed up in the Miraflores
palace pointed their lenses through the windows onto the avenue
outside. Like the excessively cheerful new occupants of the palace,
the journalists registered a curious phenomenon. The city centre was
slowly filling up with people. But these were not the usual users of
these streets. The baseball caps and T-shirts, but above all the
faces of these people, were revealing. These were the residents of
the poor districts, of the precarious shanties at the city’s edge.
Slowly, with no apparent urgency, they were occupying the avenues
around the palace. Inside the elation was turning into a mounting concern.
The presidential guard remained loyal to Chávez and refused to
acknowledge the new occupants of the presidential palace. As the
crowd swelled, grew more and more vocal, and refused to move, Chávez
was preparing his return. Military officers who supported him
arranged for the helicopter to bring him back. He had been out of
Caracas for a little under 48 hours.
The Irish television documentary shows this moment of return. What
had happened in those days was extraordinary. The sheer weight and
determination of the mass movement had tipped the political balance
against the bourgeois plotters – who had fled. More than that, the
initiative had passed, for those two days at least, from Chávez to
the mass movement in the street. There was a new power in Venezuela
now – the very mass democracy that Chávez had seen in embryo in
the Caracazo, that he had promised to rebuild and develop in his 1996
interview and in countless speeches since. That power was no longer
an abstraction, but a material reality. The collective protagonist of
revolution was waiting in Caracas’s grand avenues.
Hugo Chávez thanked them – and asked them to return to their
homes. Of course they were probably weary and quite ready to take a
rest; but that is not the point. What Chávez did at that moment was
demobilise his supporters and take back into his own hands the
leadership of the movement. In the days that followed an
investigation into the involvement of the military in the coup began
– yet the courts absolved all those who were involved. Despite the
active leadership given by the private mass media in the events of 11
and 12 April, there was no attempt to control or contain their
activities. On the contrary, they become more vocal and more active
in opposing Chávez in the months after the coup. Those responsible
for the murders at Puente Llaguno were not brought to justice – and
while Carmona fled the country, others implicated in the events were
left virtually untouched. Worst of all, the executives of the PDVSA
were restored to their posts.
The events identified the opposition and showed how far they were
willing to go:
The coup was defeated but Chávez chose not to move
against all but the most visible leaders of the conspiracy. The
absence of sanctions against the opposition was interpreted as a sign
of government weakness. The Venezuelan Supreme Court subsequently
overruled a magistrate’s order to try four senior army officers
implicated in the coup, ruling that the events of 11-A did not
constitute a coup d’etat but a ‘power vacuum’. Chávez
disagreed with the ruling but made no attempt to interfere with the
verdict. [21]
By August the opposition was regrouping, its confidence restored
by Chávez’s obvious decision not to press home his advantage.
Demonstrations that months were accompanied by cocksure declarations
from coup leaders that Chávez would soon fall.
It is hard not to be reminded of another, earlier sequence of
events with so many parallels with the current situation in
Venezuela. In Chile in 1973 the bourgeoisie was quite openly
discussing the ways it might find to overthrow the government of
Salvador Allende, elected president of the Popular Unity coalition.
The debate then was between crippling the economy and assaulting
power directly. In Venezuela exactly the same debate was taking
place. In October dissident military officers set up a ‘rebel camp’
in one of the wealthiest parts of central Caracas – so called civil
organisations were advocating a refusal to pay income tax. Chile’s
lessons for the future were painfully clear – and would become
painfully relevant as the Venezuelan situation evolved. Faced with a
challenge to its hegemonic power, faced with the prospect of working
masses seizing the initiative, as they had done in April, the ruling
class would mobilise all its power to defeat such a fundamental
challenge. Naturally, it would accept the gifts of democratic
observance which Chávez offered – the defence of its right to
‘free speech’, the acceptance of the independence of courts
dominated by figures sympathetic to it, the processing of change
through parliamentary legislation. But equally it would be willing,
like every ruling class under threat, to go beyond the institutional
arrangements in defence of its class interests.
Chávez had had a choice in April – to seek to compromise with
the coup-makers, or to radicalise the process by placing power
increasingly in the hands of the popular organisations. He chose the
first. But this only encouraged the right. The media spoke daily of
imminent chaos. Washington fuelled the rumours of disaster. Foreign
capital fled the Venezuelan economy. Yet land was being distributed
and legislation to enable shanty dwellers to earn title to their
plots was being implemented. Attendance at secondary schools in
particular expanded as a new generation of young teachers were joined
by Cuban teachers. Medical services in the poor areas were also
dramatically approved by the arrival of Cuban doctors.
While these measures maintained Chávez’s social base, they
served to fuel the hysteria of the middle classes – what better to
feed ruling class paranoia than Chávez’s evident friendship with
Fidel Castro, for example. Yet Chávez still did not acknowledge the
option of deepening and accelerating the process of social change by
a devolution of power from the presidential palace to the mass
organisations at the base.
As the time for the implementation of the new legislation on oil
(January 2003) approached, the opposition sharpened its economic
weapons and prepared its second frontal assault on the Chávez
government. In December 2002 it launched another general strike.
McGaughan describes its day to day progress. [22] Oil production
ground rapidly to a halt, businesses closed their doors, schools
locked their doors, and the cooking gas so essential to the poor
districts began to run out. The mass media, under the direction of
Cisneros and the other three horsemen of the apocalypse, suspended
normal programming and instead broadcast virtually continuous ‘news
bulletins’ describing the success of the strike and painting a
picture of chaos and violence. It was cynical and deliberate in the
extreme. The oppositional officers in the armed forces were more
cautious this time than they had been in April – the dissident
encampment was maintained but most of its sympathisers kept their counsel.
By February the strike was over – defeated above all by the
mobilisation of the people who kept supplies going, particularly of
gas, and countered the propaganda of the rich with their own Radio
Bemba, the powerful weapon of street communication. Yet there was
no doubt of the tremendous damage the strike had done – Wilpert
estimates the cost at $6 billion. [23] Yet the Venezuelan bourgeoisie
had once again been defeated by the action of the masses. The
parallels with Chile are potent. In October 1972 and August 1973 the
bosses’ strikes in that country were defeated by the mass
mobilisations of the working class, who kept the transport running,
the factories producing and the food circulating. [24] The aftermath
of that experience, of course, was the terrible repression that
followed the overthrow and murder of Allende and the ascent to power
of Augusto Pinochet. [25]
I am not suggesting any obvious or direct parallels, but the
echoes are unmistakable. In the wake of the defeated bosses’
strikes in Chile, the bourgeoisie began to speak openly of
overthrowing Allende. On the left, meanwhile, the debate turned on
the question of what was meant by ‘poder popular’ –
popular power. Could Allende maintain the middle ground he coveted
and act to balance the interests of the opposing classes? Could
socialism, the transfer of power from one class to another, actually
be achieved within the framework of a bourgeois democracy, even if
the left were in government? We now know the answers to those
questions about Chile.
 
Having survived a second time
Other important events had taken place in Latin America while the
Venezuelan bourgeoisie was attempting to bring Chávez down. In
December 2002 Lula had finally been elected to the presidency of
Brazil. And in Ecuador, Lucio Gutiérrez, closely associated with the
mass risings against the government in the previous two years, was
also elected to the presidency with a promise to oppose neo-liberal
economic strategies. In early 2003 the talk at the Porto Alegre World
Social Forum was an optimistic appraisal of the new anti-imperialist
bloc represented by these three newly elected presidents. Chávez
spoke to the state parliament in Porto Alegre and was rapturously received.
Many on the left felt at that juncture that the revival of a
project for national self-determination and economic independence was
now firmly on the historical agenda. It involved the goal of national
development and modernisation within a framework of a ‘controlled
capitalism’ – as if the nation-state had suddenly discovered a
new and unexpected capacity to defy the dictates of global capital.
Chávez encouraged such ideas when he praised Lula’s example at the
inauguration of Kirchner as the president of Argentina in the spring
of 2003. At this stage of the struggle such an approach was an
alternative to the elaboration of coordinated international
strategies of mass resistance.
The euphoria was short-lived. Lula’s pre-election pledges to the
IMF, and the political compromises enshrined in key appointments in
his government were the signal that should have given warning. Within
weeks Lula was giving assurances to the global financial institutions
while simultaneously refusing to allow long-delayed wage rises to
civil servants and the protection of their pensions. The
disillusionment was rapid and profound. [26] The same was true of
Gutiérrez, who yielded even more rapidly to the pressures of the IMF.
The Venezuelan opposition did not move to armed opposition –
though there were, and remain, all sorts of vague threats in the air.
Instead it moved to collect signatures for a recall referendum, as
allowed by the constitution of 2000. In a sense it was a defeat for
the right. Yet it also represented a pressure to move back from the
terrain of class confrontation into an institutional setting where
its international allies could also be mobilised against Chávez. In
the event, many of the signatures proved fraudulent and it would take
another year before the requisite numbers of legitimate names were gathered.
In the interim the economy began to recover as oil production
began again and a number of the social programmes long promised by
Chávez began to be implemented – the distribution of land, the
regularisation of urban settlement, the education plan and the
establishment of a health system for the excluded and the marginal.
Oil revenues are now used for social programmes, much to the disgust
of the old bourgeoisie. Organisationally the implementation of many
of these programmes has been carried out through the Bolivarian
Circles, or their equivalent, in the communities. At first sight,
these may be seen as the expression of that vision of popular power
Chávez himself articulated two years before his election to the
presidency. And yet they served not to decentralise power but to
concentrate it ever more firmly in Chávez and his immediate circle:
There is no doubt that the urban land titles, agrarian
reform, literacy programme, state-run basic food distribution
networks, Saraos, urban gardens and other projects all contribute
towards empowering the dispossessed majority. But the vast majority
of Venezuelan citizens remain bystanders to the political process,
waiting for results to be delivered ... [27]
It may be argued, of course, that change and development are being
delivered, and that increased oil revenues will only accelerate the
process. The problem, of course, is that none of this takes place in
a vacuum. The Venezuelan bourgeoisie has demonstrated amply its
hostility to redistribution or to state control of the economy, let
alone any move towards a genuine democracy from below. History
provides compelling evidence of the readiness of even the most
ostensibly democratic ruling classes to employ any means to safeguard
their power.
There is a profound difference between community organisations
whose purpose is the implementation of policy from above, and those
which both decide and enact decisions rising from below. That
alternative form of organisation will be based on the collective
power of the working class exercised and discovered in the course of
the struggle. While the language of Chávez and those around him has
placed notions of ‘the people’ at its heart, what has evolved in
the last four years in Venezuela is not a battle between the nation
and those outside it, nor yet between just and unjust or democrats
and others. In 2002, whether in April or December, it was clear to
everyone involved that this was class struggle. Democracy and justice
were important issues, of course, but they were driving forces within
the camp of the working class – and mere options for the bourgeoisie.
When the organisations that lead the struggle identify their own
purposes in class terms, then revolution – the transfer of power
from one class to another – is on the historical agenda. And within
the ‘Bolivarian’ process, such a second process of struggle and
change has intensified as events have accumulated the challenges
facing workers in Venezuela. It is not a debate between abstract
arguments, of course, but a battle to build that capacity among
workers to act independently which is the revolutionary impulse. In
the concrete, it has been a question of how workers organise
themselves, and how those organisations connect with the organs of
mass struggle which had developed and expanded so quickly in the face
of the initiatives of the Venezuelan bourgeoisie.
If the visible manifestation of the popular defence of Chávez was
the crowds that gathered around Miraflores Palace, the activity of
some workers in oil and manufacturing, in transport and the public
sector was crucial. This was even more the case in the December
2002–February 2003 lockout. Yet no organisation was available to
co-ordinate and connect their struggles, given the alliance of the
discredited CTV with the bourgeoisie. While the Bolivarian Circles
and popular organisations developed on the ground (Harnecker claims a
combined membership of 1.3 million by September 2003), they were
still organs of government, administered and co-ordinated from above.
In this respect the referendum yields up a paradox. While many on
the left warned that the referendum was a stratagem to reimpose the
limits of bourgeois democracy, the consequence of the vote has been
unexpected and surprising. It is not simply a question of the
numerical success, the achievement of a majority – it was the
manner of its achievement. The opposition had the mass media at its
disposal as well as the vigorous support of the US and dark warnings
of a possible direct intervention from Colombia. Yet the mass
movement developed organs of local activity and mobilisation in all
the parts that the bourgeois-owned mass media did not reach. The
referendum was not won by Chávez’s lengthy speeches, despite a
tendency of many on the left to hero-worship and attribute every
advance to the superhuman qualities and political leadership of Hugo Chávez.
The true history of Venezuela’s last six years tells a very
different story. Hugo Chávez’s government owes its existence,
indeed its very survival, to the repeated and determined action of
the mass of the Venezuelan lower classes. Time and again they have
shown their potential to provide an alternative power to that of the
bourgeoisie. Yet this has not produced new forms of organisation
based on democracy from below. Each initiative from below has been
expressed as a new impulse or expression of the Bolivarian
revolution. And it is true that most of those forms of resistance and
struggle have identified themselves with the ideology of Bolivarismo.
Yet it is also true – and critical – that Chávez’s explanation
of that ideology lends itself to different interpretations and
contains different and sometimes contradictory positions. So it is
that the ideology has been very differently interpreted in the
debates that have developed within the mass movement in the last two years.
The UNT (Unión Nacional de Trabajadores), for example, was
formally founded in August 2003 at a congress which claimed to
represent over half a million Venezuelan workers and their
organisations. It was seen as a new national formation in opposition
to the long-established CTV (Congreso de Trabajadores Venezolanos)
whose leadership had played such an overtly counter-revolutionary
role. UNT was clearly closely aligned to Chávez and some leading
elements intended it to function as an instrument of working class
mobilisation from above. It is becoming increasingly clear, however,
that within UNT and around it are a series of groups and currents
which are critical of excessively close links to government. The
unease with UNT’s lack of independence was expressed, for example,
in an interview given to Marta Harnecker by Ramón Machuca, leader of
the Sutiss union [28] in early 2003. Machuca, who had led an important
big strike against the privatised steel company SIDOR in 2001 in the
face of opposition from some Chavistas, expressed his concern that
many of the UNT leaders were in fact bureaucrats or political
appointees who would not maintain an independent class position
before government.
This concern has been manifested again and again and with
increasing intensity as the class struggle itself has deepened. Many
of the most combative communities, for example – like Antímano and
El Valle – insisted that the local leaderships should be directly
elected from below, and rejected nominations from the centre. Whereas
the Bolivarian movement represents a coalition of political
organisations supporting Chávez, many of them lack credence with the
masses and are seen as opportunistic Chavistas who are merely taking
advantage of a new political arrangement to advance their personal
ambitions. In the state of Vargas, it was reported, Bolivarian
organisations set up their own ‘Maisanta Comando’ (the
name given to the national mobilisation around the referendum)
rejecting the imposition of the official organisation whose leader
was a very recent convert to Chávez. And there were many more
similar examples.
In 2005 there will be regional and local elections for governors
and mayors. The lists of candidates for these elections have already
been issued from the centre. Yet a declaration issued by a new
co-ordinator of mass organisations echoes a frequently heard demand
for new lists of candidates elected from below – and for a
postponement of the elections to allow this to happen:
While it is true that the actions of central government,
and of some local and regional governments, has brought qualitative
advances in the living standards of the people ... it is also true
that the failure to give the people access to forms of participation
in government in a systematic way and in the spirit of the
constitution has allowed practices and modes of work from the past to
persist and continue ... [29]
The call for the creation of ‘poder popular’ or
people’s power – a direct echo of the Chilean process between
1972 and 1973 – is a clear demand to deepen and extend the process.
Indeed the declaration calls for a Congress of People’s Power to be
organised for April 2005. he discussion echoes in its turn a series
of articles and interventions by the ex minister of planning Ronaldo
Denis, who left government in 2001, which are critical of the
compromises and ambiguities in Chávez’s positions.
There is of course a general agreement that the referendum victory
will not mark an end to class struggle in Venezuela. While the
bourgeoisie may pause to regroup and the United States establish a
cautious pragmatic relationship with Chávez for the moment, the
class struggle will continue and intensify in the near future. And
while the call for Venezuela to be left alone may be a legitimate
slogan for an international anti-imperialist movement, it makes no
contribution to the development and growth of the left in Venezuela
itself. Chávez himself will continue to seek spaces for negotiation
with sections of the Venezuelan bourgeoisie and a renegotiated
position in the wider international market. Rising oil revenues have
provided and will continue to provide resources to finance welfare
provision and the growth of infrastructure as well as some
diversification of production. But a recently announced agreement
with Texaco and ExxonMobil to develop oil and gas production in the
Orinoco is on terms highly favourable to the corporations.
The Chávez government has been successfully defended against
attempts to undermine it. But 50 percent of Venezuela’s population
continue to live in poverty and 20 percent and more are still without
work. Transferring control over oil production from the PDVSA to a
new government ministry is certainly an attack on the old ‘state
within a state’ – but it is still a significant step away from
‘workers’ control’ of this key industry. The media, the banks
and many key areas of service industries (telephones, for example)
remain in the hands of the traditional bourgeoisie. There is still a
considerable distance to go before we can speak of a transfer of
power into the hands of the working class – which alone gives
meaning to the concept of revolution. Yet fundamental to a definition
of a revolutionary process is that is marked by a growing control
from below, by a cumulative act of self-emancipation by the working classes.
The critical question now – and it is not a theoretical issue –
is how the different struggles are co-ordinated and linked to the
working class and its organisations. It is a living debate.
Chávez has shown many times that he is bound to a concept of
reconciliation between the warring classes. Hence his decision after
both attempts to overthrow him in 2002 to open the door to
negotiation and ‘social peace’. Equally, he made speeches in
rapid succession in the wake of the referendum ranging from a call to
arm the proletariat to a clear overture to the United States,
promising to maintain the flow of Venezuelan oil to its most
important customer (the US itself). Chávez has argued throughout the
last four years, furthermore, for a Latin American economic area
embracing Brazil, Ecuador and others in a revamped Mercosur. The neat
switch from ALCA (the Spanish acronym for the free Trade Area of the
Americas) to ALBA (the Bolivarian Free Trade Area) suggests a new
dawn (alba) for Latin America through an alliance of nation-states.
But even under new conditions, these states – separately or
together – would find themselves under an obligation to accept the
conditions of trade in the world market, and inescapably those rules
would bring them into confrontation with their own workers.
If the ‘new dawn’ is to begin a process of revolutionary
change, it is the working class – acting independently in its own
interest, and leading the collective struggles of the poor, the
oppressed and the exploited – who will carry it forward beyond the
moment of compromise and reconciliation. Chile 1972–1973 yields up
a dramatic example of how that authentic power from below can look –
the cordones industriales which brought together delegates
from workers in different factories. And if we need examples of other
possible outcomes, then the ultimate failure of Portugal’s 1974
revolution may have much to tell us about a political process that
relies on a progressive wing of the military acting on behalf of but
outside the control of the mass movement.
The referendum victory was won from below. Its consolidation –
and its transformation into a new kind of society – will depend
once again on the capacity of the working class to use it as a
milestone on the way to a real transfer of power. For that to happen
demands new forms of organisation, democratic, grass roots and
genuinely powerful:
Within the social movements and the political vanguard
there is developing a rebellion against bureaucracy which can longer
be held back. It is the vital masses of Bolivarism without whom the
jargon of the bureaucrats who have claimed to represent them would
fall to pieces in minutes. That rebellion during the referendum
period allowed the ‘Battle of Santa Inés’ to be waged on two
fronts at once – against the class enemy and against the hierarchy.
The referendum has turned into a great opportunity not only to
unleash new forms of organisation but also to draw them together into
a body of proposals that develop along a single line from resistance
to electoral fraud to the creation of new political and institutional
spaces. [30]
It is those new spaces alone that give meaning to the word
‘revolution’. Tariq Ali, writing after the referendum [31], sees
the Bolivarian revolution as no more than an opportunity to develop
social democracy in Venezuela. But this is the era of a new
imperialism marching hand in hand with a global capital that
acknowledges no national frontiers and admits no exception to the
merciless operation of the market. The nation-state may seek to
renegotiate its relationship with that global system through joint
initiatives like Mercosur. But it is only the action of the workers,
the very people who have sustained Hugo Chávez’s revolution thus
far, that can challenge the system itself.

Appendix: Some views from the left:
What Chávez is attempting is nothing more or less
than the creation of a radical social-democracy in Venezuela that
seeks to empower the lowest strata of society. In these times of
deregulation, privatisation and the Anglo-Saxon model of wealth
subsuming politics, Chávez’s aims are regarded as revolutionary,
even though the measures proposed are no different to those of the
post-war Attlee government in Britain.
Tariq Ali, Counterpunch, 16 August 2004
I don’t believe in the dogmatic postulates of
Marxist revolution. I don’t accept that we are living in a period
of proletarian revolutions. All that must be revised. Reality is
telling us that every day. Are we aiming in Venezuela today for the
abolition of private property or a classless society? I don’t think
so. But if I’m told that because of that reality you can’t do
anything to help the poor, the people who have made this country rich
through their labour – and never forget that some of it was slave
labour, then I say, ‘We part company’. I will never accept that
there can be no redistribution of wealth in society. Our upper
classes don’t even like paying taxes. That’s one reason they hate
me. It’s better to die in battle, rather than hold aloft a very
revolutionary and very pure banner, and do nothing ...
Hugo Chávez in an interview with Tariq Ali
The people are patient, but they are actively
waiting. They are calm but aware, conscious of the need to
consolidate the defeat of the right wing and those dedicated to the
overthrow of Chávez.. At the same time people are conscious of the
need for change in the regime itself – taking on the bureaucratic
sectors linked to the Bolivarian revolution who are more interested
in defending their own privileges than in advancing the interests of
the people. That struggle requires increasing democracy in the
country, building the influence of the mass organisations, and
increasing the people’s control over the country’s oil wealth.
All this points to a key demand, which the government has never
seriously addressed – the expropriation of the big capitalist
groups. On the hills above the capital, Caracas, we could hear
activists posing this question: “Is this the moment for the
revolution within the revolution?
Luciana Genro and Roberto Robaina, of the new
P-sol party in Brazil
The defeat of the referendum was a major tactical
defeat of US imperialism and its local vassals. But a defeat of
imperialism does not necessarily mean or lead to a revolutionary
transformation, as post-Chávez post-election appeals to Washington
and big business demonstrate. The euphoria of the left prevents them
from observing the pendulum shifts in Chávez discourse and the
heterodox social welfare neo-liberal economic politics he has
consistently practiced ... He is closer to Franklin Roosevelt’s New
Deal than Castro’s socialist revolution.
James Petras, Counterpunch, 2 September 2004

Notes
1. Luciana Genro and Roberto Robaina reporting in Socialist
Worker, 30 August 2004.
2. G. Wilpert, The Economics, Culture and Politics of Oil in
Venezuela, on Venezuelaanalysis.com dated 30 August 2003.
3. A regime satirised in the Spanish novelist Ramon del
Valle-Inclan’s famous novel Tirano Banderas (1926).
4. M. Niedergan, The Twenty Latin Americas: 2
(Harmondsworth, 1971), p. 207.
5. M. McCaughan, The Battle of Venezuela (London 2004), p. 24.
6. Quoted by G. Wilpert, The Economics, Culture and Politics of
Oil ..., as above, p. 5. See also T. Lynn Karl, The
Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro States (Berkeley 1997).
7. G. Wilpert, Collision in Venezuela, in New Left Review 21 (May/June 2003), p. 106.
8. As above, p. 105.
9. See M. López-Maya, Venezuela After the Caracazo: Forms of
Protest in a Deinstitutionalised Context, in Bulletin of Latin
American Research, vol. 21, no. 2 (April 2002), pp. 199–218.
10. The definitive history of Chávez and his movement thus far is
Richard Gott’s In the Shadow of the Liberator: Hugo Chávez and
the Transformation of Venezuela (London 2000).
11. Quoted in J. Raimondo, The New Bolivar, 5
January 2001, on www.antiwar.com.
12. M. McCaughan, as above, p. 35.
13. As above, p. 44.
14. Bolívar, after all, was the man whose Jamaica
Letter of 1816 despaired of democratic change and elaborated
a concept of ‘enlightened despotism’!
15. See NACLA Report on the Americas (2003).
16. M. Harnecker, Venezuela:
A Sui Generis Revolution, 16 September
2003 on www.venezuelaanalaysis.com. Harnecker, a Chilean based in
Cuba, offers in this lengthy article a very impassioned apologia for
Chávez and the Bolivarian revolution. As the article’s title
suggests, the defence is based on the legitimation of Chávez’s
distance from the traditions of socialist politics.
17. M. McCaughan, as above, p. 53.
18. See C. Harman, Argentina in Revolt, International Socialism 2 : 94 (Spring 2002).
19. G. Wilpert in New Left Review, as above, p. 110.
Much of the information in the preceding paragraphs is provided by Wilpert.
20. The events of these extraordinary days are captured in a
marvellous documentary, The Revolution Will Not Be Televised,
made by two reporters from RTE, the Irish Broadcasting Service, who
found themselves by chance trapped inside the Miraflores palace
throughout these events.
21. M. McCaughan, as above, p. 115.
22. As above, pp. 123–127.
23. G. Wilpert in New Left Review, as above, p. 103.
24. See P. O’Brien, J. Roddick and I. Roxborough, Chile: The
State and Revolution (London 1975); also M. Gonzalez, Chile,
in C. Barker et al., Revolutionary Rehearsals (London 1989).
25. Edgardo Lander’s Comentarios Informales Sobre la
Situación Política Venezolana, dated Caracas, 3 January 2003,
are an early and thoughtful approach to these issues.
26. This is not the place to develop these points. But the speed
of compromise led to protests by four key PT parliamentary deputies,
led by Luciana Genro, and their subsequent expulsion from PT. See M.
Gonzalez, Brazil
in the Eye of the Storm, International Socialism 2 : 98
(Spring 2003), pp. 57–77.
27. M. McCaughan, as above, p. 154.
28. Correo de Prensa de la IV Internacional, Boletín
Electrónico, no. 761, 12 June 2003. The interview also
appeared on the website ‘aporrea’. For an interesting
account of the arguments over the new union and their outcome, see S.
Ellner, Polarisation and Class Identification in Venezuela during
the Chávez Years, www.sas.ac.uk.
29. See Declaración de Organizaciones Populares en “Conexión Social” Sobre Candidatures y Poder Popular, 3 September 2004,
published on aporrea.com.
30. Roland Denis, of the 13th of April Movement, writing on 16
July 2004.
31. T. Ali, Why He Crushed the Oligarchs: The Importance of Hugo Chávez, in
Counterpunch, 16 August 2004.
 






Mike Gonzalez has written on Venezuela in this journal
and elsewhere. Following his recent visit he answered questions
from International Socialism about the latest developments




We hear a lot about a “mass movement” in Venezuela. What
were your impressions of the movement?
I think the suggestion that there is a mass movement from below
that is pushing President Chavez to the left is both premature and
simplistic. At the moment there are a series of expressions of
developing discontent and mobilisation at the grassroots, for
instance through the trade unions. The UNT union federation has grown
steadily in membership and there is quite a lot going on, especially
around the occupation of some factories. There is quite a lot of
basic activity, but in the context of Venezuela this is always going
to be to some extent political.
The critical thing is to assess what is going on in what we can
call the “social movements”. Here one has to be careful. There is
a tendency to see the trade unions as completely separate from “the
poor” who live in the barrios. The barrios are in the centre of the
cities, as well as around the edges. People go to work from the
barrios – they work in offices, in hospitals, on the buses and in
factories. Many trade unionists are also active in local grassroots organisations.
The main organisations now are the Consejos Comunales (Communal
Councils). Because these are geographical bodies, rather than being
based in a workplace, they vary dramatically from one area to
another. In some places they are very combative and very political.
They are concerned with local issues – transport, housing, food
prices – but these issues bring them face to face with big politics
because they have to negotiate with state governors or city mayors,
who are part of the state apparatus.
There is considerable discontent all over the place, directed at
the government rather than Chavez. For instance, over the summer
there were a number of small but significant demonstrations over
local transport and food prices, and one in the state of Barinas over
the distribution of land because people felt the big farmers were
getting the lion’s share of the resources. There are a number of
these local, limited agitations over particular issues, combined with
constant debates about what is going on in the government.
When I visited a community education centre I found their general
view was that they were in a period where it was important that local
organisations begin to find ways to combine strategically. At present
there is no overarching organisation that can draw people together.
There are organisations that have this aspiration. C-Cura, the left
current in the UNT, sees itself as a gathering point for a number of
different trade unions. (Unions are separate bodies in each
workplace, rather than branches of a national union.) It has started
producing a newspaper and is very active, though still restricted by
internal disputes within the UNT.
 
Was there much debate about the new party recently proposed by Chavez?
The talk on the ground is to the left. That’s not yet reflected
in any coordination, though everyone is talking about it. The recent
moves to form a united party have, in a sense, rather confused that.
The United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV) was announced by
Chavez last year, then everything went silent. It was announced again
at the start of this year. For me, and for most of the people I spoke
to, it is clear that this was an initiative from the state and the
bureaucracy, not so much of Chavez as of those around Chavez. There
is a picture emerging of a group of people at points of influence in
the state apparatus who are beginning to combine actively and
consciously. The mass movement is avoiding the question of
coordination, but the “Chavista right” – the opportunists, the
people who have jumped on the bandwagon, the elements of the old
order who have moved into the Bolivarian state – are organising,
and organising fast. They are coordinating both inside the national
government and in the lower levels of the government at state and
city level. They include people from the military, bureaucracy and business.
The PSUV initiative originally came from these layers. However,
Chavez then characteristically went on television and told everybody
to join. What was originally intended to be quite a small
organisation controlled from above suddenly became a mass
organisation. In a month the membership went over five million. At
the moment there is no clarity about the nature of this party. There
are no statutes; the conditions of membership are not clear; the
procedures of the party are not clear; it is not even clear what the
base units of the party are.
Two commissions have been appointed, mostly drawn from the upper
echelons of the bureaucracy, and they have been given the task of
shaping the new party, whose founding conference will be in December.
Their first argument was that it should be based on geographical
units, each of which should elect a delegate to the conference. But,
of course, that means there are no workplace units and no student
units. And given where the barrios are located in the cities, a
geographical unit could quite easily embrace a poor district and a
middle class area.
As the numbers going into the party grew, organisations of the
left and the trade unions quickly began discussing what to do.
Initially much of the left argued that the PSUV was an exercise in
manipulation and that they should continue to build a current
outside. As it became clearer that many working class people were
attempting to join, this attitude changed. We are talking about a
party of 5.5 million members compared with an economically active
population of ten to 12 million – a mass organisation by any
standards. Eventually most of those on the left decided to enter the
PSUV to try to build an independent current within it.
 
Do they plan to enter as independent organisations?
At the moment it is not officially possible to organise as a
current or tendency within the PSUV. But they argue that things are
so volatile and fluid that they will effectively organise as a
separate pole. Almost everyone I spoke to said they were going in critically.
The UNT, with its slogan for an independent trade union movement
in support of the revolution, has been specifically denounced in
public by Chavez, who said if you are in the PSUV you don’t need to
be independent. This divided the UNT – the majority went in, but an
important minority led by Orlando Chirino stayed out. The 13 April
organisation of Roland Denis was also divided, with Denis, at the
moment, staying out, but some important sectors joining because the
masses are inside.
It could be that the discussion around the PSUV becomes the
opportunity to pose demands for organisation and unity, for some kind
of common organisation. Since the period of public discussion started
in August clear tensions have emerged, but it remains unclear where
things are going.
 
Have the old pro-Chavez parties all joined?
The Communist Party and Fatherland for All (PPT) have not joined.
Rank and file trade unionists, who are generally inside, say that
they are concerned because the first people who moved in included a
new organisation called the Association of Patriotic Entrepreneurs
and a lot of the old parties of the Fourth Republic, including
Chavez’s old Fifth Republic Movement (MVR), which everyone
acknowledges is full of corrupt officialdom.
 
There are also other tensions, within the state. It’s not
just a battle between the right and the movement.
No, and part of the reason it’s more complex is Chavez himself.
There are sectors of the army around Chavez, which represent, more or
less, the original project. But the process has been going for eight
years and things have moved quite a long way. Chavez sees himself
more as a statesman and more as someone mediating between the
different elements. But the questions are: what is the balance of
forces? What are the strengths and weaknesses?
Chavez functions both in relation to his apparatus and in a
strange relationship of direct communication with the masses. In his
television programmes and speeches, always articulated in the
language of the street, he will suddenly and unexpectedly launch an
initiative. A few weeks ago he said, “I’ve always been interested
in Trotsky, and I think he’s right about permanent revolution,”
or, on another occasion, he said, “Rosa Luxemburg is someone
everybody should read.” This tells you something about his
political background. He was educated by a series of political
groups, including the guerrilla movement around Douglas Bravo, the
grassroots organisations around Roland Denis that lean towards
autonomism and so on. You get remnants of all this in his discourse.
But he is also running a government that has just announced a policy
of mixed enterprises in the development of the oil industry, a
government that is prepared to reject the demands of the iron and
steel workers of Sidor for nationalisation because of Chavez’s
relationship with the Argentinian president, Nestor Kirchner.
Chavez’s relationship with the movement in Bolivia is largely
conditioned by his big project for a continent-wide oil and gas enterprise.
There are lots of ambiguities in Chavez. If you wanted to make a
selection from Chavez’s speeches you could present a man of
impeccable revolutionary credentials. If you chose different speeches
you could present a man pursuing a new developmentalist strategy for
the strengthening of the state and the diversification of the
economy. Chavez’s relationship with the mass movement is one of
direct appeal, and he has tremendous authority, but it is an
authority that has no organic form. When you get into the barrios
there is a multiplicity of organisations, local ones, city-wide ones.
You don’t know what they represent other than the activism of the
grassroots, but that has no organic relationship to Chavez. It
doesn’t yet have a connection with the trade unions, nor is it
always expressed best in the Consejos Comunales.
 
What role do arguments about the “Cuban model” play?
There are a lot of Cubans embedded in different parts of the
government. Their sympathies probably lie with that group of
bureaucrats forging this new instrument. I don’t think the Cubans
have any interest in a resurgent mass movement, partly because it
might encourage one in Cuba and partly because they have a series of
commercial arrangements with Venezuela which are very advantageous. I
can only guess, but it seems to me that the Cubans are arguing for a
strong, centralised state apparatus, controlling and directing the
economy. Chavez is fascinated by Cuba and Castro. I think Cuban
advice has a great deal of weight. But I don’t think this advice
would strengthen the movement from below at all.
Curiously I don’t think the Cubans are that popular either. The
people who go to Venezuela are earning well, especially as they are
paid in dollars, and they go back and form part of the new elite in
Cuba. Although the work they do in the health schemes is very
important, and people in Venezuela admire that work, that’s not
really where Cuban influence lies.
 
What is the situation in the factories? Are people talking
about workers’ control?
There is talk of “cogestion”, which is
characteristically vague – it’s a kind of Yugoslav style
co-management model. Government representatives run the factory,
sometimes in coordination with workers’ representatives. At the
moment there are about 60 factories under some form of workers’
occupation pressing for nationalisation. Where that has occurred it
has taken the form of co-management, which is a long way from
workers’ control.
The Alcasa aluminium plant in Ciudad Guayana has become symbolic.
Here management was given to a man who is a leading figure of the
left, Carlos Lanz, with a view that this should be a model of
workers’ control. I went to see it, and it’s a very exciting
experience, but it’s an experience of a plant trying to move to
workers’ control rather than having achieved it. Each department is
run by a commission of workers and managers, but it only functions
that way when the managers are willing to enter into that process. At
the same time there is an education process in the factory, which has
produced a highly politicised and class conscious workforce. A
conversation with any worker there will easily move from discussions
of life in the factory to the bigger political questions.
I also went to the workers’ centre where a very fine comrade
runs a “workers’ university”, which was described to me as
moving to overcome the gulf between doing and knowing, so that
workers could be directly engaged in shaping production. In some
departments of the factory workers and managers are actively
cooperating on questions of production. In the “university”
people are discussing the big questions. The objective is to move to
a situation in which the factory is run by a workers’ committee,
which will also debate the role of a factory like this. For example,
why can’t a factory that manufactures aluminium also manufacture
bicycles, which are currently imported from China at high cost?
However, it’s still a long way from that, and it’s a unique example.
Now, if you talk to people in the unions, they argue that that’s
what they want to move towards – establishing control over the
labour process, improving union rights, but also raising the issue of
social production.
So Alcasa is an interesting example of what might happen. But just
down the road is the iron and steel plant, Sidor, which is emblematic
in the development of the trade union movement. The Argentinian
owners have imposed a very brutal regime: they’ve sacked large
numbers of workers and are increasingly shifting towards contract
labour, with none of the guarantees and rights afforded to those on
permanent contracts. The demands of the workers are for
nationalisation. At first Chavez said yes, then Kirchner, the
president of Argentina, phoned him up and told him not to do this.
Chavez then said to the company: if you charge us a fair price we
won’t nationalise. That was not what the workers expected.
So you have co-management and aspirations for workers’ control
on the one hand, and you have groups of workers fighting for
nationalisation, whose demands are ignored, on the other. There are
also factories like Sanitarios Maracay, which are politically
important. Here the owners fled after the coup attempt and workers
took over, but they’re not yet nationalised. In fact the government
has just given a major contract to a rival company! The electricity
company was recently nationalised, but we have to be very wary. It
was nationalised, but only in the sense that the government bought
the shares at current market prices.
 
The economic policies seem unclear and confused, but at the
same time there is vast oil wealth, much of which is still passing
into the hands of the wealthy.
I don’t have a sense of an economic strategy. Economic thinking
is focused on how to conduct the oil industry. The oil industry has
about 10 to 15 percent of its profits directed towards social
programmes. These are basic, but they are very good. There are
500,000 people in Mision Sucre, the higher education programme, and
so on. But they are not as far-reaching and well funded as one might
imagine. And there is some disillusionment with the corruption that
has developed within some of the misions. One of the key issues at
the moment is controlling the prices of basic goods. The state-run
supermarkets are facing shortages and prices are rising, so it’s no
longer possible to buy a basket of basic goods for the minimum
wage.
 
Is that due to inflation or people’s expectations rising?
It’s to do with inflation, hoarding and farmers (and not just
big farmers) functioning as private enterprises in a market.
Everything still rests on oil. There is a great deal of talk about
exploitation of the Orinoco Delta, which has perhaps the largest
reserves of heavy oil in the world, plus large reserves of gas and
minerals. But it will be developed by the Venezuelan state in
conjunction with multinational corporations. A lot of reliance is
placed on that. Diversification is not discussed much. Expansion of
agriculture has not taken place at the rate expected.
The money goes on luxury goods. The rich live very well: there’s
no visible decline in the standard of living of the old elite. And
the statistics show there has been little major improvement in the
plight of the poor.
 
From a distance people assume it’s some kind of egalitarian
society, but the concentration of wealth in some areas of Caracas is phenomenal.
Caracas is one of the most dangerous cities I’ve been in –
because crossing the road is so risky, especially since many of the
people mowing you down are in brand new 4×4s. Some of them belong to
a new layer who have prospered under Chavez. Chavez has been trying
to force people to pay their taxes, but it’s well known that this
burden will fall on the poor, and the rich will avoid paying taxes,
as they always do.
 
To what extent are the people who are strongly anti-Chavez, as
opposed to the Chavista right, organised and visible?
Take the case of Gustavo Cisneros, the head of Venevision, one of
the richest media moguls in the world. He has clearly reached some
kind of accommodation with the government, which is to stay out of
the way and not be too directly confrontational, unlike RCTV, which
was closed. The wealthiest people seem to be pragmatic and realistic.
It’s the middle classes who are most enraged.
They say that there’s no freedom of expression, but I’ve never
been to a country with such freedom of expression. While I was there
Globovision’s news broadcast consisted of one hour of
straightforward mobilisation for a protest the next day. There were
people carrying signs saying when and where to meet, women in bikinis
walking round saying, “You’ve got to come to the protest. I’ll
be there.”
There’s a lot of talk about a “soft coup”, a phrase borrowed
directly from Chile. In 1972–3 in Chile the bourgeoisie openly
discussed the choice between a soft coup – systematic
destabilisation through propaganda and hoarding of goods, an economic
assault – and a hard (military) coup. Is this what’s going on?
That’s what they would want to happen. My feeling is that the
danger doesn’t come from there: not because the army is with
Chavez; people who say that are naive. Among those who would defend
the regime to the death are a very small number of members of the
officer class. But to me the main danger is that section of
government that has no interest in furthering the cause of the revolution.
 
But things could change. The active support Chavez has is from
a third of the population, a third are fanatically against him and
another third back him passively. If the price of oil falls on world
markets, the whole balance can shift. Calling George Bush the devil
is a provocation, one we admire, but one the US ruling class won’t
easily forget.
You’re right, and I might be overstating the case. Everything
rests on the high price of oil. Chavez has mass support, but it’s
fragile because it’s not organised. Any future has to rest on
shaping an organisation. That’s what the left has to address.
 
Tell us more about the organisation on the ground, the UNT for instance.
The UNT leads a number of major union organisations on the ground.
Trade unionism in Venezuela used to be conducted by the CTV, a
corrupt, nepotistic body, which ran unions from above. The CTV
supported the two coup attempts against Chavez, and the UNT emerged
out of that as an alternative.
According to one activist, around 1999-2000 the proportion of the
workforce unionised was 8 percent; now it’s about 16 percent with
the growth accounted for by the UNT. But the UNT has not been able to
formalise its structures because its first conference was broken up
in an argument between two factions over whether to hold elections
for leading positions. Now the PSUV is trying hard to block the UNT
in order to develop an alternative more closely linked to the PSUV
and nearer to the state. The UNT has a base in a number of important
industries – in oil, heavy industry, Alcasa, white collar sectors
and textiles.
 
Are there any large, organised Trotskyist forces?
There was the Party of Revolution and Socialism, from which many
of the leaders of C-Cura come, but that has collapsed. It’s all
been thrown into disarray by the PSUV.
 
The left seem caught by the sheer popularity of Chavez, which
makes it hard to organise anything that might be seen as opposing
him. They can lead mass movements as long as they don’t criticise Chavez.
Outside Venezuela there seems to be one attitude – whatever you
say, Chavez is the man, he’s leading the movement. But, as I’ve
explained, there is an ambivalence in Chavez. Chavez can be all
things to all people, and in a situation where the ruling class and
imperialism are attacking Chavez he is seen as a champion of
anti-imperialism. There is no feasible opposition, nor would it be
correct to oppose Chavez. Nonetheless, the ambiguities can disarm the movement.
The best Chavistas are the ones who say that we have to build from
below. Those outside Venezuela who think that the best way to show
solidarity with the revolutionary process is to give uncritical
support to Chavez, and to see him, as one writer recently put it, as
the single, uncontested leader of the world revolution of the 21st
century, are wrong. The position “with Chavez, but beyond Chavez”
seems to be the right one.
What worries me is that the left in that situation faces immense
problems. It can be isolated by the right wing people around Chavez
and smashed. The PSUV, in its original conception, was designed to do
that. I think the left is in a difficult position because it has a
hearing on the ground, but Chavez’s voice drowns out all the others
at the moment. However, people are engaged in all kinds of issues,
which creates an environment in which the ideas of revolutionary
socialism can flourish if the left doesn’t allow itself to be silenced.
 



José Carlos Mariátegui was born into a society in crisis, a Peru
deeply divided between a coastal sector where most of Peru’s
capitalist class was concentrated, an emerging mining industry in the
central valley between Lima and Huancavelica, and a mountain region
which Mariátegui described as “semi-feudal”. Here 40 percent of
the population lived in small, isolated communities, eking a
precarious living on the high Andean slopes. They were forced to give
their labour to the powerful local landowning class which
administered the region without any real influence from Lima, the
capital of a weak state.
A brief period of prosperity in the mid-19th century was based on
the export of the natural fertiliser guano and the extraction of
nitrates, with British capital entirely controlling trade in both
commodities. During the 300 years of colonial rule mining had been
the central source of wealth in the region. With the rise of guano
and nitrates the focus of the economy shifted towards the coast and
foreign trade. Peru’s small, emerging bourgeoisie grew in the
shadow of the foreign capital on which it was wholly dependent. In
the sierra the century saw an expansion of often huge landholdings
(or latifundia) into what had been communal, indigenously owned lands.
The emerging state, therefore, was an expression of the
symbiosis of the interests of these large and medium landowners, for
whom the institutions of the state served the principal function of
legitimising the pillage of the small producers and the definition of
the peasant masses as a source of labour, taxes and cannon fodder.
[1]
The growing costs of public administration were met by borrowing
from European banks, while imports grew to four times the value of
exports. At the same time, foreign capital was also sustaining the
growth of coastal export agriculture, particularly sugar and later
cotton. In the sierra the latifundios’ expansion occurred in order
to cover local demand as well as to provide a steady stream of cheap
and exploited indigenous labour. As the century advanced Peru was
entering into a relationship with the global economy, which only
emphasised and deepened the already enormous gulf between the modern
coast and a mountain world of non-Spanish speaking and racially
oppressed indigenous peoples. Where they fought back, they were
repressed with exemplary brutality. [2]
The so-called Pacific War of 1879–84 was catastrophic for the
Peruvian bourgeoisie. It lost the port of Tacna and most of the
nitrate-producing areas to Chile, and the resulting economic collapse
left it, as Mariátegui put it, “bleeding and mutilated”, and
with no resources with which to resist the effective transfer of the
economy into foreign hands. The contract for the Central Valley
Railway, for example, went to the British based Grace Corporation,
and mining came under the direct control of the Peruvian Corporation
and the Cerro del Paso Corporation. The main banks were British
owned, and foreign interests like the Gildemeisters or Peruvian
capital working in combination with external investors such as the
Larcos assumed control over agriculture. In the cities, and in
particular in Lima and Cuzco, the ancient Inca capital, new
industries were emerging as a result of this new economic activity –
in particular textiles.
Yet the original inhabitants of Peru experienced increasingly
exploitative conditions, which were unmitigated by the developments
taking place on the coast. On the contrary, their exploitation
intensified as the modern sector of the Peruvian economy developed.
It was one of Mariátegui’s important insights that these two
phenomena were interdependent: that modernisation not only could, but
actually needed to, maintain the backwardness of the sierra and the
forms of servile labour that persisted there – like the enganche,
obligatory labour, and yanaconazgo, a form of debt peonage.
There was resistance, of course. Indigenous rebellions and
anarchist led trade unions were two forms of it. There was also a
middle class movement, directed against the old landed aristocracy
and their control and manipulation of the state, which found
political expression in civilismo, founded in the mid-1870s by
Manuel Pardo. This was a movement seeking to create a strong state
committed to modernisation. But by the beginning of the 20th century
it had split into two wings, one compromised with the old elite and
committed to the continuation of economic growth based on foreign
investment, the other more committed to modernisation, an end to
corruption and a strategy of national growth. The individual who came
to represent this more radical wing was Augusto Bernardino Leguía y
Salcedo, though Leguía never questioned the central role of foreign
capital in the process. [3] He was
elected to the presidency for the first time in 1908 and would return
to power again in the momentous year of 1919.
In fact the most trenchant critique of the old order came from the
poet Manuel González Prada. He exposed the moral degeneration of the
old ruling class and set it against a picture of “Indian Peru”,
which was both romantic and idealised. Yet for a new generation his
work turned their attention to the hitherto silent and invisible
native Peruvian peoples – and laid the groundwork for Mariátegui
and his generation. Despite his reputation as a defender of the
indigenous population, however, González Prada clearly saw the decay
of Peruvian society as corrupting both rulers and ruled; though he
laid the responsibility firmly with the powerful, he never saw the
indigenous people as potential subjects of history, capable of
bringing about change through their own actions.
It was into this society that Mariátegui was born, in Moquegua in
1894. Growing up in Lima, Mariátegui found himself drawn to artistic
and cultural forms of dissent. In 1909, at the age of 15, he became a
printer’s apprentice; within five years he was writing regular
columns of social commentary in the newspaper La Prensa under
the pseudonym Juan Croniqueur. He was also associated with the group
of artists around Abraham Valdelomar and the magazine Colónida,
whose influence was far greater than its four issues would suggest.
There is no sign yet that Mariátegui’s radicalism was political.
He did not associate himself, for example, with the anarchist
organisations that led the nascent urban working class movement.
It was essentially an artistic dissidence that drew Mariátegui
towards the Bohemians who “strolled” along Lima’s avenue of
artists, the Jirón de la Unión, just as Baudelaire had strolled
along the streets of Paris – ”flaneurs” without
direction driven by a world weariness that the great French poet had
called “spleen”. Mariátegui’s writings on artistic modernism
found there the scepticism of an avant-garde pressing against
received wisdoms. But while many of his Bohemian colleagues remained
buried in an aesthetic twilight, Mariátegui began to seek out the
links between the artistic and the political vanguard.
By 1916 Peru was changing. In Lima the new factories, most
importantly in textiles, were creating a permanent labour force,
which was forging trade unions under the influence of anarchism. [4]
The first general strike, in support of the workers of the important
Vitarte textile plant, took place in April 1911. Although it failed,
a new law relating to accidents at work was passed in the same year,
the right to strike (though under limited circumstances) conceded in
1913 and the eight-hour day won by the workers of the port of Callao
a year later. Attacks on living standards in 1915 and 1916, as raw
materials were exported rather than finished goods and profits fell,
produced new waves of strikes and demands for a shorter working day.
At the same time new struggles were developing in the countryside.
The expansion of the export sector in agriculture displaced the
peasantry and increased the rapacious search for labour. [5]
The risings that culminated in Puno (the Rumi Maqui revolt) in 1915–6
showed a different aspect of the indigenous communities – as
collective fighters against the brutal mode of production prevailing
in the Andean mountains. And Puno was not the only rising. In the
central Mantaro valley there were repeated confrontations, drawing
Mariátegui and one of his colleagues to the area in 1918.
That year Mariátegui founded a new journal, Nuestra Epoca,
which expressed his movement from the artistic avant-garde towards a
growing political radicalism. The name of the journal, “Our Times”,
referred to more than a spirit of the age; it was a historical moment
of change and struggle. “Nuestra Epoca did not have a
socialist programme, but it must be seen as a move in that direction,
both ideologically and in propaganda terms.” [6]
Significantly, it lasted only two issues; it was banned after
publishing an article by Mariátegui criticising the armed forces.
Early the following year Mariátegui set up La Razón, a
newspaper whose unambiguous purpose was to support people in
struggle. It was the first major watershed in his development as a
Marxist and a working class leader.
The year 1919 was a turning point. The cost of living for workers
had almost doubled since 1913, and the previous two years had seen a
series of strikes in Lima and elsewhere for wage rises and a shorter
working day. The first general union, the Federación Local Obrera de
Lima, was formed in 1918, and the premature creation of an organising
committee for a Socialist Party reflected the generally militant
atmosphere rather than any serious political advance. The year began
with a strike of bakers, which rapidly became general, under the
leadership of anarcho-syndicalists. The government conceded the
eight-hour day, but refused wage rises. The Comité Pro-Abaratamiento
(for a lowering of prices of basic goods) formed in April, bringing
together a wide range of organisations in a series of protests, and
in May new strikes paralysed the city, leading to the arrest of three
union leaders. The declaration of a state of emergency and the arrest
of the movement’s leaders did nothing to lessen the level of
popular protest, which now coalesced around support for the return of
former president Leguía, in the belief that he would challenge the
old ruling class and introduce measures to modernise the Peruvian state.
Leguía took power on 4 July and immediately released the
imprisoned workers’ leaders. The triumphant demonstration that
paraded them through the streets stopped outside the offices of
Mariátegui’s La Razón and invited him to join the head of
the march. The Leguía honeymoon, however, was brief. By August
Leguía was already repressing working class action. La Razón
was suppressed, and Mariátegui and his co-editor, César Falcón,
were “invited to leave the country” with a grant to study abroad.
In October they left for Europe. Later Mariátegui would be accused
of taking the king’s shilling, of surrendering to Leguía. His own
explanation is that his activity was restricted as Leguía assumed
increasingly dictatorial powers, and that the working class movement
was still too weak and disoriented for him to operate successfully
within Peru. Leguía offered him the alternative of exile and
Mariátegui accepted.
The protests that returned Leguía to power were joined by a
growing student movement based mainly in the southern city of Cuzco.
This was a pale reflection of the hugely important university reform
movement that had begun in Córdoba, Argentina, in 1918. While
Mariátegui’s activities were restricted to the workers’ movement
in Lima, his contemporary Victor Raúl Haya de la Torre was emerging
as the leader of the student movement. Haya would come to represent
an alternative political direction in Peru, and indeed throughout
Latin America, enshrined in Apra, the organisation he later founded.
[7] While at this stage Haya claimed to
be a Marxist, and criticised Mariátegui for leaving Peru, it would
become clear that his project for modernisation involved an alliance
with “progressive” sections of both the national and the
international bourgeoisie, led by the middle class. Thus there was no
contradiction for him in working with Leguía in setting up the
Universidades Populares, a programme for the education of
workers, in 1920. Three years later, however, Haya too would be sent
into exile by the increasingly dictatorial Peruvian president. While
today Apra is identified with corrupt regimes pressing for neoliberal
strategies, in the 1920s Haya’s claim that it was a new
revolutionary creed did win him some adherents, though its
philosophy, with its mix of Marxism, indigenism and an intense
personalism around the figure of Haya, in fact made its programme
very difficult to follow. Yet at this early stage Mariátegui
continued to work with Haya’s supporters in common projects, and
continued to do so until Haya, from Mexico, announced the formation
of his Peruvian Nationalist Party, which later became Apra.
 
The road to Europe and back
Mariátegui had left Peru with an established reputation within
the country’s working class movement, an important body of
journalistic work and some knowledge of Marxism. [8]
His trip to Europe clearly had as one purpose the development and
deepening of that understanding. Having spent a little time in
France, he went to Italy where, as he later put it, he “acquired a
wife and some ideas”. [9] He was
present at the founding conference of the Italian Communist Party at
Livorno in 1921 and learned much of his Marxism during this period.
[10] Arriving after the Italian factory
occupations, his articles and essays reflect his immersion in the
debates around the issue of hegemony. More importantly, Mariátegui
saw at first hand how the political weakness of the bourgeoisie and
the vacillations of reformism could permit the emergence of fascism –
and these would be the central themes in his lectures and classes on
the world situation which he gave at the Universidad Populares
after his return to Peru, [11] and in a
subsequent series of articles in various newspapers in 1923–4,
published later under the title Figures and Aspects of
International Life. [12]
A great deal has been written about the various influences on
Mariátegui’s Marxism, and his voracious reading and reviewing of a
wide range of European writers has encouraged that. The key point,
however, is that his contemporary writings show a very clear
recognition of the world-historical significance of the Bolshevik
Revolution of 1917 and a consistent admiration for Lenin; a dedicated
reading of current Marxist debates; and at the same time a consistent
reflection on his own reality from the perspective not so much of
Europe as of the international situation:
Mariátegui’s insistence on the need for an
internationalist perspective is not the negation of nationalism so
much as its supersession ... It is a dialectical negation but not in
the sense that he condemns or disqualifies nationalism as a
historical necessity at a given moment in time. [13]
He returned from Europe in 1923 a “convinced and committed
Marxist” (“Marxista convicto y confeso”) with a
developed critique of the Second International’s version of
Marxism, which waited passively for the development of capitalism
automatically to open the way to socialism. [14]
What this meant for him was demonstrated in the activities that would
absorb the remaining six and half years of his life. First, the
publication of Amauta, a magazine that would provide a
platform for political debate between all the currents of thought
within the socialist movement in Peru and beyond, and second the
working out of the key ideas that would inform his work as a trade
union and party organiser in the late 1920s.
 
Seven Essays
Published in several stages in his magazine Amauta,
Mariátegui’s key work is his Seven Essays. [15]
The central themes of his analysis of Peruvian history and society
are developed in a pathbreaking materialist account that goes beyond
any previous historical work, while setting out the framework of his
activism and the political work that would absorb the last two years
of his life. It is a book drawing on the work of several years, which
confirms that economics must provide the foundation of a Marxist
understanding, but also develops the concerns and questions that
Mariátegui has identified as central to understanding the
specificities of Peruvian history. These will shape his
organisational methods, his exploration of the class struggle and his
definition of the national reality. For some commentators, hostile in
principle to his dialectical method, this definition consigns
Mariátegui to the camp of revolutionary nationalism at best. For
others, he remains locked in a kind of irrationalism which belies his
insistence on locating the development of class consciousness in
particular material circumstances. And for the functionaries of the
late 1920s Comintern pursuing Stalin’s ultra-left “class against
class strategy”, it suggested that Mariátegui was guilty of
heterodoxy and indiscipline. Yet none of these judgments are
justified by his work, either his theoretical writing or his
practical engagement with the organs of class struggle.
The seven essays of the title cover religion, education,
regionalism and (the longest essay) the development of Peruvian
literature. The three key pieces, however, which open the work,
provide a historical narrative that informs and explains his
political strategy. For Mariátegui was always, first and foremost, a
strategist of revolution – and his writings the foundation and
explanation of that strategy. Analysing the Peruvian economy, he
contrasts the colonial economic system with what went before. Under
Spanish imperial rule Peru was a source of mineral wealth, its
population locked in a system of ruthless exploitation within a
structure of authoritarian control centred on the dominant colonial
class. Its religious and secular institutions were informed and
sustained by an ideology of racial superiority (“pura sangre”
– pure blood) which legitimated that exploitation. It was central
to Mariátegui’s vision that this contrasted dramatically with the
pre-colonial, Inca, society structured around the ayllu system
of kinship-based collectives. Critics have been quick to point out
that these communal organisations functioned within a centralised
theocracy that was also highly repressive. Mariátegui acknowledges
as much in an extensive footnote in the essay on The Problem of
the Indian [16] – and he admits
that those traditions have suffered disruptions and transformations
through three centuries of colonial rule.
His argument, however, is that there is a cultural continuity and
an ideological one which has ensured the maintenance of a collective
consciousness in the indigenous communities of Peru. For Mariátegui
that tradition of collective solidarity resonates with socialist
ideas, and it is the task of socialists in that society to build on
that synthesis. The importance of that “natural socialism” as
Mariátegui himself described it, however, is not because of some
romantic nativism, some sense on Mariátegui’s part that socialism
was the result of cultural processes. He insisted over and over again
that ethnic characteristics were inextricably interwoven with class –
and that the indigenous community was defined by its economic
relationships with the ruling class.
When Peru won its independence from Spain that structure was
maintained – and indeed reinforced – as he describes in the
opening essay, The Structure and Evolution of the Economy. The
struggle for independence was led by a nascent bourgeoisie anxious to
break the Spanish trading monopoly rather than challenge economic
dependence on foreign trade altogether. The ruling class that emerged
from the independence wars built the new economy around guano, the
natural fertiliser deposited by seabirds on the coastal islands,
which was exported exclusively to Britain. And the colonial system of
exploitation, particularly in the mountain regions, far from being
challenged by the new dispositions, was reinforced and later
exploited as a source of cheap and pliant labour. This socio-economic
structure is defined in the essays that follow – The Problem of
the Indian and The Problem of the land – as gamonalismo:
[The term gamonalismo] designates a whole
phenomenon. It encompasses a far-reaching hierarchy of officials,
intermediaries, agents, parasites. Even the assimilated Indian is
transformed into an exploiter of his own race when he places himself
in its service. The central factor of the phenomenon is the hegemony
of the large estate in the politics and mechanism of the state. [17]
It is based on forms of servitude and debt peonage, explained by
racist stereotyping – a clear example of the interweaving of race
and class. The critical consequence of this analysis was that the
post-independence economy developed in subordination to external
interests, and maintained the forms and structures of colonial
exploitation. The Peruvian bourgeoisie, in the age of guano, and
later when the dynamic sector of the economy moved to the mines and
the coastal agricultural estates after the the Pacific War, remained
dependent upon foreign capital. It had no independent national
project of its own. And in his exploration of education, religion and
culture Mariátegui found the same characteristic parasitism and lack
of independence – though he also identified the points of
resistance and struggle, whether in the history of indigenous
rebellion or in the echoes in Peru (faint though they were) of the
university reform movement that had begun in Cordoba, Argentina, in 1918.
Although the Seven Essays offered a fairly comprehensive
analysis, each of them was clearly intended as the foundation for a
deeper and more extensive exploration, which was precluded by
Mariátegui’s early death. But they were part of a political
project, rather than a theoretical one, in the sense that conclusions
were drawn from them in revolutionary practice.
His call to the workers on 1 May 1924 is a key to understanding
his strategy. [18] Calling for a
“united front” he emphasised that “we are still too few to
split into different parts”. In the working class movement the
influence of a declining anarchism was still significant, generating
a suspicion of revolutionary parties; among the students and the
social movements, the influence of Haya’s democratic nationalism
was still considerable; and in the world of the sierra, where
resistance was the stuff of everyday life, other, more local,
traditions provided the points of reference. And yet, as Mariátegui
would increasingly emphasise in his studies of Peruvian reality, and
in particular in his Seven Essays, that ideological separation
belied the role that each played in a unified economic structure
integrated into the international market.
The working class movement in this country is still too
young for us to contemplate dividing or splitting it. Before the time
of division comes, and I suppose it is inevitable, we have a great
deal of common work to do, in a spirit of solidarity. We have to
awaken in the Peruvian proletariat a class consciousness and a
feeling for their class; and that is a task for socialists and
communists, communists and libertarians equally. It is up to all of
us to win workers away from their “official representatives” and
to struggle together against repression. It is up to all of us to
defend the workers’ press and workers’ organisation. It is up to
all of us to support the demands of the oppressed and enslaved
indigenous race. And as we fulfil these historic responsibilities, we
shall be doing our basic duty, our roads will merge and run together
whatever our final objectives. [19]
Any socialist strategy must of necessity build a united front of
forces, while within that unity political debate should continue to
develop and advance the centrality of Marxist ideas. But it was clear
that Mariátegui was extremely anxious to avoid sectarian splits. In
fact he was operating consistently with the positions adopted at this
stage by the international Communist movement, although, as Messeguer
suggests, he may not have been aware of the discussions taking place
in the Comintern. This drive for unity explains too his continuing
relationship with Haya de la Torre and his newly formed Peruvian
Nationalist Party, later to morph into Apra. It was an alliance that
continued with the founding of Amauta in 1926 and lasted until
the definitive break with Haya’s group in 1928.
It was no coincidence, therefore, that in the extraordinarily busy
year of 1928 Matriátegui founded the newspaper Labour in
November as a paper for a growing working class movement. This was in
clear anticipation of the formation of the Peruvian Congress of
Workers (CGTP), which he would be central in setting up in May of the
following year. By this time the labour force consisted of some
58,000 industrial workers (mainly in Lima but also in the southern
city of Cuzco) and some 28,000 miners. About a third of the urban
workforce was unionised; in the mines, the building of trade unions
was much harder, since the foreign mining companies immediately
dismissed (or worse) anyone who attempted to set up a union. [20]
It was critical, however, to also acknowledge that some 1.5 million
people remained within the rural and indigenous communities or were
recent migrants into agriculture or indeed into mining. [21]
The implications of that social structure for political organisation
had been a central and recurring concern in Mariátegui’s writings
throughout the late 1920s. For while, as a Marxist who knew and read
Lenin, Mariátegui recognised the leading role of the working class,
he argued fiercely that a socialist movement in Peru must of
necessity address the question of building a united front of struggle
that could embrace and mobilise the majority of the exploited in that
society. His insistence on that central issue was what produced
Mariátegui’s particular and original contribution to the
development of Marxism in Latin America.
It was the collective traditions and natural solidarity of the
indigenous communities, as he depicted them, which would ensure the
resonance of socialist ideas in the particular conditions of Peru.
But that connection could only be made consciously and deliberately
by Marxists. It was this question that he would address in the essays
collected in Peruanicemos el Perú, [22]
though it was discussed and debated in the pages of Amauta
throughout its existence. As he argued in a debate with the leading
Aprista intellectual Luis Alberto Sánchez in 1927:
No one ... can be surprised by the confluence of
indigenismo and socialism. Socialism orders and defines the
demands of the masses, of the working classes. And in Peru those
masses are four-fifths indigenous. Thus our socialism must declare
its solidarity with the native people. [23]
It was Mariátegui’s conviction that revolutionary socialism
must of necessity connect with local traditions and conditions that
would very soon bring him into confrontation with the Communist
International. Yet if Mariátegui insisted on the “nationalisation”
– or rather the adaptation to the real historical experience of
each society – of Marxism, he remained emphatically
internationalist in his perspectives and relentlessly committed to
building the trade union movement as well as, in the same hyperactive
year, to the setting up of a Peruvian Socialist Party in which, once
again, he would play the leading role. Yet this again would bring him
into conflict with the Comintern and its Latin American representatives.
The period between the beginning of 1929 and his death in April
1930 was overshadowed by the gathering clouds of a disagreement with
the Communist International. [24] Early
in 1929 a Comintern representative visited Peru to invite
Mariátegui’s group to send delegates to two upcoming conferences –
the trade union conference in Montevideo and the first congress of
Latin American Communist Parties, to be held in Buenos Aires in May
and June. Mariátegui himself was unable to travel to either – the
osteomielitis that dogged his short life was worsening – but he
briefed the delegation of four who did attend. They included Hugo
Pesce, the young doctor who would later make such an impression on
the young Che Guevara and suggest his first readings of Marx, and
Julio Portocarrero, a young worker from the important Vitarte textile
plant in Lima. Portocarrero was in fact elected to the executive of
the Latin American Trade Union Federation (CSLA). Yet “to some
extent these meetings represented a showdown between the path being
followed by the Peruvian cell and the official line of the
Comintern”. [25]
Ostensibly the dispute centred on the question of whether or not
the new party would be called “socialist” or “Communist”. To
the last Mariátegui was adamant that it should be a socialist party
and resisted the Comintern’s mounting pressures. There was never
the slightest doubt as to the character of the new party. Its
statutes declared the party’s affiliation to the Communist
International and its commitment to what it described as “militant
Leninism”. Its six-point programme was equally uncompromising. It
argued for the expropriation of the landed estates and their
redistribution to communal organisations or small peasants, with
guarantees of technical and financial support. It called for the
expropriation of all foreign enterprises as well as those belonging
to big Peruvian capital. It demanded an immediate renunciation of the
foreign debt and all imperialist controls and called for the
immediate enactment of the eight-hour working day, as well as the
immediate arming of workers and peasants and the dissolution of the
armed forces and police into the militias. Its sixth point called for
establishment of “workers, peasants and soldiers municipalities”
as the organs of power in the new society. [26]
By no stretch of the imagination could this be described as a
reformist programme, still less as lacking a clear revolutionary
impulse. The fact that the Socialist Party did not call for soviets
but for municipalities did not affect the fact that these were
clearly organs of workers’ power similar in character and structure
to the soviets.
If there was so little ideological difference, however, why did
Mariátegui stick so stubbornly to the “socialist” label? In my
view there are several reasons, but they are all tied to his sense
that within the framework of revolutionary Marxism each national
struggle must find its particular articulation of the local and the
international. This was clearly a principle with Mariátegui. Another
factor is that he had been briefly arrested and jailed at the
beginning of 1928 after the “discovery” by President Leguía of a
“Communist plot” to bring down his regime. The reality of the
plot was open to severe doubt, but it provided the pretext for a
repressive response. It may be that Mariátegui was anxious to avoid
a similar response to the foundation of his party which, he hoped,
would operate legally as far as possible. [27]
Beyond that, however, and of much more fundamental significance, was
his conception of the “united front”. The party, as its founding
programme demonstrated clearly, was intended to appeal to workers, to
peasants and indigenous communities, and to the anti-imperialist
sectors of the middle classes.
These latter layers were people to whom Haya de la Torre’s Apra
had appealed, with some success, in the earlier part of the decade –
and using some of the same language of “unity” as Mariátegui
had. The pages of the journal Amauta were an open forum in
which the supporters of Apra participated freely. But Mariátegui’s
September 1928 editorial Aniversario y Balance in the journal
marked a clear and definitive break with the Apristas:
Amauta now enters its second period, when it no
longer needs to describe itself as a vanguard or left journal. To be
faithful to the revolution, it is enough that it be socialist ... The
very word revolution can lend itself it to ambiguities. Its meaning
needs to be clear. The Latin American revolution can be nothing other
than a stage, a phase of the world revolution. It will be, quite
simply, a socialist revolution. [28]
Haya’s announcement from Mexico in 1928 of the formation of a
party of his own provoked Mariátegui’s trenchant response. Up till
then he had regarded Apra as a “front” with whom joint work was
still possible, despite a continuing debate and a widening
ideological gulf. The formation of the party, however, precipitated
matters – for Mariátegui had made his criticisms of Apra clear in
Amauta and elsewhere. Where Apra argued the possibility of a
broad front in alliance with elements of the bourgeoisie,
Mariátegui’s formulation of the nature of the united front clearly
argued for a unity of the working classes and indigenous communities
led by socialists. Haya de la Torre, by contrast, had always argued
that Peru’s backwardness meant that leadership must necessarily
fall to middle class elements and the progressive military. While
these arguments could be conducted in the context of broad movement
of activists, Mariátegui may well have seen the building of a
socialist party as a lesser priority. Now, however, the socialist
vision of the united front which he propounded required a clear
political expression.
Mariátegui’s consistent and withering critique of Second
International Marxism and reformism provided the political groundwork
for this. His studies of the Peruvian economy, particularly in the
Seven Essays explored the consequences of the weakness of the
Peruvian bourgeoisie and its incapacity to carry through an
independent national project. The tasks of economic development and
growth would therefore have to be carried through by a socialist
movement. The concept of the united front and what was clearly an
evolving theory of “permanent revolution”, although never couched
in those terms, seemed to suggest at least some awareness of Leon
Trotsky – and there seems to have been some direct contact between
Mariátegui and the Trotskyist groups around Naville during 1929.
But this does not seem to be the primary reason for the deep and
growing hostility of the Comintern representatives in Latin America.
Rather, it derived in the first place from Mariátegui’s resistance
to calling his party Communist. And that in turn seems to have been
interpreted as an indication of a deeper deviation, prioritising race
over class and nation over the international movement. Mariátegui’s
response was to send with the Peruvian delegates to the May–June
Congress three key documents addressing those areas of concern: The
Problem of Race in Latin America, The Anti-imperialist
Perspective and Antecedents and Developments of Class
Struggle. [29]
 
Final days
Since his days at La Razón Mariátegui had been a tireless
campaigner, organiser, writer and provider, through Amauta, of
a platform for socialist debate. As the 1920s drew to a close his
level of activity did not diminish, despite his deteriorating
physical condition and increasing financial difficulties at home. His
Wednesday evenings at home in Calle Washington, Lima, brought the
movement to him – and the respect he had earned ensured that the
movement did visit. His correspondence – aside from his hundreds of
articles, reviews and documents – reveals an activist as engaged
with comrades elsewhere in the continent as with those in Peru. [30]
The amputation of his right leg meant that he would conduct his
activity in this final period from a wheelchair.
His letters from this time to his friend Samuel Glusberg in Buenos
Aires, reveal that the political tensions in Peru were becoming
increasingly difficult to handle and the pressures on him mounting;
just before his death he began to make arrangements to move to Buenos
Aires where he felt the atmosphere would be less oppressive and he
would feel his isolation less. In May–June 1929, however, he was
unable to travel and it was Pesce and Portocarrero who would once
again present his documents to the Comintern.
But the frosty reception given to the publication of his Seven
Essays gave Mariátegui some sense of the hostility his ideas
might meet at the conference. Codovilla, secretary of the Argentine
Communist Party and the representative of the Comintern at the
conference, argued fiercely that Mariátegui’s analysis of the
specificity of the Peruvian situation was a concession to
nationalism. Peru, he argued, was more than adequately described by
the general thesis on semi-colonial nations, and by extension could
not therefore be an exception to the general “class against class
strategy” laid down by the Third International.
Yet Mariátegui’s documents did not argue Peruvian
exceptionalism; they discussed the application of revolutionary
strategy in the particular conditions of Peru. Thus his document The
Anti-imperialist Perspective is a fierce condemnation of Apra’s
anti-imperialism, because “even if it were able to mobilise the
national bourgeoisie and the peasant masses (a possibility we have
discounted) this would not cancel conflicts of class”. He uses the
experience of the 1910–17 Mexican Revolution (about which he wrote
extensively) as a warning. In Mexico the revolutionary movement
represented most clearly by Emiliano Zapata had produced a bourgeois
nationalist regime whose first act had been to attack the peasant
revolutionaries. Mariátegui argued, “Our mission is to explain to
the masses how only the socialist revolution can offer real
opposition to the advance of imperialism.” It is hard at this
distance to understand why this position should have generated such
opposition from Codovilla and others. But in the context of the
Stalinist turn of the Third International towards an ultra-left
policy of treating all non-Communists as counter-revolutionaries,
even “social fascists”, it becomes easier to understand.
Mariátegui’s second paper on the “problem of race” met with
equally obstinate resistance. Returning to the arguments that he had
made in Seven Essays and elsewhere, Mariátegui reminded the
conference that four-fifths of Peru’s workforce were still peasants
or semi-rural workers (for example in the mines) with conflicting
allegiances. By mobilising the solidarity and collective action
embedded in indigenous traditions, he argued, socialism could take
root among the majority of the exploited in Peru. The Comintern line,
by contrast, was to see this as a national question and to argue for
the “self-determination of the indigenous peoples”. It was ironic
that Mariátegui’s insistence on the interlacing of race and class,
and that the situation of the indigenous peoples had to be understood
ultimately in terms of the economy, should have been rejected in the
name of Marxism!
The consequence of the Buenos Aires conference, given the
authority of the Comintern representatives, was that Mariátegui’s
authority and leadership came under immediate attack. Eudocio
Ravines, a sinister character who had moved from Apra into the
offices of the Third International in Paris, was now sent to Peru to
implement the decisions of the conference and form a Communist Party.
Mariátegui’s letters to Glusberg reveal a man of failing health
increasingly frustrated by events at home. Ironically, Mariátegui
welcomed Ravines when he arrived in Peru early in March 1930 and
agreed that he should take over the leadership. A month later
Mariátegui was dead and the city of Lima stopped all activity for
five minutes in his honour. His funeral was a massive demonstration
of the affection in which he was held.
By May the Peruvian Communist Party had been formed – on the
basis that Mariátegui’s project for a united front had been too
broad, admitting intellectuals and petit bourgeois elements. [31]
Within a year a disastrous armed rising in the indigenous highlands
isolated the communities and brought down on them the most severe
repression. By the mid-1930s much of Mariátegui’s patient work in
the trade union movement had been undone, and his ideas
systematically misrepresented to the succeeding generation. By then,
of course, the Third International had turned back to many of his
positions – without acknowledgment, of course.
Perhaps it is appropriate to leave the last word with Gregory Zinoviev:
Mariátegui has a brilliant mind; he is a true creator.
He does not seem like a Latin American; he does not plagiarise, he
does not copy, he does not parrot what the Europeans say. What he
creates is his own. [32]
In his own time, that originality was his undoing. Today, it is
the reason to rediscover his work.

Notes
1. Yepes del Castillo, 1972, pp. 41–42.
2. The rising at Huancané in 1866 was
so brutally crushed that a “Society of Friends of the Indians”
was formed by white sympathisers, the forerunners of the “indigenist”
schools of writers and artists of the early 20th century.
3. See Garrett, 1973; Yepes del
Castillo, 1972, chapter 10; and Kapsoli, 1976.
4. See Pflucker, 1978, and also
Pflucker, 1973, her undergraduate thesis on the important anarchist
newspaper La Protesta. See too Kapsoli, 1976, and Denis
Sulmont’s work in general, particularly Sulmont, 1978.
5. This is the theme of a number of
the early “indigenista” narratives by writers such as Ciro Alegría.
6. Martínez de la Rosa quoted in
Checa, 1964, p. 116.
7. Apra, the Latin American Popular
Revolutionary Alliance, currently holds the presidency of Peru in the
person of Alan García. It was, from the moment of its formation as a
party in 1924, the main political antagonist of Mariátegui,
especially when Mariátegui finally broke with Haya in 1928. Despite
the break, many subsequent writers have attempted to claim Mariátegui
for Aprismo!
8. According to Redondez, 1982,
Mariátegui had been introduced to Marxism already by one professor Maúrtua.
9. His experiences in Europe, largely
published in newspapers and journals at home, were later collected as
La Escena Contemporánea, volume one of the Obras Completas
(Mariátegui, 1959—) and his Italian writing as Cartas de
ItaliaÂ¸ volume 15 of the same collection. See too Vanden, 1986.
The main writer on this aspect of Mariátegui’s work is the Italian
scholar Antonio Melis. See for example Melis, 1994.
10. While he frequently mentions
Antonio Gramsci’s name in connection with his Italian experiences,
he makes no special mention of him, though Mariátegui’s wife later
said that the two men had spoken on several occasions.
11. These lectures are collected in
Historia de la Crisis Mundial, volume eight of Mariátegui,
1959—. Some of these are available in English.
12. Volumes 16, 17 and 18 of
Mariátegui, 1959—.
13. Quijano, 1986, pp. 44-45.
14. Most cogently expounded in his
Defensa del Marxismo (in volume five of Mariátegui, 1959),
which was not in fact published until after his death.
15. Siete Ensayos de
Interpretación de la Realidad Peruana (Seven Interpretive
Essays on Peruvian Reality) to give it its full title, volume two
of Mariátegui, 1959—. There is also an English translation of this
work – Mariátegui, 1971.
16. This essay is currently
available online.
17. Mariátegui, 1971, p. 27.
18. El Primero de Mayo y el
Frente Único, in Ideología y Política, volume 13 of
Mariátegui, 1959—, pp. 107–110.
19. Mariátegui, 1959—, volume 13, p. 108.
20. For a glimpse of the atmosphere
that prevailed in the mines see the translation of Ciro Alegria’s
famous novel Broad and Alien is the World (Alegria, 1983),
which includes several chapters set in the mining areas (these were
not included in early translations).
21. These figures are from
Chavarría, 1979, p. 156.
22. Peruanicemos el Perú (We
must Peruvianize Peru), volume 11 of Mariátegui, 1959—.
23. Mariátegui, 1959—, volume 13, p. 217.
24. Galindo, 1980, explores this
conflict in detail. It should be read in conjunction with Martínez
de la Torre’s Notes Towards a Marxist Interpretation of Peruvian
History (Torre, 1958). Torre was one of Mariátegui’s closest
collaborators, who broke with the Communist Party after his death.
His two volume history is invaluable because it reproduces so much
primary material – leaflets and pamphlets, as well as correspondence.
25. Chavarría, 1979, p. 158.
26. Galindo, 1980, p. 87.
27. He later insisted, for example,
that the CGTP should register under Leguía’s labour laws, despite
their restrictive character.
28. An Anniversary and an
Accounting, volume 13 of Mariátegui, 1959—, p. 247.
29. All three appear in the first
section of Ideología y Política, volume 13 of Mariátegui, 1959—.
30. For his correspondence, see
Mariátegui, 1984.
31. Chavarría, 1979, pp. 165–167.
32. Chavarría, 1979, p. 162.


References
Alegria, Ciro, 1983, Broad and Alien is the World (Merlin).
Chavarría, Jesús, 1979, José Carlos Mariátegui and the Rise
of Modern Peru 1890–1930 (University of New Mexico Press).
Checa, Genaro Carnero, 1964, La Acción Escrita (Lima).
Galindo, Alberto Flores, 1980, La Agonía de Mariátegui (Desco).
Garrett, Gary R, 1973, The Oncenio of Augusto B. Leguia: Middle
Sector Government and Leadership in Peru, 1919–1930 (University
of New Mexico).
Kapsoli, Wilfredo, 1969, Luchas obreras en el Peru (Lima).
Mariátegui, José Carlos, 1959—, Obras Completas (Amauta, Lima).
Mariátegui, José Carlos, 1971, Seven Interpretive Essays on
Peruvian Reality (University of Texas).
Mariátegui, José Carlos, 1984, Correspondencia, in two
volumes (Amauta).
Melis, Antonio, 1994, Leyendo Mariátegui (Lima).
Pflucker, Piedad Pareja, 1973, undergraduate thesis, Universidad
Católica (Lima).
Pflucker, Piedad Pareja, 1978, Anarquismo y Sindicalismo en el
Peru: 1904–1929 (Lima).
Quijano, Aníbal, 1986, Introducción a Mariátegui (ERA).
Redondez, Raimundo Prado, 1982, El Marxismo de Mariátegui
(Amaru Editores).
Sulmont, Denis, 1978, El Movimiento Obrero en el Peru:
1900–1956 (Lima).
Torre, Ricardo Martínez de la, 1948, Apuntes para una
Interpretación Marxista de la Historia Social del Perú, in two
volumes (Lima).
Vanden, Harry, 1986, National Marxism: J.C. Mariátegui’s
Thought and Politics (Boulder).
Yepes del Castillo, Ernesto, 1972, Perú 1820–1920: un Siglo
de Desarrollo Capitalista (Lima).
 



John Holloway
Change the World Without Taking Power: The Meaning of Revolution Today
Pluto 2002, £15.99
For the anti-capitalist movement across the world, the Zapatista rising in Mexico in January 1994 was a kind of symbolic awakening. Although the movement would really reach a point of generalisation with the Seattle demonstrations against the WTO five years later, it looked back into a prehistory that seemed to begin with that indigenous rising in Chiapas. Its scream of defiance – Ya Basta! – became a watchword picked up and relayed by a new generation of rebels and resisters.
In some senses, the Zapatistas’ symbolic capital arose from the apparent simplicity of their act of resistance. Their wooden rifles and simple dress became iconic – representative of a kind of innocence, a purity of motive that appealed to a generation that wore Che Guevara
T-shirts and found its heroes among the uncorrupted voices of the oppressed like Malcolm X and Che. There was a strong moral impulse at the heart of this new kind of politics. And that was, without question, a reaction against a history of Stalinism which had brought Marxism into deep disrepute and through which the revolutionary ideal had been tainted with the recent memory of the Ceausescus and the Brezhnevs and the Hoxhas. They had each employed a grotesque parody of socialist ideas to legitimate their tyrannies.
Yet this new anti-capitalist movement seemed proud to describe itself as revolutionary, as an enemy of a global capitalist system of exploitation and oppression. Today, that movement has swollen and deepened, and added to its vocabulary of denunciation a concept of imperialism it has rediscovered for itself in the developing resistance to the military assault on Iraq.
The scream, to use John Holloway’s term, has become deafening.
As it has grown louder, the debate within the movement has begun to move from denunciation and critique to questions of revolution and the construction of a different society. What kind of world is this ‘better place’, this ‘possible place’ announced at successive world and European forums? And what are the obstacles that stand in the way of its creation? In the course of that discussion across the global movement, a number of distinct positions are beginning to emerge. [1]
We have dealt extensively in previous editions of this journal and other publications with the view that the existing nation-state can come to reflect and defend the demands for reform. In Europe, this hope is expressed in the campaigns around the Tobin tax – a limited redistributive measure through which some of global capitalism’s excesses might be attenuated by a small reduction of corporate profits. In recent months, this aspiration to reform and renegotiate the relative rules of participation in the world system found new reason for optimism with the emergence of what Hugo Chávez, the Venezuelan president, wittily described as ‘the axis of good’. The combination of his own regime with the new Brazilian government of Lula and the recently elected Ecuadorean president Lucio Gutiérrez was seen by some commentators as representing a new space for democracy and reform, strong enough to challenge the prevailing norms in international trade. A very few months after Lula’s accession to power, however, he is confronting both the left within his own party and large sections of his working class base as he seeks to justify new conditions of austerity imposed by the international financial system. [2]
Large sections of the anti-capitalist movement are rightly sceptical of such views, of course. It does not take much searching through the annals of history to find examples of promises of renovation and reform that have been turned on their head in hours or days. In Britain, France and Spain, for example, social democratic parties promising profound transformations have built alliances with sections of the bourgeoisie against the working class and have enthusiastically assumed the priorities of global capital. The capitalist state is fast proving to a new generation its role in organising and maintaining capitalism itself.
For those without illusions in the capacity of the nation-state to reform itself, who are often among the most resolute fighters against it, a different body of ideas has been offered as a practice and a solution. The hugely successful (and often impenetrable) Empire, by Toni Negri and Michael Hardt, has found a keen audience among them. August Nimtz has offered a thorough (and in my view devastating) critique of their views in a recent edition of this journal. [3] But it is interesting to note Holloway’s own critique of Hardt and Negri, and in particular of their central concept of the ‘unrooted and amorphous “multitude” that has replaced the industrial proletariat’ (as Nimtz puts it). [4] Holloway appears in many ways to agree, in his critique:
Worst of all, perhaps, is the total eclipsing of the centrality of doing in the development of the concept of ‘multitude’. The concept of ‘working class’, for all its problems, for all its fetishised deformations, has at least the great merit of taking us to the centrality of human purposive activity, social doing. In the concept of multitude, this is lost completely. If doing is not at the centre of our thought, all that is left is opposition, not hope. [5]
In his rejection of Hardt and Negri, however, Holloway exposes some of the contradictions in his own thinking as well as setting out the problems of language that sometimes serve to obscure them.
Holloway employs a characteristic and highly idiosyncratic language to express his ideas. A couple of examples:
The crystallisation of that-which-has-been-done into a ‘thing’ shatters the flow of doing into a million fragments. Thing-ness denies the primacy of doing (and hence of humanity). [6]
or:
Identity makes life bearable. Identity kills pain. Identity dulls feeling ... identity, that fragmentation that enables us to erect private morality into a wall to keep out the pain of the world. The scream is the recognition and confrontation of social pain. [7]
There is kind of democratic impulse behind this language – and a poetry that clearly borrows from the lyrical and intensely metaphorical writings of Subcomandante Marcos, the leader of the Zapatistas. [8] But it also bears an embedded critique of the language of scientific interpretation, and a concentration on the subjective as the terrain of revolution.
’It is from rage that thought is born, not from the pose of reason ...’ [9] That rage becomes ‘the scream’, which he defines as the negation, an opposition born from instinct or from a sense of other possibilities within us. ‘It is not only groups of people that are oppressed’, he says, ‘but particular aspects of our personality’. The scream comes from those suppressed areas of the self, and is evidence of what other potentialities lie within us all. And the imagined life in which those other parts may find expression is defined by (a term he borrows from Marcos) ‘dignity’ – the rediscovery of our full humanity.
Where Negri and Hardt suggest that that can be done by an act of physical and social withdrawal from the social relations of production, the creation of other ‘free’ spaces, Holloway remains too rooted in a Marxist understanding of capitalist production to buy the idea.
Indeed, the new language actually conceals understandings which may be found, often in equally poetic language, in the works of Marx himself. Commodity fetishism, on which Holloway rests so much of his case, was a concept which allowed Marx to address the way in which the world of objects, produced by human labour, then presents itself as a world of things outside, and indeed alien to the producer. ‘Identity’, in Holloway’s usage of the term, thus becomes a way of describing our equally fixed positions in relation to that world of things – our ‘power-to’, as he puts it, is subordinated to the ‘power-over’. ‘Criticism’, then, ‘is an assault on identity’. [10]
What follows is a kind of caricature of Marx and Marxism on which Holloway’s critique largely rests. He describes that relationship with a world of things as a kind of imprisonment from which only a self appointed elite may exclude themselves. That cartoon version of dialectical thought leads then to the critique of the revolutionary party as the substitute for the class. We may all be able to lay hold of examples of such distortions of the revolutionary tradition – the history of Stalinism and at times of Trotskyism offers a plethora of them. But all were predicated on the marginalisation of the working class from the revolutionary process. Yet in the tradition in which we stand, revolution is the self emancipation of the working class.
In among Holloway’s often imprecise and muddy metaphors it is easy to become confused as to why this is not his purpose too, especially since he frequently makes reference to the centrality of that idea. Yet at the same time he departs from it with an argument at once sophisticated and demobilising. Class, he argues, is the product of capitalist relations of production; we are working class because our labour is alienated. Clearly, the proletariat as a class will disappear, and become the universal class, when alienated production is obliterated. It is not John Holloway who invented the image of human beings overcoming alienation.
But the ‘negation’ of that alienated self is neither an act of will nor an act of consciousness alone, but a conscious transformation of the material conditions of production. What is lacking in Holloway is the sense of the dialectic, the way in which we are locked into production in conditions which lead to an inescapable contradiction. We are addressed as individuals, yet we are inescapably social; we are shapers of the world who are constantly told that the world is shaped by other forces; we are equals in our common alienation or our shared labour who are relentlessly persuaded of our difference. Far from dissolving the social relations of production into mere economic categories, Marx and Marxism affirm the opposite – that ‘economic categories are only the abstractions of the social relations of production’. [11]
In his difficult discussion of ‘identity’ Holloway argues that the concept of working class (which as we saw earlier he finds meaningful when contrasted with Hardt and Negri’s ‘multitude’) is fetishised. That class identity encloses us and locks us into a kind of dependency on capitalism – the very capitalism we reject – because we cannot see ourselves as other than workers. Again the problem is a wilful refusal to recognise the decades of Marxist debate in which the working class is the subject of revolution as well as its object.
This leads Holloway into a trap whereby negation becomes an act of will, of psychological redefinition rather than material transformation. We can only engage socially in that ‘purposive doing’ whose highest expression is revolution. A world without private ownership of the means of production is the vision of a propertyless class. Its achievement, however, is not merely an act of affirmation but the culmination of class struggle. How is freedom to be achieved, other than by wresting power from those who impose unfreedom, who have ‘power-over’?
Holloway is scathing in his critique of Empire of the notion that alternative spaces can be created – be they nations or communities. Yet his alternative to ‘power-over’, his unfetishised space, is a metaphorical space. This place of ‘constant becoming’, located somewhere outside history, is designed, I imagine, to avoid the difficult question of what to do about the capitalist class and its machinery of domination and control. Fetishism, he says, is ‘in antagonism to the opposing movement of anti-fetishisation, the struggle to reunite subject and object, to recompose doing and done’. [12]
Yet the struggle for that freedom is in the first instance a material battle to wrest control of the means of production from the controlling class. It is true that labour is alienated under conditions of capitalist production; but it is also true that that powerlessness is also a power. Without labour there can be no production. That is the contradiction from which the development of class consciousness emerges and on which the power of workers rests.
Hal Draper contrasts two visions of freedom. The first (the anarchist) depends on the ‘total impermissibility of any imposition of any authority upon the unconditional autonomy of the sovereign Ego’. The second, Marx’s view, ‘depends upon the relation of the individual to his (or her) membership in the human species which is historically organised in a society ... It is a shorthand term for democratic freedom in society’. [13]
I began this review with a mention of the Zapatistas. In some senses, the material reality of their situation is the living expression of the limitations of the autonomist position that Holloway argues. The symbolic authority of Chiapas is boundless, the internal life of the communities driven by the highest and most noble ideals of authentic co-operation and community, the language of political life grounded in multiplicity and the popular imagination. Yet consider their conditions of life – besieged by a ruthless global capital, the very stuff of life (water, electricity, medicines) repeatedly taken from them, the state machine squeezing them in a menacing vice. Beyond the steel cordon lie their allies and supporters, reproducing the power of capital. The Zapatistas gave the anti-capitalist movement a dream of freedom and a language of liberation; yet the power to realise the project, to seize the state and make the revolution, still lies elsewhere.

Notes
1. See A. Callinicos, State of Discontent, in Socialist Review 272, March 2003, pp. 11–13.
2. See M. Gonzalez, Brazil in the Eye of the Storm, in International Socialism 98 (Spring 2003), pp. 57–76.
3. A. Nimtz, Class struggle Under “Empire”: In Defence of Marx and Engels, in International Socialism 96 (Autumn 2002), pp. 47–70.
4. Ibid., p. 49.
5. J. Holloway, Time to Revolt: Reflections on Empire, October 2002, published on The Commoner website at www.commoner.org.uk. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
6. J. Holloway, Change the World Without Taking Power (London 2002), p. 33.
7. Ibid., p. 103.
8. See J. Holloway and E. Peláez (eds.), Zapatista! (London 1998), and in particular the editors’ introduction, Reinventing Revolution.
9. J. Holloway, Change the World Without Taking Power, op. cit., p. 1.
10. Ibid., p. 106.
11. A. Callinicos, The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx (London 1987), p. 75.
12. J. Holloway, Change the World Without Taking Power, op. cit., p. 89.
13. H. Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, vol. 4 (New York 1990), pp. 174–175.
 



‘As the century begins we are faced with two alternatives: Porto Alegre or Davos.’ That was the view of Olivier Besancenot, presidential candidate of the French Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire in 2002, published in their newspaper Rouge in January.
On the one hand, the World Social Forum in Brazil gathered activists from across the political spectrum around the slogan ‘A better world is possible’. On the other, the World Economic Forum at Davos in Switzerland was far more exclusive – it drew together the most powerful financiers and economic decision makers in the global capitalist system to determine how best that system might serve their narrow interests.
In 2003, however, there was an unexpected connection between the two. Lula (Luis Inacio da Silva, to use his full name for the first and last time), who had recently won the Brazilian presidency by an overwhelming majority on behalf of the Workers Party (PT), put in an appearance at both conferences, despite the fact that a large group of his own parliamentary colleagues, and many branches of his party, had appealed to him not to go to Davos. Yet Lula addressed an admiring crowd at Porto Alegre’s Por do Sol stadium and then flew to Switzerland, where he was photographed shaking hands with Bill Clinton, the head of the World Bank and George Soros, among others.
Emir Sader was only one of those who had urged him not to go:
Lula should not attend this banquet of all those responsible for the world’s misery...the handful of bankers who created the policies that have produced hunger in Africa, Asia and Latin America and in Brazil itself. Lula should not cross to the other side of the barricade when those of us fighting because ‘a better world is possible’ are marching in protest at the policies of the IMF, the World Bank and the WTO. [1]
Lula’s decision was confusing, and it was revealing. And it forced many of his most fervent supporters to acknowledge some of the deeper contradictions in the strategic vision of the Lula government that were emerging even in the first weeks of the new administration.
As Rouge put it:
It is a government at a crossroads. It will manage the affairs of the dominant classes, but in a context marked by the strong presence of the mass movement, and particularly the unions and the landless. [2]
This way of characterising Lula’s government begs more questions than it answers – a ‘presence’, after all, need not be an actor. Yet if, as the same newspaper asserts, ‘Brazil is the political laboratory for the future’, the experiment deserves our detailed and careful analysis, because there is no doubt that claims and counterclaims about the success or failure of the Lula project will influence and to some extent shape the international political debate in the months to come.
 
The missing flags
Let me begin with a personal impression of an important difference between the Porto Alegre Forums of 2002 and 2003. In 2002 the Workers Party (PT) dominated the event. Its flags were everywhere, its stickers attached to every surface, its logo behind every speaker and visible at every press conference. It was impossible to avoid the impression that PT was the party of the social movements that had come together in Porto Alegre. It was true, of course, that Porto Alegre had a particular significance in the mythology of the PT. The city (and the state whose capital it is – Rio Grande do Sul) was under PT control and had initiated the system of ‘participatory budgeting’ which attracted much attention across the world. Meetings of state workers and community organisations, among others, were given the opportunity to advise on the distribution of the resources allocated to the city by the federal government in Brasilia. The experience was offered as a radical new form of popular participation, a sharing of responsibility among all sections of the community – and it was an example of advanced democracy which certainly had very few precedents in the bourgeois democracies of the rest of the world. On the other hand, it would be quite wrong to see it as a redistributive measure – after all, it was an experiment conducted in the wider framework of a country and a time in which the gap between rich and poor was growing at a startling rate. And the global budget was predetermined by central government. But I will return to the issue below.
The important point is the clear and ubiquitous identification between the PT and the resistance to neo-liberalism, many of whose most combative fronts were represented at the forum. That identification was noticeably absent in 2003. It is not that PT had disappeared – but it no longer presented itself as a voice of the movement. It was certainly in evidence, but only in the form of Lula. The implication was very clear and reinforced the sense I had of what had occurred in the intervening year. While Lula’s reputation and history were a powerful representation of an undifferentiated ‘people’, Lula was now a president and the head of a government in which the PT was a partner with several other parties whose past and present policies gave them no credentials to claim such representation. It seemed to me that Lula and the PT were placing themselves above class in a neutral state pursuing balance and an equality of representation between the classes.
And that is borne out and confirmed by the recent history of both the PT and Lula himself, and by the decisions already taken by the new government barely a month into its first administration.
 
The long march into the state
In last October’s elections Lula received 68 percent of the popular vote in the second round. That represents some 68 million people. This is an important indication in itself of the level and range of popular support that Lula has.
In this (Lula’s third) presidential election his spin doctors and advisers were at tremendous pains to project Lula as an outstanding individual. Electoral propaganda made enormous play of his personal history, a journey from poverty to the presidency. His open shirt was exchanged for an Armani suit. It may seem to an outside observer that this is no more than the usual image-making that is increasingly common in elections of this magnitude. But in Lula’s case the significance was deeper. For in his previous candidacies and throughout his previous political career Lula stood as a representative figure who stood for high office in the name of the working class movement with which he had been closely identified throughout the previous 20 years. The manufacture of the individual candidate for the campaign of 2002 was, at least implicitly, a considered attempt to disengage Lula from his own history in the movement. And yet – and this is another of the contradictions that will certainly blossom in very short order – his solid working class support came to him because he was widely seen as a man of and for the workers’ movement.
Lula entered the engineering industry of São Bernardo in 1966. Unlike the traditional engineering workshops of São Paulo, the factories of São Bernardo were giant modern car and bus plants. The older industries had been the site of bitter political struggles in the earlier part of the decade which had ended in defeat for the rank and file militants and the emergence of a powerful trade union bureaucracy embedded in the metal workers’ union. Yet that militant tradition persisted in what was called the Metalworkers Opposition (MO). In São Bernardo, by contrast, that tradition did not exist, and the union bureaucracy was able to control its membership and absorb the best young workers. One of these was Lula, who became a low level official after only three years on the shop floor. [3] In 1976, however, as the ‘economic miracle’ began to falter [4], the São Bernardo unions began to adopt a more aggressive stance over wages. Lula emerged as a leader of this more militant wing and two years later, early in 1978, he was elected in his own right (and without the patronage of the old bureaucracy) to the leadership of the union. His acceptance speech included a promise to ‘fight even if it costs us the sacrifice of our lives to improve the conditions of life the engineering workers’. [5]
Three months later strikes began to paralyse the huge car plants in the industrial belt around São Paulo known as the ABC, which included São Bernardo:
At 7 o’clock in the morning of Friday 12 May the 2,500 workers on the day shift at Saab-Scania in São Bernardo clocked in as usual, went to their positions, but refused to switch on the machines ... It was a new kind of strike, without prominent leaders, without pickets, and without scabs. On the following Monday they were joined by 9,500 metal workers at Ford. Within ten days, similar strikes had reached 90 engineering firms ... Within two months, half a million workers at some 400 factories in 18 towns in São Paulo tested their strength in strike action ... [6]
In November, however, an end of year pay claim still carried behind it some of the militancy and confidence – the factory committees had, after all, been recognised by both trade unions and employers in the wake of the earlier actions. This time, however, the bureaucracy seized control of the movement and reached an agreement that provided a large (58 percent) wage increase, but only in exchange for the consolidation of earlier increases, a one-year no-strike clause, and a series of limitations on the factory committees. A rigged vote ensured that the agreement was accepted. The result was widespread demoralisation in São Paulo.
São Bernardo, however, had learned different lessons from its experience, and organised co-ordinated pickets and shop floor committees for its anticipated strike in April 1979. The core of that organisation, however, was the union, not the politics of shop floor organisation, expressed in the São Paulo factory committees. According to Beecham and Eidenham, the difference was much more than a matter of emphasis or the accidents of local organisation:
The real reason for the resistance to independent factory organisation is the separation of politics from economics which is characteristic of social democratic ideas. The São Bernardo leaders founded the Workers Party (PT) precisely because they saw politics as an activity distinct from workers’ struggles. [7]
Events in São Bernardo moved quickly, following to a degree the pattern of the São Paulo strikes of the previous years. Mass meetings of workers signalled a high level of militancy. The government responded with repression and arrested Lula. The employers offered a deal which included a 63 percent wage rise hedged about with a series of penalty clauses and limitations on union activity. Lula reappeared at a mass rally and argued for acceptance. When the workers returned there was a systematic campaign of victimisation, but a high level of rank and file factory organisation sustained a largely successful resistance to management’s campaign of revenge. It could not be counted a victory, however, despite the general improvement in wages. Yet elsewhere in Brazil the news of the ABC movement spread and inspired many other groups of workers – transport workers in Rio, building workers in Belo Horizonte, public sector workers in São Paulo – to organise stoppages.
The following year ABC assembled for another massive strike over wages, union representation and compensation for inflation. It was to begin in April 1980, following the collapse of wage negotiations during the previous month. This time the state and the army moved in quickly. A number of local trade union leaders were arrested, including Lula, who was later accused of murder. [8] Supporters of the strike were picked up or harassed, and crowds of workers were immediately dispersed by armed units. The harsh response of the state had a great deal to do with a changing economic situation – the so called ‘miracle’ of debt-led expansion (to which I will return) had reached a point of crisis, in part due to the rise in the world price of oil. Faced with the rising cost of debt-servicing, the regime had clearly decided that the risk of a confident and well organised rank and file response was the most pressing potential risk.
The strike continued for six weeks, before it was finally overwhelmed – ‘effectively the workers were starved back’. [9] Yet the immediate impact of the strike-one of the longest in Brazil’s history at six weeks, was double-edged. While many of those involved were understandably demoralised, other engineering plants seemed to gain inspiration from the struggle itself, and several strikes erupted in the following weeks. In reality, however, the strike wave centred on São Bernardo and the metal workers’ union ebbed after 1980, partly as a result of the defeat of that year and partly because the economic crisis then began in earnest, with a rising foreign debt, accelerating inflation and rising unemployment.
Yet during those six weeks the strikes had mobilised support and solidarity far beyond the ABC region. As well as other trade unionists, the radical Christian Base Communities had been at the heart of the organisation of that support. That explains in part why the São Bernardo actions achieved a national projection, and came to represent, countrywide, the possibility of resistance to the military regime. For a new generation, the strikes came to represent the return of the organised working class onto the historical stage. It was that experience that Lula came to symbolise and articulate, and his iconic status always refers back to that high point of class struggle and resistance.
 
PT: The Workers Party
The PT, the Brazilian Workers Party, has its origins in the same historical experience. It was born directly out of the experience of workers’ struggles in the São Paulo and São Bernardo regions, and founded in 1979, when the legislation against the forming of new parties was rescinded. Lula was among its founders.
The PT included a variety of currents – its founding documents laid great emphasis on openness and pluralism. And while the party acknowledged its roots in the workers’ movement, it took considerable care not to define its political perspectives too precisely. Despite the presence within the PT of a number of Trotskyist and syndicalist currents, it is true to say that radical Christianity – the theology of liberation – was the major ideological current among its ranks. Lula himself was closely associated with the Christian Base Communities, as were many of the PT’s leading figures. And in its early years it caused great excitement internationally in that it represented a radical party ‘of a new type’. It was open and democratic, and its lack of definition at that formative stage could be and was presented as a positive virtue. Most importantly, perhaps, it was a party with a mass working class base of support. It rejected Stalinism (which explains the ferocious and sustained hostility of the Brazilian Communist Party, PCB, towards it) and the cross-class populism so dominant in Brazilian politics. On the other hand, its founding manifesto made no mention of socialism, but restricted its specific demands to questions of labour legislation and parliamentary representation.
The foundation of the Brazilian Trade Union Federation, the CUT, was also a direct result of PT agitation and organising. Formed in 1983, it drew much of its support from the rank and file militants who had played such a key role in the strike wave of 1976-1980. Yet from the very moment of its founding it was clear that there was a contradiction at the heart of the CUT which reflected in its turn the unresolved political direction of the PT. Many of the leaders of both the CUT and the PT – most notably Lula himself – had emerged from a new union bureaucracy born out of those same struggles. Here too the link between the formation of the CUT and agitation for new labour legislation was too close to ignore. Just as the PT was moving towards an increasing emphasis on electoralism by the mid-1980s, so the CUT too saw the election of left officials as a primary task. The consequent neglect of rank and file organisation produced an increasingly angry confrontation within both organisations between the CUT Pela Base (Rank and File CUT) and the official leadership at the 1986 CUT Congress. The tensions were already obvious in 1983, when a new strike wave in São Bernardo was resolved after the formation of a common front between the old union bureaucracy and the leadership of the PT (including Lula), despite the bitter criticism of many rank and file groupings. By the time those political differences came to a head two years later, however, the elections of 1985 had produced a 10 percent national vote for PT. The military government had instituted indirect presidential elections in 1983 (through an electoral college) which the PT boycotted, winning it considerable support.
Direct elections presented the PT with the opportunity to pursue electoral success. The advocates of the pursuit of power through parliament were bolstered by the election results, and it was their political positions which retained the majority within both the PT and the CUT. The debate in the same year about the continuing existence of internal factions within the PT was a sign of the same rightward drift. And although the CUT had no formal connection with the PT, it was no secret that its leadership were overwhelmingly members of the PT and thus influenced by the same political pressures and arguments. If the PT leadership now saw before it a serious prospect of entering government at state and national level, the same was true for the leadership of the CUT, for whom the prospect of replacing the old populist leadership beckoned. As Beecham and Eidenham noted in 1987:
Not suprisingly, as the PT’s circumstances have changed, so have its language and practice, especially in relation to the centrality of the working class and to internal democracy ... Lula talks of the PT having achieved ‘maturity’ – i.e. it no longer restricts its base to the working class. It is consciously trying to appeal to the middle classes. [10]
It could not, however, break so easily with its solid working class base, or distance itself from a radical past which, for all its studied programmatic vagueness, still rested on a popular memory of struggle and resistance and the tradition it had generated. And the active cadre of the PT then (as now) still identified with that tradition.
In the 1988 municipal elections the PT won 36 mayoral contests, most prominently in São Paulo where Luiza Erundina, a working class woman in the best PT tradition, became the regent of Brazil’s largest city. Yet it was relatively soon after her election that she found herself fighting the CUT and the PT itself when they jointly led a series of strikes among city employees. A year later, in the 1989 presidential elections, Lula won 47 percent of the national vote – which is to say that 31 million Brazilians supported him.
There were many straws in the wind. In 1987 Lula had given a speech at the Escola Superior de Guerra, the crucible where the 1964 military coup was forged and where the systematic repression of the Brazilian workers had been planned and directed. He was, we are told, ‘received with great cordiality’.
The May 1990 Congress of the PT produced a key document called O socialismo petista (Our Socialism). [11] While Michel Lowy characterises it as ‘one of the most significant and rich documents of the “new thinking” developing in the Latin American left at the end of the 20th century’ [12], it is a document that is studied in its ambivalence. The document represents in some senses an ideological compromise which can only be achieved at the level of rhetoric, for the political practice of the PT was moving in a very different direction:
To the extent that the PT galvanises growing sectors of Brazilian society and is given credence as a political alternative for the country, our historic alternative must be more explicit. Many apparently conjunctural challenges – reform of the state, for example, or the struggle for the democratisation of landed property – can only in fact be met and overcome in the light of better strategic definitions. [13]
To this reader, at least, this paragraph reads as a studied evasion rather than as a model of theoretical clarity. And we know that at the same congress a resolution calling for a ‘return to the streets’ was followed by another that rejected a proposal that the PT should campaign for the removal of President Collor, on the grounds that he should be allowed to ride out his constitutional term – this despite his obvious corruption and his vigorous implementation of fierce neo-liberal policies! Clearly, that decision was made with an eye to the constitutional arrangements that the PT hoped to exploit itself at the next presidential elections. And while the document was forceful and explicit in its rejection of the Stalinist models of ‘actually existing socialism’, the conference adopted a commitment to pluralist market socialism – which was presumably the ‘strategic definition’ to which Our Socialism referred?!
 
The line of march
The case of the Landless Workers Movement (MST) illustrates, albeit indirectly, some of the tensions. One effect of the policies of rapid state-led economic expansion adopted by the Brazilian military regimes after 1964 was to accelerate the transformation and modernisation of agriculture. But it would do so in the interests of a powerful agribusiness sector. The agrarian reform process which had promised some degree of agrarian reform and land redistribution under the previous president, Goulart, was arrested by the coup. The military plan was designed to deliver land to large landowners and companies and to deal with the deepening problem of landlessness by ‘encouraging’ the landless to settle in the Amazon basin – in many cases occupying lands belonging to indigenous peoples. In any event, the ‘settlers’ discovered very quickly that the Amazon landowners had no compunction about using violence and murder to keep them out – though they were happy enough to have a cheap labour force at their disposal for mining and logging.
The landless people in the south of Brazil resisted the enforced migrations and instead began to occupy unused lands. As the pressure mounted in the latter half of the 1970s, the tactic of land occupation became the key method of resistance. [14] The struggles were long and bitter, confrontations between the most deprived sections of Brazilian society and some of the most powerful and ruthless members of the capitalist class. There can be very few examples of such uneven battles won by the weaker side simply because of their determination, their organisation and their courage. The experience of the movement was shared with landless groups from all over the country at a first Congress in 1984, out of which the MST was born.
There was intense debate within the MST (and it continued thereafter) concerning the relationship it should have with the PT and the trade unions. This was a movement of the rural poor, involving men, women and children in a continuous struggle for recognition of their rights to land. The conception of the community as the unit of struggle owed much to liberation theology – so too did the emphasis on internal democracy and the development of consciousness (called, with obvious religious overtones, la mística). [15] While they often supported the PT, and saw it as an ally, the movement’s leader, Joao Pedro Stédile, laid considerable emphasis on the independence of the MST from the broader political aims of the PT, and from a trade union movement which could not embrace the unemployed, the landless or their families. More significantly, perhaps, there was a very clear sense that the agrarian reform which was the central demand of the MST could not be carried through without radical redistributive policies – without, in other words, a transformation of society.
Since its formation the MST has grown to include over a million people. The basic strategy of land occupation, even in the face of unimaginable brutality from the landowners and the repressive forces, has continued to be the heart of the movement. Yet despite the conquest of several million acres of land for settlement, and despite the remarkable achievements the MST have made in terms of education and the incorporation of the landless into the struggle to transform their own lives, a long term perspective must look to the transformation of society as a whole. It is common to shorten the movement’s name to the sem terra, the landless, but the movement’s complete name is the Movement of Landless Workers. There was intense debate at the early congress where the name was adopted – and the decision to include ‘Workers’ was significant. Yet the MST has maintained a distance from the PT – very largely out of a profound mistrust of what it sees as the increasingly electoral orientation of the PT’s work and activity. On the other hand, that poses a problem for any general strategy for the socialist transformation of society – for this most combative and independent section of society, no land reform that is not part of a deeper and more complete redistribution of wealth and power can address the issues of land hunger that have made them such an extraordinary example of the courage to resist.
As the PT entered the 1990s, it was becoming clear that its origins were increasingly becoming political myth. Its practice, on the other hand, was focused on gaining power in the institutions of Brazilian society. In 1994 Lula came face to face with Cardoso in the presidential elections. It was a curious encounter, since Cardoso had once been seen as a theorist of the left, the advocate of radical emancipatory solutions. He and Lula were friends, or at least they had known each other for a long time.
The election took place against a background of rising debt, increasing unemployment and a plummeting standard of living. Ten years after the end of the military dictatorship Brazil was more unequal, more indebted and more crisis ridden than ever. The Sarney government had offered a weak and ultimately immobilised gradual reform, and then Collor’s government provided the first steps towards neo-liberalism. Cardoso came to power with a radical promise of economic transformation under a neo-liberal umbrella. Despite the radical rhetoric of PT documents at the beginning of the decade, Lula was now offering a programme of economic development firmly located within the existing capitalist framework, nationally and internationally. The PT was now a governing party in a number of cities and states; its programme for agrarian reform, for example, was far less radical than the MST might have wished. CUT, for its part, was now transformed into a national trade union apparatus long since distanced from the rank and file who had created the organisation in the first place:
The new trade unionism has thus come face to face with a basic paradox: at the very peak of its influence in the broader political process, it may be losing its effective workplace presence... The only way to strengthen the union movement is to maintain an organised broad base of support in workplaces. This requires a certain degree of militance [sic]. Despite the CUT’s militance at various points in its history, the dominant forces within the organisation today are increasingly seeking compromise and negotiation. [16]
The PT had found itself facing the same dilemma – and had made its choice. A radical rhetoric of participation and support for social movements belied the pursuit of what Lula called ‘governability’ – a project for broad cross-class electoral support for a PT government. As James Petras had noted:
In Brazil, the Workers Party is experiencing tensions between an increasingly social democratic leadership willing to sacrifice commitments to structural change in order to preserve electoral opportunities and militant rank and file trade unionists being increasingly pressured by Collor’s neo-liberal economic strategy toward more and more direct action initiatives. [17]
The pressures were to grow dramatically during the eight-year presidency of Fernando Henrique Cardoso. But in fact, Lula and the PT had already taken the decision as to the direction the PT would take and the strategy it would adopt.
 
The view from the presidential palace
The military regime which took power in 1964 set in motion a programme of rapid expansion organised from the state and financed by massive private loans. This so called ‘Brazilian miracle’ came to a crashing halt at the start of the 1980s, and as it slowed in the period after 1978, it encountered large-scale resistance from the very bodies of workers that the ‘miracle’ had concentrated in the new engineering plants in the ABC area. At the same time, the growth of the MST expressed the resistance of rural workers and their families to the attempt to reorganise agriculture in favour of agribusiness.
When the military regime yielded power, it attempted to control the transition through indirect presidential elections. Its failure to control the process as it might have wished produced a weak civilian administration under Tancredo Neves, but Neves’s death on the eve of his inauguration passed the presidency to José Sarney. Sarney was himself a landowner who was a close ally of the military in his home state of Maranhão. Nevertheless, he switched allegiances – at least on the surface – and became an advocate of agrarian reform. But the extreme scepticism of the leaders of the MST proved justified – Sarney’s agrarian reform was a shadow of the reform he had promised, and even that fell apart in the face of landowner resistance. The MST, for its part, intensified its rate of land occupation. [18] And the level of working class activity began to rise in the mid-1980s as well. Yet by the end of the decade, as the 1990 presidential elections approached, ‘Brazil witnessed a steadily increasing concentration of wealth and income in the hands of the top 5 percent; the purchasing power of the 50 percent of the population receiving the minimum wage is currently (1991) at a historic low.’ [19]
Fernando Collor, a media executive and a well known media personality, won the presidency by a narrow margin in 1990 – beating Lula:
In March 1990 ... Collor announced an IMF-type anti-infaction (stabilisation programme) which included an end to price controls, the elimination of producer subsidies, and a major reduction in the size of the public sector. [20]
But in this Collor was simply imposing with more brutality the measures already pursued by Sarney and his predecessor government. Its purpose was to squeeze living standards and public spending in order to repay the mushrooming service on public debt. Once in power Collor obeyed the dictates of his masters and set out to impose the punitive regime that the IMF and others were demanding in exchange for a rescheduling of the debt. The complete failure of the plan simply produced a second version, Plan Collor II, which accelerated the previous measures, expanded the range of privatisation and imposed new austerity measures. Brazil, in other words, was experiencing its first brutal form of ‘structural adjustment’. [21] The consequence was accelerating inflation and a consequential catastrophic collapse in living standards. Millions fell below the line of absolute poverty. By 1994 the inflation figure had reached 2,000 percent. But Collor was no longer there to supervise it – he was impeached in 1993 for multiple corruption. His successor, Itamar Franco, appointed a new finance minister, a man who was known in the 1970s as a leading Marxist theorist, Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
A year later Cardoso became president and launched his own solution. It was neo-liberalism at its most extreme, intensifying privatisation, liberalising imports and throwing the doors open to foreign capital. But it was not only an encouragement to foreign capital to invest in industry – this was an invitation to speculators too, with high interest rates and special conditions to allow foreign speculators to move in and out of the economy at a moment’s notice. Between 1995 and 1999 foreign investment went from representing 6 percent of GDP ($42.5 billion) to 21.6 percent ($197.7 billion). Inflation plummeted (to 1.7 percent in 1998), imports fell in price and the value of wages rose. Some 9 million people escaped absolute poverty (leaving 33.9 percent of the population-some 50 million people – still surviving in misery). [22]
But this whole short-term resurgence was based on massive borrowing. Cardoso, the theorist of dependency and development, was elaborating a plan (the Plan Real) which envisaged the fastest possible integration of the Brazilian economy into the global capitalist system. By late 1995 interest rates were at 64.8 percent and privatisation was accelerating. If there were short term gains in growth in the job market, and control of inflation, it was Cardoso’s own predictions (in the 1970s) on the consequences of dependency that would now be confirmed as his presidency evolved:
Brazil’s access to overseas funding ultimately depended on the demand and supply of capital in the North and, in particular, on the cost of borrowing they set ... In practice this meant that the Brazilian economy was at the mercy of international developments triggered by the opportunities or dangers facing core [i.e. foreign] investors. [23]
By late 1997 one of those developments, the South Asian crisis, revealed how exposed the Brazilian economy was to the shock waves moving through the world system. Foreign investors fled Brazil, and the government borrowed high risk private capital to fill the gaps and service the burgeoning debt. Wages were frozen – unemployment rose dramatically. The collapse of the Russian economy a year later drove the point home again. Cardoso turned to the IMF for a $1.5 billion loan:
As Joseph Stiglitz recently reminded us, when the IMF comes in to bail out a Third World economy, it virtually always calls for austerity to force a deflation that will enable the country to earn foreign exchange and run a government surplus in order to pay back its debts. It does everything possible to prevent a reflation of demand to raise employment and alleviate popular suffering, since this would tend to make for bigger government and public sector deficits. [24]
The pattern was faithfully reproduced in Brazil from 1998 until the end of Cardoso’s second presidential term in 2002. The net result of his ambitious and high-sounding ‘Third Way’ [25] was an average rise in per capita income of just 1 percent across those eight years, a doubling of urban unemployment between 1995 and 2000, and a fall in the value of real wages of over 10 percent by 2001. Most scandalous of all was the picture of income distribution in the new Brazil. In 1999, 10 percent of the population owned 47.4 percent of the national income, while the bottom 10 percent shared between them only 8.1 percent of the total.
While the auction of publicly owned utilities had earned $90 billion, none of that was reinvested in Brazil – rather the general picture was one of mergers, acquisitions and collapse of small and medium enterprises. Their production was then replaced by imported goods – telephones are one among many examples. All of this was then covered by emergency IMF loans – of $15 billion three yeas ago, and last year (2002) a further loan of $30 billion. The usual conditions applied!
This then was the situation of economic and social crisis in which Lula presented his candidacy for the presidency of Brazil.
 
Olé olé olé olé – Lula Lula!
In the weeks before and after Lula’s assumption of power the atmosphere was festive. Finally, after so many near misses, the Workers Party candidate had been elected. The level of expectation among ordinary Brazilians was extraordinary. Brazil, after all, was experiencing hunger. The level of unemployment had risen to close to 10 percent of the population. The official minimum wage of 211 reales at the end of 2002 was roughly equivalent to $60 per month. The number of people without homes, or living in fragile and temporary accommodation, was one more result of the deepening crisis in the Brazilian economy. The portrayal of life in the city slums – the favelas – in films like City of God may have distorted the proportion of people involved in drug trading and associated crime – and ignored the number of people who did find work of some kind or who simply struggled to make ends meet. But the truth was that Brazil’s huge and spreading cities were experiencing a growing level of social violence – an obvious and self destructive consequence of the absence of horizons for half the population at least. Add to that the small business sector that had experienced catastrophic collapse in the mounting crisis after 1996 – where perhaps much of that violence was concentrated. [26]
Throughout that period employed workers had been confronted with wage freezes, a steep decline in the purchasing power of what they did earn – a minimum wage, for example, which had not changed for several years and which was completely inadequate. Privatisation’s effects were much the same as those experienced everywhere else in Latin America – a steep decline in the quality of public services. And where there was resistance, the response was stubborn and unyielding and the consequences were often severe. The bus drivers of São Paulo, who had struck for improved wages, were fined after the strike ended and had prison sentences hanging over them for non-payment of fines. The oil workers in the state-owned enterprise Petrobras had met repeated repression when they flexed their muscles over the falling value of their wages.
The Landless Workers Movement (MST) had given its support to the PT, but insisted on its autonomy from it. And while Cardoso boasted that some 90 million hectares of land had been appropriated for redistribution among the landless, the real picture was very different. The majority of that land was in the Amazon basin, and was effectively impossible to cultivate, or as often as not it was controlled by local landowners and their armed thugs who had no intention of yielding the land to settlement (an entirely familiar experience over 20 years of land occupation under MST leadership). [27] And at the same time, some 60 million hectares of serviceable and fertile land had been absorbed into large-scale agriculture as a result of mergers and takeovers.
Some within the PT, even in recent weeks, have called for a complete break between the PT and the MST, others for a judicious distance to be established. But most leading PT members regard the MST with suspicion as ‘ideological purists’ – though this may have something to do with the MST’s absolute prohibition on any member accepting a government post at any level.
For all these sectors, the election of Lula was the fulfilment of a long held hope, a yearning for a just redistribution of wealth, for an end to hunger, for the exercise of control over the unrestrained activities of the transnational capitalist interests that Cardoso had invited to take control of key areas of the Brazilian economy. Above all, the financial agencies – the IMF and the World Bank – would now be subject to a government that would recognise the injustice of a debt incurred largely to service previous debts and to create favourable conditions for external investors at the expense of Brazil’s population.
And if such extraordinarily high expectations were invested in a government led by Lula, it was because he and his party had somehow come to symbolise the sustained resistance of the working classes over 20 years. In other words, the name Lula and the logo ‘PT’ had gathered around them an enormous symbolic capital. And within the PT itself there were still many sections and factions of the revolutionary left who fostered and reinforced the notion that the PT did carry within it the legacy of workers’ struggle.
I have tried to show, in the earlier part of this exploration of the Brazilian experience, that the myth of the PT did not necessarily correspond to its practice – especially as it came increasingly close to positions of power and control at city and state levels. The internal contradiction within PT, to which many commentators have referred, was not a tactical difference, but a strategic division. Yet, as the 2003 election results have shown, the hopes and aspirations have been invested in Lula and his party despite the deep ambiguities of their trajectory over recent years.
If those different hopes were set against what we already know about Lula’s presidency, so recently begun, would they be justified in their expectations?
 
The view from above
Before assuming the presidency Lula announced his principal cabinet nominations. In every area concerned with the economy, his nominees were people of the right committed to neo-liberal strategies. Most emblematic was his proposed director of the Central Bank – Henrique Meirelles, ex-president of the World Bank, a millionaire businessman and a member of the PMDB. More importantly, Meirelles was a key figure in the Cardoso regime and as he himself proudly announced, he represents ‘continuity’! As the gilt on the gingerbread, Lula simultaneously announced the independence of the bank. Similar nominations of wealthy businessmen committed to the global capitalist project were announced for the economics ministry (Palloci) and the ministry of development (Furlan). At the ministry of agriculture the new incumbent was a representative of some of the most powerful agribusiness interests in the country.
These appointments need to be seen against the background of Lula’s general policy regarding debt – currently at $400 billion and rising. The PT government has committed itself to honouring the foreign debt incurred by the Cardoso government on behalf of a shrinking number of powerful private economic interests. Presumably, if the debt obligation is accepted without renegotiation, so too are the conditions appended to it – the freeze on public spending, the increase in the domestic capital surplus [28], the maintenance of a low wage bill, etc. Thus the first, best hope of this most central of strategic decisions – a refusal to countenance the repayment of the foreign debt – has already been frustrated.
On the other hand, Lula has insisted that he is also simultaneously pursuing a policy of development. He would have to be very deaf indeed not to hear the clamour from the vast majority of Brazilians for a redistribution of wealth. That, of course, would embrace the land redistribution and agrarian reform for which the MST has fought since its foundation. And at the ministry of agrarian reform the new incumbent, Roseto, would seem to have appropriate credentials. He is a member of Democracia Socialista, a Trotskyist organisation within the PT allied to the USFI, the Fourth International. Yet when the economic development and agriculture ministries are firmly in the hands of the right, the ministry seems like a poisoned chalice.
More broadly, it is hard to imagine any meaningful policy of development that does not involve the growth of the domestic market and a high degree of state control and direction of the economy. Yet it is quite clear that, as far as control over economic strategy is concerned, the ball has already been passed back to the global system. While it is true that Brazil occupies something like eleventh place in the list of industrialised nations, the structure and ownership of that industry, in the wake of its transformations under Cardoso, tie it to the movements of global capital. By the same token, the growth of the internal market requires radical policies of redistribution of income. While it is easy to make sonorous promises, the clear signs after a few weeks of a Lula presidency are that this is wholly incompatible with those other neo-liberal strategic interests to whom, it seems, Lula is already hostage. The minimum wage, for example, will rise from 211 to 240 reales per month. Independent calculations suggest that for an average family of four to maintain an acceptable standard of living would require 1,500 reales at 2002 prices!
When civil servants who have been denied any wage increases for eight years called for an emergency 25 percent cost of living increase from the PT national and state administrations, the new government refused point blank to consider it. And yet – in a decision that will certainly come back to haunt them – MPs in the national parliament, where the PT have a majority, did immediately vote themselves a 30 percent increase in pay, from 6,000 to 8,000 reales, plus a virtual doubling of their expenses. When this cascades down through the various levels of the state apparatus, this will represent a considerable commitment – at the expense of those earning less than the minimum wage. ‘So to speak of a developmentalist policy in the era of capitalist globalisation is problematic in itself; but to think of implementing it side by side with neo-liberal policies is at the very least a contradiction in terms.’ [29]
In 2002 a proposed plebiscite to demonstrate the popular rejection of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) was held, but the PT withdrew its support for the plebiscite and abstained from the campaign. While it expresses its rejection of the FTAA today, it is not in the terms of the mass campaign of last year – a rejection of the FTAA is a rejection of the policies of global capital and its neo-liberal strategists. Instead Lula and the PT have spoken of an alternative market, Mercosur. Given Brazil’s tiny share of world trade (around 1 percent) and its export dependence on the US (around 23 percent of total exports), this proposed alliance of national capitals is a phantasm in an age of aggressive global expansion. In any event, it is to Brazil’s internal market that any progressive government should be looking. However, to repeat the point, there can be no internal market unless there is a commitment to a radical redistribution of wealth. But there is no such policy!
The question of hunger, however, has been central to Lula’s early governmental decisions. One of the two new institutions created by the new government is the ‘Fome Zero’ (Zero Hunger) campaign around Lula’s promise to ensure that ‘every Brazilian will eat three proper meals a day’. For the 53 million or so who have no such possibility at the moment, this is a promise full of meaning.
Yet what is the reality of the proposed campaign? Essentially it is a food welfare programme, to be paid for either by tokens or by a sort of credit card which may be exchanged for food. We know in Britain how socially disabling food tokens are. They identify and further marginalise the poor. More importantly, these policies are not only paternalistic but they are not redistributive; they do not alter the share of national income that goes to the poor. This kind of ‘social inclusion’ programme – for that is what it is – creates a dependency on the state and in the real world of a political life controlled and dominated by the PT and its allies, a relationship of clientilism.
But there is a yet more sinister element. The second institution created in the early days of the Lula government is the CDES, the Commission for Social and Economic Development on which most trade unions and social movements are represented. Britain has its own experience of such National Economic Development Councils. But the frame for the commission’s work was set out by Lula in a pre-inauguration meeting with trade unionists in which he called on employed workers to ‘recognise their social responsibility towards the poor’. ‘Helping them is much more revolutionary than demanding a 5 percent wage rise,’ he said.
The irresistible conclusion is that there will be redistribution, but only from the relatively poor to the very poor – while the beneficiaries of the years of neo-liberal economic transformation will enjoy the protection of a workers’ government.
 
Lula from below
Seen from below, and from the perspective of all those who have invested such hope and expectation in Lula, the new regime may provide an opportunity, a real opening. It is not a matter at this early stage of attacking a government which is viewed with such optimism by the mass of working people. Instead the task is to build a movement ready to support whatever initiatives may come from that government – but able to act independently of its institutional arrangements to enact the changes for which so many have waited for so long.
But the reality, I suspect, is that those institutional arrangements will represent an obstacle to the fulfilment of those aspirations from a very early stage. What kind of government is it? The answer lies in the term that Lula – or rather the besuited, elegant and professionally advised Luis Inacio da Silva-increasingly employs to describe the framing political concept of his presidency – ‘governability’. In practice the term means an agreement with conservatives and capitalists to maintain social and economic stability. Thus the ‘equilibrium’ in the cabinet is the first manifestation of ‘governability’; the second is the sharing of parliamentary posts with the right – thus Jose Sarney, the ex-president, is the PT’s candidate to lead the Senate in exchange for his party’s support for the PT candidate for president of Congress.
How will Lula react to the new wave of occupations planned by the MST in March? How will it respond to a national strike of oil workers, which seems likely to occur? How will it deal with a national strike of the white collar workers to whom it has denied a long overdue wage increase? What will ‘governability’ mean in those circumstances? In the end the maintenance of a political coalition forged with a large section of the bourgeoisie in exchange for ‘stability’ will be determinant, especially when the instruments of economic power have already been delivered into their hands.
A more likely scenario is that the trade union leadership will be called upon to maintain what is already being called a ‘truce’ (presumably an agreed pause in the class struggle?). After all, a glance back at the PT’s real history over the last decade and a half shows us not a party engaged in building the capacity of the mass movements, the social organisations and the trade unions to develop their capacity to struggle, but rather a growing insistence that they cede that impulse to struggle to those who will govern in their name.
They may for a brief period govern in their name – but ‘governability’ will ensure that they cannot govern in their interests, not when they are in a strategic alliance with their class enemies. This is not a time to denounce Lula – but it is a time to demand that he acts on behalf of those who put him where he is. That can only be done from below, from the mass movement; the challenge cannot be mounted from secret seminars in the presidential suites of Brasilia, and the subtleties of political debate will pale into insignificance in the face of the pressures of capital. For revolutionaries, the task – as always – is to build on our victories and prepare for the struggles to come; the socialist future will emerge from the experience of struggle from below, and the definitive transfer of power and control to those who for so long have produced the extraordinary and highly concentrated wealth of this huge but still deeply divided country.

Notes
1. E. Sadir, Correo de Prensa de la IV internacional, in Boletín Electrónico, no. 530, 9 January 2003.
2. Rouge, 20 January 2003.
3. Much of the information on this early history is taken from D. Beecham and A. Eidenham, Beyond the Mass Strike: Class, Party and Trade Union Struggle in Brazil, in International Socialism 36 (Autumn 1987), pp. 18–19.
4. See the discussion of the economy below.
5. D. Beecham and A. Eidenham, op. cit., p. 19.
6. Brazil State and Struggle (Latin America Bureau 1982), p. 67.
7. D. Beecham and A. Eidenham, op. cit., p. 24.
8. He was finally acquitted of the charge in 1984.
9. D. Beecham and A. Eidenham, op. cit., p. 29.
10. Ibid., p. 32.
11. Reproduced in M. Lowy (ed.), Marxism in Latin America from 1909 to the Present (Humanities Press 1992), pp. 264–271.
12. Ibid., p. 264.
13. Ibid., p. 269.
14. The story of the MST is movingly told and with a wealth of detail in S. Branford and J. Rocha, in Cutting the Wire (Latin America Bureau 2002).
15. For more on this see L. Kane, Popular Education and Social Change in Latin America (Latin America Bureau 2001), particularly ch. 4.
16. I.J. Rodrigues, The CUT: New Unionism at a Crossroads, in NACLA Report on the Americas: Report on Brazil, vol. XXVII/6 (May/June 19950), p. 36.
17. J. Petras and M. Morley, Latin America in the Time of Cholera (Routledge 1992), p. 20.
18. See S. Branford and J. Rocha, op. cit., pp. 31–32.
19. J. Petras and M. Morley, op. cit., p. 13.
20. Ibid., p. 52.
21. For the best analysis of the experience of neo-liberal economic measures through the 1990s in Latin America, see D. Green, The Silent Revolution: the Rise of Market Economics in Latin America (Latin America Bureau 1995).
22. This section owes much to Geisa Maria Rocha’s careful consideration of the Brazilian economy under Cardoso in Neo-dependency in Brazil, in New Left Review (July/August 2002), pp. 5–34.
23. Ibid., p. 13.
24. Ibid., p. 15.
25. Cardoso appears to have seen no contradiction between his early Marxism and his current enthusiastic advocacy of neo-liberalism. The ‘Third Way’ he espoused may have been closer to the route taken by Felipe Gonzalez in Spain, but he obviously saw himself in the same group as Blair. And in their shared enthusiasm for the benefits of globalisation, for privatisation and for the extension of the market to every sphere of human activity, they clearly are compatible bedfellows.
26. Apart from films like City of God, the novels of Patricia Melo – Killer or Inferno – give a flavour of favela life, as does the proliferating prison rap music that has so defined the last few years in Brazilian culture.
27. See S. Branford and J. Rocha, op. cit.
28. In neighbouring Argentina that same phrase has been used to explain the combination of cutbacks in all areas of public spending, plus a rise averaging 10 percent in the price of all public utilities – gas, water, electricity, transport.
29. R. Polly, Governo Lula: uma Analise, in Socialismo Internacional, no. 1 (São Paulo, January 2003), p. 9.
 



For Richer, For Poorer. Shaping US-Mexican Integration
Harry Browne
Latin American Bureau £7.99
There may still be some people somewhere who believe that the
market can bring benefits. The last and latest attempt to
re-establish the illusion was the signing of the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) on 1 January this year. Unfortunately for
Clinton, his assurances to Congress that his version of the agreement
would be more socially responsible than earlier drafts were exposed
by 20,000 armed peasants in southern Mexico who showed that it would
bring only hunger and poverty.
NAFTA has only one purpose – to integrate the world market for
the benefit of powerful capitalist interests. The consequences will
be immediate. Populations expelled from their land will become wage
labourers producing crops for export or will drift to the factories
that are moving from the US or Canada to Mexico because this
disposable army of workers is cheaper and less able to defend its
working conditions.
These new factories will produce goods for a wider market, but
most of them will be beyond the reach of those who produce them. In
the very short term 500,000 jobs will be lost in Mexico. Once the
ruling classes of the so called ‘Third World’ tried to set up
their own protected areas of economic activity, now they are rushing
to become part of great international conglomerates.
NAFTA is a model of what free trade and global integration mean.
The British and Mexican ruling classes not only share a common
ideology – they are competing for resources in exactly the same
way. Each claim that the economy as a whole will benefit from any new
investment. The reality in the long recession of the 1990s is that
some economic sectors will grow, but the benefits will be accumulated
in the heart of a corporation that will seek to spread its
investments across the world for its own profit.
The authors of this book offer plenty of evidence and detailed
statistics to reinforce the point. They underline the dangers and the
brutal consequences of this ‘corporate bill of rights’. At the
heart of their critique is a hope that new international institutions
will arise to oversee and control the international order.
It is a futile hope. GATT and NAFTA are the economic arms of a
system whose military and political expressions, like the UN, have
made it brutally clear on whose behalf they are prepared to act.
Change will come only when power shifts towards the producers. All
the guarantees offered by the Mexican government to the people of
Chiapas were meaningless until they fought back.
The alternative of creating an independent state able to protect
itself from the system has been exposed in Cuba, Nicaragua and Mexico
itself. Such states may offer the opportunity of resistance – but
they cannot offer an alternative. The sane world the authors of this
book so clearly wish to see can never be created by members of a
capitalist class whose survival depends on the successful
exploitation of workers.
Politically, only the international organisation of workers offers
an alternative future. The great illusion that a global economy will
bring a general improvement is exposed from Chiapas to the sweatshops
of China. The only improvements in the lives of workers have been won
by workers themselves.
 



Pedro Paramo
Juan Rulfo
Serpent’s Tail £7.99
Juan Preciado returns to his mother’s village in obedience to
her dying wish. As he descends into the little town of Comala what he
finds is not the green pleasant place of his mother’s memories but
a dead town full of disembodied voices.
Comala turns out to be a sort of purgatory in which a series of
tormented souls live out a perpetual guilt that forbids rest or sleep.
What all of them have in common is that they were corrupted and
used by the man who controlled the town – Pedro Paramo. Not only
did he and his son use everyone in the village for their own ends –
he also ‘let Comala die’ after the death of his son Miguel.
The setting for the novel is Mexico; the time is the 1940s or
1950s – it is never clear exactly when. The writer, Juan Rulfo,
wrote only this and an earlier book of short stories. But Pedro
Paramo is a fine novel, and quite enough to justify Rulfo’s
reputation.
Within the novel there are many lost worlds – Juan’s mother
remembered a utopian place, and the one person Pedro Paramo loves,
Susana San Juan, takes refuge from him in a dream of Arcadia he
cannot enter.
In 1910 Mexico experienced a revolution whose purpose was to sweep
away the class to which Paramo belonged. Its central object was to
redistribute land to the small farmers and take it from the great landlords.
Yet here the revolution makes only a brief appearance. The
revolutionary leaders are bought off by Paramo and quickly leave.
Comala is abandoned by the revolution and plucked out of the stream
of history.
Forty years later (in 1955), when Rulfo wrote his novel, he could
not fail to suggest the betrayal and corruption of the promises of
revolution – and the poor dead souls of Comala as the victims of
the process.
The novel is not a conventional narrative. It is, rather, a chorus
of disparate voices from which emerges a sense of shared experience,
though each of the speakers is obsessed by their own loneliness. It
is a poetic, evocative song of regret, and a powerful image of the
living death that is the result of isolation from the dynamic process
of history.
 



Colombia (so often misspelt and so rarely understood) has hit the headlines in Britain just twice in 2001 – once when a British oil company employee was kidnapped by the ELN (Colombia’s National Liberation Army), and again when three alleged members of the IRA were arrested as they left the territories under the control of the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, the country’s largest guerrilla organisation). Despite the many column inches devoted to these incidents for the day or two that media interest lasted, little was done to dispel the stereotypical image of a Latin America populated almost entirely by guerrillas, drug dealers and generals in dark glasses. Certainly there was no attempt to take the opportunity to explain why the US government has thus far given over $1 billion in aid under the auspices of Plan Colombia, nor why the vast bulk of that money has been spent on military training and weapons, despite the repeated assertions from US State Department sources that the central purpose of the aid programme is to eliminate drug production. [1] Mo Mowlam was one politician recruited for the campaign to reassure the world of the high moral purposes of Plan Colombia. She briefly graced the front pages of the British press kneeling beside a dead coca plant – living proof that the Blair government’s support for Plan Colombia was one more component of its ethical foreign policy.
The reality, of course, is far more sinister and more far reaching. Equally clear is the fact that even a successful outcome of Plan Colombia will have virtually no effect on the rising graph of drug use in the US. Whether the British government is just deeply disingenuous, or a willing accomplice in the concealment of the realities of a new period of expansion and militarisation whose horizons lie far beyond Colombia, is unproven. [2] The evidence, however, is accumulating relentlessly, as human rights groups, NGOs, guerrilla organisations, striking trade unionists and social movements give notice to the world of what is happening to Colombia, and as hundreds of thousands of displaced people and refugees fleeing from areas of conflict and destruction offer poignant witness to the real objectives of Plan Colombia.
 
The genesis of Plan Colombia
Plan Colombia was presented to the Colombian Congress by its current president, Andres Pastrana, in 1999. It was strongly rumoured that the Spanish version he offered them was a translation of a version originally written in English and discussed during a visit to President Clinton in Washington. Whatever the truth, there is no doubt that ‘Plan Colombia is both a continuation and an escalation of US politico-military policy...adapted to new global realities’. [3] That was not how it was represented. Pastrana’s justification for the plan was that it offered a strategy for restoring stability and peace to Colombia, a country whose modern history has been characterised by violence and conflict. The centrepiece of the policy, ostensibly at least, was a drugs eradication programme. The relationship between the two was that Clinton would thus be able to argue at home that the plan was not a military intervention in Latin America but rather an extension of domestic drugs containment policies. Pastrana for his part could argue that the plan identified the drug producers as the central obstacle to democracy in the country. The $1 billion of aid that Clinton sought from Congress was overwhelmingly devoted to arms and military spending. The only other measure was a large-scale programme of defoliant spraying intended, it was alleged, to eliminate coca and poppy production while leaving other crops unscathed.
It certainly seems that the British government, among others, has bought the drugs eradication story-accepting without demur the suggestion that the large guerrilla organisations and their continuing confrontation with the Colombian state were no more than extensions of the drug war. A new term – ‘narcoguerrillas’ – was coined to make the elision easier. Thus the US State Department was able to report on 30 June 2001 that ‘the US Congress gave final passage June 30 to an $11,200 million spending bill that includes $1,300 million in emergency aid designed to help the government of Colombia battle the illegal drug trade’. [4]
It became immediately clear, however, that the US government was fully aware that the likely effect on drug trafficking into America’s cities would be negligible – previous eradication programmes had demonstrated that beyond question. Public statements from the Colombian government seemed entirely concerned with defeating the guerrillas, while the spokespersons for the US government were clearly preoccupied with matters of ‘regional security’.
The net effect of this eradication programme has been the increasing militarisation of Colombian society, the displacement of up to 2 million people, and the creation of a deepening economic crisis whose victims include the small farmers, oil and transport workers, and urban refugees who have repeatedly demonstrated their concerns in the streets of Colombia’s cities in recent months.
The claim of the plan’s US sponsors to be concerned with the restoration of human rights and the consolidation of democracy was a veil that covered completely different purposes. The direct consequence of that aid package has been to legitimise a whole range of assaults on all democratic rights, to militarise all aspects of civil society and to subordinate the interests of the majority of Colombians to the geopolitical concerns of global capitalism.
 
Drugs – myth and reality
The Colombian drugs boom began in the 1960s when the northern regions around Santa Marta provided marijuana, much prized in the booming US market. The result was a kind of gold rush along Colombia’s Caribbean coast, when the infamous Cherokee Chieftains with smoked glass windows signalled the arrival of a newly rich class. When US authorities began to control that trade, the weed was replaced by cocaine which was much more profitable and less bulky. [5] The raw material was the coca plant, grown by peasants and small farmers in Bolivia and Peru, then collected in unmarked planes and taken to small laboratories and processing plants in the Amazon regions before export to the US and, in smaller quantities, to Europe. The profits were unimaginable, even when they had to be shared with the ruling elites of a number of Latin American countries. In Bolivia, for example, the military regimes of the 1970s were deeply involved in this continental drug trade. [6] The involvement of US-based agencies, and the CIA in particular, is murkier, though arms for drugs exchanges were to emerge into the public arena in the following decade, with the testimonies of Oliver North and others.
Colombia’s geography lent itself well to the creation of hidden jungle laboratories and the trade routes had already been laid out during the marijuana years. Now Medell’n became the centre of this new drug trade – dominated first by Carlos Lehder and later by Pablo Escobar. [7] This group had emerged from the poorer urban sectors, and they ensured their loyalty by generous acts of charity. But the scale of profits involved in the trade gave the drug cartels the ability to buy and sell politicians, lawyers, judges and generals – and to murder those who refused to comply. In 1990 the Medell’n cartel murdered three presidential candidates. Escobar was boasting that he could pay off the national debt, or take on the Colombian army and win. As was to be expected, the Colombian ruling classes found this challenge intolerable. While it was always true that Colombian society was deeply divided and cross-hatched by regional power bases, [8] and that the state was a point of negotiation between them, in the final analysis Escobar was challenging the power of the ruling classes as a whole. And even if, as subsequent years would demonstrate, those classes had been corrupted and controlled by the drug cartels, they could not tolerate an alternative power within the nation state. The grandfather of the cartel, Lehrer, was now in prison in the US. Washington was demanding the extradition of the current cartel leaders too. Escobar therefore reached an agreement with the government to turn himself in, in exchange for a guarantee that he would not be extradited. A special jail was built for him – but it quickly became clear that it was effectively a fortified hotel with state protection, since he quite openly continued to conduct his business from there. In any event, he walked out in 1992 and remained in hiding until his assassination at the hands of Colombian anti-drugs agencies a year later. Power then moved to the competing Cali cartel, which explicitly spurned any aspirations to power. In 1995 its leader, Rodriguez Orijuela, was also arrested, just as the extent of its involvement in and control of the government of Ernesto Samper – the very government that had proclaimed its resolve to crush the cartels – began to emerge with mounting supporting evidence.
The effect of this and other anti-drug measures promoted by the US government was negligible. In the 1980s major interventions in Bolivia and Peru – the chief source of the coca leaf – had simply resulted in a shift in the areas of primary production towards southern Colombia. The traffic found different routes and expanded onto a worldwide terrain that embraced Turkey, Albania, Central America and Mexico as the chief portals to the European and US markets respectively. The long and short of it was that the spectacular assaults on coca and poppy growing areas only affected the smallest cog in the system – the peasant growers. Since the coca plant gives a crop in 60 days, it took very little time for new crops to be grown elsewhere:
According to a 1999 General Accounting Office (GAO) report, ‘Despite two years of extensive herbicide spraying [in Colombia], US estimates show [that] net coca cultivation actually increased by 50 percent’. [9]
In fact:
Even if ‘successful’ eradication were actually achieved in Colombia, there are 1.6 billion acres in the rest of the biophysically hospitable Amazon. That is more than 2,000 times the 740,000 acres needed to fulfil the complete international demand for cocaine. In the entire history of the use of force against illicit crops, not one effort has succeeded in reducing the supply of natural drugs needed to fully supply the world market. [10]
The reality, then, is that the fundamental issue is the demand, not the supply – and the US government, while willing to disburse tens of millions in spectacular interventions in the affairs of supplier countries, refuses to address the issue of why drugs are used to the extent that they are in the US. While there seems in recent times to have been a slight decline in middle class use of drugs as their harmful effects have been documented and publicised, the inner city poor have no alternative. They are criminalised and the small-scale dealers are added to the millions in America’s prisons. Meanwhile, an estimated 50 percent of the half a trillion dollars of profit that drugs yield every year remains within the financial system of the US itself, reinvested and manipulated by some 500 or so economic actors. [11]
Within Colombia itself the Medellín and Cali cartels have been successfully broken, but this has not meant even a momentary break in the flow of drugs. Local production is now in the hands of several hundred middle size refiners and distributors whose task it is to pass it on to the major actors in the traffic.
The US, meanwhile, continues with its policy of spraying crops across southern Colombia. There has been a sinister change, however, under the aegis of Plan Colombia, the effects of which are likely to be profound and destructive in both social and economic terms. For nearly two decades the use of the herbicide glyphosate, it is claimed, has eliminated some 150,000 acres of land devoted to the cultivation of coca and poppy plants. Yet, as we have seen, the effects on overall production were relatively small. In recent times the fields have been sprayed with a different agent – the myoherbicide Fusarium oxysporum – whose effects are far reaching and indiscriminate. It kills a wide range of plants, and will almost certainly have catastrophic effects on the fragile ecology of the region. [12] Even more curious, and a point to which I shall return, is that, while 40 percent of Colombia’s coca is currently grown in the north of the country, spraying is concentrated in the south.
This issue is complex and its ramifications need to be considered in more detail elsewhere. But at another level, the irresistible conclusion is quite a simple one. The drug eradication programme which ostensibly lies at the heart of Plan Colombia is incapable of realising its own goals – as all previous drug eradication programmes pursued in the last two decades have repeatedly demonstrated. This is well known in State Department circles and reiterated in every debate on the issue. We must therefore assume that the ‘war on drugs’ is the veil behind which hides a very different strategy.
 
Strategies in the backyard
Plan Colombia, as Petras emphasises, is the latest chapter in a long narrative of counter-insurgency – the succession of policies and strategies whereby the US protects the economic interests of its home-based capital. [13] Thus the military intervention in Cuba, Puerto Rico and Nicaragua at the turn of the century both provided a bridgehead to guard its ‘backyard’ and ensured a security fence to protect the activities of the United Fruit Company among others. Its surrogates and representatives were on hand to crush Chile’s 100-day republic in 1930, the 1932 insurrection in El Salvador, the 1933 rising in Cuba and so on.
The Cuban Revolution of 1959 ushered in a new period of counter-insurgency, which combined military, economic and ideological interventions under the twin banners of the Alliance for Progress and the Inter American Security Treaty. The objective was to isolate Cuba, provide alternative routes to reform within the imperial context and impede any growth in the development of guerrilla warfare across the continent. The iron fist emerged from the velvet glove of reform in September 1973, when Chile’s experiment in radical transformation through parliament was destroyed by a US-supported military coup led, among others, by Augusto Pinochet, who eventually emerged as its undisputed head. The Chilean coup was not just a local matter, but a strategy of militarisation and enforced economic integration. The ‘Chilean miracle’, proclaimed by Thatcher and others, effectively subjected workers to the laws of the market in their most brutal form while destroying their organisations of self defence. It is ironic to hear the mock horror expressed by Western leaders when the co-ordination of repression by the military regimes of the southern cone (Plan Condor) emerged into full public view during the Pinochet trial. That regionalisation of the conflict and the co-ordination of strategies between the new military governments was the hallmark of US thinking throughout this period.
The Nicaraguan Revolution of 1979 turned the arrow around – suddenly it was pointing at the heart of the beast. The Central American region was in turmoil, and a mass movement in El Salvador made the possibility of a regional revolutionary process a real one. In the event, the Sandinista government of Nicaragua chose to disengage the fate of its revolution from the intensifying struggle in the rest of the region. [14] It did not save it, of course, from systematic assault – military, economic and ideological – from the north, the destruction of its economy, the death of some 60,000 of its citizens and the wounding of twice that number. It is one of the many tragic ironies of Latin America’s recent past that the consequence of US policy in the region through the 1980s was to systematically destroy the Sandinista attempt to develop an independent social economy and return both Nicaragua and its neighbours to a servile dependence on the very drug trade the US now denounces.
US strategy in Central America in the 1980s was characterised by ‘low intensity operations’ – a misnomer if ever there was one:
Through the application of a flexible mix of aid blockades, trade sanctions, economic sabotage, political and psychological pressures, civic action ‘pacification’ programs, military warfare and electoral intervention, Reagan-Bush policy has attempted to consolidate or install in power in Central America elected governments willing to accommodate White House objectives – not least in the economic sphere. [15]
Petras’s definition hardly captures the human costs of the policy – the tens of thousands dead, the destruction of economies, the displacement of millions towards the slums around the capital cities, the creation of monstrous corps of murderers like the Nicaraguan Contras with their specialities in the dismemberment of living bodies, the creation of a kind of counter-reform in the countryside where large swathes of land are restored to the landowners, often through the actions of peasant militias. The militarisation of society, the implantation of terror in the countryside, renders any and all forms of self-organisation or self-defence impossible. The role of the US lay in supporting internal counter-revolutionary forces, reinforcing the military through direct military aid and the provision of trainers, using international financial and other agencies to isolate and undermine the local economy, and mobilising a massive propaganda apparatus across the world.
After nearly a decade of struggle and resistance the peace accords of 1989 in El Salvador and the fall of the Sandinista government in 1990 [16] were to usher in a new era. We now know what that new era looks like. In southern Honduras, which had provided the base for anti-Sandinista operations through the 1980s, the economy was destroyed and the population corrupted and prostituted by the Contras and their US advisers. Agricultural production in the whole frontier region virtually ceased as the population fled the Contra war. Drugs regularly supplied to US military personnel and their allies turned the area into a boom zone for some and an important transition route for the drug trade. In El Salvador the economy is now wholly reintegrated into the world market, most food is imported and unemployment is endemic. Nicaragua’s economy collapsed through the period of the Contra war, but unsurprisingly the promised post-election aid never arrived. Now Nicaragua too has all the familiar characteristics of an impoverished economy open to the ravages of a world system – unemployment rates hovering around 60 percent, a horrific drug problem, a collapsing infrastructure, an agricultural sector where living standards are unimaginably low, and a tiny middle class living comfortable lives under siege conditions. In every case the leaders of the guerrilla organisations of the 1980s led the peace negotiations and were absorbed into the new governments. In El Salvador and Nicaragua many of the ex-guerrillas entered the army and the police. They then found themselves to be functionaries of the neo-liberal or ‘structural adjustment’ policies whose net effect was to subject those in whose name they had so recently been fighting to the laws of a confident and barbaric world market. [17] Most brutally paradoxical of all, perhaps, was that the ex-guerrillas found themselves co-operating with those who had been guilty of the most appalling human rights atrocities and in many cases negotiating their immunity as a condition of the ‘peace’ process. It is particularly poignant to travel through Nicaragua today, and see the living conditions of those who fought the Contra war compared with the luxurious lifestyle and ostentatious wealth of many of those who led that war.
That, then, is the background to Plan Colombia. The strategic priorities of US policy – the destruction of resistance in order to create an open terrain for international capital, and US-based capital in particular – have been consistently pursued through the countries of the southern cone in the 1970s and Central America in the 1980s. It is those same geopolitical imperatives that impel US policy in Colombia today, though the scale of things has changed. Clinton’s legacy to Latin America – Plan Colombia – both continues and develops that policy, adding significant new resources, reinvoking a right to intervention by redefining the issue as a domestic US matter (the campaign against drugs), and emphasising its international and regional nature. To that must be added, however, the reality of a world entering the 21st century in an era of globalisation on the one hand, and mounting resistance to globalisation on the other.
The outlays envisaged by Plan Colombia amount to $1.3 billion. The distribution of that finance is revealing – 82 percent of it will go to directly military purposes, divided between helicopters for the anti-drugs battalion of the Colombian army (47 percent), sea and river operations (27 percent) and 7 percent to the national police. Of the remainder just over 11 percent will be dedicated to alternative development projects and 7 percent towards the defence of human rights! [18] This leaves very little room for doubt as to the repressive purposes of Plan Colombia. It is a military project whose objective is control over the southern regions of Colombia. Furthermore it is not limited to Colombia itself. The six-year projection within the plan assumed the progressive involvement of what are described there as ‘partner nations’. The real significance of the term is already emerging, as the Ecuadorean government has been ‘persuaded’ to cede the Manta air base and its hinterland near the Colombian border to the US.
But even were the distribution of the total package to be altered – were alternative development to be given more, for example – nothing would be changed. For the allocation to human rights and alternative crops is determined within the wider context of the plan – that is within the framework of a geopolitics whose strategic purposes involve the ‘rooting out’ of coca and poppy production from the area by military and chemical means. As the new more aggressive spraying policy begins to affect other crops, and as the confrontation between the military and the guerrilla forces grows more intense (for what other purpose can the cascade of new military material into the area have?), tens or hundreds of thousands of peasants will join the fleeing columns making for the larger cities. They will not only be escaping the increasingly generalised violence – they will also be moving because their very livelihood has been destroyed. Others, however, will swell the ranks of the guerrillas for identical reasons (I will return to the issue in greater detail in the final sections below) and provide legitimacy for a mounting and costly military campaign. It is already the case that Colombian society is becoming increasingly militarised as a result of Plan Colombia – not only because the armed forces now have enormous logistical and ideological support from the powerful northern neighbour, but also because the priorities of the Colombian government are increasingly military. As the tide of refugees grows and the availability of basic foods declines, so the repression currently focused on the areas under guerrilla domination will generalise and intensify. This is not an imagined outcome – it is already a reality. The public sector and transport strikes of July this year were testimony to the social effects of Plan Colombia.
It is perfectly clear that for some time the Colombian state has been unable to control or contain the strains and contradictions within the society. Shot through with corruption, nepotism and conflicts between regional and sectoral interests, the state has – it seems to me – effectively crumbled into warring factions squabbling over the booty. Each new president – Pastrana, the current incumbent, among them – has set out to impose human rights and developmental priorities, yet in each case revelations of complicity, corruption and the exchange of favours have rendered those promises meaningless. Those public servants, and there have been many, who have attempted to act democratically have been cut down in their hundreds and thousands.
In the latter half of the 1980s it did appear that a political space was opening in parallel with the settlements reached between the leaderships of the armed struggle and the state in Central America. But as elements in the Colombian state opened dialogue with the M-19 and the FARC guerrillas, many within the military establishment were demanding a military solution. Those who came in from the cold to negotiate and became candidates in the elections of 1990 were almost all murdered, while trade union leaders and militants in social movements were assassinated in growing numbers. The assault on the cocaine barons, by contrast, yielded almost nothing. Some were captured and some killed, but the structures of their invisible order remained intact.
The reality was that the Colombian state was powerless to impose any kind of national solution or to initiate a process of reform. While the army complained bitterly that it was perpetually being restrained in its counter-guerrilla activity, and darkly criticised the political agenda and the concept of peace as essentially the concession of victory to the guerrillas, the political class was so compromised and corrupt that it did not and could not seize the window that had briefly opened for it. [19] The army’s frustration expressed itself in the growth of the paramilitary organisations that terrorised populations and waged a private and undocumented war against the rural population in particular. It is quite clear that these were the irregulars of the Colombian army, and that in many cases their connections with the military were intimate and immediate. [20] On the other hand, they were also directly connected to the drug cartels – or were instruments of rival factions. This did not stop them enjoying the covert support of sections of the army, the political class, and indeed US agencies like the CIA. It is bitterly ironic that one of the principal leaders of the paramilitary gangs, Carlos Castaño, is now offering himself as a broker between the Colombian government, the drug barons and the US government. [21] For any who imagined that Plan Colombia would bring the paramilitaries under control, or limit their activities, this is the most public of replies. The paramilitaries will now become effectively absorbed into a strategy of military containment and control – and their leaders, like Castaño, will be incorporated into the structures of a new, militarised state. Colombia Report (4 June 2001) reported a bill recently passed in the Colombian Senate which, among other things, provided virtual immunity to members of the armed forces who commit human rights abuses while combating ‘supposed’ terrorist groups. In what may be a sign of things to come, 2,500 members of the Colombian army seized towns in Nariño province as part of the ‘anti-drugs’ Operation Tsunami – 110 people were killed, only 18 of whom were guerrillas.
 
Friends and enemies
What are the perspectives that inform US policy in Latin America? The framework for Plan Colombia is marked by two key dates as far as economic policy is concerned. In January 1994 the long-prepared North America Free Trade Area (NAFTA) was announced, drawing Canada, Mexico and the US into a tariff-free zone of economic activity, which represented the first stage in a new phase of global economic integration. This was not simply a trade agreement, but the creation of a single economic unit dominated by US capital. After all, transnational capital had already found a comfortable home in a Mexican economy which had undergone massive privatisation of state assets under the Salinas presidency (1988–1994) and whose financial markets had already been thrown open to external involvement. This was definitely an announcement of things to come. The next stage of this aggressive process of continental integration was already envisaged, with the extension of NAFTA into Central America and the subsequent creation of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) which was finally agreed, with sirens and the explosion of teargas canisters as background music, at Quebec City in April 2001.
At the same time, the confidence of the principal actors in the institutions of world capitalism was slightly shaken at the very moment of NAFTA’s inception by a ‘small local difficulty’ whose symbolic impact on the world was far greater than its material effect. The Zapatista rising in Chiapas stole the headlines from the spin doctors of the multinational financial institutions and raised a cry – ‘Ya Basta!’ – which would very soon resonate across a growing worldwide anti-capitalist movement. [22] It would seem that the much vaunted ‘end of history’ was now over (if the paradox may be excused) – resistance was back on the agenda, placed there by sections of the community at the very margins of the global system – yet, as its leader Marcos so eloquently argued, directly suffering the consequences of the structural adjustment of the new neo-liberal economic order.
It was clear that the Andean region had a key role to play in the expansion plans of global capital. Venezuela (now no longer necessarily a ‘partner nation’) was a key supplier of oil in the region, but Colombia possesses major deposits of oil and natural gas, currently exploited by foreign multinationals and distributed through the state oil enterprise Ecopetrol. The scale of deposits means that Colombia will become a powerful player in the world oil trade. To a lesser extent so too will neighbouring Ecuador. Control of these resources – as well as other important export areas like flowers and other commodities – is crucial to the growth and expansion of the regional ‘free trade’ area. Ecuador’s economy has already been ‘dollarised’ – that is, integrated into a global economy. Venezuela, on the other hand, is now run by the nationalist-populist Chavez regime. His rhetoric is clearly rooted in a politics of national liberation and anti-imperialism, and he has followed through by establishing friendly and co-operative arrangements with Cuba, including cut-price oil. Furthermore, OPEC’s new president is a Venezuelan. Chavez’s actual attitude to the US is less easy to measure, and there are hints that he will be prepared to deal with the US. The future of the region, the fulcrum on which a whole geopolitics is balanced, is therefore Colombia: ‘Plan Colombia has to be seen as an attempt to behead the most advanced, radicalised and well organised opposition to US hemispheric hegemony’. [23] Petras’s rather adulatory characterisation of the guerrilla organisations, and particularly FARC, will need some added nuances. But his overall explanation of Plan Colombia’s greater purposes is, I think, undeniable. For Winfred Tate too, the US is ‘gearing up to repeat the mistakes of the past’. [24] That may well be its intention, but as the year 2001 has unfolded it has become increasingly clear that there is a growing resistance to the strategies of globalisation, not only in a burgeoning worldwide anti-capitalist current, but also in a growing Latin American resistance. The implementation of FTAA has been met with rolling strikes in Argentina, while in Bolivia the victory of the mass front in Cochabamba against an attempted water privatisation has been an inspiration. And despite the advancing integration of its economy into global structures, Ecuador has borne witness to an inspiring struggle of indigenous peoples and working class organisations which began in 1990 with the formation of CONAIE, the Ecuadorean Indigenous Peoples Confederation.
But the major test of the geopolitical strategies of the US and global capital is undoubtedly Colombia. It occupies a highly strategic location on the continent, bridging the Caribbean and the Pacific, and dominating the northern part of the continent. Its resources are considerable. But the key consideration, in my view, is political. In the era of globalisation the capacity of capital to gain access to all terrain – the absence of any key region outside its control – becomes a central issue. The history of guerrilla warfare in Colombia has been a very particular one. As a result there do exist well defended and well supported guerrilla enclaves where the cost of a military incursion could well be very high. But it is also a test of capital’s resolve and its power, and Vietnam weighs heavy on the memory of the US ruling class. There is not, as some commentators have suggested, a direct parallel to be drawn between Colombia and Vietnam. There is no long history of colonial war, no national liberation struggle as such, no international power struggle reflected in the specific arena. The liberated territories under FARC control do not correspond to the existence of a state (North Vietnam) with its own mass military organs. If, on the other hand, the comparison is with the possibility that the US may find itself compelled to commit large numbers of US troops in the face of the collapse of its local surrogate and the decomposition of the military command (as in South Vietnam), then I think this unlikely too. The Colombian army is numerous and well organised, all the more so with the high level of training and support it has received throughout the 1990s (and not just since the implementation of Plan Colombia) from the US. What Plan Colombia does represent is an escalation of that involvement – and a clear perception on the part of the US that the Colombian state was not able to co-ordinate or impose a political solution across the national territory. Pastrana is only the latest in a series of modernising presidential candidates committed, at least verbally, to processes of reform, who have found themselves unable to create the conditions to make that happen. The ‘peace process’, which brought the guerrilla leaders and the government into dialogue, was destroyed by the paramilitaries with the complicity of both the army command and the drug cartels. Each attempt to renew the process has produced a similar response. The agreement to a demilitarised zone (zona de despeje) in late 1998 and the security guarantees given to the guerrilla forces by the Pastrana government produced an ill concealed fury in the army command – and while the zone still exists, Plan Colombia itself is the guarantee that its existence will be brief.
 
A catastrophic equilibrium?
Plan Colombia clearly represents, at one level, an attempt by the US to break what it sees as a stalemate in Colombia: a weak state overseeing a divided country with a number of power centres; significant guerrilla armies controlling extensive territories embracing numerous largely peasant populations; combative trade union and human rights organisations exposing the actions of the paramilitaries and the deepening economic crisis; the paramilitaries linked to the armed forces at an earlier stage, yet now acting independently both as a repressive force and as an economic actor; and the multiple participants in a drug economy whose major beneficiaries almost certainly operate outside Colombia but who are themselves wealthy and powerful and able to act independently of state and army.
Who, then, will tip the balance? The US clearly sees itself in that role, reinforcing the interests of the Colombian bourgeoisie, imposing the rule of a strong militarised state and successfully defeating the opposition.
But can the guerrillas be defeated? The major guerrilla organisations the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia), the ELN (National Liberation Army) and the ERP (People’s Revolutionary Army) have long but different histories. The FARC, under its legendary leader Manuel Marulanda or Tirofijo, meaning ‘sureshot’, emerged during the years of La Violencia, the 14-year period during which all political life in Colombia was played out in armed conflict. La Violencia began with the assassination in the capital, Bogotá, of a trade unionist and Liberal presidential candidate, Jorge Eliécer Gaitán. The violent reaction to his death began in the capital, but set in motion a process in which social struggles ‘degenerated into local party feuds’. [25] That is not to say that there were not issues of class at work – the period prior to La Violencia had seen major trade union struggles on the one hand and battles over land and peasant rights on the other. But in the appalling atmosphere of violence unleashed in 1948, it was local chieftains who organised guerrillas to carry out revenge attacks or to settle scores against peasants or rural communities that had opposed them in the past. In some areas the Communist Party began to organise armed peasant defence and to introduce the land issue into its demands. But the irony was that this was a boom time for the Colombian bourgeoisie. Industrial production rose while wages fell – small wonder when all forms of independent organisation were repressed in both city and countryside. In the second half of the 1950s successive governments tried to negotiate an end to the violence, yet each amnesty or ceasefire produced more violence and death. In any event, the amnesties did not apply to the communist party, which had now grouped several thousand peasant families into areas of the south known as the independent republics, like Marquetalia. In 1963 these were invaded and crushed by the Colombian army. Those who escaped the subsequent repression formed mobile guerrilla groups, which met (for the second time), in 1966 to form the FARC. [26]
The FARC is indelibly marked by the circumstances of its birth. It emerged first as, and has remained in essence, an organisation of peasant self defence. Its association with the Communist Party did not mean that it was ideologically driven. It responded in pragmatic ways to the changing demands of its social base – which might explain its survival and continuity for over 40 years (a record no other armed guerrilla organisation in Latin America can claim). In the anarchic conditions of the Colombian countryside it has in many ways constituted both a form of local administration and, as Jenny Pearce puts it, ‘virtually a rural civil guard’. As a result it has survived through crises that have almost destroyed the other guerrilla groupings. As violence, official and paramilitary, has continued to characterise daily life for most of Colombia’s rural population, organised self defence has increasingly become the major issue, but the base of FARC is among small farmers living in precarious conditions. Many of them grow coca – and FARC has taken a tax from this, as from all other activities in the areas under its control. This has allowed the US and its allies to coin the term ‘narcoguerrillas’ – and to lump FARC together with the drug-producing cartels as if they were two faces of the same phenomenon. Their profits seem to be modest – they have very few of the trappings of the servants of the drug cartels, no AK-47s or Russian secondhand submarines. Most of their weapons are still homemade. [27] They also appear to be highly disciplined and to punish any violation with some ruthlessness. Petras avers that ‘in most of their dealings with the rural population, the FARC represents order, rectitude and social justice’. [28] He goes on to say that ‘the strength of the FARC is based on the interplay of ideological appeals and the resonance of its analysis and political practices with the everyday reality of peasant life’. This sentence seems to me to contain some studied evasions, since their ideology has changed over time. Rooted in a communist Party tradition, the FARC adopted a more pragmatic and nationalist position through the 1970s and won considerable support in the process. This was reflected in the UP, the Unión Patriótica formed in 1984 as an electoral front, and which won a significant number of parliamentary seats in 1986. In anticipation of later developments in Central America, the government’s strategy here was to transform the guerrilla organisation into a political party. But in 1985 the seizure of the Palace of Justice by the guerrilla organisation M-19, and the subsequent killing of over 100 people by the army, initiated a period of renewed repression. M-19’s positions were curious and sometimes contradictory, but in the late 1970s and early 1980s it won widespread support, particularly among the urban poor. One poll conducted in 1985 suggested that, should it stand for election, M-19 would win 36.7 percent of the vote. But its relationship with the FARC (some of its founders had been expelled from FARC in the early 1970s) remained tense. The systematic murder of most of the leading members of M-19 after the Palace of Justice events effectively eliminated it from the scene. But the repression fell on all the other armed organisations too.
The FARC’s rival, the ELN, was founded in the mid-1960s by students, intellectuals and left wing priests, and was based on the Cuban model. It has undergone a series of internal crises and splits, but currently prevails in areas of the north and centre of the country. While FARC entered into a protracted series of negotiations with the government from the mid-1980s, ELN refused to follow it and organised for armed insurgency, seeking to build a common front with some of the mass organisations that were merging in the 1980s. Nevertheless their methods have continued to rest on the perception of the guerrillas as substitutes for the masses. kidnappings, particularly of oil company employees, have gained them the resources for survival. In 1993 the FARC declared a renewed military offensive in the face of stagnation in the peace negotiations, just at the time when ELN for the first time was opening discussions with the government of Ernesto Samper. Under Pastrana the talks with the ELN have remained in suspension, while he has reopened discussions with the FARC.
Behind the painful and tortuous progress of negotiations, however, Plan Colombia resolutely advances in its preparations for the eventual destruction of the guerrilla armies. And while that fundamentally repressive strategy must be exposed and denounced, the reality is that the guerrilla strategy cannot lead to an assault on the power of the Colombian state. As the state becomes increasingly militarised, the space for mass democratic action will certainly become more restricted. But the imposition of the imperatives of globalisation is an absolute priority for the US. It is difficult to see how those imperatives can coexist for long with liberated territories of any kind. The domination of large areas by the paramilitaries, with the complicity of elements of the state, cannot coexist with a strengthened centralised power. The likely solution will be an attempt to incorporate the paramilitaries into the repressive state apparatus, while occasionally invoking human rights legislation against those who resist such incorporation. But elsewhere Colombia’s human rights record will grow worse, since the priorities of Plan Colombia are deeply inconsistent with any regime of protection or defence of the rights of the majority. Defoliation of the coca fields does much more than kill coca bushes. It drives huge populations off the land, presumably also depriving the guerrillas of bases of support and emptying the terrain for easier occupation (and the experience of the 1960s provides the precedent). It may render the land ultimately safe for the oil and gas companies gazing lustfully at these areas. But the coca and the poppy will very soon be growing elsewhere – because the demand is there in the richer nations of the world, and the coca millions directly or indirectly flow into the restless capitals streaming through the international financial institutions.
Prediction in this situation is a dangerous procedure. One thing is sure, however. The deepening involvement of the US, through Plan Colombia, will not produce a modernisation that will in any way benefit the millions of displaced, exiled or terrorised Colombians who have expressed their resistance or despair in support for the guerrilla organisations (with possibly some 20,000 people under arms) or in their active involvement in a range of organisations of protest and resistance. In Ecuador, in very recent times, the combined forces of workers’ unions and indigenous organisations brought dramatic change and a real challenge to power. In Argentina the provisions of FTAA have met with furious and sustained resistance. The strategies of the revolutionary organisations must build on these successes – for if Latin America’s political history has taught us anything, it is that no free territories will be allowed to exist in isolation for very long. They are crushed or they are absorbed by economic or military means. That is much harder to do when there are multiple fronts to fight on, and when the massed demonstrators of Genoa or Seattle seek the means of building active solidarity with all those who resist across the world.

Notes
1. US State Department website, www.state.gov/internatl. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
2. Foreign Office website, www.fco.gov.uk. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
3. J. Petras, The geopolitics of Plan Colombia, in Monthly Review, vol. 53, no. 1 (May 2001), p. 31.
4. US State Department website, op. cit., International Information Programs, 30 June 2001. My emphasis.
5. See C. Harding, Colombia: a guide to the people, politics and culture (London 1996), pp. 28–36. For a general discussion see J. Pearce, Colombia: Inside the Labyrinth (London 1990), ch. 2.1, Colombia’s Two economies, and in particular pp. 103–115.
6. This was particularly true during the first period of government of Hugo Banzer, who became a millionaire several times over at this time. In his second manifestation, at the very end of the 1990s, Banzer became – in a twilight of life conversion – a vigorous advocate of suppressing the cultivation of coca. A grateful US government rewarded him with large amounts of aid and investment.
7. Escobar’s story is most powerfully told by Gabriel García Márquez in his News of a kidnapping (London 1997).
8. This tension between regional and central power is a key to understanding Colombia’s violent history.
9. W. Tate, Repeating past mistakes, in NACLA report on the Americas, vol XXXIV, no 2 (September–October 2000), p. 17.
10. R. Vargas Meza, Biowarfare in Colombia?, in NACLA Report on the Americas, op. cit., p. 21. My emphasis.
11. This conclusion of an OECD report is quoted in the document Plan Colombia: Máscaras y Artificios by Belén Vásconez of the Comisión Ecuménica de Derechos Humanos of Ecuador, published on the web at www.pulsar.org.ec by the Pulsar Agency (27 November 2000). [Note: This Link has not been checked.]
12. Documented in convincing detail by R. Vargas Meza, op. cit..
13. For a general picture of that relationship Eduardo Galeano’s classic The Open veins of Latin America (New York 1967) remains unsurpassed.
14. For a discussion of the moment of the revolution and its subsequent unfolding through the 1980s, see M. Gonzalez, Nicaragua: what went wrong? (London 1990).
15. J. Petras and M. Morley, Latin America in a time of cholera (London/New York 1992), p. 63.
16. The Guatemalan peace accords would not finally be signed for another eight years.
17. Duncan Green’s The Silent Revolution (London 1995) is a painstaking and passionate account of the realities of that process.
18. These figures are quoted by R. Vargas Meza in a fine piece called Plan Colombia: Construcción de Paz o sobredosis de Guerra? on the Equipo Nizkor website: www.derechos.org/nizkor/colombia/doc/vargas.html. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
19. It is interesting now to return to Jenny Pearce’s characteristically thorough and insightful study, Colombia: Inside the labyrinth, completed in 1989 and published the following year. She ends her book with this perspicacious question: ‘Can an economy that has created only 500,000 jobs in manufacturing, which a leaked World Bank Report (July 1989) describes as closed and meeting the needs only of a minority, provide the majority of its population with a humane existence and the means to a livelihood? The archaic political order that has kept that minority in power has proved incapable of taking on this responsibility. The bomb will carry on ticking until it does, or until the left proves itself able to unite the people around an alternative social and political project’ (p. 287).
20. See N. Richani, The paramilitary connection, in NACLA Report on the Americas, op. cit., pp. 38–41.
21. See G.M. Leech, The Drug War: an exercise in futility, in Colombia Report (16 April 2001), www.colombiareport.org. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
22. See M. Gonzalez, The Zapatistas: the challenges of revolution in the new Millennium, in International Socialism 89 (Winter 2000), pp. 59–80; and J. Ross, The war against oblivion: the Zapatista chronicles (Monroe, Maine 2000).
23. J. Petras, The geopolitics of Plan Colombia, op. cit., p. 35.
24. Repeating past mistakes: aiding counterinsurgency in Colombia, NACLA Report, op. cit., p. 17.
25. J. Pearce, Colombia: inside the labyrinth (London 1990), p. 47.
26. Ibid., pp. 49–68.
27. A fact reinforced by the recent capture of IRA members alleged to have gone to Colombia to train members of the FARC in the manufacture of bombs.
28. J. Petras, op. cit., p. 45. I suspect he is idealising somewhat here.
 



On 13 March 2001 the Zapatista column came to Mexico City. It was the culmination of an extraordinary three-week march through Mexico, accompanied by tens of thousands on its way. The delegation attended the Indigenous People’s Conference before moving on to the capital, where it was met by a huge crowd in Mexico City’s main square – the Zócalo. The British media contemptuously described the crowd as ‘several thousands strong’ – but anyone who has ever stood in that vast colonial square knows that ‘several thousands’ would barely occupy one corner. There were hundreds of thousands there.
The Great March marked a crucial turning point, a crossroads at which the Zapatistas (or to give them their full name, the Zapatista Army of National Liberation, or EZLN) still stand. It was in many ways a tactical victory for the embattled communities of Chiapas, yet politically it did not resolve the dilemmas and contradictions that face a movement in search of its future.
 
Two tactics of Zapatismo
The march to the capital had two linked purposes. On one hand, it was a way of breaking out of the iron encirclement imposed with increasing ferocity since the Zapatista rising of 1994 by the Mexican state – 60,000 military personnel had closed the circle around the Zapatista communities as they were deprived from time to time of water and electricity, harassed at the omnipresent roadblocks, and threatened by rival, often government-supported, peasant organisations. The roadblocks seemed curiously powerless to prevent the traffic into Zapatista communities like Acteal, where 45 were murdered in 1997 in one of many paramilitary incursions. Peace talks with the government, in what was clearly an endless delaying tactic, were held spasmodically, then effectively abandoned after 1997.
To the physical isolation was added an ideological siege made easier by the deepening ambivalence of the so called left of Mexican politics represented by the PRD, the Democratic Party of the Revolution. The organisation had gathered dissident elements of the ruling government party, the PRI (Institutional Revolutionary Party) and others behind the candidacy of Cuahtémoc Cárdenas. Cheated out of what was probably a very high popular vote in 1988, Cárdenas’s vote fell in 1994 and his support continued to wane. It became clear that he was fundamentally a political opportunist who could not represent the mass struggles growing up in Mexico in resistance to the economic measures taken under Salinas (1988-1994) and Zedillo (elected in 1994 for six years). Immediately after the Zapatista insurrection of 1994 the PRD claimed some right to speak on behalf of the Zapatistas outside Chiapas. But they were very clearly interested only in the electoral advantage to be gained. There was never any possibility that the PRD could become the political voice of a mass anti-globalisation movement from below. Cárdenas’s election as mayor of Mexico City in 1997 brought no advantage to the EZLN in Chiapas or the solidarity movement in the capital. Thus when it became clear that Cárdenas was negotiating with the right wing Catholic PAN (National Action Party) to present a joint candidature to the presidency in the elections of 2000, whatever doubts might have existed about where the PRD stood in relation to the mass movement were definitively dispelled. The extremely low PRD vote in the election was evidence of widespread popular disillusionment with a so called left whose sole purpose was to assume control of the existing government structures.
The beneficiary of Cárdenas’s discredit was the candidate of the PAN, Vicente Fox. A former Coca-Cola executive, Fox posed the first serious challenge to the party that had maintained a virtual monopoly of power in Mexico for over 70 years – the PRI. The PRI’s corruption, its assault on Chiapas, but above all its support for the structural adjustment programmes that formed part of the 1994 NAFTA agreement, had undermined its traditional capacity to mobilise support through the trade unions and other institutions with a combination of fear and selective bribery. Its internal struggles (several leading members had been murdered in the 1990s) only added to the sense of decay. At the same time, Fox subtly distanced himself from the deeply conservative Catholic establishment which led the PAN and launched a populist campaign centred on ideas of clean government, modernisation and, crucially, a promise to end the situation in Chiapas ‘in 15 minutes’ – what he actually meant by that, however, was always left unexplained. Fox’s Catholic credentials were never in doubt, and his economic strategy resolutely and unconditionally followed the directions set out in the NAFTA agreement. Fox was no threat to globalisation – that much was certain! And yet he ran a successful populist campaign in which he distinguished himself from the old PAN and won significant support among working class Mexicans.
Fox was the victor in the July elections. When he formally took over the presidency in December, Fox would be the first non-PRI president (or at least the first not to be a product of the political class emerging from the Mexican Revolution that ended in 1917) since the mid-1920s. And while his adherence to Catholic doctrine on the touchstone issue of abortion made it clear where his allegiances lay, it was also true that his cabinet choices underlined the ambivalences of his presidential campaign. The new foreign minister, for example, is an extremely well known academic who was hitherto identified with the ‘new social democratic realism’ of the post-Stalinist era – Jorge Castañeda. It remained very unclear, therefore, what his response to Chiapas would be.
The Great March was undoubtedly designed to put that to the test. Fox himself moved quickly to declare his desire to reach a resolution over Chiapas, and the Zapatista leader Subcomandante Marcos responded on 31 January in his first interview with a Western journalist for five months. ‘I’m optimistic,’ he said. ‘I think we will have a successful dialogue with the government.’ Eventually, the journalist reported, Marcos ‘would like the Zapatistas to take off their masks and become a legitimate political force.’
 
The accords of San Andrés
But what were the Zapatista demands? They centred on three issues – the removal of the army from Chiapas, the release of Zapatista prisoners, and the passing of the San Andrés accords into law. These accords, agreed with government representatives in 1996 but never enacted, represented essentially the right of Indian communities to collective autonomy and organisation based on indigenous traditions. Their entry into law would certainly represent a historic step forward for Mexico’s 10 million people of indigenous origins. Rights had been systematically ignored and trampled under successive governments as powerful economic interests expanded and took Indian lands, expelling their inhabitants. In this the corporations were ably assisted by governments that, aside from supporting them directly, did so indirectly by removing agricultural subsidies and official credits and effectively driving indigenous communities into the arms of unscrupulous middlemen and corporate interests.
Fox declared himself in favour of the accords, despite blowing hot and cold in subsequent weeks as the balance of forces in Congress dictated. The arrival of the Zapatista column into Mexico City, however, and Marcos’s rhetorical declarations that he would not leave the capital without an agreement, made further evasion impossible. There were anxious hours while Fox negotiated with recalcitrant representatives of his own party as well as the other parties in parliament. Some prisoners had already been released and undertakings were given that the rest would soon leave prison – although there were and will be delays and reluctance at a local level. Fox had also promised to withdraw troops. Some have certainly left Chiapas, but significant numbers remain and there are constant claims and counter-claims between the government and the Zapatistas as to how many have left and how quickly the process is moving. But despite the mutual distrust, and however sluggishly, it is clear that these two demands will be met. The key point, of course, was the accords (there were other Zapatista demands which were set aside). The decision, after much argument, to allow the Zapatista delegation into Congress was a clear signal – and some weeks after their departure, an amended version of the accords was accepted by the Mexican parliament.
There was no doubt that this was a historic victory for Mexico’s indigenous people. But it had other consequences and implications. The Zapatistas, above all through the prolific writing of Subcomandante Marcos, claimed a representativity – a right to speak for a movement of many struggles united against globalisation and its impact. This is the central reason why the Zapatistas have come to symbolise the anti-capitalist movement worldwide. Yet the negotiations behind the accords, and the agreements themselves, narrowed and limited the nature of the Zapatistas’ demands. Slowly, imperceptibly, and with the collusion of many of their external supporters, the Zapatistas were redefined as a movement exclusively concerned with indigenous rights. The difference is a subtle one – but it is fundamental. Did the specific local history of Chiapas demonstrate the common experience of all of those addressed in Marcos’s speeches and communiques? Was Chiapas therefore the embodiment of the rich possibilities embodied in the slogan ‘Think globally, act locally’? Or was it an exception, a special case albeit with an especially high moral charge?
 
The exception or the rule?
The political implications are fundamental. Because if Chiapas was to be addressed as an exception its great symbolic power would be thrown behind an argument that its original example had served to overcome. Namely, the argument for autonomous struggles, linked to specific conditions or problems, and resolved by negotiations with the state. In other words, the politics behind the theories of ‘new social movements’.
Let’s put it in different, more flesh and blood terms. There are or have been some 29 points of armed confrontation with the Mexican state in the seven years since the Zapatista rising – the most important in the state of Guerrero, where the massacre of whole communities is openly conducted by the local military. In and around the capital, with its concentration of industrial production and population (some 22 million at the last count and rising), the consequences of structural adjustment policies have been impoverishment, rising unemployment, and hunger as all subsidies on basic necessities are removed, the collapse of public services, particularly health, the spectacular rise of a precarious black market economy, the ‘Calcuttaisation’ of whole areas of the city centre and so on. In the labour movement long struggles against corrupt leaders and for the formation of rank and file organisations have signalled new forms of resistance to cutbacks and worsening working conditions. In the universities the courageous 14-month struggle of students at Mexico City’s huge National University (the UNAM, with something around 220,000 students) was directed against the imposition of tuition fees. Fees would mean the definitive end of democratic education – a further requirement embedded in the economics of structural adjustment which prohibits public spending other than on infrastructural support for private enterprise. There can be no doubt that all of these struggles have been inspired, strengthened and generalised by the politics of the Zapatistas. What does the agreement on the accords say to them? Given its extraordinary political authority within the movement, what impact does it have when Comandante Ester, speaking for the Zapatista delegation in Congress, says, ‘We have not come here to humiliate or defeat anyone ... we have come to engage in dialogue’?
The movement has been encouraged by forces both within and outside Mexico to look to the Zapatistas for some political direction. Yet when some of the mass organisations that formed part of the solidarity movement gathered after the Great March to discuss the future and look for ways to build on and extend this victory, they were told that the EZLN had no blueprint or plan for the future, no sense of how to organise this movement into a force with a vision of a different society and an evolving method for achieving that future. ‘I am a rebel,’ Marcos announced, ‘not a revolutionary.’
The ruling class, in Mexico and beyond, must be feeling mightily relieved. A fairly cautious recognition of indigenous rights is a relatively small price to pay in exchange for a declining threat from Chiapas. That presumably was the thrust of the private discussions between Fox and his parliamentary colleagues.
The paradox is that with completely opposite intentions some of those in the anti-globalisation movement who have worked hard to draw attention to the Zapatista struggle have celebrated aspects of their tactics which will disarm or at least confuse a movement so deeply encouraged by their example. At this point in its development the growing anti-capitalist movement faces important political issues. How will a powerful ruling class be persuaded to relinquish its increasingly contracted power? George W. Bush’s recent unilateral withdrawal from the Kyoto agreements must surely signal that the goodwill of Western states is a worthless currency. Vicente Fox in Mexico has negotiated the San Andrés accords, but he has also repeated his commitment to the economic strategies enshrined first in NAFTA and now in its expanded version the FTAA (Free Trade Area of the Americas). In Ecuador a magnificent movement of workers and indigenous organisations brought down one government bent on imposing similar policies, and is confronting its successor for the very same reasons. In Argentina the labour unions are organising to roll back the consequences of the FTAA. And in Bolivia mass resistance defeated a programme of water privatisation that flowed directly (if you’ll excuse the pun) from structural adjustment policies. The central task now is to combine those struggles and tie them to the strongest sections of the movement – those with the power to stop the engine of production on a world scale.
In these circumstances the refusal to make decisions or commitments to the broader struggles is not a virtue. The wholly justified authority of the Zapatistas was born of a heroic struggle, but it carries a responsibility that cannot be renounced so easily. The eloquent promise of a different, more humane and just world is an inspiration, but those who stand between us and that future will not surrender power under the burden of guilt or moral condemnation. They will disappear when the working class seizes power from them. To pretend otherwise is to disarm our movement at the very moment when the struggle itself demands solutions to these problems.
When Naomi Klein and other powerful voices of the new anti-globalisation movement speak of Marcos in tones of reverence and admiration, they depoliticise his movement, make of him something exotic and romantic, but also empty Marcos’s symbolism of its political content. The Zapatistas placed revolution on the political agenda again. True, they warned against the excesses of Stalinism, rediscovered and regenerated the democratic heart of the revolutionary tradition, and insisted that the emancipation of the working class must be the act of that class itself. But that simply underlined the necessity of addressing the question of power.
We would do better to pick up on an analogy offered by Marcos himself. When the EZLN reached Mexico City, Marcos drew a parallel with the arrival in Mexico City in November 1913 of the peasant armies led by Emiliano Zapata and Pancho Villa. It was the mid-point of the Mexican Revolution which had thrown out the old dictator Porfirio Díaz. The shape of the new state was not yet clear and no bourgeois forces were yet in a position to assume power over the new post-revolutionary state. For two months Villa and Zapata’s armies held the capital and the potentiality of power over the whole society. Then they left the city and returned to their own local areas. They had no perspective, no plan for a new and different kind of power – and so they abandoned the capital and left a political vacuum behind them. The new head of state, Venustiano Carranza, assumed power and began to forge a new state out of an alliance between a new national political class and the old landed classes. His first act was to form an army to disarm Zapata and Villa. From then on Zapata’s area of control in Morelos province began to shrink under the tightening siege of government troops supported (more symbolically than militarily) by a Workers’ Batallion. Within Morelos, Zapata was thinking through the implications of recent events, and coming to a growing understanding that isolation (physical and political) was the anteroom to destruction – that without their natural allies in the working class the Morelos Commune would be lost. But the realisation came too late.
The task of those who have made the struggles in Chiapas the touchstone of the movement on a world scale is to draw global conclusions as well as lessons about the realities of state power, how it is won and how it is lost. That is our obligation to the great revolutionary whose name the fighters of Chiapas have taken as their own. We must not allow history to repeat itself as tragedy.

Note
This article is intended as an updating of The Zapatistas: The Challenges of Revolution in a New Millennium, International Socialism 89 (Winter 2000).
 



6 June 2005: Bolivian president Carlos Mesa submits his
resignation in an attempt to end weeks of crippling protests
demanding nationalisation of the country’s natural gas reserves.
7 June: Mass demonstrations continue to paralyse La Paz,
cut it off from the rest of the country and surround the Congress.
8 June: Meeting in El Alto, heartland of the great
rebellion, the Popular Assembly of the First Nations forms a People’s
General Staff on which all the mass organisations are represented
(though in the end not all of them attend). La Paz daily La Razon
editorialises, ‘[The situation is] a profound crisis for Bolivia
... [Mesa] could have been a great president, but luck had it that
the necessary political conditions were against him, and it fell to
him to have to face a ferocious and irrational ideological
onslaught.’ Santa Cruz’s El Deber writes of ‘one of the
worst crises in Bolivia’s republican history’.
9 June, morning: Congress moves to Sucre in an attempt to
avoid demonstrations in the capital. There are moves to give the
presidency to a hard right-wing figure, Vaca Diez, who would try to
impose military rule. The Congress building is surrounded by members
of the mass organisations. The major highways are blocked for the
third day running – 119 today. The Santa Cruz gas fields are taken
over by their workers. Pipeline valves are shut down in Cochabamba
and La Paz. Airline workers shut down all the country’s airports.
In El Alto, the Popular Assembly issues a six-point declaration that
begins by declaring that El Alto is now ‘the general headquarters
of the Bolivian Revolution of the 21st century’. It announces the
formation of a unified leadership. Its central demand is the
nationalisation of hydrocarbons(oil and natural gas). It agrees to
form people’s assemblies in every department,and rejects electoral
solutions and constitutional successions.
9 June, evening: Evo Morales, leader of MAS, the biggest
left party in Congress, agrees to a compromise formula, with the
presidency going tothe head of the Supreme Court, Eduardo Rodriguez,
until an election towards the end of the year. Strikes end,
roadblocks are lifted and the protests come to an end. Oscar Olivera,
leader of protests in Cochabamba, declares:
In this mobilisation we have seen two things. On one hand
we, the various social movements, are capable of paralysing the
entire country, and of counteringthe manoeuvres of the businessmen
and bad politicians. On the other hand, we have not been capable of
imposing our own decisions and objectives ... Based on these two
considerations, we have opened a wide debate in all the
neighbourhoods and communities of Cochabamba and the country about
the need to build, little by little, our own capacity for
self-government, to push for that in the next mobilisation. Our
immense strength should correspond to a great and creative capacity
to carry out our own decisions beyond the official institutions and
traditional political parties, which always drive us to the edge of
the precipice. On this occasion, this has begun to happen with the
occupation of hydrocarbon wells, gas plants and refineries, and on
the next occasion we must be capable of operating them ourselves for
our own good. [1]
 
Three Bolivias
It is often said that Bolivia is not a single country but three,
linked by historical circumstance and colonial convenience. The
differences between them are economic and political, but they are
also ethnic and historical. The altiplano, the heart of Bolivia’s
ancient Aymara culture, was and remains primarily indigenous – it
was the native Bolivians who were driven into the mines to work them,
or who sustained the high altitude agriculture sometimes only made
bearable by the coca leaf. It is also the site of Bolivia’s major
cities – La Paz, Potosí, Sucre, and the newest city of them all,
El Alto, 1,000 feet above La Paz, and home to over a million
indigenous people. Cochabamba, in the lower valleys, was more
hospitable but distant culturally and geographically from the world
of the high Andes. Santa Cruz, to the east, was inaccessible from the
mountains until very recently, when the twin commodities of oil and
coca forced the region open to the wider world.
Since 1999 all three have become elements in a social
confrontation that has placed in doubt the relentless campaign of
global capital to absorb and control Latin America, along with the
rest of the world. The traditions of workers’ organisation and
indigenous resistance in the high Andes have combined in a struggle
that has expanded into the valleys around Cochabamba and the streets
of El Alto before erupting into the streets of Bolivia’s capital,
La Paz. The demand was for control of the key resources of the
country – first water, and more recently oil and gas. The
landowners and entrepreneurs of Santa Cruz, the private beneficiaries
of that wealth, have threatened to declare themselves independent
from the rest of the country, and to keep the income from oil, gas
and coca for themselves.
Bolivia is the region’s poorest country after Haiti. Yet
throughout history it has produced enormous riches for a very few.
The altiplano, the high plateau of the Andes, was for centuries the
source of Bolivia’s extraordinary wealth. In the mid-16th century
the city of Potosí was larger than London was at the time, and
produced some two thirds of the world’s silver. Three centuries
later tin hacked from great volcanic slabs buried deep in the
mountains made fortunes for a tiny group of local and foreign mine-owners.
The region around the city of Cochabamba is a fertile plain. Its
climate is temperate and spring-like, and its markets full of the
colourful products of local agriculture. Big landowners and small
farmers share the region. But for small producers especially, water
has always played a key role. Despite appearances, the area suffers
from a chronic shortage of water exacerbated by the growth of urban
areas, especially the city of Cochabamba itself, and a rising graph
of water consumption.
Santa Cruz, in the eastern lowlands, is an area of open plains
fringed by rainforest. During the first half of the 20th century it
was sparsely populated and controlled by landlords who owned vast
expanses of land. It was also the scene of perhaps the most brutal
episode of Bolivian history – a three-year war with Paraguay
(1932–35) in the Chaco region for control of the region’s oil
reserves. In the mid-1950s, however, agriculture expanded – mainly
cotton, sugar and cattle – and foreign corporations like Gulf began
to drill for oil and gas. In the 1970s and 1980s more and more land
was given over to the cultivation of coca, from which cocaine is
manufactured, as the drugs trade proved to be by far the most
profitable.
 
The neo-liberal assault
On 6 June 2005, for the second time in two years, a mass movement
brought down a government. President Carlos Mesa finally yielded to
the pressure of the community organisations, anti-gas campaigns,
trade unions and indigenous groups, and resigned. He had failed to
convince the Bolivian masses that his proposed law on the control of
oil and gas production was anything other than an attempt to evade
the clear and insistent demand of all sections of the movement –
nationalisation of Bolivia’s hydrocarbons. Mesa should have known
better. Until October 2003 he had been the country’s
vice-president, with a reputation for independent thought. His
predecessor, Gonzalo Sánchez de Losada (‘Goni’), however, could
make no such claim.
Losada headed a government dedicated to the objectives set out for
him by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The
discovery of huge reserves of natural gas, calculated in 2001 at 47
trillion cubic feet, placed Bolivia second only to Venezuela in the
level of its reserves. This appeared to provide an opportunity for
the Bolivian state to generate considerable income, as well as
respond to domestic demand for cheap and accessible fuel after years
of impoverishment, and deepening social and economic inequality. But
Losada was a creature of neo-liberalism, his role to hasten Bolivia’s
integration into the world market. So his response was to enter
negotiations with a consortium of Repsol (the Spanish oil company),
BP-Amoco and British Gas to channel the reserves to the United
States. [2]
The idea was to channel a pipeline through Chile, and from there
up the western seaboard to California. Bolivia itself has no access
to the sea, having lost its two major coastal cities to Chile and
Peru in punishing late 19th century wars. It has been suggested that
the first popular reaction to the plan arose out of nationalist
resentments towards Chile, always a topic of the speeches of the
populist right. But this cannot in any way explain the breadth and
intensity of the reaction to Lozada’s plan – a plan that would
eventually lead to the death of over 60 demonstrators and Losada’s
hurried flight to the United States.
His ejection was the most dramatic step thus far in a battle that
had begun four years earlier in Cochabamba.
By then, Bolivia was already 14 years into a strategy of
aggressive integration into the world market – a policy
euphemistically described as ‘structural adjustment’. In some
ways, Bolivia was to be a model of how the project would be managed
elsewhere in Latin America, for although it was among the poorest
nations in the region, it was also one whose recent history (the 1952
revolution and its aftermath [3]) had placed the organisations of the
working class at the heart of politics, and had seen at least
apparent attempts to implement nationalisations and agrarian reform.
By the early1980s, however, the economic foundation of working class
organisation – the mining industry – was in steep decline, and
the body of producers whose long history of heroic resistance had
written so many chapters of Bolivia’s history was dispersed and demobilised.
The presidency of Paz Estenssoro set in train a series of measures
which would lead to the privatisation of much of the economy,
including the privatising of education, the result of which was a
dramatic rise in the levels of illiteracy. [4] Sánchez de Lozada’s
first spell as president followed (1993–97), and he initiated the
so called Plan for All (Plan de Todos) that enabled him
to sell off all Bolivia’s publicly-owned utility companies –
electricity, telephones, railways and, most significantly of all, the
Bolivian national oil company YPFB.
This consolidated the end of an economy based on mining, and a
definitive shift towards an economy based, on the one hand, on drugs
and export agriculture, and on the other on the growth of small-scale
industry, especially in and around the capital. Privatisation drew in
the external loans, but it also reflected the increasing integration
of a new Bolivian oligarchy partly based in the expanding economy of
Santa Cruz and the institutions of global capitalism.
As elsewhere in Latin America, neo-liberalism brought windfall
fortunes to those who represented its interests and sold off the
state’s assets at preferential prices. The economy was sluggish.
Bolivian exports at the beginning of the 1980s were worth $1,300
million – in 2003 the figure was $1,600 million, a minimal
improvement. Meanwhile the average per capita income in 1980, $940,
rose by only $20 in the same period. [5]
Yet Jeffrey Sachs, the ubiquitous guru of neo-liberalism,
described Lozada as one of the most creative politicians of the age.
It was likely that Sachs was moved to such eulogy not only by
Lozada’s obedience to IMF dictates, but also by the fact that there
was relatively little popular resistance to these measures. There are
several possible explanations for this. Coca cultivation guaranteed a
higher income to small farmers than any other cash crop – and the
world trade was booming. The traditional organisations of struggle
which stood in the leadership of every struggle in the decades since
1952, the miners’ union and the national trade union federation
(COB) which it dominated, were undermined and disarmed by the
dismantling of the mining industry and the migration of its social
base. The economic crisis of the 1980s had exhausted the Bolivian
working class, and its national profile gave way in those years to
more local and sectoral forms of resistance.
Lozada was succeeded in power by Hugo Banzer, a military oligarch
whose previous presidency (1971–77) had been marked by widespread
and monumental corruption, and sustained and savage repression. It
was widely known that Banzer and his cabinet were deeply embroiled in
the growing drugs trade of the times, and there was little attempt to
conceal the fact that military aeroplanes regularly transported coca
out of the country. So it was particularly ironic that Banzer’s
return to power, in 1997, should coincide with the US government’s
much-vaunted ‘war on drugs’, whose first public manifestations
were directed against the coca growers of the Chapare.
Miners who had migrated after the shutting of the mines did not
lose their collective memory of decades of struggle, and US-backed
attacks on coca cultivation met fierce rejection. Meanwhile in the
communities of highland peasant farmers a different tradition of
struggle developed. A new peasant federation (the CSUTCB) had been
formed in 1978 under the powerful influence of the Tupac Katari
Revolutionary Movement [6] (MRTK) led by Genaro Flores Santos. This
new movement was driven by a conception of Aymara nationalism and
traditions of ethnic resistance very different to those of highland
peasant organisations that had once functioned under the leadership
of the COB, with its traditions of revolutionary workers’
organisation. Issues of ethnicity prevailed in the battles and
confrontations of the late 1980s and 1990s, although the movement was
far from unified – indeed, one of the best known Katarista leaders,
Victor Hugo Cardenas, became a vice-president in the first Lozada government.
 
Cochabamba on the march
In 1999 President Banzer announced the sale of Cochabamba’s
public water enterprise to a new company, Aguas del Tunari, a
subsidiary of the giant US corporation Bechtel:
Privatising Cochabamba’s water was a major item in the
World Bank’s June 1999 country report for Bolivia, which
specifically called for ‘no public subsidies’ to hold down water
price hikes. In a process with just one bidder, local press reports
calculated that investors put up less than $20,000 of upfront capital
for a water system worth millions. [7]
There was an explosion of popular rage when it became clear the
immediate result would be a rise in prices. In December 1999 the
Coordinadora del Agua was formed under the leadership of a machinist
in his mid-forties, Oscar Olivera [8], after a series of actions
through the previous month in which small farmers blocked highways
into the city.
The demonstrations in Cochabamba began in January, with the demand
for the withdrawal of the price increases. The Coordinadora gathered
its forces for a major demonstration on 4 February paralysing the
city. While popular protests have always characterised Bolivian
history, this was a different and new movement. What was most
impressive about it was that it gathered into a single stream a whole
range of the currents of resistance that had grown up, mainly around
local issues, in the preceding years. Here indigenous and community
organisations marched with market traders, coca farmers (the
cocaleros), organised workers, students and civil servants. On
4 February and subsequent days they took on armed police, and
breathed in the teargas thrown at them.
‘Everyone took a role,’ says Oscar Olivera. ‘Youth were on
the frontlines, the elderly made roadblocks.’ When protest leaders
called on the radio for a citywide transportation stoppage in
response to the police downtown crackdown, little old women with bent
spines were out in the streets within minutes, building blockades
with branches and rocks. [9]
There was no direct connection with the events that had occurred
three months earlier at Seattle, but it was not inaccurate to
describe the atmosphere in Cochabamba as redolent of the ‘spirit of
Seattle’. At opposite ends of the hemisphere the strategies of
neo-liberalism, and the multinational corporations that were its
instruments and beneficiaries, were meeting a new kind of unified resistance.
And it won. Within seven days the Banzer government withdrew the
contract from Bechtel and introduced a new system for the
distribution of water, controlled by the mayor and a committee of
elected representatives. [10]
The Cochabamba action was in every sense a triumph. It was also a
detonator. Protests proliferated across the country. In La Paz a
militant police strike erupted over levels of taxation, rural
communities resisted a new law that removed local control of water,
and the state of the roads brought other communities out onto the
highways with their own barricades. In El Alto, water privatisation
also brought the largely indigenous population of the city into
direct confrontation with another multinational water company, Suez.
Cochabamba was the turning point at which mass struggle at the
grassroots became a determinant in resisting neo-liberalism. It
provided anew model of struggle. It was not a matter of the
combativity of those who took to the streets – the whole history of
the country is peppered with examples of heroism and determination in
the face of the forces of the state. Rather it was the unity and
coordination of different organisations that marked a new stage, as
well as its increasing politicisation. The demonstrators, like the
anti-capitalist protesters after Seattle, found that every local
issue brought them rapidly face to face with the global strategies of
capital. Equally significant was the fact that it was a
politicisation that took place largely outside the framework of
existing political organisations, even those of the left, and the
discredited formal structures of the political system. It was a
radicalisation whose rhetoric and references addressed several
different traditions at once – the history of working class
struggle, the historic experience of the left, the complexities of
community organisation, and also the strength of a resurgent
indigenous nationalism.
 
Looking to the past: the Bolivian revolution
For many of those involved in activities today, a key point of
identifications the revolution of 1952. Its lessons do not apply in a
direct way to the contemporary situation, because in some ways the
continuity of Bolivia’s political history was broken in the 1980s.
But memories are not easily wiped clean, nor the victories of the
past, as well as the defeats, so easily forgotten. And for the left,
struggling to link the most advanced experiences of class struggle to
the debates emerging in the current phase, 1952 is a point of
departure on many levels.
While it is probably the least known of Latin America’s
revolutionary moments, the events of 1952 are in some ways closest to
the pattern held dear by the revolutionary socialist tradition and
captured in that most central of defining phrases that the revolution
shall be the ‘self-emancipation of the working class’. Its
central actor was the most advanced section of the working class, at
the heart of a revolutionary national union. It imposed state control
over Bolivia’s most important national resource – tin. And at the
moment of revolution, organs of direct democracy and workers’
control emerged in the context of an armed people. Yet its outcome –
the progress from the overthrow of an old regime to the creation of a
new workers’ state – was not that envisaged by those who led the
movement, and heroic though the revolution was, it must figure among
the list of defeats suffered by the workers’ movement. Though that
should not diminish its importance as a rehearsal of workers’ power.
Bolivia in 1952 was even more deeply submerged in poverty than it
is today: 72 percent of its population were involved in agriculture
on 2 percent of the land. Just over 3 percent of the people worked in
mining, which represented 25 percent of GDP. The main product of the
mines was tin, 80 percent of it owned at that time by three powerful
individual Bolivian families – their exports amounted to nearly 20
percent of the world’s tin production. At a time of rearmament and
war, tin was a hugely profitable commodity, especially given the
inhuman conditions under which its miners lived and worked. [11] By
the early 1940s the richest of the three, Simon Patiño, boasted a
personal fortune of $70 million, placing him among the six richest
people on earth. [12] Like his fellow tin barons (known collectively
as La Rosca), Patino reinvested in Europe and the US. Bolivia derived
precious little from its metal.
At this time the mining workforce numbered 53,000, and already had
behind it a history of bitter and brutal struggle. When the miners
formed their first national union in 1944, at a meeting at Patiño’s
Huanunimine, it was at the initiative of the MNR (Revolutionary
National Movement). Formed in 1940, the MNR was a nationalist
coalition with an anti-imperialist perspective and a populist
rhetoric. In 1942, when striking miners and their families were
gunned down during a strike, the MNR launched a campaign of support
for the workers and publicly attacked the government and the Rosca.
At the same time, however, they were working with a small group of
nationalist officers – one of whom, Gualberto Villarroel, came to
power in a coup in December 1943. [13]
Within the working class the dominant organisation was the
Stalinist PIR (Party of the Revolutionary Left), which was hopelessly
compromised by a policy of support for the government on the grounds
that the priority was support for the Allies in the Second World War.
For Bolivia, that support meant maintaining a low price for tin and
discouraging miners from fighting to raise the price of their labour.
Thus they opposed a Villarroel government which supported workers and
trade union rights. Thus in the two years he was in power, trade
union membership and militancy grew – and it was the MNR,
represented by the general secretary of the miners, Juan Lechín
Oquendo, that filled the ideological vacuum left by the PIR. In the
more militant unions, however, the Trotskyist POR (Workers
Revolutionary Party), led by Guillermo Lora, was also gaining a
significant influence. [14]
The MNR joined the government in 1944. Its future presidential
candidate Víctor Paz Estenssoro became finance minister, and his
highly orthodox economic policies directly attacked working class
demands. Striking workers were attacked and the regime became
increasingly repressive – yet Paz remained a minister. Support for
the MNR among workers rapidly waned. An emergency conference of the
miners’ union in March 1946 broke definitively with Villarroel and
adopted a programme of demands drawn up by Lora and the POR – the
Pulacayo Theses. James Dunkerley describes the theses as
‘essentially an application of Trotsky’s 1938 Transitional
Programme to Bolivian conditions’. [15] They argued that
Bolivia was a backward capitalist country in which the proletariat,
as the leading revolutionary class, should seek alliances with the
peasantry, artisans and petty bourgeoisie, but warned against the
incorporation of workers’ ministers into bourgeois governments. It
set out a series of tactical demands including a sliding scale of
wages, nationalisation of the mines and the creation of a national
trade union confederation.
The Theses won considerable support – a reflection of the
respect that members of the POR enjoyed within the working class
movement. But this is not the same thing as asserting that the
majority of militant miners had been won to a revolutionary
perspective, nor that the POR in fact enjoyed a dominant position in
the organisations of the working class. The acceptance of a
revolutionary programme (albeit undeclared) does not automatically
confer political leadership on those who have presented it – a
lesson many times repeated then and since. In the situation of
Bolivia, the paradox was all the more evident. For it was the
leadership of the miners’ union, and Juan Lechín in particular,
who would now be called upon to implement the Theses – and
Lechín belonged to the MNR. It was a contradiction that would return
to haunt the movement after the revolution.
The period between 1946 and 1952 was a time of bitter repression.
Villarroel was lynched by a crowd in July 1946 – in subsequent
elections the POR won a parliamentary seat. But the new government
turned once again on the trade unions and, with the collaboration of
the Stalinists, pursued and murdered a number of leading activists.
Lechín and Lora were arrested in 1949, and an occupation of the
Catavi mine ended with the murder of 300 workers. In September that
year the MNR launched an armed rising, with the support of the
miners. Although it failed within a couple of months, the workers had
controlled a number of towns for brief periods of time. In the months
that followed there were strikes and armed confrontations across the
mining areas in which both the POR and MNR members took a leading role.
The MNR, despite its earlier ambiguities, became increasingly
identified with opposition to the military government, and with the
militant trade union movement. When the MNR’s candidates, Paz
Estenssorro and Siles Suazo, won the presidential elections in 1951
the military refused to recognise the result and sought to impose
military control.
On the night of 10 April 1952 workers across the country polished
their concealed weapons and set out to confront the military
detachments that had been sent out to stop them. In La Paz the army’s
lines of retreat were cut off by armed miners from the town of Oruro,
which was now under workers’ control after the military commander
had turned his guns on the crowds in the town square and murdered 90
people. Conscripts in uniform very quickly remembered their origins,
and turned their caps to show they had changed sides. And the armed
workers’ militia controlled the streets.
The situation that Siles and Paz faced was extraordinary.
Consistent with their strategy of taking power through a military
coup supported by a mass movement in the streets, they had
anticipated that this would be the pattern in April 1952. Instead the
army defended the old regime to the last, and it was the armed
workers who seized control of the situation. After three days of
fighting, which left 600 dead, the working class was effectively in
power. On 17 April the first national trade union federation, the
COB, was formed. It organised peasants, students, community groups
and tenants as well as trade unions and was for a brief period ‘the
only centre of power worthy of the name’. [16] The workers’
militia controlled the streets – on May Day 40,000 workers marched
through the streets of the capital with arms in hand.
The acting MNR president, Siles Suazo, responded astutely to the
situation. He appointed three working class leaders to his cabinet –
Lechín for the miners, Butron for the factory workers and Angel
Cromez of the transport union. For Lora and the POR, the dominant
position of the COB guaranteed their continuing control of the
situation. Lechín was the COB’s man in government and, given the
balance of forces in those first revolutionary days, would follow the
dictates of the movement. The POR argued for the COB to take power,
but Lechin and the other worker ministers wanted to share power with
the MNR. With their customary skill and cunning Lechín and Siles
rode the revolutionary tide, adopting the demands for nationalisation
of the mines and the redistribution of land to the peasants.
Lechín’s role is central. Lora described him as ‘incarnating
the radicalism of the masses’. [17] The POR saw him as sympathetic
to their positions, and relied on him to carry the politics of
workers’ power into the cabinet. In reality Lechín was developing
a radical working class politics for the MNR, and conducting an
internal political battle using the COB to strengthen his position
within that party. The reality of the days and weeks after the
revolution was that power lay with the organised working class –
briefly, the POR was a powerful political influence within the
movement. But it did not use the moment to forge the instrument of
political leadership that would enable it to consolidate and organise
its alternative strategy for the state. Instead it placed enormous
reliance on the very ‘worker ministers’ it had warned against in
the Pulacayo Theses.
The reliance on Lechín stemmed from a conviction that the MNR
would immediately betray the revolution and drive the working class
and the workers’ leaders into the arms of the revolutionary left.
But the MNR acquiesced in and supported many of the demands of the
working class, crucially the nationalisation of the mines – indeed,
they went further and argued for ‘workers’ control’ (control
obrero) of the mines. Thus the miners saw the victory as won, and
the POR did not argue the need to control the whole of Bolivian
society and transform the state – perhaps it also saw the victory
as won. The result was to reinforce the insularity of the mining
communities [18], which, in a contradictory way, was the source of
their extraordinary resolution and solidarity.
In effect, the leadership of the COB elected to share power with
the MNR, and the MNR skilfully used the situation to establish its
control over the working class movement. From 1952 to 1953 power
still lay with the working class – the workers’ militia continued
to accumulate arms, for example. The gains they made in that period
were real and dramatic, symbolised by the nationalisation of the
mines. Yet the seeds of defeat were already present at the moment of
greatest triumph. On 31 October 1952 the mines were nationalised –
but compensation was paid to the previous owners. Simon Patiño’s
company paid $400 in taxes that year – and received $900 million in
compensation. Further, the nationalisation decree was specific and
limited. The POR attacked the MNR for this, but by now the POR had
lost much of its influence at the national level, and Lechín felt
secure enough by early 1953 to break publicly with the POR – they
had served his purposes well enough.
To a large extent the influence that the POR had exercised in the
months immediately after the April insurrection was shown to have
been dependent on Lechín’s goodwill. Once that goodwill was
withdrawn, their influence was reduced to its proper proportions. [19]
The opportunities to build revolutionary organisation in such
favourable conditions come rarely and last only a short time. By
mid-1953 Lora recognised that the moment had passed. His comrades in
the Fourth International, however, disagreed, and insisted that the
MNR could still be driven to the left and won to a revolutionary
perspective. [20] The consequence, of course, was that many of the
POR’s leading trade unionists moved into the MNR – the logical
consequence of a politics which continued to paint the nationalist
leadership with communist colours.
It was no accident that the next COB congress did not occur until
1954. By then the trade unions were largely controlled by bureaucrats
newly appointed by Lechín and the MNR. The peasant farmers, who had
taken little or no part in the April rising, were nevertheless drawn
into the process by the conscious activity of the radical leadership
of the COB. By 1954,however, the enactment of a capitalist land
reform had created a new class of small rural capitalists who were
equally dependent on government. The rebuilding of the army was under
way, and the mining industry was beginning to be decapitalised and
state development spending turned towards newer, mainly agricultural
sectors outside the highlands. Two years later, in 1956, the
government of Siles Suazo would introduce a Stabilisation Plan whose
purpose was the reintegration of the Bolivian economy into the world
market. By now the MNR government felt strong enough to turn on its
erstwhile allies and attack the trade unions. The combative response
of workers across the country led Siles to turn to his old allies in
the army, an army rebuilt by him in anticipation of just such a
moment. At the same time, the mining industry would be consigned to a
slow death and, with external aid from the end of the 1950s, new
areas of private capitalist development would be financed and encouraged.
The second Bolivian Revolution, whenever it came, would arise in a
very different Bolivia – but the memory of 1952 would leave an
important political legacy for the next generation of resisters.
 
A curious blend: water, coca and oil
Among those who demonstrated in Cochabamba in February 2000 were
the cocaleros, the coca farmers of Chapare. Many of them were
ex-miners who had been encouraged to move down to the area around
Cochabamba by the grant of small plots of land. Coca, of course, is a
legal crop in Bolivia, sold from enormous sacks in the street
markets. The tradition of coca chewing is part of the experience of
life at high altitude, where food is often scarce and labour hard and
unrewarding. El Tío, the protective god of the mine, is offered coca
every Friday morning, and the leaves form part of most communal ceremonials.
The huge expansion in heroin and cocaine consumption in the West,
and the US in particular, from the early 1970s onwards transformed
the economies of Latin America. By the late 1990s cocaine represented
8 percent of global trade. An apparently bottomless demand created
the multimillionaires of Colombia, Peru and eastern Bolivia, not to
mention the anonymous wealthy entrepreneurs who facilitate the trade
north of the Rio Grande. Successive US governments launched and
relaunched eradication programmes against drugs through the 1980s and
1990s, attacking the origin of the leaf rather than the social causes
of its massive levels of consumption within the US. In 1988 agreement
was reached with the Bolivian government to limit levels of
cultivation to meet local demand – unlike Colombia, Bolivia did not
have to deal with blanket herbicide spraying, but it did have to
accept the presence of US Drug Enforcement Agency personnel on its
soil. [21]
Under Banzer (1997–2000) – the same man who had made shadowy
fortunes out of the drugs in the 1970s – the campaign against coca
production was stepped up. The cocaleros themselves, however,
were already on a battle footing, having joined with other peasant
organisations in a coalition which in 1999 became the MAS (the
Movement Towards Socialism), taking up the name of a previously
existing group in order to register for the 2002 elections. Its
leader, whose face had become well known in the earlier campaigns
against eradication, was Evo Morales, who would become a key figure
in the events of the coming years.
The cocaleros were central actors in the Cochabamba events
of 2000.The impact of the neo-liberal reforms launched after 1985 on
the land was to restructure production around export crops and open
the country to imports of cheaper food. For small farmers, the threat
could be allayed to some extent by turning their land over to growing
coca. The eradication programme, however, was a direct attack on
their livelihood, and water privatisation would sound a death knell
as production in the Chapare fell significantly. There has been a
flow of aid from the US and the European Union into projects designed
to promote alternative crops, but these have rarely been able to
offer an income comparable to the earnings from growing coca. More
importantly, perhaps, US aid has often been conditional on abandoning
the established forms of communal organisation and replacing them
with individual land titles – and that in its turn has provoked
resistance on cultural and ideological grounds.
Many of those who had moved away from the mining areas of the
highlands had gone to Chapare. Others moved towards the city of El
Alto, an indigenous satellite city high above the capital, La Paz.
They brought with them the Aymara language (or its variants, like
Aymara-Quechua),and the traditions of communal organisation
reinforced by the Katarista tradition and, after 1996, by the impact
of the movement led by Felipe Quispe el Mallku. They were also the
bearers of a collective memory of extraordinary workers’ struggles
in the relentlessly harsh environs of the high Andes.
There were other important sectors of Bolivian society which had
suffered the direct impact of neo-liberalism. There were the civil
servants, teachers and other state employees who were the victims of
a 50 percent cut in state employment (the police, after all, launched
their own strike in 2000). The growth of the private sector in the
areas they might once have worked in did not replace their jobs –
by definition the multinationals were centrally administered outside
the country, and were in any case invariably capital intensive. [22]
There were the students of the deteriorating state university sector,
and especially the University of El Alto, whose prospects of finding
work were minimal. And there were the pensioners whose state pensions
after the mine closures often went unpaid because the state pension
fund was shrinking as a new neo-liberal pension scheme directed money
into private pension funds. [23]
All of these sectors had come under attack in one way or another
as a result of the neo-liberal strategies imposed by all the
post-1985 governments, but particularly by Lozada and his successor,
Banzer. In the five years after the Cochabamba rising each of these
social groups drew both inspiration and confidence from their
participation in the movement against privatisation of water. From
February 2000 onwards there is a pattern in Bolivia of highway
blockades, marches, protests, strikes and collective resistance which
evolves and develops towards new levels of intensity and new forms of
organisation – culminating in the demand for a Revolutionary
Popular Assembly in the aftermath of the 2005 actions. Their
immediate impulse, without any question, comes from the Cochabamba
victory. Events elsewhere in Latin America also have their impact.
And yet the expressions of this developing mass struggle often have
as their reference points a long history of resistance.
In 2002 presidential elections were to be held. Evo Morales,
leader of the cocaleros and candidate of the MAS, presented
his candidacy and won 22 percent of the national vote. This has to be
set in the context of a political environment in which most political
parties were essentially machines for government and/or apparatuses
to advance the careers of power hungry politicians. The mass
movements that had developed through the1990s were linked by their
common distrust of party politicians – or indeed politics of any
kind. Oscar Olivera, leader of the Cochabamba movement, expressed
that caution in a seminar in La Paz in June of 2000:
For the true nation not to be supplanted by the market or
the state, the working class, both urban and rural, and the
marginalised and economically insecure of the nation – in other
words, the overwhelming majority of society – must assume control
over the wealth embodied in hydrocarbons. And they must do so through
assembly-style forms of self-organisation at the neighbourhood,
regional and national levels. The nation must enact a
self-presentation – it must self-govern through autonomous
structures of participation that socialise responsibility for public
life. [24]
Olivera’s description of the movement closely corresponds to
what did emerge in the subsequent four years. But his words are
imbued with a notion of mass organisation and resistance in isolation
from the political life of the state – including involvement with
the institutions of representative democracy. Morales’s candidacy
in 2002 exposed a tension at the heart of the movement. On the one
hand, his support clearly came from those who regarded him as a
representative of the movement, rather than of the party in whose
name he stood – MAS – because Bolivian electoral law required
that he stand on behalf of an officially registered political
organisation. On the other hand, his entry into the electoral arena
proposed an alternative dynamic, a different kind of resolution, to
the kind of power enacted from below that Olivera was proposing. But
what remained unclear, and still does, is what the political
expression of such a movement would be – and how it would address
the continuing power of the state. The experience of 1952 had left
little doubt as to the consequences of such an omission.
For the moment, however, Bolivia’s political future was not
being played out in the Congress but in the streets – and in
particular in the streets of El Alto:
Traffic moves constantly over the black mud that covers
roads and pavements; the sound of car horns mingles with Andean
music, played on pan pipes or electric guitars, and the shouts of
people buying-selling-complaining-bargaining. Hundreds of lorries
prepare to dive into the bowl of La Paz or to haul themselves up the
interminable mountain roads. This is El Alto, 4,100 metres above sea
level, where the freezing air blows down from the snow-capped
Cordillera. Its population is around 800,000; 81 percent describe
themselves as indigenous people. The majority are poor, 20 percent
have no access to drinking water or sewerage, 75 percent have no
health cover and around 40 percent are illiterate. [25]
Yet this is a highly organised population, gathered in a series of
local and communal organisations which alone can guarantee their
survival in such hostile and unforgiving conditions. Zibechi
describes them in detail:
There are mothers’ circles, youth and cultural
associations, centres for immigrants from different regions,
associations of migrant workers, family organisations that specialise
in organising education, and COR, the Regional Workers’
Organisation of El Alto which brought together groupings of small
traders, artisans and sectoral workers. Since its creation in 1988 it
has worked closely with Fejuve, the powerful federation of community
organisations. It was their joint agitation, for example, which led
to the creation of the public University of El Alto in 2001.
The 40,000 market stalls along the main highway through El Alto,
for example, are not individually owned but are collective property
allocated by the appropriate organisation. The provision of public
services is decided for each area in public meetings and assemblies,
while educational provision is the remit of the family organisations.
Furthermore, the leaders of the organisations have to fulfil a series
of conditions in order to be eligible – they cannot be speculators,
nor traders, nor belong to any political party. According to Pablo
Mamani, head of sociology at El Alto University, these organisations
share features with the Andean communities in their structure,their
control of territory and their forms of organisation. And it was
precisely these organisations, and their horizontal networks, which
were mobilised during the insurrectionary actions of 2003.
In February that year there were major protests in El Alto and
elsewhere against a government attempt to impose an additional 9
percent tax on income. The police joined the protest, and a number of
public buildings were razed to the ground. On the altiplano, the
movement led by Mallku blocked principal highways in protest at a
number of unresolved demands regarding land. The government responded
with repression, and four peasant farmers were killed. Then, on 19
September in La Paz, a massive 500,000-strong demonstration assembled
to demand the return of Bolivia’s gas reserves to public ownership.
They also raised the call for a constituent assembly. When Lozada
refused to responded, the organisations of El Alto combined to
organise an indefinite paro cívico, a general civic strike.
In Chapare the cocaleros barricaded highways, and other
roadblocks began to appear around La Paz. As food began to run short,
Lozada sent troops into El Alto – in the confrontations that
followed 70 died, and many more were wounded.
It was too much for Lozada. Unable to drive through the
Hydrocarbons Law which would effectively have ceded control of
Bolivian gas to the foreign multinationals, he resigned and fled the
country on 17 October. His successor, Carlos Mesa, promised a
referendum on the issue of gas. But he had no intention of
nationalising – he would not break existing agreements with foreign
multinationals, he announced. And the ballot paper contained no
mention of nationalisation. Then, in March 2004, the Bolivian
Congress passed a new law which added 32 percent taxes to the 18
percent royalties those companies paid. It was still far from what
the movement demanded – but it was too much for Mesa, who tried to
veto the law. Yet the Supreme Court, headed by Eduardo Rodriguez,
declared all previous contracts null and void.
The political tensions which already existed within the movement
itself were exacerbated by the confusion deliberately sown by Mesa.
Morales’s electoral success in 2002 appeared to open up a
possibility of answering the demands of the Gas Coalition without
challenging the state. It was an illusion carefully fostered by
Morales and sustained by many outside Bolivia – a promise of reform
that flew in the face of the whole of Bolivia’s recent history. But
for Morales and the MAS the experience of 1952 was not the key
reference point – in late 2003 his perspective could be legitimated
by setting Bolivia within a Latin American framework. Here Lula had
just been elected to the Brazilian presidency as the candidate of the
Workers Party, Lucio Gutiérrez still presented himself as the
candidate of the Ecuadorean popular movement, Kirchner in Argentina
claimed to speak with the voice of the Argentinazo, and in
Venezuela Hugo Chávez had survived two attempts to bring him down.
In fact, Morales had thrown his weight behind Mesa as Lozada’s
replacement. But his growing moderation seemed not to impress the
rank and file movement – in the 2004 municipal elections his voted
was halved to 11 percent nationwide. Indeed, by May 2005 the mass
movement had grown weary of Mesa’s wheeling and dealing and the
prevarications of Morales. The protest movement was renewed with a
clear and simple demand – nationalisation. On 16 May a symbolic
encirclement of La Paz announced a new phase of struggle. The COR
called for another paro cívico – a civic strike – which
was launched in El Alto on 23 May. The following day indigenous
Aymara protesters from Felipe Quispe’s movement came within yards
of the Congress, before they were driven back.
El Alto was again at the heart of a national movement. But there
were important differences from 2003. First, the level of
participation was higher and the degree of coordination across the
country was significantly greater. There were occupations in
Cochabamba and Oruro, and actions in Santa Cruz province. In El Alto
itself the indefinite strike caused serious problems of supply,
particularly of petrol, for the capital. Most significantly, perhaps,
the indigenist movement had now moved into El Alto, which it began to
describe as the headquarters of the Aymara rebellion. Thus
organisations of workers in the mainly small workplaces in and around
La Paz, the teachers’ unions, Fejuve and the community groups,
housing cooperatives and student groups were at the heart of a broad
movement which had a single, unified demand – nationalisation of
oil and gas.
The deepening crisis of the ruling class was becoming obvious.
Mesa’s compromises and corruptions had failed to hold the movement
back. His resignation had become inevitable – and the internal
battle for the succession centred on the Senate leader, Vaca Díez,
who represented the business interests of Santa Cruz which were now
demanding regional autonomy and a right to secession for Bolivia’s
wealthiest province. His bid also failed, and the interim replacement
for Mesa, Supreme Court head Rodríguez, represented little more than
a holding operation.
Here the role of Evo Morales becomes both more central and more
sinister. On 26 May a brief truce opened a space for the Catholic
church to intervene with a proposal that linked issues of human
rights, regional autonomy and the demand for a constituent assembly.
This was clearly an attempt to reinforce, or perhaps more accurately
to create, a middle ground of compromise that could pull back the
movement from its revolutionary objectives. And in this the support
of Evo Morales was critical. Announcing his electoral running mate,
García Linera, a supporter of Quispe and an ex-guerrilla of the
Tupac Katari Guerrilla Army, Morales and the MAS set out to embrace
and recruit to their project of compromise and reform the
increasingly militant indigenous movement.
But events were accelerating away, though it has to be
acknowledged that the intervention of MAS and the church produced a
kind of hiatus and a confusion deliberately sown. On the face of it
the demand for a constituent assembly may have seemed to differ very
little from the call for a National Popular and Indigenous Assembly.
In fact, the constituent assembly was a body whose elected delegates
would function as a bourgeois parliament until and unless the
bourgeoisie – reeling now under the impact of the mass popular
rising – could find ways to reimpose their institutional order
which, for the moment, was irredeemably corrupt and incapable of functioning.
It became obvious in June, by contrast, that the model already
being constructed at a local level was for a very different kind of
assembly, a form of mass democracy recalling the great popular
decision-making gatherings of the 19th century called ‘cabildos
abiertos’ – open local governments. These assemblies enshrine
the project for the future that can carry through not only the
nationalisation of oil and gas, the immediate demand, but also
establish the existence of a new kind of power – democratic,
accountable, and controlled by the producers.
Mesa’s resignation on 6 June was a victory for the mass
insurrectionary movement. He had threatened to resign twice before in
the face of protests over price rises – but, in the absence of any
alternative, the bourgeoisie had kept him in power for a further
three months. For Evo Morales, his departure opened a space he could
clearly see himself as filling – and he rushed to present himself
as the saviour of the Bolivian state. It may well be that he will be
the successful candidate at the elections of 2007 – but his role
will be to restore and legitimise a state that has been brought to
the edge of collapse by a determined mass movement from below. And
what of the future? The speed of events is illustrated in the shifts
of position within the MAS. The sociologist and one-time guerrilla
leader Alvaro García Linera is a key supporter of Morales – and
will probably be his electoral running mate. In a fascinating
interview [26], Linera is explicit – the MAS project is for the
creation of a strong Bolivian capitalism.
Linera: Socialism is not a viable project in
Bolivia, because it can only be built by a strong working class base.
The socialist utopia emerges from the extreme maturity of capitalism.
In Bolivia there is no capitalism; 70 percent of urban workers are in
small family businesses. You can’t build socialism out of small
business, but on the basis of advanced industries, and we don’t
have that in Bolivia. You can’t build socialism where 95 percent of
the rural population live in traditional communal economies.
Interviewer: So what kind of society is MAS trying
to build?
Linera: A version of Andean capitalism.
Linera goes on to discuss the problems MAS is having in its
negotiations with other organisations – with Felipe Quispe the
Aymara leader, with Jaime Solares of the COB, and with the leadership
of the coordinating organisation of community groups, Fejuve. It is
hard, he argues, because everyone wants to be part of the electoral slate.
Yet the promise that Evo Morales represents echoes the rhetoric of
Lula in Brazil and Lucio Gutiérrez in Ecuador. Linera is quite clear
that MAS’s hope lies in an alliance with Lula, Chavez and the other
new populist regimes in Uruguay and Argentina. Leaving aside the
discredit into which the Lula government is falling, the programme
for a revitalised and strengthened alliance of capitals does not
challenge the neo-liberal project. On the contrary, it merely offers
the prospect of a government that will mediate between global capital
and the mass movements that had carried each to power. A future
Morales government will function to restore a Bolivian state vying
for a place at the banqueting tables of Davos and the WTO. Yet the
fundamental irony of all this is that global capital, and the US
government, will only tolerate such regimes because of the strength
of the mass movement – and until that strength is sapped, or the
movement weakened or diverted.
What has become incontestably clear in the last five years is that
the Bolivian mass movement is anti-capitalist in its spirit and its
demands. It is an insurrection that has challenged not simply the
conduct of successive governments but their strategy. The
privatisation of resources – their transformation into commodities
bought and sold on a world market by private capitalists – is the
object of their rage and their resistance. It is true that there has
been a debate about whether a higher level of taxation of foreign
corporations would be enough – but that demand was first suggested
by the now ejected Mesa, and only later taken up by Morales and the
MAS for their own purposes. And while in 2004 that was echoed across
the movement, its radicalisation since then has left the argument for
50 percent taxation as the demand of the moderates, while the central
policy of the combative majority of the movement in 2005 has been for
the nationalisation of Bolivia’s gas and oil resources. Used for
the general good, they could transform the Bolivian economy – but
not in the context of a neo-liberal market.
The alternative is a transformation that fully realises the demand
for democratic control over the economy enshrined in a new state. The
people’s assemblies that developed in the May/June days were the
embryonic expression of a new kind of power – democratic,
accountable and transparent. As yet, that experience has not been
embodied in an equivalent national organisation, though it has been
proposed and argued for in the local gatherings. In part, that is the
result of confusion about the demand for a constituent assembly as an
electoral forum – in part it is also a consequence of the lack of
political coordination and agreement in the movement.
The analysis put forward by the miners’ union (FSTMB) argues
that the task is to ‘forge the political instrument of the working
class’ [27] – the revolutionary organisation capable of unifying
and giving strategic political direction to the many forces that have
waged such a heroic and successful struggle against the present state
over the last five years. No one on the left would disagree with that
as a general and abstract proposition. But the reality is that the
COB, which has played that role historically in Bolivia, no longer
fills that central role. The definitive crushing of the miners in
1984–85, and the rapid decline of the tin mining industry that
followed it, marked the end of the era when mining was Bolivia’s
central industry. In fact, of course, it had long ceased to be
sufficient to sustain the economy, yet until that moment there was an
uninterrupted tradition to refer to in the political debate.
Where is the working class in Bolivia today? It is dispersed
across the country. In Santa Cruz it is the oil workers. In the
mining areas it is the small cooperatives working to extract metal
under terrible working conditions in the now declining and
increasingly dangerous mine workings. In El Alto and La Paz the COB’s
influence is largely restricted to teachers and health workers. The
manufacturing and productive units in the region are for the most
part small workshops producing consumer goods – the workplaces
rarely employ more than ten people. They are organised by the COR, a
regional trade union federation rooted in El Alto. More importantly,
these organisations are essentially concerned with developing a
militant trade unionism – a syndicalist position which does not
pose the question of state power, but is seduced by notions of
political spaces autonomous of and separate from the state.
And that working class is also indigenous – 81 percent of El
Alto consider themselves to be Indian (Aymara and Quechua), and the
same is true among the cocaleros. It is a mark of the
qualitative development of the movement that Quispe’s indigenous
peasant movement has become active in the urban environment as well
as in the highlands. But it is also evidence of its continuing
authority. In the past, in 1952 for example, the demands of
indigenous communities were largely marginalised – they were seen
as anachronistic and inhibiting the modernising project represented
by the working class movement. In the situation of the late 1970s and
early 1980s,however, it was these communities that fought the state
and developed forms of mass confrontation which have certainly
informed and shaped the more recent mobilisations. For nearly 20
years, communal resistance was the centre of the popular movement in Bolivia.
The fact that other sections have now emerged to take on the state
is a great leap for the movement, but the ideas of the indigenist
movements are still powerful. Community and territorial unity are
still central even in the urban struggles. And the suspicion of
political organisations among them reflects a real experience of
manipulation and opportunism by political leaders in the past. Many
of the communal organisations, for example, do not allow members of
political parties to stand for leadership positions. In their
perception, the left is not exempt from that charge.
Between March and June 2005 the Bolivian mass rising crossed an
important frontier. Its confidence and determination grew out of the
successful challenge to Lozada, the renewed struggles around gas
privatisation that began in February this year, and Mesa’s
subsequent bluff in March. The tactic backfired on him, but it both
deepened the conviction of the resistance and exposed the rifts
within the ruling class itself, particularly between the Santa Cruz
oligarchs and the powers centred in La Paz.
The effect was to radicalise the movement even further and to
propitiate an emerging unity of the many forces in struggle. On 16
May, while100,000 people besieged the parliament in La Paz, the
miners began a march towards El Alto and the teachers’ union
launched a strike. Inexorably the movement’s actions moved towards
9 June, the high point of this phase of the ‘Bolivian Revolution of
the 21st century’. On that day a powerless government faced a mass
popular movement that was resolute, coordinated and proposing
alternative forms of power.
Yet within days it seemed that the unity was fracturing and the
confidence faltering.
The new president, Rodríguez, was a transitional figure – he
immediately proposed presidential elections for December. This opened
up the possibility of a solution to the deep crisis the country was
facing within the structures of the existing state. And it won the
instant approval of the MAS, whose candidate, Evo Morales, would be
the likely winner of such a contest. Thus within a matter of two days
the political focus was shifted back towards an electoral solution
and a restoration of the system, and away from the revolutionary
demands for a different kind of power and the suspicions of the
electoral process voiced just days earlier by the people’s
assembly. The government side was strengthened too by the tantalising
promise of a recognition of Aymara national rights in a new constitution.
The situation, of course, is far from over – and the movement
far from demobilised. But it is confused as to its next steps and
unclear in its direction. Unity in struggle has not translated itself
into a strategic political unity. Yet the future outcome of the
movement will be critically shaped by its capacity to develop that
general strategy for the conquest of the Bolivian state. Bolivian
history is eloquent when it comes to illustrating the revenge that
awaits movements that do not pursue their independent purposes but
seek compromises and negotiations in the corridors of power.
The Bolivian mass insurrection is an extraordinary movement for
its absolute determination, its courage in struggle, its insistent
collective impulse, its combination of many different demands. In
1952 that most powerful of instruments, the COB, made unity a class
issue, and drew peasant and indigenous struggles behind a working
class leadership that could have been capable of challenging the
state. Yet indigenous struggles were subordinated to class politics
rather than fused with them. The demise of the COB – for both
material (the decline of mining) and political (the internal
divisions that were in part the consequence of defeat) reasons –
has left the movement with no coordinating, centralising force. There
are some left groups influential within the COB today who might claim
that it does lead the movement. That is simply not true, and nothing
is gained from the pretence that a ready-made programme and a
self-proclaimed directorate is all that is required to achieve
leadership of this complex and varied movement. There is a dominant
ideology, which is sectional, nationalist, communal and in many
sections syndicalist. All of these currents militate against the
forging of a common politics whose purpose is the conquest of power.
The Bolivian ruling class and its neo-liberal masters are
certainly preparing new instruments of exploitation, new schemes to
deliver control of Bolivia’s natural resources to global capital or
its surrogates in the IMF or the other international agencies. It is
the task of revolutionaries to relentlessly expose the nature of
these projects, and to challenge the notion that capitalism’s
solutions to its own crises can ever fail to be at the expense of
workers and peasants. Evo Morales is already attempting to sow those
illusions. [28]
So the struggles and the resistance will continue. The future,
however, will depend on the ability of those who argue for the
politics of class struggle to embrace the demands for indigenous
rights, education, housing, health, the right to work, the use of
resources for the benefit of all, as class demands which will be won
through the collective action of workers who may speak several
languages, dress in different ways, retain different histories, live
in different environments, but whose experience is increasingly that
of a single class confronting a hostile and exploitative capital. And
because it sits at the heart of a continent, the echoes of its
struggles and successes have been and will be heard by all those who
are facing the same global enemy.

Notes
1. See NarcoNews, 10 June 2005, www.narconews.com.
2. See J. Crabtree, Patterns of Protest: Politics and Social
Movements in Bolivia (London 2005), pp. 98–99. Crabtree’s
is an informative and accessible account of the events of the last
five years.
3. I’ll come back to this below.
4. See W. Queiser Morales, Bolivia: Land of Struggle
(Colorado 1992), p. 147.
5. W. Cháves, Â¿Por qué son tan combativos los movimientos
sociales bolivianos?, in La Insignia.
6. TÃºpac Katari led one of two major indigenous insurrections
against the Spanish colonists in 1781. His name has regularly
reappeared as new insurrections against successive colonial and
repressive regimes have claimed that original tradition of
resistance. See S. Rivera Cusicanqui, Aymara Past, Aymara Future,
NACLA Report on the Americas, vol. 25, no. 3
(December 1991), pp. 18–23.
7. Jim Schultz of the Democracy Center at
http://www.democracyctr.org/waterwar/.
Schultz lives in Cochabamba and wrote a series of eyewitness reports
on events there.
8. The most thorough account of Cochabamba’s water wars is O.
Olivera and T. Lewis, Cochabamba!: Water Rebellion in Bolivia
(South End Press, 2004).
9. J. Schultz, as above.
10. Crabtree gives a brief summary of the subsequent developments
in the region. The reality is that lack of investment on the one
hand, and on the other extreme inequalities in access to water, have
left the situation still unresolved. J. Crabtree, as above, pp. 30–31.
11. The Magruder Commission sent by the US government in 1943 to
investigate conditions found there to be no rights of collective
bargaining, declining wage levels despite a rise in productivity, and
levels of nutrition that were ‘dangerously low’. Quoted in James
Dunkerley’s important history, Rebellion in the Veins (London 1984).
12. See A. Céspedes, El metal del Diablo (Havana 1965); and G.F. Geddes, Patiño the Tin King (London 1972).
13. This model of populism, mass mobilisation, and the creation of
secret organisations within the military was also pursued in Peru at
the time, encouraged by Haya de la Torre, the extremely influential
leader of the Peruvian organisation APRA whose shadow also fell
across Bolivian politics.
14. For an excellent account of the Bolivian Revolution see J.
Newsinger, Revolution in Bolivia, International Socialism 2 : 18 (Winter 1983), pp. 60–86.
15. J. Dunkerley, as above, p. 17.
16. G. Lora, A History of the Bolivian Labour Movement (Cambridge 1977), p. 283, quoted in J. Newsinger, as above, p. 76.
17. J. Newsinger, as above, p. 80.
18. See J. Nash, We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat Us (New York 1977), a wonderful study of the history and culture of the
mining communities.
19. J. Newsinger, as above, p. 77.
20. For these debates see Bolivia: The Revolution Derailed?,
Revolutionary History, vol. 4, no. 3 (Summer 1992).
21. It is worth noting that the effect of eradication was to
reduce production in the Chapare, the result of which was a rise in
the international market price. In Yungas, however, production rose
by 18 percent in the same period. J. Crabtree, as above, pp. 40–41.
22. See Bolivia Fights Back, NACLA Report on the
Americas, vol. 31, no. 3 (November–December 2004),
especially the article by Arce and Kruse, The Consequences of
Neo-Liberal Reform.
23. See J. Crabtree, as above, chapter 4.
24. Reproduced in T. Lewis and O. Olivera, as above.
25. R. Zibechi, El Alto: un mundo Nuevo desde la diferencia, 23 August 2005, at www.ircamericas.org.
26. Available at econoticiasbolivia.com (2 September 2005).
27. Published on econoticiasbolivia.com (30 July 2005).
28. Morales has found an enthusiastic ally in Venezuela’s
president, Hugo Chávez, who intervened in his support during the
June events. Yet Chavez himself declared, in January 2005 at the
World Social Forum, that he was an advocate of socialist revolution.
Chavez’s dilemma is a reflection of the intense and continuing
debate within the movement – a debate in which Evo Morales does not
and cannot represent a revolutionary future.

Bolivia: a guide to terms
Carlos Mesa: president October 2003 to June 2005
Vaca Diez: right wing politician linked to oil interests
Eduardo Rodriguez: interim president after June 2005 uprising
Gonzalo Sánchez de Losada (‘Goni’): president
1993–1997 and 2002–2003, overthrown October 2003
Evo Morales: leader coca growers and MAS party, second in
2002 elections, presidential candidate in forthcoming elections
Felipe Quispe el Mallku: leader Aymara nationalist movement
García Linera: former Aymara guerrilla, sociologist, vice-presidential candidate
Guillermo Lora: historic leader POR Trotskyist party
Hugo Banzer: military dictator 1971–78, elected president 1997–2001
Jaime Solares: leader COB union federation since it moved
to the left in 2003
Juan Lechin: leader Bolivian miners’ union during and
after 1952 revolution
Jeffrey Sachs: Harvard economist, neo-liberal adviser to
Bolivian, Polish and Russian governments, now head of UN
‘anti-poverty’ programme
Lucio Gutiérrez: army officer, joined Ecuadorian uprising
January 2000,president 2002, overthrown April 2005
Oscar Olivera: leader Cochabamba water movement
Paz Estenssoro: leader MNR party, president 1952–56,
1960–64, 1985–89, imposed neo-liberal ‘reforms’
Siles Suazo: bourgeois nationalist, president 1956–60,
1982–85, began neoliberal ‘reforms’
Altiplano: high plateau where both La Paz and tin mines are situated
Aymara: the biggest group of indigenous peoples
Chapare: tropical coca-growing region
COB: Bolivian Workers’ Confederation
Coca: plant from which cocaine is manufactured
Cocaleros: coca growers
Coordinadora del Agua Cochabamba: campaign
against water privatisation El Alto working class satellite city to La Paz
MNR: bourgeois nationalist party, took part in 1952
revolution, now neo-liberal
COR: regional union for El Alto
Fejuve: federation of community organisations
in El Alto
POR: Bolivian Trotskyist Party during and after 1952 revolution
Pulacayo Theses: revolutionary programme
accepted by Bolivian miners’ union in 1946
Santa Cruz: second biggest city, centre of eastern lowland
tropical region where oil and gas have been discovered
Tupac Katari Revolutionary Movement (MRTK): Aymara
nationalist movement
 



It had been a very hot summer in Porto Alegre. The grass was
scorched all along the riverbank site where the 2005 World Social
Forum was held. Only the converted gas plant which served as a
communications centre offered any kind of shade. Unlike previous
years, the meeting was divided by areas – environmental, indigenous
struggles, social movements, culture, and so on – each with their
own complex of different sized marquees to accommodate the meetings
and debates.
Walking along through the ranks of tents and past the 2,500 or so
talks, you could pick up snatches of the discussions going on inside
– though it was over an hour’s march from one end to the other.
There were heated conversations about every aspect of the movement –
global warming, land rights, sustainable development, the role of
trade unions, the future of social movements, the political strategy
to follow. It was as if you were listening to the soundtrack of a
new, living movement.
The 155,000 gathered in Porto Alegre were the delegates and
representatives of a huge and growing movement, multiple in language
and background, wide and diverse in its range of concerns. It was
extraordinary to think that it had not existed six years earlier –
that this movement emerged in Seattle, weathered the post-9/11 demand
that we declare ourselves for civilisation against the terrorists,
and embraced the anti-war impulse without losing sight of the enemy.
Far from being diverted from the critique of capitalism as a system,
as some leading intellectuals had feared, a predominantly young
mobilisation now rediscovered imperialism, its systematic use of
violence in pursuit of economic ends, and linked them in a
deceptively simple slogan – ‘No blood for oil.’
In January 2003 the third World Social Forum took place just weeks
after the election to the Brazilian presidency of Lula, candidate of
the Workers Party (the PT), which he had led since its creation in
1980. For the 60 percent of Brazil’s electorate who supported him,
Lula’s election promised change. The civil servants who had been
fighting for years over their pension rights, the landless workers
whose organisation (the MST) had been involved in bitter struggles
with private gunmen and government forces for nearly two decades, the
poor families who were pressing for a democratised education system,
all had invested their optimism in Lula. And it was optimism
encouraged by many sections of the left, including one Trotskyist
tendency, the DS, which joined his government – and remains there.
Yet when Lula visited the forum in 2003, and was rapturously
received, he was already on his way to the World Economic Forum at
Davos, where he would be photographed shaking hands with the
luminaries of the world financial system. The World Social Forum
began two years before precisely as an alternative, a counterweight
to the meetings of the bankers whose decisions would directly affect
the vast majority of the peoples of the world while giving them no
access or involvement in reaching those decisions. So it was
particularly ironic that Lula should go straight from Porto Alegre to Davos.
The WSF, after all, was not intended as a lobbying group but as an
alternative, a place where the strategies of resistance against the
programmes and projects of the WTO, the World Bank and the IMF could
be discussed and coordinated. It was already obvious, however, that
Lula was bent on renegotiating the terms of Brazil’s engagement
with the world economy, not on challenging or rejecting them. His
first tests came early in 2003, with the confrontation with the civil
service unions, new land occupations and the nomination of
representatives of capital to key posts like the head of the national
bank and the ministry of agriculture. Three PT deputies and a senator
opposed to the government’s pensions and tax policies were first
disciplined and later expelled from the party.
Meeting two years later (the intervening WSF took place in January
2004 in Mumbai, India) the promise and the disillusionment could not
help but shape the atmosphere and political direction of the forum.
Lula’s presence caused friction, anger and frustration. There was
no sign of the euphoria of two years earlier, despite the attempts by
the PT to recreate it at Lula’s rally in the Gigantinho sports
stadium on the first day. But it was a staged affair: the seats had
been packed early with party loyalists, though there were a small
number of critics who shouted from the benches. A demonstration
outside by a number of left groups accused Lula of betrayal.
But in a sense the evidence of a wider disaffection was provided
by the PT’s recent loss of power in the city. And this was Porto
Alegre, the symbol of a new kind of political arrangement embodied in
the ‘participatory budgets’. Some of the key figures in the WSF
organising committee, people like Hilary Wainwright, had written
passionately about the Porto Alegre experiment. It seemed to fit well
into the framework of arguments about taking power without
necessarily seizing the state.
In fact it was always open to serious question, as the popular
assemblies could only discuss the allocation of a small proportion of
the municipal budget, let alone address the overall priorities of the
distribution of wealth on a national scale.
In any event, the loss of Porto Alegre was an enormous blow, and
no amount of grandstanding could conceal that from a radical
Brazilian audience. But the reality was that the implications of
Lula’s defeat set the whole political agenda. The national rally of
PSOL (the Socialism and Freedom Party founded by the deputies
expelled from the PT and others) drew some 1,800 mainly young people
and announced the creation of a political space of great potential
significance. On a wider panorama, the Lula experience called into
question the very positive spin that sections of the movement had
placed on the group of new Latin American presidents – Gutiérrez
in Ecuador, Kirchner in Argentina, Parra in Paraguay, Chávez in
Venezuela (and the recently elected president of Uruguay, Tabaré
Vázquez). Kirchner still enjoyed some degree of popular credibility
because he had moved against the perpetrators of the human rights
abuses under previous military government and seemed to be acting
with some independence in the face of international capital.
Gutiérrez, on the other hand, had compromised and abandoned his
commitments to the mass movement that carried him to power.
Just before the conference the death was announced of the
venerable Brazilian economist Celso Furtado, the main architect of a
theory of dependency and its attendant strategies of independent
national economic development. Months before his death he had broken
with Lula – and the new president did not attend his funeral. The
symbolism was inescapable. The promise of a solution based on a
single nation-state taking on a global capitalist system had
foundered in Brazil as it had in Ecuador and elsewhere.
Yet the forum had always had at its heart a strong current of
reformism led by ATTAC, the coalition opposed to international
finance whose strongest section was in France, and the majority of
NGOs. For them the focus was always on a moral case which could
persuade social democratic governments to acknowledge a
responsibility to aid and debt relief programmes. Blair and Brown’s
much-vaunted Africa initiatives, for example, seemed to encourage
that kind of approach. On the other hand the recent failure of most
of the governments of the wealthy nations to deliver aid in any
quantities to the victims of the tsunami called that perspective into
question. And recent Latin American experience, with Lula at its
heart, did not augur well for any serious challenge to global capital
and its priorities – despite the defiance displayed at the WTO
conference in Cancun last year.
Against this background, strategic questions were again on the
unwritten but acknowledged agenda of many of those present at Porto Alegre.
It had always been a rule of the social forums that political
organisations should not take part directly. The rationale was that
the problems should be addressed in terms of practical solutions and
in a wide-ranging debate. The rule was always honoured in the breach
– but it did have the advantage of limiting the intervention of
political parties with little or no involvement in the movement. In
some ways, the physical organisation of the forum – this year in
particular – encouraged the view of its work as a series of
parallel and specific debates, with strategic thinking informed by
‘regional’ considerations alone. This year, as opposed to all
previous years (and very particularly to Mumbai), there was no
central event or space which could bring together all the components
and create a sense of the whole movement – with all its tensions
and contradictory pressures.
This undoubtedly did present a problem at this key conjuncture.
Faced with the failure of the Lula alternative, the central question
for all of us was how to develop a central and united strategy to
confront the highly centralised and coordinated project of global
capital. In 2003 the decision to back the worldwide protest against
the Iraq war on 15 February brought 20 million people into activity
worldwide and vindicated our common purpose. This year, while the
Assembly of Social Movements did emerge ultimately with a clear
anti-war position and a call for global action on 19 March, it was
harder to achieve than two years earlier, precisely because there was
an emphasis on diversity and fragmentation rather than unity of action.
Yet at the same time there was clearly a counter-impulse within
the forum. If fragmentation encouraged a lobbying view of the
political role of the forums (world, regional, social) there was a
different, although not fully formed, political understanding present
as well. The questions that were being debated showed the openness of
many delegates to discussions about socialism, alternative ways of
organising society and explorations of how a different world might
look and feel.
And in some ways the alternative was summarised – in a rather
contradictory way – by the reception given to Hugo Chávez. He
appeared at the end of the forum – in effect his visit to the
Gigantinho stadium was the closing act of the forum. And it was clear
that the reception he was given was spontaneous and authentic –
unlike Lula’s in the same place a few days earlier. For three and a
half hours he addressed a crowd inside the arena, and outside it,
with the kind of populist rhetoric he is so good at. He spoke with
real instinct to the audience he had before him, insisting on his
anti- imperialism, arguing for the arming of the people and for the
first time ever describing his political objective as a socialist revolution.
Chávez symbolised a more radical alternative with its emphasis on
organisation from below, on popular power and on a vision of a
socialist future. And in that sense, he spoke for and to the
anxieties and concerns of the majority of the delegates to the forum,
particularly the young, for whom the issue now was a way forward
moving from protest and resistance towards a purposive struggle.
The problem, of course, was that what Chávez said at Porto Alegre
was not at all the same thing as what his government is doing. Within
Venezuela, the movement for change is also facing a crossroads. It is
the upsurge from below that has saved Chávez three times in the last
three years from the attempts by the right to overthrow him. But on
each occasion he had pulled back from the demands of the movement,
seeking compromise with the US and even with sections of the
bourgeoisie. The government itself includes people who are bitterly
hostile to the project of popular power and democracy from below to
which Chávez committed himself in Porto Alegre.
Thus, while Chávez could symbolise the alternative the movement
was seeking, he could not claim to be implementing it. If there was a
model of a different kind of power, it came not from Venezuela but
from Bolivia, where a mass popular movement had twice defeated
capitalist economic strategies imposed by the international financial
agencies.
For the left, the challenge of Porto Alegre and the period to come
is twofold: to build the movement in all its breadth and diversity,
as activists and organisers on the one hand, and to raise within that
movement the larger political questions on which the revolutionary
socialist tradition can offer a body of understanding, experience and
ideas. But in fulfilling that double task, there are habits that have
to be abandoned – habits of sectarianism and isolation, of a
refusal (or perhaps an inability) to engage with those sections of
workers, for example, whose daily resistance will bring them into a
closer engagement with those ideas – but whose starting point may
well be distant from that of the left.
The successful experiences of recent times, the anti-war movement,
for example, have built a united front around shared objectives; that
has then become the space in which the politics of revolutionary
transformation, whose starting point is exactly that self-activity of
the class, can begin to take root and make sense. The openness of
PSOL’s first congress was an encouraging sign of the possibilities
to come. For if the World Social Forum has taught us anything it is
that in the absence of revolutionary ideas as a living force within
the movement other ideas will fill the void, ideas which cannot offer
the prospect of a socialist democracy or a transfer of power out of
the hands of that minority that today seems so ready to place the
future of the planet in jeopardy.

Further Reading
Critical Reflections on the Fifth World Social Forum, by Alex
Callinicos and Chris Nineham
 

