

From Paris comes the alarming news of a Hitler-Pilsudski plot against the Soviet Union. J. Sauerwein, Foreign editor of the Paris Matin, reveals the whole machination in a wire to the New York Times of June 1.
French authorities made the news public in an effort to hold Poland and the Little Entente in line, a task which has become increasingly difficult for Quai D’Orsay diplomacy due to the rigors of the world-wide economic crisis. The Polish move in support o£ the conspiracy, originally concocted by Nazi statesmen, is interpreted as an attempt to counteract the Four Power Pact plans of France, which have met with resistance from Warsaw due to provisions for rearmament made for former Central Power nations, which the Pilsudski regime fears. Sauerwein writes:
“The idea of the Nazi scheme, as the French understand it, is that Poland would make a big territorial concession to Germany in the Polish corridor and receive as compensation territory in Soviet Ukraine in the direction of the Black Sea. It is a German idea ... Marshal Pilsudski has had his eye on the Ukraine ever since he fought the Russians there in 1920.”
From the report, which Monseiur Sauerwein says, the French consider reliable and which they obtained from “secret sources,” one thing stands out most clearly, Namely, that on every side of the European diplomatic tangle the way out is, seen – in an attack against Soviet Russia and in its subsequent colonization.
Furthermore, in this attack, Hitler is indubitably to be the spearhead. The French merely want to contract him for the job under the conditions of the Four Power Pact, with Poland as a subsidiary. Poland itself wrangles for a more prominent place.
That the French are losing their grip somewhat is apparent. With Mussolini to the South and Hitler to the East of them, loss of control over Poland and the Little Entente would seriously weaken them. That is why they hold on so desperately.
Hitler, on the other hand, would like nothing better than to gird himself for the French by an alliance with the other notorious adventurer of Eastern Europe, Pilsudski. In this he no doubt hopes for Washington’s blessing. The Roosevelt “peace message,” which the Nazi chancellor was only too ready to welcome in his last Reichstag address, leaves ample room for such an aspiration. The first step in its fulfillment is clear – the Nazi-Polish alliance against the USSR. What else has Hitler to offer Pilsudski? On what other grounds can Pilsudski meet Hitler?
Yet, no matter which way the Franco-German tangle is solved, with France directing or with Hitler in the lead under American auspices ultimately, the line-up must be against the fatherland of the workers. It will be concluded. That much is obvious. Only the purblind cannot see this. To trust in non-aggression pacts, as the Litvinoffs and Stalins and Karakhans do, means under these conditions, to prepare the ground objectively for a smashing defeat of Soviet Russia.
To put confidence in the imperialist contradictions alone, as the present regime in the Soviet Union does, means to go to the slaughter blindfolded.
The Western powers are heading for an intervention agreement. Japan, in the Far East, is making ready for collusion in the attack by the seizure of the Chinese Eastern, by the setting-up of a new North China vassal state, by the conclusion of a binding truce with the lackeys of the Kuomintang. From all sides, imperialist ambuscades lurk ahead for the fortress of the world revolution.
Stalinism has paralyzed the Communist International, the arm of world revolution.
Stalinism has betrayed the Chinese proletariat and helped into power the Kuomintang bandits, who have sold out to the Japanese aggressor.
Stalinism has betrayed the German working class by a senseless, unrealistic policy which has played into the hands of Fascism.
To what end? So that socialism might be built in one country – in Russia!? Where has this wise, “practical policy,” which has “compromised” with Chiang Kai Shek and alienated the bulk of the reformist working class of the world, led to?
It must be plainly said: It has led to the isolation of the revolutionary fatherland. It has laid it open to attack from without by opportunist compromises directed against the world revolution. It has laid it open to decay from within by the adventuristic reeling of bureaucratic centrism.
The fortress of the world revolution is in danger. By the perfidy of non-aggression pacts, by the trust it gives to the conflicts of world imperialism, Stalinism is only throwing dust into the eyes of the workers. It is only undermining the worker’s’ fatherland and the cause of world revolution.
If workers’ Russia is to live, Stalinism must go. If the land of the Soviets is to light the way for world revolution, the reactionary theory of socialism in one country must be thrown overboard.
Back to the line of Marx and Lenin – bajck to the Marxist perspective of the permanent revolution! Return the exiled Bolshevik-Leninists, Trotsky, Rakovsky and their comrades, to the post of struggle which they held in the victorious October! That is the command of the hour.
Every Communist worker who sees the danger; to whom the Four Power Peace Pacts and the Hitler-Pilsudski plots reveal it; who is not fooled by the capitalist non-aggression pacts and the peace talk, must do his duty.
Demand the reinstatement of the International Left Opposition into the Communist International! Demand the return of Trotsky and Rakovsky! That is the way to bring new vigor, a new source of strength to the proletarian army, which is sorely in need of it.
Act while there is still time to act!
 



On June 4 and 5, the European Anti-Fascist Congress, many times delayed and postponed, was finally held in the Salle Pleyel at Paris. The Daladier government had refused permission to hold the meeting anywhere outside of the well-known Communist halls. The restricted nature of the congress, lacking a broad working class base, did not allow for a mass protest and pressure to force the concession from the government to hold the convention in full view of the Parisian proletariat.
The “free lancers” – the Radical deputy Bergery, the novelists Andre Gide, Victor Marguerite, Henri Barbusse, the professors Prenant and Nejedly, etc. – naturally dominated the scene. The Stalinist Comintern bureaucracy, which improvised the whole affair, kept well in the background during its entire duration.
 
Daily Worker on Congress
Significant for the sham character of the whole business, is the reaction of the Stalinist press to it. The Daily Worker, for instance, did not even dignify the congress with a first page account, but relegated it to the back page. This speaks enough for the bureaucracy’s own lack of confidence in their doings. No decisions of any value were adopted, no discussion of fundamentals was permitted. Ceremony and flowery speeches – there is the sum total of the results achieved by it.
 
Left Opposition Excluded!
The International Left Opposition was officially excluded from the sessions. Behind the scenes, the bureaucracy built up an entire apparatus whose business it was to see that the Left Opposition’s voice be stifled, no matter from what quarter it may come. Direct reports are still forthcoming and it is not yet definitely known whether the Bolshevik-Leninists gained access by round-about ways or not. But from the preliminaries attending the meet, a distinct impression may be gathered of the fierce intent of Stalinism not to permit the Left Opposition to force it to give an account before the whole working class of the crimes it perpetrated against the German and the international proletariat in the tense mouths and weeks preceding the seizure of power by Hitler.
 
Slug Bolshevik-Leninists!
At a regional Anti-Fascist Congress in the Grange-aux-Belles (Red Trade Union Headquarters of Paris), Left Oppositionists, delegates from the Ligue Communiste and local unions were forcefully unseated and disgracefully battered by sluggers organized under the direct leadership of outstanding French bureaucrats.
At a second regional meet in Paris, not only were the delegates from the Left Opposition excluded, but bona fide trade union and mass organization representatives suspected of solidarity with the views of the Left Opposition were barred from the hall. Stalinist united front!
 
Nevertheless – Our Voice Is Heard!
It remained for a member of the Young Communist League of France to take the floor for a presentation of the views of the Left Opposition. That was entirely unexpected and consternation reigned in the ranks of the bureaucracy. Before the young orator could conclude his remarks with a declaration of concrete proposals put forward by the L.O., the bureaucracy organized a monstrous noise throughout several parts of the hall to drown out his voice. His counter-resolution received two votes, the Stalinist masquerade was not entirely airtight.
 
Why the Terror Against the Left Opposition?
Why the terror against the Left Opposition? Why this unheard-of determination on the part of the bureaucracy? A glance at one of the speeches is sufficient for illumination on this point. The German delegate Mueller, shoved to the forefront by the bureaucratic impressarios, had the following to say:
“If today Fascist terror is raging worse than ever before, it is not an indication of the strength of Fascism, but of its weakness (!). But it is also a sign of the rapid rise of the revolutionary wave.” (Daily Worker, Saturday, June 17, 1933.)
 
A Fabric of Lies
It is with such a fabric of lies and illusions that the Stalinist bureaucracy means to cover up its criminal shipwreck in Germany. It is upon this self-same rotten fundament of untruths that Stalinism proceeds to cover up its tracks before the working class of the world by speaking of preparations for a German general strike to overthrow Fascism now. It is their fear that the Left Opposition would tear the mask off their cynical, lying countenances and force through a discussion of the real state of affairs and those responsible for it that caused the Comintern bureaucracy to work so diligently to keep the delegates of the International Left Opposition away from its halls.
It feared the concrete proposals of the Left Opposition for the organization of the European Anti-Hitler united front from organization to organization, beginning with the problem of Austria and proceeding onto a wider plane. For the Stalinist bureaucracy is afraid of its own shadow. It has lost all actual faith in working class action. It is interested only in maintaining its own dwindling and undermined prestige. And for that purpose the united front masquerade à la Barbusse is sufficient for it.
But the last word has not yet been said. The Left Opposition will not allow the Stalinist organizers of defeat to cover up their already overflowing crimes with new crimes. The Left Opposition will continue to expose mercilessly the shameful maneuver at Paris and its Stalinist initiators. It will work tirelessly to make the truth known to the workers of the world and to organize genuine, effective united front action that meets the needs of the real situation.
* * *
As we go to press, we have at hand a dispatch from Paris, confirming the scandalous exclusion of the International Left Opposition and rendering a full account of the proceedings. The article will be published in the next issue of The Militant. – Ed.
 



The tension between Nazi Germany and the Bonapartist Dollfuss regime in Austria has again caused sharp outbreaks, due to high-pressure Nazi propaganda, involving a bombing terror in the country on the Danube. The Hitler plans to force, if not the long yearned “Anschluss,” then at least a friendly Nazi coalition government at Vienna, have brought the relations between the two countries at the breaking point.
Uollfuss and his supporters, especially the “Heimwehr” which tends toward a Hapsburg restoration, have the backing of Italy, France and all the powers that do not care to see the Hitler state strengthened. The fight between the Heimwehr Fascists and the Hitler Fascists in Austria proper is therefore part of a larger scheme of imperialist struggle and that is why it assumes the long and drawn out character that it does.
The Austrian authorities reacted to the increased Nazi agitation and terror by the expulsion from their territory of the Reichstag Deputy Habicht, who had been smuggled into the country as director of the Hitler campaign under the guise of press attaché to the Reich legation. The Hitler government retaliated by the expulsion of the Austrian press attaché, the Catholic priest Wasserbaeck, who is said to have been closely in touch with the High Councils of the Centre Party in Germany proper.
If we take, into consideration the attacks of the Fascists on the Catholic Journeymen’s Congress in Munich, the whole amplitude of the situation becomes exceedingly clear. Austria is predominantly a Catholic country. In case of union with Germany or of an alliance with it, the strength of the Catholic Centre would be of a quantity far more formidable than it is in the Reich at present and would constitute a serious obstacle in the path of Hitler’s progress. The attacks on the Catholics in Germany itself and the high-pitched campaign of the National-Socialists in Austria would therefore indicate that the time for a forceful solution of the question of power between Dollfuss and Hitler is drawing near.
In this internecine struggle between the Fascist factions, which offers such tremendous possibilities for a working class movement, it is impossible to overlook the ignominious role of the Austrian social democracy, the most powerful single political party in the country and the all-time pride of the Second International. Seitz, Bauer and Co. lift, literally, not a finger to gain a proletarian solution to the crisis, but sit back with their puny hearts beating and their reformist hopes fluttering for some miracle to save them. The indolent excuse of “Communist splitters” is here completely lacking, the social democrats, caught like rats in a hole, have no one to cast the blame on. They present the most pitiful spectacle, a veritable epitome of reformist impotence.
Only a new movement rising out of the ranks of the workers themselves can save the Austrian working class from the sorry fate of its German brothers. The Left Opposition is hard at work, exerting every bit of energy in final efforts, to constitute such a government.
 



New York, N.Y. – Suspension of all jobless relief by the city administration stared in the faces of 2,000,000 unemployed workers and their dependents this week. The question is not yet decided as we go to press. Only vague promises of aid from the state government have been made. The situation of the unemployed remains highly precarious and a desperate tension exists in their ranks.
The suspension of relief came about as a result of a financial crisis due to the sabotage of Relief Bond sales by the local bankers. The bonds had been issued by the city government. The bankers are intent on cutting clown the city budget so as to enable the administration to pay them on loans due, or at least to force concessions profitable for them (e.g. a raise of fares to bolster up the traction interests they control).
On Monday and Tuesday crowds of workers milled around the relief bureaus voicing their protests and demands and anxiously awaiting word of the most recent developments. On Wednesday afternoon delegations of jobless appeared before a meeting of the Board of Estimate at City Hall to present their demands to the administration. And here, the whole sorry plight of the organized unemployed movement came to the fore. The delegates did not act in a body. Socialists appeared separately and Communists separately. No attempt was even made to get a united delegation with a united program.
The result of this split of forces was obvious. The Tammany fakers naturally used the one against the other. While some time ago, on a similar occasion, they allowed the socialist Norman Thomas to speak and ejected the Communist delegation, they this time turned the tables and permitted the Communist Robert Minor to speak, while ejecting the socialist representatives. The socialists are reported to have protested vigorously against the “united front between the democrats and the Communists.” It comes with ill grace from them. For they were in a similar situation the last time and may just as well be the next time. It
is true that Minor did not protest against their exclusion, but neither did Thomas when he had occasion to. The responsibility for split in the ranks of the unemployed, which is of the greatest aid to Tammany fakerdom, rests squarely upon the shoulders of both the social reformist as well as the Stalinist bureaucrats.
 
Minor to the Board of Estimate: “Now Comrades ...”
It is of special interest to revolutionary workers to observe how the delegate from the party-controlled unemployed council acted. Minor’s address to the Board of Estimate was the purest reformism and did not breathe a breath of the revolutionary spirit of Communism. On the contrary, it serves to breed further dangerous illusion among the broad masses as to possibilities of permanent relief from their miseries under capitalist government. He restricted himself almost exclusively, to a statement of immediate demands, never once even touched upon the Communist class struggle position. It could not be otherwise. Under the guise of revolutionary phrases, under the guise of “struggle against social Fascism”, the Stalinist leadership is making a new Right turn whose opportunist trappings hit the revolutionary worker right in the eye.
So engrossed did Minor become in his “positive, constructive” opportunist program that he forgot at one point before whom he was presenting it and broke out into the appellation: “Now, comrades ...” amid the smiles of the Tammany racketeers. He barely caught himself in time.
The whole position of the Stalinists flows from their past line. Their rejection of the Leninist united front and their “third period” unionization program has left them divorced from the broad mass with an artificial, “private property” – as to speak – mass movement on their hands. Unwilling to make the turn toward a correct united front tactic and union policy because that involves their shaky bureaucrat! prestige, and on the other hand, afraid of losing whatever non-party forces they still control, they mimic the reformists in the unemployed council headed by themselves and capitulate to opportunism within their own four walls, so to speak. How else can a speech like Minor’s be explained?
In the meantime, this policy does serious damage to the working class as a whole and discredits the very name of Communism. What the unemployed workers need in the face of the threat to cut off relief is a single, united unemployed organization that will be able to rally the whole million or more of jobless in the city solidly the serious Communists must strive under its banner. That is the task for at present. That requires the immediate adoption by the Unemployed Councils of the unity basis put forward by the Chicago Conference, which last May created the national Federation of Unemployed Workers Leagues, in which the Stalinists participated. On this basis, they will be able to challenge the social reformists to enter into the united front and to hold them responsible before the masses of workers.
The establishment of such a genuine, Leninist united front – with freedom of expression and criticism for every labor tendency – will also enable the Communists to carry out the Communist task in the mass movement – that of educating broad layers of the working class with demonstrative class struggle facts in the futility and rottenness of the capitalist system and in the inevit ability of the Communist way out of misery – the proletarian dictatorship.
The Tammany threat still impends. The need for the unity of the unemployed workers is indispensable, if it is to be defeated, if Tammany is to be prevented – by splitting the workers’ ranks – from reducing the unemployed to a state where they get not enough to live and just too much to die. The task of the Communists is obvious – a frank and open, Leninist united front proposal to the reformists, which will make unity possible and which will be of permanent value insofar as it will permit the Communists to implant class consciousness within broad strata of the workers.
 



The significance of Roosevelt’s speech last Monday night cannot be overestimated. It constitutes an historical milestone in the downward development of world capitalism. It foreshadows the whole course of the American bourgeoisie in the coming period, both at home and abroad.
“I have no sympathy,” said the head man of capitalist America after four years of crisis, “with the professional economists who insist that things must run their courses and that human agencies can have no influence on economic ills”.
And the president went on to affirm the future utilization of “human” agencies by the bourgeois class. What this means, he makes quite clear. It is the closer and more open merging of the economic interests of the ruling class with their political, state apparatus. In other words, a system of state capitalism which is not unsimilar to the benevolent despotism of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth century kings.
The idea of “benevolent” retrenchment of the ruling classes is rehashed in a new form, with the oppressed classes standing to gain even less than in the past; the part of the “despot” still sharper, that of “benevolence” even more shallow.
What is the particular “human” agency Mr. Roosevelt refers to? It is the so-called blanket code, proposed by the “National Recovery Administration”. What are the “economic ills” this agency is to remedy? They constitute the organizational backwardness of American capitalism in relation to its outstandingly predominant position on the world market.
How will the support which the president calls for in regard to the code accomplish the task he sets himself?
It is intended first of all, by giving up the former, reckless “laissez faire” policy, to rally American capitalism on strictly national lines for a breathing spell on the internal market which will permit a concerted, national attack on the world market.
It is intended, in the second place, to forestall a powerful movement for the workers’ way out of the crisis, by throwing a sop to the 17,000,000 desperate proletarians, whose elemental, immediate demand is a job with half-way tolerable” pay, through the introduction of the stagger system, pure and simple: and furthermore, by coralling the forces of the working class, ahead of time, in servile, class collaborationist organizations, through the sponsoring of A.F. of L. activity in such a manner as to entrench the influence of capital’s lieutenants within labor’s ranks.
All in all, a scheme for the Europeanization of industry on the “American” mass scale, with all its benefits for the bourgeoisie and as little as possible of its drawbacks.
This is the meaning of the Chief Executive’s oration: the mobilization of the capitalist United States for a long range drive toward absolute world domination; a determined and carefully conceived plan to chain the working class to this drive.
It is necessary to realize the thorough cunning of this scheme, its farsightedness. The approach towards its fulfillment is in itself remarkable. Mr. Roosevelt calls upon “the employers of the nation to sign this convenant with me – in the name of patriotism and humanity”.
He calls upon “the workers to go along with us in a spirit of understanding, etc.”
Patriotism is demanded of the bourgeoisie right off the bat. The whole nationalistic paraphanalia is set into motion. Badges of honor to be handed out to employers who “cooperate”. Strong national agitation has already been broadcast, in all the stands the administration has taken on international affairs, in all the speeches. Mr. Roosevelt can already boast of achievements insofar as the bourgeoisie is concerned. Hasn’t he reestablished the credit of the country when it lay prostrate? Haven’t he put through the Farm Bill to curtail agricultural production and raise farm prices for the benefits of all the farmers’ creditors? He feels that he treads on sure ground here, that he can make demands of the bourgeoisie. He has been their man.
Of the workers he only demands that they “go along with us.” In this field he is not so sure. For what achievements can he boast of here? The miserable conservation camps, with their forced labor and their $1 a day wage slavery? This is not very likely to impress the workers. In the meantime, strikes of all sizes and amplitudes sweep he country. It is necessary for the capitalist strategist to go easy with the workers. They are in no mood for fanfares.
He merely pleads with the workers “that no aggression is now necessary to attain those (the workers’) rights” He merely assures them that “nobody will be permitted to whittle ... away” the rights which they have not got.
He prefers to wait and see how the workers will fall for the gag of the stagger system and the minimum wage – which every capitalist will have no trouble to transform into the maximum wage, while remaining perfectly within the law.
He prefers to see how well his labor lieutenants Green, Hillman, Dubinsky and Co. will be able to fasten their stranglehold on the working masses. The patriotic paraphernalia – “for working class consumption” – will come later. He can bide his time. Capitalism is experimenting and its perspective is a long one.
What the worker can expect from the blanket code is evident from what he received from the grandiose public works scheme. Roosevelt is the sponsor of both. From the public works – the conservation camps – the workers had several hundred thousands of their own employed: at the niggardly wage of $1 a day.
The blanket code promises minimums of $14 and $11. That is to be the law – for employers and workers alike, says the president. What is to prevent the trusts, the syndicates and corporations to mobilize their armies of flunkey lawyers to circumvent the law, as Morgan did with the bank laws’. Nothing. The bosses make the laws, they have the “right” – their means, their resources – to break them just as well.
A French wit once said: “The state forbids both rich and poor to steal bread; the state forbids both rich and poor to sleep under bridges.” ...
The state: Roosevelt – that is the bosses’ state. Its laws are the laws and the codes of the employers. Workers’ rights must be fought for. They are not granted, they must be snatched from the boss class. The same holds true for the blanket code and the whole Roosevelt rigmarole.
Those labor fakers who speak of the Roosevelt administration as “above the classes”, who speak of the fairness of the codes, are preparing the workers for further and greater oppression and misery. They must be exposed. Every step of theirs must be watched, mistrusted. Every proposal carefully examined. The working class counter-proposals, the proletarian counter-strategy to the Roosevelt offensive must be prepared.
The need of the moment is the concentration of all Left wing and genuine progressive forces in the American labor movement for the elaboration of such a policy. The official Communist party under Stalinist leaderships and the Musteite Conference for Progressive Labor Action have called a conference on the National Industrial Recovery Act in Cleveland for August. Whether this conference will accomplish this burning task is questionable and yet to be seen. What is needed to accomplish this task is a well worked out Communist program, one that is based on principle and confirmed by experience, one that will stand the test. Not the least factor in such a program is a correct international orientation. The Left Opposition will be on hand with such a program, it will work with all its might to unite a solid Left wing movement, to make it the driving force within all labor organizations, in the A.F. of L. and among the unorganized.
 



MR. ERNEST T. WEIR, steelmaster, very quietly challenged Section 7a of the NRA last week. He held an “election” in the mills of the Weirton Steel Company (a subsidiary of the National Steel, of which he is president) at which 49 company union men were delegated as “representatives of their own choosing” by the mill-hands. To keep up face, the Labor Board and General Johnson protested, fretted and threatened.
* * * *
But Mr. Weir, the papers tell us, read David Copperfield for the hundred and first time. “It gets better with each reading”, he remarked.
* * * *
The steelmaker, “a rugged individualist who came up from the ranks in the old American way”, has every cause to maintain his equanimity. “The next step is up to the administration”, and that the administration will merely mark time is self-evident from all past experiences.
* * * *
This is not the first and we don’t believe it will be the last instance of the utter contempt with which big business regards the ever so solemn agreements concluded from time to time by the code authorities in Washington. The National Steel made more profit in 1931, according to reports, than all the other steel companies put together. That is a persuasive enough argument to counter any of the General’s forceful paper ultimata which serve as a veil for feeble action. Such arguments abound in the ranks of the rugged individualists.
* * * *
In most cases, the next step on the part of the administration is a surrender to the captains of industry all along the line. A case in point is the latest development in the needle industry. There the code authorities, after arbitrating the great New York strike last fall with a seeming victory for the workers, have now made public some rulings which practically turn the tables in favor of the employees. A so-called “sub-normality” clause permits the payment of a wage below the established minimum to “slow” workers. What other effect can this have but the granting of a loophole to the needle bosses by which they can abolish the minimum wage altogether? Another ruling in the same industry gives the Southern and Western employers the right to pay their workers from 30 to 40 per cent lower wages than in the East. What other effect can this have but the enforced reestablishment of the Sweatshop?
* * * *
At a meeting of unorganized workers and union men, an A.F. of L. official who is also serving on one of the NRA Complaint Boards told those present that he believed the chiselers had wormed their way clear into the NRA itself. Being all hepped up by the propaganda against the chiselers, the good man appeared to be quite outraged, by this fact. It never occurred to him that an administration which stands four-square for a system – the profit system of capitalism – which upholds the free-for-all grab and may the best chiseler win, cannot help being swamped by them.
* * * *
While the American workers may not as yet have come to the realization that it is up to them as a class to take the works into their own hands and run industry for the benefit of all the people, they are nevertheless gropingly doing something about it. They are realizing already with increasing clarity that NRA won’t do a thing for them unless they themselves get together in formations of their own and see that they get whatever they can out of it. They no doubt notice with growing apprehension the fact that out of 3,000,000 Blue Eagles issued to the boss class – and how many million violations? – the National Recovery Administration announces only 53 (fifty-eight!) withdrawals ...
 



“FORTUNATELY, I think”, thinks General Electric’s Owen D. Young, “it will be easy to persuade our people that it is their duty to consume luxuries in order to provide an import balance so that our cotton and our copper may be exported. Such a personal sacrifice for the public economic welfare can be safely predicted”.
* * * *
Mr. Young made this warm spiel for a cold winter evening in the New York Times last Sunday. As luxuries he classes: Coffee, tea, fruit, wines, tobacco, etc. Considering all sides of the question very carefully, we cannot help reaching the conclusion that the G.E.’s man is not too unduly optimistic, we know at least half a dozen unemployed ourselves that would readily make the sacrifice. Of course, in line with the worthy gentleman’s “division of consumption” theory of economy, and corresponding to current codes of fair competition, the American unemployed might ask, in return for the conviction that it is their duty to consume luxuries – the concession that it be their privilege to consume also some necessities: Such as bread, butter, pork chops and potatoes, for instance.
* * * *
But until the necessary arrangements tor this sort of a square business deal are concluded, we must unfortunately content ourselves with the luxury of Mr. Young’s ingenious philosophy. We could not quite make the sacrifice of consuming it whole. Yet we will nibble at it.
* * * *
The gist of the idea is that the old conception of world economy being based on an international division of labor has gone haywire. Modern technique, communication, transportation have made it possible for every country to build up its own manufactures, its own industry. And, as a matter of fact, Mr. Young rightly finds, most countries are quite content that this should be so. This is called the new trend to nationalism.
* * * *
Of course England needs India’s cotton and France the Saar’s iron ore and Germany the potassium of Alsace-Lorraine. But that lies in the realm of a division of consumption rather than of labor. And in this same realm of the division of consumption, our nation is the most advantageous. Its labor is to consume the luxuries and to furnish for the consumption of the others, our cotton arid our copper. Out of pure goodness of heart we will also offer for consumption to the budding national industries our motors and generators and dynamos.
* * * *
So much for the general outline of the future. The whole plan is based on an augury that Mr. Young has plucked from his own intellectual Olympus that we have been wrong in thinking that a compressed world – compressed by the material rapprochement offered by wireless and radio and aviation – breaks down national barriers. It raises them instead. An ordinary mortal might be inclined to ask, how? That is because he is not acquainted four-dimensional approach of Mr. Young, however.
* * * *
Still, if our oracle leaves us in doubt as to how – we can be made quite clear as to why it should be so. American business stands to gain all around by the new nationalisms. While fostering cultural exchanges with the other countries, American big business, in addition to the philosophic satisfaction of nurturing all the new nationalisms, can, as a sort of a by-product find a market for its capital export. And if the different nationalisms come to a clash of arms in their consumption of cotton, potassium or iron ore, that is just too bad. But Uncle Sam will always be there to pull the chestnuts out of the fire and the big boys of Wall Street will be expecting the American masses to lend a hand – it will all be for the sake of doing their duty to consume more luxuries.
* * * *
Finally, as an illustration that it is possible for a nation uninitiated in the old order of industrial nations to build up a national economy all its own without dependence on the rest of the world, Mr. Young offers us the example of Russia. If, by some mystic or messianic formula socialism can be built in one country, why can’t capitalism. Another big victory for Stalin’s diplomacy ...
* * * *
In the meantime, since the “readjustment in this field (the new division of consumptive power) may not be abrupt”, Owen Young consoles us, “Russia ... will provide a cushion, temporarily at least, for diminishing trade in manufactured necessities” ...
 



THE DOLLAR isn’t all that’s “baloney” under the NRA. Mr. Al Smith may have a broad wit but he has limited interests. Under his brown derby rests the cares of a member of the possessing class. They have the dollars. And they don’t want them transformed into risky sausages.
* * * *
What do we have? We have unemployment, cold weather, low wages, speed-up – and so far only a lot of baloney promises: about re-employment, jobless relief, a living wage and a 30 hour week. NRA speaks for all these dire needs of the working people but what does it do about them?
* * * *
Section 7a of the Recovery Act grants the legal right of both individual and collective bargaining, “individual bargaining” – that means, as so many of us have discovered – the right of the boss to hire and fire at will, to command you to work for a bowl of miserable slop or be thrown out into the street altogether. Collective bargaining – any worker who has successfully participated in the use of this weapon, will tell you – means organized union struggle; workers joining up in big bodies to put across their needs.
* * * *
In his effort to wrest improvements from the boss, the laboring man has no strength other than the helping hand, the common mind and will of his fellow men. The boss has the banker, the police, the gunman and the dollar on his side. And the employing class has made ample use of the provision for individual bargaining in NRA, not to speak of the many ways they have found for getting around any of the still too few and weak attempts that have been made by workers at “collective bargaining”.
* * * *
What the worker is beginning to feel more and more is the need for more and bigger “collectives”, for genuine broad collective effort – so that the “bargaining” won’t be all on the bosses’ side. It is interesting that the first organized expression for this need comes from the employees in an industry that was among the first to be blessed with a NIRA code – the textile industry.
* * * *
THE UNITED TEXTILE WORKERS union, by decision of its executive council – the country’s press informed us on Tuesday last – has decided to call upon the American Federation of Labor to prepare for a General Strike to bring about the 30-hour week and other union demands. The General Strike – that is the most effective weapon for “collective bargaining” there is. The fact that the reactionary labor skate McMahon has appeared as the chief spokesman for the U.T.W. in this move, is doubly significant.
* * * *
When a McMahon speaks for General Strike – that is a sign that the textile slaves under him are pushing hammer and tongs for it. When a McMahon begins to give lip service to labor action – then that means that the McMahonocracy is holding in store for the toiling masses bearing down upon the advocates of class peace, a betrayal far greater than any of those in the past.
* * * *
Watching his fingers closely, the workers who have determined to stand up in struggle against capitalistic misery will use every measure to make McMahon and his ilk live up to their words. A sweeping country-wide collective strike is the best and surest way for labor to advance its interests at this stage. In preparation for it, practical and strategic problems loom up big: how to get together employed and unemployed, skilled workers and the unskilled, those already organized and those still unorganized. Men on the job will be discussing these problems in increasing numbers and with growing interest in the coming days. We will contribute our opinions in the general discussion.
 



LYNCHING IS once again occupying the center of public attention. The mob murder of the Clarke kidnappers at San Jose and its public condonement by California’s Governor Rolph brought on its trail wave of repercussions in mass sentiment. The spectacle of a “law and order’’ representative endorsing this highest expression of social lawlessness could not help bringing a new courage and new verve to the dregs of American society engaged in the barbarian pastime. Aside from the repetition in St. Joseph, Missouri and the liberation of the Maryland mobsters, there were just as serious reactions of a more general, wide-spread character.
* * * *
The Atlanta, Georgia, correspondent of the New York Times has the following to report on the subject:
“When Rolph’s praise of Lynching was printed, sentiments in line with the following utterances indicate the reaction of certain groups: ‘California’s my new address now’, ‘Let’s send all the niggers to California’, ‘That California man oughter be President’, etc.”
The tragic heroes of most of the Lynching bees in American history have been Negroes for the greater part. (“From 1889, when records of lynching began to be kept”, says the N.Y. Herald-Tribune of last Sunday, “to 1932, 3,745 persons lave been killed by mass violence ... 2,954 were Negroes.”) The mob act has ever been a weapon of the white rulers of the South to strike terror into the doubly exploited masses of dark-skinned toilers. By his conduct of the “legal” trial of Heywood Patterson, ruling class Judge Callahan assured all his fellow barbarians that it will not be necessary for them to “Send all the Niggers to California” to be lynched.
* * * *
THE TRIAL of Patterson and the rest of the Scottsboro boys dramatizes vividly and with striking clarity the social roots of the Lynch madness. The original frame-up, as is well-known, took place at a time when; the black share-croppers of Alabama were stirring in revolt. The Boss class and its liberal agencies are well aware of the social basis of the mob-murder phenomenon. The Southern Commission on the Study of Lynching has made some interesting observations on the causes.
* * * *
In its reports, the Commission investigates the circumstances that lead a crowd of people into the killer frenzy against the Negroes. Some hair-brained professors, it seems, explained “it all” as a sort of mid-summer madness. Lynchings do, to be sure, occur more often in the Summer than in the other seasons, the commission explains, but
“Working and living out of doors in warm weather, mid-summer unemployment, landlord-tenant relations in summer, and other factors greatly modify any all-weather explanation ... During the summer mouths, after cultivating is done and harvesting begins, there is little to occupy the time of Negro and white workers on Southern farms ... Manhunts and lynch-ings – afford an avenue of emotional escape from a life so drab and unilluminated that any alternative is welcomed.”
* * * *
The honorable Commission has, willy-nilly, hit the nail on the head: “landlord-tenant relations” – that is what makes the Negro share-cropper the butt of the Lynch organizers. “A life so drab that any alternative is welcomed” – that is what makes the poor whites, declassed proletarians, the instrument in the hands of the landlord Lynch organizers. Can the basis of this species of human rabies be abolished without abolishing the system of boss class dominance which nurtures it? Can the disgrace of Lynching be wiped out in this country without a working class movement to do away with a “life so drab that any alternative is welcomed”?
* * * *
That is what every sincere fighter against Lynching must ask himself. The workers for their part must make the organized mass protest against Lynch-exponent Rolph and Legal-Lyncher Callahan a forefront task of their class battle.
 



Cleveland. – At a big demonstration called by the Unemployed Council on Market Square (West Side) today, workers protesting against Mayor Miller’s “plan” for forced labor and demanding cash relief from the city-controlled Associated Charities, also echoed the cry for solidarity with the German proletariat faced with the attempt of the Fascist Hitler regime to exterminate their organizations, to suppress their military and to prepare Germany for a spearhead position in an imperialist aggression against the workers’ fatherland – the USSR.
On the march to the Square and at the demonstration, prominent banners were displayed linking the struggle of the unemployed with the flight against German Fascism, with such slogans as: “In Cleveland – Miller wants Forced Labor. In Germany – Hitler”, “Long Live the International Solidarity of the German and American Workers against Forced Labor, against Hitler and Fascism”.
On the Square, after speeches by unemployed militants and party members, comrade Sam Gordon of the Left Opposition was asked by party workers and sympathizers to address the crowd. In a short, but impassioned speech, the comrade from the Left Opposition sounded the call for active support of the German proletariat in their desperate struggle against the Hitler hordes. He showed the relation between the struggle of the American unemployed and the German workers, pointing out the meaning of Hitler’s coming into power, showing the danger of a Fascist German attack against the Soviet Union. Exposing the role of the yellow German social democracy in paving the road for Fascism he continued with an explanation of the need for the immediate establishment of a united front against the Hitler hordes which the Communist party alone can do by directly challenging the social democratic fakers to join in the fight, in this way showing the way out to the socialist workers and arousing their pressure against the leadership. He called upon the workers present to demand that the Communist party take this course and ended up with a cheer for the international solidarity of the working class in the struggle against hunger, war and Hitlerism. The speech was greeted with a good round of applause.
A march followed to the headquarters of the Associated Charities at which a Committee of unemployed presented demands.
 



Cleveland – Last Saturday night a liberal sympathizer of the USSR, Ella Winters (Mrs. Lincoln Steffens), spoke in the auditorium of the Women’s City Club under the auspices of the “Friends of the Soviet Union”. After the lecture there were many questions from ihe floor, a good number of them relating to Trotsky and to his status in the Soviet Union.
In reply to a question as to what the children are taught in the Soviet schools about the exiled Bolshevik leader, Mrs. Steffens replied that Soviet textbooks do not even mention his role in the October insurrection or in the civil war. She had asked a Soviet professor if this were not ... falsifying history (these are her own words). The gentleman in question replied:
“True, it is falsifying history, but it is a means to an end. To teach the truth about Trotsky would revive dangerous sentiments for the leader of the Left Opposition and disturb the great work of socialist construction that is going on. In order not to obstruct this great end falsification is justified.”
And he assured Mrs. Steffens that in a few years, after socialism is secured, this will ail be rectified and Trotsky will again be given his due place in Soviet history. The true facts, objectivity in the science of history has – so to speak – only been temporarily suspended, not eliminated. Of course, all for the good of the cause ...
“And this, my friends”, the worthy lady concluded with approval, “is the realistic way in which the Soviets approach the problem.”
A comrade asked the speaker how such an explanation can be reconciled with the scientific, Marxian foundation of Soviet society – which requires at all times, objectivity and the truth – recalling that the central organ of the Bolshevik party itself bears the name Pravda, that is, “Truth”. The speaker replied that she could not answer that question. Besides, she did not wish to go into “inner-party, politics”!
This blunt explanation of Mrs. Steffens’ deserves an evaluation. Unless she lied, it is also the explanation of Soviet pedagogues. Of course the explanation is quite in line with the Stalin regime and is no doubt in the “spirit of comrade Stalin’s letter”, which, the Daily Worker cynically tells us, represents Marxism or Leninism of the present period, the one of completing the “first phase of Communism (socialism)”. But why is falsification so readily endorsed by people who are associated here in America with muckraking liberalism and what does this endorsement mean?
That the American muckrakers were not to be taken very seriously became obvious during the last war, when the whole pack of them jumped on the Wilson bandwagon. Can these same people be trusted as “Friends of the Soviet Union”? These people always, or nearly always have good intentions. We will not dispute that. But will not these “good intentions” which paved their way to Wilsonistic jingoism betray them also when the Soviet Union is really in danger, when more is required of them than uncritical and meaningless praise for the actual successes of socialist construction in the USSSB.? The light-minded endorsement of Mrs. Steffens of what she bluntly calls “falsification of history” cannot but make us sceptical with regard to the actual value of her role as a “Friend of the Soviet Union”. What the Soviet Union, what the working class at the head of it, needs most and at all times, Lenin – following the scientific approach, of Marxism – always stressed: is the truth, the objective facts. Support for the working class which is not based upon a sympathy with the actual facts, with a thorough examination of them, is extremely questionable, is superficial and because of this superficiality, unreliable when a real test of conviction has to be withstood, in times of crisis. And that is when real friends of the Soviet Union are actually needed.
 



The past week was marked by a hectic development of the political tension on the European continent and by whirlwind American intervention to allay it. The surprisingly easy and rapid consolidation of the Nazi power in Germany while France and the rest of the entente had expected a prolonged period of internal strife to keep the German nationalists tied to their strings – led to increasing boldness on the part of Hitler on the foreign front and served, as the cause of something which is being described by the universal press as a “war hysteria comparable to that of 1914.”
As long as the fate of Germany was undecided, as long as it was not certain that the proletariat of that country would not rise against the Fascist monster and institute its own rule, the ruling classes of France, England, etc., not only had no objections to the Nazi Storm Troops but regarded them as warriors in the defense of “civilization.”
But the moment when it became clear that class struggle in Germany had for the time being, decided by the passive submission of the workers – betrayed by the socialists and kept divided by the Stalinist bureaucracy – the allied capitalists immediately saw the menace of German “rearmaments” in these same Brown Shirt formations.
It had been the original intention of the Versailles victors to solve the German crisis by maintaining their stranglehold on Germany on a new plane – showing a Fascist Germany to the forefront of war for the extermination of Soviet Russia, where it could make gains only as an agent of all of the powers of Western Europe and only to the degree to which they consented. Civil war in Germany would have left Hitler no other choice.
With the inexpensive triumph over his internal enemy, the Nazi chieftain naturally gained inspiration to drive for a much better bargain – for a place among the equals in the family of robber capitalist nations. Now, if he is to attack Soviet Russia, he wants to make sure that he will have the force behind him to dictate his own terms and to turn the balance in favor of Nazi Germany in any case. The lack of proletarian resistance within Germany itself facilitates his devilish game of flirtation with the U.S.S.R., which is a club in his hands for the purpose of shaking the positions of the Western powers.
Hitler’s excursions into Austria, and growing Fascist strength there, only served to further alarm his Allied opponents, whose aim is, of course, to hold on to that balance of power which they have held so tightly ever since Versailles. Therein lay the reasons for all the talk about “sanctions and preventative war” that so swiftly threw all of Europe into a frenzy last week.
It was at this point that Wall Street’s “New Deal” president interfered. The heavy billions of American capital investments, of war debts and private contracts which constitute the economic basis of America’s world hegemony were at stake. “Isolation” policy, which under the pressure of financial and economic intervention (Dawes Plan, Young Plan) had shrunk to the size of a flimsy formality, was definitely thrown overboard.
Retaining the traditional hypocrisy of imperialist U.S. “pacifism,” President Roosevelt addressed himself to the nations of Europe with something that amounts to a political ultimatum. Money talked and all the high and low politicians of Europe listened.
The Washington administration had been careful beforehand to make clear that it would definitely oppose all “sanction” (the occupation of the Ruhr, etc.) but dropped a gentle hint to Berlin to bide its time. Roosevelt did, to be sure, tell the Nazis that he would not stand for German “rearmament.” But at the same time, he just as categorically demanded French disarmament as a precondition for holding Germany in check.
 
Hitler’s Reichstag Speech
The Roosevelt message was a bitter pill for the Western powers to swallow but they had no alternative. It takes finances to impose “sanctions” and to insure against possible consequences. Hitler’s Reichstag speech, on the other hand, while indicating a turn to a slower tempo in the reestablishment of armed equality with the other powers, nevertheless showed that this was to be done only by bowing to Wall Street’s wishes and not at all on the basis of French or British pressure.
America was to be considered as “guarantor of European peace,” as a sort of super-arbiter. All in all, a handsome victory for United States imperialism and another strong twist of the American noose around Europe’s neck.
It is not strange that the capitalist press in this country has welcomed Hitler’s kowtowing to Washington. It is not strange that it now goes into peons of praise for Hitler, the pacifist. It is only somewhat ludicrous, part of the general comedy of armed pacifism.
That France and England will disarm – is hardly likely. That Hitler will, therefore, continue equipping German military forces up to France’s level – gradually, to be sure, and on the “MacDonald plan” – is just as sure. The tension has only been temporarily allayed. The race of armaments will go on as fiercely as before. The final word will, however, rest with Washington.
 
Hitler and the Mussolini Pact
Significantly also, Hitler reiterated his determination to stand by the Four Power Pact of Mussolini. The direction of this pact – against the Soviet Union – has been made clear before this. The danger of war against the workers’ fatherland is just as imminent as before. Only the preponderance in this looming attack against the fortress of the world revolution remains to be decided.
No amount of pacifist talk, no amount of flirtation with the USSR – by Hitler or by Roosevelt – can cover up that danger. To gloat – as the Stalinist Daily Worker does – over the fact that Litvinoff’s definition of “aggressor nation” has been accepted by Geneva, can only have one meaning: To support all the illusions of bourgeois pacifism and to help prepare the slaughter of the working class.
For workers there are no “aggressor” and “defender” nations. For workers there can only be imperialist wars and revolutionary wars. If the Soviet Union is to exist as the workers’ fatherland, the preparations for imperialist war must be mercilessly exposed. If the workers are to be forewarned against the coming butchery, it is criminal to play around with nonsensical dabblings on “aggressor” nations” and “partial disarmaments”.
Finally, if the murderous aim of the capitalists are to be defeated, the working class of the world must be rallied into a solid, compact fighting mass by the Leninist tactic of the united front, step by step in their everyday struggles, and up to the unified struggle against imperialist war. The role of the American workers in this task is, in view of the world position of American capitalism, doubly great.
 



There is no end to the crimes of Stalinism. Those serious Communist workers who have hoped that the heavy blows of Fascism in Germany might have served to give conclusive warning to the Comintern bureaucracy and to bring about a fundamental change of line, must have been overcome with dizziness by the newest crime of Stalinism. We refer to the entirely unexpected and breathtaking reversion to the infamous “united front from below” in the manifesto issued by the Communist International on the occasion of May Day and printed in a special Sunday edition of the Daily Worker on April 30.
Only six weeks before, the Communist International had issued a resolution, first published in l’Humanité of Paris on March 6, instructing the various parties to approach the Central Committees of the socialist parties and trade union centers in their respective countries, for united front negotiations and at that, to refrain from attacking the latter in the course of the united front activities.
The practical change of line that resulted brought a swing to the ultra-right which necessitated a warning on the part of the Left Opposition against new opportunist excesses on the style of the disgraceful bloc with Chiang-Kai-Shek and the Anglo-Russian Committee. In the United States too, this turn toward opportunism became increasingly evident and at the various Mooney-Scottsboro and May Day conferences and committee meetings, the representatives of the Left Opposition had as their main task, the struggle against opportunist distortions of the united front by the Stalinists. That was before April 30.
 
“Now ... Not Negotiation”
On April 30, the C.I. May Day manifesto, printed in the Daily Worker, not only has no word to say any longer about approaching the Central Committees of the reformists or against attacking them. It tells us, in so many words: “Now we need United Front from below, not negotiations with top leaders!”
The reason? “For the leaders of the Second International, negotiations with officials on top is merely a method of delaying, hindering, and disrupting the united front of the working class.”
The worker in the street cannot help being amazed by this lightning-quick swerve to the former, ruinous policy. The Communist worker can hardly believe his eyes. For years he had been breathing and talking “united front from below”. On March 6, his International leaders tell him, now we must approach the top leaders (the Central Committees). A little bit confused, but as a disciplined comrade, the Communist functionary approaches the Central Committees of the S.P. and the A.F. of L.
Some go even so far as to let socialist speakers go unrefuted, without distinguishing themselves from their reformist jabbering. Some go to the extent of even distributing the socialist press from Communist platforms. (Witness the case of the demonstration against the Hitler-Birthday Celebration in Teutonia Hall, New York. See the Militant of April 29.)
Now, in the May Day manifesto, the International leaders once more tell him: “Now we need United Front from below, not negotiations with top leaders!” Can the Communist worker help being bewildered? Can this latest step do anything but increase the confusion in the Communist ranks? Can such people, who change their policies with the weather, expect to maintain their authority or even to be taken seriously at all?
 
What Will Be the Consequences?
The revolutionary movement is not a game of leap frog and no matter how deeply the disease of bureaucratic centrism, of unexplained commands from above may have penetrated into the ranks of the Communist party, the Communist worker cannot go on switching his line of march with such fierce twists Indefinitely. The laws of friction have their function in politics as well. And any one of these numerous Stalinist turns-about-face, without explanation and without previous preparation, must finally serve as the straw that breaks the camel’s back.
The bureaucratic reversion to the “united front from below” – if, in its aim to cover up the bankruptcy of the whole previous Stalinist “third period” course, it does no stop with the mere mouthing o phrases in manifestos – is bound to call forth a violent reaction within the ranks of the party. Many responsible and serious comrades breathed a breath of relief when the March 6 C.I. resolution cleared the road for actual progress in mass united front actions.
The Leninist united front tactic applied to the American socialists in the Mooney and May Day conferences and actions has thrown the reformist party into convulsions and brought about successful and concrete results.
The question or the united front has sharpened the internal conflict within the S.P. tremendously and the treacherous, die-hard stand of the Hillquit faction has served to increase the Left wing trend within it.
The whole Chicago district of the S.P. and other numerous Y.P.S.L. locals have been expelled by the Hillquit clique on the very issue of the united front with the Communists, which the former have carried through in several localities.
The powerful May Day demonstrations and the healthy reactions of the socialist workers to them were in themselves the best vindication for the Leninist united front tactic. And all this has taken place within the brief period of the six Weeks, in which the C.I. had given up the blunders of the “united front from below”.
The responsible party comrade could not have overlooked all these developments and could not have missed their significance. The Stalinist bureaucrat will have a difficult lime explaining to him what it is that prevented the leaders of the Second International from using “negotiations with officials on top” as “merely a method of delaying, hindering and disrupting the united front” on March 6 and why this suddenly becomes a fact only on April 30.
The serious Communist workers will reply to the bureaucrats and say to them: We know very well that the socialist leaders will attempt to delay, hinder and disrupt the united front of the working class. They always have.
 
What the Serious Communist Workers Will Say
We also know that the masses of reformist workers do want united actions. They have shown it on May Day, they have shown it by their struggle against the disrupting leaders inside their own ranks.
We can see, furthermore, the process of swift disintegration that is overtaking the Second International after the collapse of the German social democracy and the impending debacle of “Austro-Marxism” The reformist fakers have already begun to be alarmed and it is to be expected that in the future they will especially exert themselves with shouting for working class unity and for united action in the future.
The socialist masses are moving to the Left and the socialist mis-leaders will use every possible “Left” fuse to maintain their control of them. The task of exposing the reformist betrayers and of loosening their control of the masses that follow them is all the more urgent in this especially favorable situation.
The Leninist united front tactic, therefore, holds all its force as the only method of fulfilling the revolutionary task of the moment It is our duty to apply it. We have no interest in replenishing the shattering prestige of the bankrupt Stalinist bureaucracy. Our interests coincide with the needs of the revolutionary working class.
The Left Opposition will continue its work of explanation and clarification and find common ground with Communist workers on this basis. Together with them and in merciless struggle against criminal Stalinism, it will help in re-establishing the Marxist party of the International proletariat.
 



Sixteen years after that glorious October which witnessed the rise of the Soviet Union, the workers’ republic stands in graver danger of attack and aggression than ever before.
Soviet Russia arose as the workers’ fatherland through a revolution which aroused the working class of the whole world, which rallied to its banner an international proletariat that knew how to aid in its defense by effective solidarity action throughout the years of the civil war and the innumerable foreign invasions.
 
International Defense of Soviet Russia
The revolt of the French fleet in the Black Sea, the fraternization at the front of German soldiers, the Shop Stewards’ defense movement of England, the strike of the Seattle transport workers against the shipment of munitions to Kolchak – the stirring first years of the Russian revolution are replete with flaming examples of international solidarity and heroism like these.
The international social democracy, the treacherous Second International, acting in the best interests of the bosses of all countries, showed itself worthy of the those years. Taking the helm of government for their national ruling classes, in Germany, in Finland and elsewhere, they succeeded at that time in preventing the glowing international solidarity which came to the fore in the defense of the first labor state from transforming itself into a further, sweeping extension of the Russian revolution, from achieving new victories on the road to the world Soviet.
 
The Russian Revolution and the Comintern
It was in the struggle for the extension of the Russian revolution, in the fire of struggle against capitalist intervention and social reformist treachery that the Communist International was founded in 1919. From the first, the great Marxists taught the Russian workers that their ultimate fate was bound up with that of the international proletariat, that the very existence of the government which they had established with their blood and their lives depended in the first place upon its active support by their fellow workers in Western Europe, in America, in Asia. Soviet diplomacy was used by the authentic Bolsheviks as a weapon of revolutionary internationalism.
The years following the death of Lenin and the temporary relapse of the Western European revolution brought forth a spirit of pessimism in regard to the international perspectives and a utopian optimism in regard to the possibility of building an isolated Socialist society in Russia. This national-socialist disease infiltrated even into the ranks of the world vanguard – the Communist International – alien to its principles and purpose. The carriers of this disease were the Stalinist bureaucracy which grew up and nurtured itself like a parasite on the body of the Russian revolution and the Soviet republic.
The Soviet bureaucracy, the parasites of the revolution interested in the maintenance of their own existence and position at all costs – with the least possible disturbances – was a bulwark of support for Stalin’s revisionist theory of “building up socialism in one country.”
 
The New Revisionism
It was with this revisionist idea, born out of the bureaucracy’s lack of faith in international solidarity that Stalinism replaced ithe fighting internationalism of Lenin in the vanguard of the world working class. Stalinism thus began a long process of undermining the Russian revolution and the Soviet state.
With the purpose in view of withdrawing into its own shell and of preventing all possible shocks from without, the Stalinized Communist International subordinated the vanguard of the Chinese working class, its Communist party to Chiang Kai-Shek’s bourgeois Kuo Min Tang. Lacking conviction in the power of the Chinese workers to lead and to enforce the struggle of the exploited colonial masses in the earth-shaking rebellion against imperialism, they placed their hopes in the Chinese bourgeoisie. The latter accepted this Stalinist gift and then proceeded promptly not only to wipe out the organizations of the Chinese proletarian, but to conspire with the imperialist states against the Soviet Union itself. The Sino-Russian crisis of August 1929 was Chiang Kai-Shek’s payment for Stalin’s policy.
 
Opportunism on the International Field
With the same national-socialist purpose in view, the Stalinist leadership united with the British trade union fakers – Purcell, Hicks and Co. – in the Anglo-Russian Committee. In return for a worthless promise to help forestall British military intervention against the Soviet Union, Stalinism subordinated to the English trade union bureaucracy a budding, militant Minority Movement led by the Communist party. Purcell, Hicks and Co. utilized the Comintern support and authority to sell out the General Strike of 1926 – the greatest revolutionary action in the history of the British working class. The labor lieutenants of English capitalism paid for this by absolute passivity at the time of Austin Chamberliu’s raid on ARCOS – the Soviet trade representation – which threatened to be a prelude to a war against the Soviet Union.
 
The Swing to Adventurism
The period of 1925 to 1929 was full of such policies and practices of the Stalinist bureaucracy. When in 1929, the course of opportunist agreements with colonial bourgeois politicians and metropolitan labor fakers had suffered shipwreck, Stalinism reversed its tactic, but not its aim. After the ultra-Left reaction of 1928–1928 [sic!], the Stalinist bureaucracy, having helped to wreck the international revolutionary movement, having helped to sell it out to the fakers and betrayers, lost all interest in it. They filled the leading posts of the Communist International with notorious incompetents who unleashed a reign of irresponsible adventurism in the ranks of the revolutionary vanguard. For the practical purposes of preserving their national-socialist utopia they began to set their hopes of Soviet defense directly on agreements with the diplomats of the foreign bourgeoisies.
On the other hand – the policy of the combination at the top with the social deformists was replaced by an ultra-Left refusal to get together with them on the most minimal questions of common action. The allies of yesterday had suddenly become “social Fascists”, social reformism the “twin” of Fascism. “United Front from below only”, ultimatist demands of “United Front only under the leadership of the Communist party” – these were the slogans put forward by irresponsible Stalinist adventurers to split the working class in times when unity was most urgent. This was the line of policy that was combined by a national-communism – “People’s revolution”, “national and social liberation” – which grew directly out of the Stalinism national-socialism in Soviet Russia and which was to serve the German Communist party as an item of competition with Hitler’s Fascists.
 
“Non-Aggression Pacts”
On the other hand, “non-aggression pacts” with various bourgeois powers, raising false hopes in the workers of peace by “scraps of paper” and supplemented by “anti-war congresses” – comedies with all kinds of individual stars: novelists, artists, free lancers who represented no one but themselves. That has been the course of Stalinism from 1929 up to the present.
The balance sheet of Comintern must be drawn today, Stalinist opportunism destroyed the great defense of the Soviet Union latent in the Chinese revolution and in Stalinist adventurism aided the German social democracy to maintain its positions of influence in the labor movement and split the working class hopelessly on the eve of Hitler’s coming into power. With the Fascist destruction of the German working class vanguard, the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics loses its strongest pillar of defense in the capitalist world. The Fascist butchers now directly threaten Workers’ Russia!
 
The Downfall of the Comintern
The defense of the Soviet Union is the most urgent task of the moment for the revolutionary workers. The Communist International, created by Lenin and Trotsky for its defense by the one realistic policy of the extension of the October revolution, has been strangled by Stalinism. For over five years no congresses of the Communist International have been held. While the policies of the Soviet bureaucracy have helped to raise Hitler into power, to bring about the annihilation of the organized German working class and to isolate the Soviet Union, workers’ democracy within the Communist International has been completely stifled. The greatest of crimes are committed with impunity. The internationalist fighters – Trotsky, Rakovsky and their comrades – are expelled from the ranks of the parties. The bona fide leaders of the Russian revolution, the founders of, the Communist International fill the Stalinist deportation camps and the places of exile.
Who will prevent the oncoming attack of the world bourgeoisie, with German Fascism in the West and Japanese militarism in the East? Who will lead in the defense of the Soviet Union ever more isolated by a ring of [counter-]revolutionary governments?
The Communist International of Stalin cannot and will not do the job. National-Communism has reduced the Comintern to a hollow shell of its former self. An organization which has been poisoned by a discrediting bureaucracy, which has left a trail of frightful defeats in its wake – in China, in Germany, in Great Britain, in every country – an organization which even at this late date when danger threatens immediately, shows no signs of organizational life, whose representatives no longer gather in congresses to consider the serious questions – such an organization is hope[less]ly lost.
The Communist International was killed by the disease of Stalinist national socialism. The national-socialist bureaucracy of the Soviet Union is leading the Soviet Union to catastrophe. While it has replaced revolutionary internationalism with “non-aggression pacts”, the “non-aggressor” French bourgeoisie is making loans to Japanese militarism and selling arms to German Fascism. The Communist International is lost, the German Communist party is lost. But the Soviet Union must not be lost!
 
Reconstitute the International Vanguard!
There is only one power in the world that can save it. That is a reconstituted vanguard of Internationalist Communism. That is a new, a Fourth International, grouping around it all those revolutionary workers who have learned the lesson of the past ten years, who genuinely want to defend the Soviet Union and who know that the only way to do it is by the extension of the October revolution.
Those who were foremost in the battle lines of the Russian Revolution are today foremost in the struggle for its revolutionary defense against the impending attack. With a firm conviction, the Bolshevik-Leninists, on this day of the commemoration of the sixteenth anniversary of October revolution, proceed to the order of the day – the foundation of the new International and the new Communist parties.
 



BACILLI CULTURES, concocted by bespectacled scientists in chemical laboratories, will serve as major ammunition in the next war. An article in a recent issue of Weltbuehne, published in Zurich, Switzerland by a group of exiled German intellectuals, reveals feverish activity among the bio-chemical savants as part of the general militarization of Germany by Hitler and his Nazis. The article is the work of an anonymous chemist, himself employed at this devilish task.
* * * *
The last war introduced the use of gases to poison the enemy en masse at the front. But the “enemy” was still left with sufficient human resources behind the lines. In the future, war methods are to be more effective: They will take care to rid the “enemy” of manpower in the hinterland as well. Reliable spies, equipped with the choicest of these deadly serums, will need apply only a single injection into one head of cattle to bring about the extermination of a whole metropolis, of millions of men, women and children.
* * * *
Meanwhile the war clouds are gathering, the harpies of capitalism are concocting the brew of bloody slaughter out of economic chaos and political despair. The spirit of the coming war is being nurtured with the mysterious hocus pocus of pacifist or nationalist slogans.
Who does not recall how the mystic gas of “Save the World for Democracy” poisoned the minds of hundreds of thousands whose bodies were later poisoned by Melinite and Yperite on the battle fields?
Who does not recognize today the venomous substance of that “democratic” war-cry which has brought in its wake the bloodiest and most ruthless of dictatorships in Italy, in Germany, in the Balkans, in Poland and Hungary?
* * * *
SUCH EXPERIENCES should put on his guard every thinking worker, every human being who can see further than his nose. The workers must be armed against the mental bacilli which are to do the advance work for the more tangible bacilli that threaten to destroy them by the millions.
* * * *
One such bacillus is the vapid oratory about Soviet Recognition as a step toward peace. Nothing can be more dangerous from the point of view of those whom the capitalist system exploits as profit-producing machines today and as cannon fodder tomorrow. If the Stalin bureaucrats who pose as Communist leaders of the workers join in and promote the spreading of such a poison – that only puts the stigma of betrayal upon them. The militant and wide-awake workers will not recognize the Roosevelt toasts of the Pravda Stalinists as the voice of the Soviets. They will recognize it much rather in words, that the bosses’ New York Times rejoices to remark, are “miles ... away when we read the undertakings given by the Soviet Foreign Minister (Litvinoff) ... as a condition of recognition by the United States”. (Editorial, Saturday, Nov. 18)
* * * *
Those words, the reply of Lenin’s Soviet Congress in 1918 to an overture from the Roosevelt of that time, from the “idealistic” war monger Woodrow Wilson – were:
“The Soviet Republic takes advantage of the message of President Wilson to express to all the people who have suffered from the horrors of imperialist war, its warm sympathies and its honest belief that the happy moment is not far away when the workers of all countries will throw off the yoke of capitalism and establish a socialist regime, which alone is able to bring about a just and lasting peace and to contribute to the civilization and prosperity of the workers.”
* * * *
The horrors of the “bacillic” imperialist war of the future – which promises to be a thousand times more terrible than the last, “poison gaseous” war – can be prevented in that same way only. This is the truth that the revolutionary workers in this country will have to pound out as a powerful defense against the advance bacilli.
 



“Worker, Farmer ‘Join Up’”
Worker, Farmer “Join Up” – is not, as you might suspect, just another Communist slogan. It happens to be the news-head of a story in the daily press. The story deals with the strike of the workers at the George A. Harmel Packing Co. plant in Austin, Minnesota.
* * * *
The strikers, say the newspapers, “seized the plant, seventh largest in the world ... after a clash with guards. The strikers were aided by members of the Farmer’s National Holiday Association.” The headline – Worker, Farmer “Join Up” – merely sums up a cold fact.
* * * *
And still such a matter-of-fact headline sends a thrill of appreciation down a militant worker’s spine. It has within it the portent of a magnificent perspective. It forbodes, by recounting a live incident, such a union of the mass of toilers in this country as will finally spell the doom of the ruling capitalist class.
* * * *
The productive forces of society on either pole – on the farm and in the factory – instinctively join hands! They have many different viewpoints, they may have varying conceptions of property, of law. But they are drawn closer and closer to each other in mutual self-defense against the destructive force of society – in defense against the ravages of capitalism.
* * * *
The events at Austin, Minnesota, bear a striking proof of this inevitable getting-together of workers and farmers. It is spontaneous, as the passion of the fghters themselves. The unity which is to deal he decisive blow for the preservation and defense of humanity in this country is still in the groping stage. More “Austins” will dot the map as time goes by.
* * * *
“Joining up” of farmers and workers will become more than a spontaneous outburst. Thinking farmers will give more thought to the idea of linking up their fight for life with that of the city producer.
It will be up to the industrial workers, with all their strike-experience, with all their natural discipline of action and aptness for collective struggle – to give the lead.
* * * *
Powerful unions, a unified working class policy, and above all – the assimilation of international experience – will do more than anything else to enable American workers to build up and buttress the fighting front of the workers and farmers for a decisive, revolutionary solution of their common problems.
* * * *
Austin lights the way. It unfolds the possibilities of successful struggle. But it is also an admonition, a challenge to workers to prepare for the opportunities that are bound to arise.
* * * *
If They Won’t Raise ’Em – They’ll Stretch ’Em.
Not a step that the New Dealers take but has the interests of the working class at heart. Recently they put over Repeal. But, you might ask: What has Repeal to do with the interests of the workers in particular?
The answer is pretty easy. That is, if you’ve heard of the New York State regulations for the sale of liquor. Bottled drinks are to be sold cash down only. This provision, New York State’s dictator of booze – Mr. Mulrooney, who not so long ago had the occasion to show his love for the workers in his capacity as police commissioner of the city – explains, is motivated by a desire to prevent pay envelopes from being emptied out by heaped-up charge accounts. It is, in other words, designed to stretch wages.
* * * *
NRA and the codes haven’t done much to bring about higher pay and guarantee decent living conditions. But the New Dealers are determined to do right by the working man. If NRA and the codes won’t do the trick – no doubt the liquor regulations will be of help. No doubt!
If they can’t raise wages, then they’ll stretch them.
 



“Pigs Is Pigs”
It might have been another chapter of the Mad Hatter and the March Hare. But it was actually a news account in the New York Times.
We refer to a story of triumphant justice as it is practised in these United States, in this day and age. – After NRA, after the New Deal and after the Rooseveltian exultation and mobilization of the “Human Agencies”.
* * * *
In Brooklyn, the other day, a magistrate held court over a villain who maltreated three poor little pigs, cooped up uncomfortably in a cage too tightly built. A representative of the S.P.C.A. after pondering over this sight (which was used as a display advertisement for a popular porcine comedy at the Flatbush Theatre) had the perpetrator of the ... crime ... arrested.
The judge, whose commiseration with such animals thereby becomes understandable, ordered the hogs freed, scolded the defendant and snapped the cryptic sentence:
“Pigs is pigs and not subway sardines.”
* * * *
All this may be found to be an exact rendition of the Times story on Wednesday, October 20, 1933. The magistral announcement, reported here in all its cynicism, gives a good measure of capitalist justice and the system on which it is based. “Fit for pigs” – that’s capitalism alright.
* * * *
A Subway Sardine Commits Suicide – With Apologies to the Police
John Subway Sardine, on election day known as Mr. Taxpayer or the Voice of the People and otherwise regaled with eulogies on the dignity of labor, leads a less dignified existence than the three little porkers. The courts are not for him. He is not provided with any warm covering to protect him from the cold (that was another point of litigation in the case of the Flatbush Theatre). There is no S.P.C.A. to prevent cruelty against him.
Yet, he holds the proud title of human being. He is, by the law – “a free man”. Free: to sell his labor power to the boss. Free: to starve when the “supply” of labor hands exceeds the “demand”.
* * * *
How fictitious this freedom is, how much human dignity is lowered beyond the range of swine by the “commodity market” which produces unemployment, may be gathered from another item in the week’s news (World-Telegram, Tuesday, November 7, 1933):
JOBLESS, GOING BLIND, HE SLASHES WRISTS
Note on Park Bench Apologizes to Police For Trouble ...
Robert Guinewahl sat on a park bench in Central Park before dawn today and took stock of himself.
He was 45. He was hungry, jobless. He was going blind, and he could not pay for medical care. It would become worse when winter came.
He scribbled a note to police:
“I am sorry, for causing all this trouble,” then he cut his wrists with a razor blade. He collapsed finally from loss of blood. A motorist took Guinewahl to Bellevue. Doctors said he might live.
* * * *
Boss class justice deals kindness to pigs. Working class victims apologize for committing suicide! This is the U.S.A., 1933.
How long will workers stand for pig justice? How long will they apologize for going under? How long will they allow a system of society which degrades them to a fate lower than the beasts, to do its work of human distraction?
 



Who Are the “Chiselers”?
A substantial part or the president’s last radio address was devoted to vituperation against the “chiselers”. Although, as members of the working class we have always been against this chiseling system – of capitalism – we cannot help pointing out thee injustice of this attack in itself.
* * * *
For who, after all, are these particular “chiselers”? They are, in the main, the small bosses, the peanut businessmen. They are, for instance, the social prop of that big hulf [?] of Mid-Western rebellion. They are the boys who live in deadly dread of big time competition.
* * * *
Take the Swopes, the Owen Youngs, the steel magnates and the textile barons. A “fair code of competition” – that is just their meat. They have big capital reserves, tremendous credit resources, gigantic mass production facilities. They have hosts of lawyers to wind their way out of any “labor provisions “. What chance has the poor little chiseler to keep pace with them? He has to live and produce on a hand-to-mouth proposition. The bank is down on his neck every minute of the day. The legal sharp charges exorbitant fees. Can he help lengthening hours and cutting wages. Can he do anything but perpetuate the sweatshops and skin his neighbor?
Not if he wants to keep his place under the capitalist sun. And yet, NRA or no NRA, he feels it in his veins – that sun is setting for him.
* * * *
Hearst to the Rescue
The NRA obviously hastened the eclipse of small fry in business and industry. No doubt the real framers of it made “reorganization and centralization of business” one of the main objectives. The little fellows felt it.
* * * *
When Mr. Ford bucked up against the big bad wolf, he became their idol. Mr. Ford, of course, had no need of a “code of fair competition”. There are no small fry to wipe out in his field.
* * * *
Now Mr. Hearst comes to their rescue. And that’s encouraging for them.
“The blighting effect of NRA policy”, says the white hope of the middle class, “has been so complete that a justifiable interpretation of the letters NRA would make them read appropriately, ‘No Recovery Allowed.’”
* * * *
The Hearst newspaper chain was among the first to back Roosevelt and boost the New Deal. Its present defection is, therefore, a blow with an extra sharp sting to it.
* * * *
Which Way Is the New Wind Blowing?
While it reflects a widespread movement, the Hearstian pronunciamento no doubt has aims of its own. Mr. Hearst is a jingo patriot of the first water. And he is circumspect in his patriotism.
He backed the New Deal in its efforts to harness American capitalism to a single aim – national concentration in the preparation for a new lunge at the world market.
When the national concentration of capital reached a point where it threatens the political concentration he balks. The small businessman is the indispensible prop in case of war, the middle class is the final resort of Big Business in case of a workers’ rebellion.
* * * *
“It imposed,” runs Mr. Hearst’s indictment against the NRA, “upon industry, struggling towards recovery, shorter hours and higher pay and greater employment ... than industry was able to bear (sic).”
* * * *
There you have a successor to NRA: the remedy is a return to longer hours, less pay and lesser employment. If the small businessman can’t bear the burden, the worker can!
* * * *
This great vision is dubbed by Mr. Hearst : “Back to Democracy”. Mark Sullivan, the Tory correspondent of the N.Y. Tribune, thinks that its proponents should be called the “new liberals”
* * * *
A London news dispatch says that the speculators there have become so cynical, every time there is some new declaration about the soundness of currency or business – they rush to sell short. Every time the boss class and their press lackeys begin to talk about “Back to Democracy” and “Liberalism”, it’s a cinch there’s a big club hidden somewhere for the workers.
* * * *
As to the Workers
The NRA – like the League of Nations – is tumbling. The worker who wants to keep his shirt on his back had better join a union. And get his fellow workers to join. It’s going to be a tough fight, from the looks of things. And it’ll take all of those 10,000,000 new members Bill Green has been talking about, to hold our own.
Bill Green is just talking. It’s up to you and you to do the job, Green and no Green. Working class unity – for higher wages, for the six hour day, five day week; for unemployment insurance – there is the first step to get rid of chiselers and chiseldom.
 



In the last issue of Die Weltbuehne (the radical bourgeois Berlin periodical) to reach here, Hellmuth von Gerlach, the well-known pacifist, who has since been reported under arrest and subject to the tortures of the Fascist police, quotes the following conversation between a Nazi leader and a prominent French journalist:
Nazi: “We know quite well that Germany needs fifteen years to come to power again economically and fifteen more in order to be in shape as a military power.”
Frenchman: “But the corridor?”
Nazi: “The question of the corridor can be solved of itself, without war. It wont take long before Russia cracks. Then we leave the Poles the Ukraine as far as Odessa and we in turn, get the Corridor and Danzig.” (Weltbuehne, February 28)
This solution of the Nazi chieftain is, of course, rather over-simplified. In their calculations, the German reactionaries, intoxicated with their recent and rather easy successes, are counting without their host – the international working class. The latter on the other hand has not as yet, by far, said its last word. But it is necessary to face the situation clearly, to look eye to eye with the facts. And the facts point to a shifting of the specific gravity of the world political situation from Germany where world reaction has been able to put a feather into its cap, to Soviet Russia, which is from all indications, the next butt of its attack. The defense of the Soviet Union as the fortress of the world revolution stands first on the order of the day for the international proletarian movement. A genuine defense of the world revolution and its Soviet fortress requires a recounting and an evaluation of the set-back already suffered in Germany.
 
The Warning of the Opposition
When the International Left Opposition first sounded the alarm over the Hitler danger and raised the implications it had for the USSR and the progress of the world revolution, the Stalinists accused us of a counter-revolutionary design to draw the attentions of the workers away from the threat of Japanese invasion in the East. In doing this, the shining lights of bureaucratic Centrism only exposed their own lack of foresight, their own poverty of fundamental international perspective and orientation. Blinded by their “practicality”, by their empiricism, these pretenders to Communist leadership only see a danger when they come up square against it. So it has been with the Hitler danger, to which they are only now, two years after the Bolshevik-Leninists warned against it, waking up.
The Left Opposition foresaw the danger in its time thanks to its internationalist orientation, the guiding line for which is furnished by the Marxist conception of the permanent revolution. Only that conception, viewing the class struggle as an international phenomenon and its revolutionary solution as a solution to be realized decisively only on a world scale, provides the foresight that is necessary in coping with the problems posed for the Communists in the present epoch. The Stalinist conception of “socialism in one country’’, repudiating, as it does, the fundamental ideas of Marxism, of necessity leads to blind groping, to the bungling of the strategical problems posed, to the perpetration of crimes against the revolution, to the heaping up of defeats for the proletariat.
The breath-taking events of the last few weeks and months in Germany are a case in point. The Fascist reaction is almost without obstruction consolidating its power and preparing for its next steps in the East. These blows are struck in the face not of an unorganized proletariat, but of the best organized working class in the whole capitalist world. Germany possesses not only the strongest social democracy in the world, but the strongest Communist party – outside of the USSR – as well. In accounting for the events that have transpired, in analyzing the set-back that has been suffered, it is therefore indispensable and of the greatest import to probe the basic policies of these two tremendous! forces, the policies which failed to stand the test and the leaderships that failed to stand the test. The basic policies of the social democracy have long been those of treachery to the working class and the betrayal they achieved in helping Hitler to power was ail the less surprising because it merely complemented their treacheries of 1914 and 1918. The key to a successful resistance of the Fascist danger naturally rested with the Communists and their ability to win the majority of the working class from the social democrats and for revolutionary struggle. That involved, above all, the highly important and concrete question of the application of the Leninist united front tactic. But in evaluating the events, it is once more necessary to give a complete characterization of the social democracy, especially insofar as it has a bearing also upon an understanding of the Stalinist role in the situation.
The German social democracy started out on its road of working class betrayal by substituting for the Marxian perspective of the permanent revolution, the perspective of national socialist reformism.
“The conception of the permanent revolution was set up by the great Communists of the middle of the XIX century, by Marx and his adherents, in opposition to that democratic ideology which, as is known, presumed that all questions should be settled peacefully, in a reformist or evolutionary way, by the erection of the ‘rational’ or democratic state. Marx regarded the bourgeois revolution of ‘48 as the direct introduction to the proletarian revolution. Marx ‘erred’ Yet his error has a factual and not a methodological character. The revolution of 1848 did not turn into the socialist revolution. But that is just why it also did not achieve democracy. As to the German revolution of 1918: it is a proletarian revolution decapitated by the social democracy; more correctly, it is the bourgeois counter-revolution, which is compelled to preserve pseudo-democratic forms after the victory of the proletariat.” – (Trotsky)
The petty bourgeois character of the social democratic bureaucracy that grew up before the war, turning aside from the revolutionary outlook of the great founders, directed the movement into the quagmire of “realistic” and “practical” reforms. The course of the petty bourgeois leadership led to the capitulation to the monarchy in August 1914. The fulfillment of the petty bourgeois ideal, after the collapse of the monarchy in 1918, involved the decapitation of the proletarian revolution, the counter-revolutionary obstruction of the permanent course of the revolution and was crowned by the setting up of the “democratic” Weimar republic. That only the proletarian dictatorship can complete the democratic revolution, that the Weimar type of republic can only head off this course, that it is impotent in preventing the re-entrenchment of the reaction – all this has been amply proved by the development of events culminating in the coming to power of the Fascists. The treacherous role of the social democracy, beginning with the capitulation to the Hohenzollerns in 1914, proceeding through the betrayal of the revolution of 1918 and degenerating into the lowest depths with the policy ofl the ‘’lesser evil” paved the road for the Fascist victory in 1933. That is an established fact. The rejection of the concept of the permanent revolution, the petty bourgeois ideal of national socialist reformism, has worked, in the last analysis, as a trap for the social democracy itself and has served to aid the growth and the seizure of power by the Fascists, whose purpose it is to liquidate the working class movement of Germany built up in the course of more than half a century.
The responsibility of the Stalinists, for years undisputed in the leadership of the Bolshevik party and the Communist International which arose in the struggle against the social democracy and its treachery, assumes thereby all the greater significance. The whole past of the social democracy anticipated their role in the Hitler disaster. But why did not the Communist party, the German section of the Bolshevik International prove equal to the task? This is the paramount question that is posed by the German events. This is the question upon the answer to which depends the successful preparation for the tasks that face us at present. Without the correct answer to this question it will be impossible to make up for lost time, to repair the losses already suffered and to arm for future action.
* * *
(Another article on this question will follow in the next issue.)
 



Part I

Part II
 



(This is the second of two articles on this subject. The first appeared in the Militant of April 1.)
II.
All the elements of the objective situation favored the revolutionary solution of the German crisis under the leadership of the Communist party. The crisis was brought to a head by the ravages of the world economic depression. The social democracy was becoming increasingly discredited by the collapse of ah social legislation – “practical” reformism – in the country (the Stalinist leadership of the party even went to the fantastic extreme of declaring the social democracy exposed as “social Fascists” – twin brothers of Fascism). The progress achieved by the Five Year Plan was a powerfully vivid demonstration of the superiority of planned socialist economy (the Stalinists themselves even went further with monstrous exaggerations of the successes and the proclamation of the establishment of a classless society within the next few years). What more could be desired? Yet the Communist Party of Germany failed miserably in the face of the tasks and the possibilities.
It is impossible to grasp the extent of this failure and the responsibility of the Stalinist faction for it without considering the particular policy; pursued in the light of fundamental perspective. The highly unrealistic policy of the ultimatist united front from below was not accidental. It flowed directly from the whole zigzag course initiated by the rise of the petty bourgeois current of Stalinism within the Communist International. It is this basic perspective – or rather, lack of perspective – which prepared the German catastrophe arid it is for that reason that the disastrous policy in Germany can and must be stigmatized as a policy of betrayal.
Bolshevism grew and developed in the struggle against the treacherous petty bourgeois ideology of social democracy. In this struggle it led the proletariat of Russia to victory and showed the working class of the world the way, creating for it the Communist International in the fire of combat. Stalinism arose within the Bolshevik party and the Communist International as a reaction to Bolshevism, feeding upon the fatigue of the Soviet masses after the years of the Strenuous civil war and upon the temporary defeats of the West European proletariat in the years 1918 to 1923. It was in all respects a hangover from the petty bourgeois ideology of the pre-Bolshevik period. Stalin had as late as March 1917 held on to the idea that it is the task of the provisional (democratic) government to “consolidate the achievements” of the revolution in which the masses were the chief actor. On the higher plane of the situation created by the October Revolution, Stalinism reproduced all the basic defeats of the social democracy – its national reformism, its short-sighteduess.
The German social democratic bureaucracy, raised to power in the trade unions and mass organizations by the struggle of the working masses within the framework of the bourgeois state, rejected the Marxist perspective of the permanent revolution even within the narrow bounds of their own country. They rejected the proletarian dictatorship for the Weimar Republic. Their basic motivation was the fear for the preservation of their bureaucratic powers, the little posts and positions which the petty bourgeois layer of the movement had attained to. In the end, their shaky policy inevitably caught them within the trap of its own logic – and landed them in the lap of Fascist reaction.
The Stalinist bureaucracy, raised to power within the Soviet state by the October revolution is no more and no less than this same, petty bourgeois bureaucracy reproduced on a higher historical stage. The anxiety for its own self-preservation and perpetuation has also been its guiding line. It is along this line that Stalinism started on its career with an attack upon the Marxian conception of the permanent revolution defended by L.D. Trotsky and the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists. The Stalin faction declared a, struggle to the end against the permanent revolution in 1923. Two years later it broadened this breach with Marxism by setting up the theory of the possibility of establishing a socialist society in a single country – for all “practical” purposes, in Russia.
Within the framework of national boundaries the perspective of the permanent revolution signified steering a course toward the proletarian dictatorship. Only the dictatorship of the working class could serve as a conclusive guarantee for the completion of the democratic revolution. On the international scene, created by the establishment of the first workers’ republic, this perspective pointed out a course leading to the extension of the October revolution to the rest of the world. Only the victory of the proletarian dictatorship in several of the advanced capitalist countries could assure the establishment of a socialist society in Soviet Russia with all its economic backwardness. This basic perspective called for a policy of intense attention and active aid to the development of the proletarian revolutionary movement in the capitalist world, in the first place. Secondly, it called for an internal policy of strengthening the Soviet; regime by increasing the share of the socialist sector in economy so as to maintain the alliance of the working class and the peasantry as the practical base of the proletarian dictatorship. The rejection of the fundamental perspective meant, in reality, also a rejection of the policies flowing from it.
By repudiating the perspective of revolutionary realism the Stalinists deprived the Soviet government and the Communist International, of which they had gained control, of the possibility of conducting a consistent policy corresponding with the practical tasks. The utopianism of their theory of socialism in one country predicated their utterly barren strategy and tactics in the problems which arose.
The perspective of the permanent revolution coupled with the Leninist evaluation of the imperialist epoch as one of social convulsions, wars and revolutions, signified struggle. That is above all what the petty bourgeois wants to avoid. The petty bourgeois Stalinist bureaucracy preferred to console itself with the possibility of shutting itself off from the rest of the world. On the basis of the theory of building a socialist society within the isolated Soviet state, Stalinism proceeded to heap disaster upon the international proletariat. The problem of the Chinese revolution arose. The task there was poised as one of not throwing Chiang Kai-Shek (the national bourgeoisie) into the arms of imperialism, of not giving the imperialists an occasion for intervention against Soviet Russia where socialism could be established if foreign intervention was forestalled. The defenders of the permanent revolution, the Bolshevik-Leninists pointed out that the problem was one of strengthening the bonds between the Chinese masses and the Soviet Union, that the Chinese masses could be won as fighting allies only through the development of the proletarian revolution and the setting up of the proletarian dictatorship. That required the independence of the Chinese Communist Party and a course toward Soviets. The Stalin faction had its way. For the sake of not losing Chiang Kai-Shek, it handed over the Communist party to the bourgeois Kuo Min Tang – bag and baggage. The result is well known. Chiang Kai-Shek and the Chinese bourgeoisie received all the Stalinist aid gleefully and in due time slaughtered the vanguard of the working masses; made their peace with the imperialists and in 1929 came to the brink of a war against the Soviet Union itself.
The problem of the British General Strike and the movement that preceded it, is an equally illuminating example of the period of outright opportunism that followed immediately upon the heels of the orientation toward “socialism in one country”. The disasters of the Chinese revolution and the British General Strike on a large scale and all the lesser disasters, on a smaller scale as well as the bankruptcy of the opportunist policy within the Soviet Union itself – the bloodless insurrection of the kulaks in the spring of 1928 finally opened the eyes of the Stalinist empiricists – pushed the bureaucracy toward a sharp turn to the extreme Left.
Again it was a matter of self-preservation. Soviet economy was at an impasse. The tactics of the “bloc of four classes” in China and of the Anglo-Russian Committee had only increased the isolation of the U.S.S.R. and undermined the basis of the bureaucracy itself. The zigzag to the ultra-Left which initiated the famous “third period” clearly revealed the political character of Stalinism as that of a vacillating bureaucratic Centriam.
Its method appeared clearly as the method of empiricism, of trial and terror – lacking in all foresight and irresponsible in its consequences. The policy of ultimatism, of commands from above, was substituted for the policy of opportunist blocs. In place of the united front with any one and every one and under all conditions came the united front “from below only”. The highest fruit of this blind policy, which was accompanied by a growing disinterestedness in the progress of the international Communist movement, was the debacle of January 1933 in Germany. The failure of the German Communist Party to lead the working class against the Fascist onslaught, its miserable disappearance from the scene, is the culmination point of the whole headless course of Stalinism in the Communist International.
The collapse of the Communist Party of Germany deprives the Communist International of its one great mass party and the Soviet Union of its strongest ally in the capitalist world. It is the last item in the balance sheet of ten years of the rule of bureaucratic Centrism in the Communist movement. The course of Stalinism, which began with the repudiation of the concept of permanent revolution, has wound up in the most frightful isolation of the workers’ fatherland. The Stalinist bureaucracy too, has been caught within the trap of its own logic. It has endangered the existence of the Soviet Union from without and from within.
Hitler’s Brown Shirts are on the march. The alliance between the workers and peasants – the practical basis of Soviet economy and the proletarian dictatorship – is being threatened by that same headless, un-Marxian course which has led to disaster in Germany, by the course of vacillating bureaucratic Centrism. No time is to be lost. If Communism, if the Soviet Union if to live, Stalinism must be destroyed. Only the re-establishment of the Marxian perspective of the permanent revolution, only the return of its defenders – of L.D. Trotsky, Rakovsky and the Bolshevik-Leninists – to their rightful posts can aid in cleansing the working class vanguard of the petty bourgeois poison which had been paralyzing it and clear the road for the effective defense of the fortress of the proletarian revolution and for a new upsurge of the revolutionary movement in the International.
 



The government press in Germany offers quite a picture of the strategy of the Fascist coalition after its rapid consolidations. Differences within the coalition itself are carefully suppressed and covered up: the working class must be made to feel that its counter-revolutionary opponents as a solid mass. Every rumor or report of the establishment of the proletarian United Front is quickly squashed and discredited. A consistent attack is made above all on the workers faith in proletarian internationalism. These are the lines along which the counter-revolution is exerting every effort to scatter, to demoralize, to pulverize the as yet massive hosts of the German working class.
One outstanding example: While in the past this Rightist press has always been painfully engaged in “proving” the “hand of Moscow” in the most phantastic plots against the German nation, this same press, thundering against Marxism, calling for the ruthless extermination of the Communist party (utilizing such obvious frame-ups as the Reichstag fire) has the following to say about “Moscow” today:
 
Is Russia No Longer Interested in the C.P.G.?
“Moscow, Feb. 1. – The appointment of Adolf Hitler as Reichs Chancellor was received quietly in the Russian official circles. There are reassuring explanations that Hitler does not represent any danger for the German-Russian trade relations. Insofar as the measures of the Hitler Cabinet against the C.P.G. are concerned, the official circles appear to be quite disinterested. The Soviet government is said to have only an academic interest in whatever happens to the Communists outside of Russia. That is the affair of the III International, which has nothing to do with the government.” (Der Tag, Feb. 2, 1933)
Innumerable such samples could be cited. Their primary aim is of course to cast despair and discouragement into the ranks of the workers, to cut them off from that tower of strength, from the USSR – the fortress of the world October. And it must be said openly: By its silence, by its criminal abstention from official pronouncement, the Stalinist leadership is helping along this cunning game of the German counter-revolution. If the Stalinist leaders were in the slightest degree true to the internationalist colors of Communism, the purpose of the Fascists and their allies would quickly come to naught, the German working class would rapidly be awakened from its lethargy and impotence and Germany would soon present a different scene. The betrayal of proletarian internationalism which began with the establishment of the theory of “socialism in one country” is being posed in a sharp and concrete manner in Germany. Shall the German reactionaries be allowed to bank on this betraal in their campaign of annihilation against the organized working class? Shall they thus be permitted to make the most adequate preparations in the longed-for assault on the U.S.S.R.? Or will the Communist workers wake up and demand that the Communist International, that its Stalinist leadership speak up and give the counter-revolutionary strategists of Der Tag the answer of the Leninist Comintern? Let the Communist workers themselves sound the alarm. Let them put the Stalinist leadership to the test in the crucible of the tremendous events in Germany.
 



Cleveland. – A highly gratifying mass meeting of the Left Oppostion was held here last Wednesday night at Painters Hall. More than 130 workers were present, more than half of them party members or members of party mass organizations. Comrades Hugo Oehler and Sam Gordon presented the point of view of the Communist League on the German crisis, with comrade John Brantin in the chair. A good collection was taken and numerous Militants were sold.
This marks the largest and first peaceful meeting of the Left Opposition in this city. All previous meetings took place under organized attacks from the Stalinists. The previous intense and widespread activities of the local group with regard to the German Fascist danger – participation in demonstrations and meetings, extensive distribution of leaflets, etc. – had aroused great interest in the German meeting of the Left Opposition and the official party leadership saw itself forced to refrain from the well-known physical argument this time and actually to send down a representative to take the floor in their name.
After the presentation of the views of our organization the chairman, comrade Brantin, asked if the party representative wanted the floor for 15 minutes. Comrade Leonard Patterson, in the name of the party, did his best in the course of twenty minutes to defend the indefensible position of Stalinism in Germany. After a great deal of confusion and stammering, he finally concluded with that poor trump card of the bureaucracy – the swindle about the “dissolution” of the German Left Opposition.
Comrade Oehler replied for the Communist League and with firm but comradely arguments tore the bottom out of the contentions of the party representative, exposing in an even more convincing and concrete way the inadequacy and faltering, criminal stupidity of the Stalinist position in Germany! Many questions, testifying to the intense interest in the subject, were asked by the audience, to which our comrade gave the proper revolutionary answer. After comrade Oehler’s summary, the meeting adjourned amid continued private discussions outside the hall.
All in all, this represents a great step forward for the Left Opposition in Cleveland. Not only the excellent attendance, but even more the comradely and sane spirit of the discussion is bound to have a profound effect on the local Communist workers, but those who constituted the majority of the audience as well as those who will come in contact with them. For the first time in their experience, they saw how deep principle disputes among Communists can he conducted in a Bolshevik manner, in a manner aimed to bring about genuine clarification in the proletarian ranks. That this will show them the futility and shamefulness of the Stalinist methods of physical terror in settling disputes with the Left Opposition cannot be doubted.
 



The class conscious worker who has pursued with any measure of watchfulness the unfolding improvisations of this latest “Great Effort” of capitalism will receive the Green-Woll legend of NRA’s unionism with his tongue in his cheek. He will remember the sudden “strike truce edict” of the great labor friend in the White House following hot on the trail of the powerful challenge to the coal bosses thrust out by the miners of Pennsylvania last July. (The promised, “fair”, “pro-union” coal code is, by the way, still in the offing.) He has witnessed the Johnson-Richberg comedy around section 7 (a) of the Recovery law. He has seen an automobile code adopted with a stridently anti-labor, open shop “merit” clause. He has heard the Recovery cop, Whalen, invoke NRA for the arrest of peacefully picketing shoe and bakery strikers in New York. And so on down the line.
But even more striking than all these manifestations of the “pro-labor” tendencies of the Recovery administration are its acts which involve the parts assigned to Green, Lewis and Co. themselves. A national arbitration board is named:
Only two representatives of “organized” labor. And what representatives! – John L. Lewis, the reactionary Czar of the United Mine Workers and Bill Green, Hoover’s darling. Two labor representatives out of a board of seven ...
The steel barons meet for a code hearing. Bill Green arrives as representative of the administration. The steel men rise in angry protest – they won’t negotiate with the President of the A.F. of L. Green apologizes, swears he is not there, god forbid, as a representative of labor but as a legitimate spokesman for the NRA. No use. You can’t fool the good capitalist instincts of the steel men. They turn their heels on poor Mr. Green.
A few facts, an incident, that speak volumes! The case-hardened boss class will not give up its class positions one inch without a fight. They know that it is only the docile William Green. They know that he is ever ready to talk peace to them, to betray every last worker he represents.
But no matter. To accept him as an administration representative? The idea alone makes the steel Tories see nightmares of a Soviet! Not an inch of such a concession, it sets precedents!
And the good General Johnson wears out his knees in genuflections before them, repudiates Green as representative and ruefully rehabilitates him upon the protests of his colleagues.
But enough – the class face of the NRA is unmistaken. For Roosevelt it represents an effort toward a revamping of capitalism by internal reform and through the mobilization of a huge class collaborationist machine. For the steel barons it is a risky experiment. They will not deal with Browder’s “Fascist” A.F. of L. Green. Tomorrow they may have to deal with social Fascist Norman Thomas and the day after tomorrow – with Left social Fascist Muste? You never can tell. It isn’t safe to give in to anyone who represents labor!
But the labor movement remains silent. The official Communist party shows no comprehension for the events or their possibilities. The Left wing of the trade unions is out of the picture.
Only one solitary gesture of protest rises against this hypocrisy of the NRA: It comes – alas – only from a lady social worker who has been appointed to a post in the administration.
Mrs. Kleeck of the Russel Sage Foundation withdraws her acceptance of the post on the grounds that NRA does not give labor sufficient representation, that it deprives the workers of their only genuine weapon of bargaining – the right to strike, etc. The lady liberal took the reformism of Roosevelt at its face value. Her protest is genuine. Of course, it is only the isolated protest of a sincere labor sympathizer.
What the NRA deserved was a protest from mass pressure by labor itself. That will come, that will be effective and take the road to workers’ victory when the Left wing realizes the tremendous opportunities afforded by the situation, when the Communists appraise and analyze the present situation realistically, when the militant section of labor penetrates the A.F. of L. and snatches the leadership of organized labor away from the Greens and the Wolls and the Lewises.
 



Last Saturday Hitlerite Germany bolted the League of Nations and the Geneva Disarmament Conference in a precipitant action which the press universally describes as a bombshell. Insofar as the Hitlerist maneuver contributes to a more complete and accelerated decomposition of the farce of capitalist “internationalism”, the bombshell has no doubt hit its mark.
After the departure of Japan last year, the German “Austreten” – as the Nazi diplomats express it – leaves little more of the League of Nations than its bare name.
The sudden and startling move of the Reich followed repeated and increasingly difficult attempts of the former allies on the one hand, to hold the lines of the status quo achieved by their robbers’ treaty of Versailles; and of National Socialist Germany, on the other hand, to achieve “arms equality” and a free hand in war preparations. The desperate internal and external, economic situation of post-war Germany brought into its leadership a clique of political adventurers prepared for any gamble. It was only to be expected that the latter would, the moment they felt themselves to any degree masters of their own house, initiate drastic action on the foreign front.
 
The Adventurism of Despair
The men whom the agonizing Reich bourgeoisie brought into power are destined to extend their adventurism of despair beyond the national borders. Under the camouflage of a “pacifist” and “disarmament” propaganda which has characterized the inter-European diplomatic maneuvers ever since the .World War, Hitler attempted to get universal approval for his plan to reestablish Prussian militarism within the framework of the League of Nations. Facing, as he had always expected to face, an immovable aversion on part of the former allied powers to give up any of gains they achieved over Germany by the Versailles pact, he has from the first sought to bring about a showdown by an open break which would clearly be of advantage to him.
He merely seized the opportunity offered by the British-French stubbornness at Geneva last week. The pacifist Hitler throws the onus for the failure to disarm right into the face of the British and the French, and their dilatory tactics. Winning sympathy thereby for his “sincere desire for peace and disarmament” from all sorts of neutral nations, he makes the “just” demand: on that basis to be allowed an equal opportunity to arm up to the standards of the rest.
 
Fascism Seeks Military Independence
Fascist Germany is out to get a free hand in girding itself for its next, external atack. The unkind eye cast by the United States upon the British-French hegemony on the continent, its “disinterested” and “neutral” stand; the aloof position of Mussolini, growing out of Italy’s special interests – undoubtedly aids Hitler’s strategy. France and England are faced with a fait acompli in the German move for military independence. The hope for allied control over German armaments – arising less from fear of an immediate war, than from a view to more distant advantages – has been badly shaken by the Nazi “bombshell”.
The Reich government, on its part, has made clear that in striking out for armaments independence it in no way gives up the idea of cooperation with the governments of France, Great Britain, et al. On the contrary. In his radio speech explaining Germany’s action, Chancellor Hitler goes out of his way to point out that this latest step is not at all intended as an affront to the above two nations. He goes further than that. The Nationalist Hitler makes a direct gesture, to the French to bury the hatchet with the Erbfeind (the “hereditary enemy” who takes up such an important place in the racist ideology of the Nazis).
“It would be a tremendous event”, said Hitler, “if the two peoples could once and for all ban force from their common life ... After the return of Saar to the Reich, only a madman could believe in the possibility of war between the two states.”
 
A French-German Alliance?
Inclination to accept this overture was not lacking among French ruling circles, immediately after it was made. After all, the independent stand of Germany was an accompished fact. The question arose of how to deal with the new reality. French-German cooperation, on a new, separate basis, was a possibility in any case. The sentiment in this direction grew with the publication of the Fascist chancellor’s speech in full. A striking passage therein reads:
“When, however, the French premier asks why the German youth is marching and falling in line, I reply, it is not to demonstrate against France, but to evince that political determination that was necessary for throwing down Communism and that will be necessary to hold it down.”
In the same speech, the Nazi leader alludes further to the aims of Germany’s newly gained independence of action:
“It is not immaterial whether on the Rhine or on the North Sea the outposts of the spiritually revolutionary and expansive Asiatic world empire stood watch ... when the National Socialist movement snatched Germany back from the brink of this threatening catastrophe; it not only saved the German people, but also rendered a historical service to the rest of Europe.”
 
Hitler’s “Eastern Orientation”
On the basis of extending this “historical service”, by a transition from the defensive to the offensive (for which full armament freedom is needed), the French ruling class sees more than an even chance for a German rapprochement. It demands that Hitler explain himself more fully. But it already knows clearly his motive. He has made his “Eastern orientation” – the Drang Nach Osten – more than sufficiently clear.
What is involved is an attempt to crush the workers’ state in Russia and the colonization of the Ukraine. To this end the French bourgeoisie is prepared to talk business, even to consider the question of the Saar.
It is generally known that such a direction of Nazi foreign aggression is more immediate than a war against France. It is known that in such a case, the aid of other powers, financial and otherwise, is imperative for Germany. A representative French paper writes:
“We cannot understand why anyone should unreasonably remain attached to a type of procedure and international mechanism which has missed its aim, Hitler’s appeal has created a new situation. In a new fashion conversation seems possible.” – Le Jour, October 17.
 
French Munitions for Germany
France is preparing to bow before the inevitable and to try for new gains, new advantages on a different basis. From the appearance of things, the new French orientation already has taken roots. The French firm of munition manufacturers, Schneider-Creusot, was recently accused of furnishing 400 tanks to Hitlerite Germany. In replying to the accusation, the company makes a denial of the specific charge, but not of the general one. More interesting is its reference to relations with the French government:
“The company does not export war material without government authorization. That regulation is still in effect.” The statement of the blood-stained war manufacturers then goes on to accuse those campaigning thus against it, of harming the “pacific policy of France”!
It is common knowledge in Europe that Hitler has been rearming secretly for some time. It is also common knowledge that the Quai D’Orsay is well aware of this fact. Now tne munition manufacturers of France itself indirectly confirm shipment of arms to Germany with government knowledge. The new turn has gone far already.
 
German-Japanese Plans in Anti-Soviet Front
On top of the above, reports have been abundant of a German-Japanese plan of cooperation. The purpose of it is unmistakable. The documents published recently by the Soviet press from the dossiers of Japanese secret diplomacy are enlightening enough. Now comes a report from Mukden of a loan of $60,000,000 to be made by France to Manchukuo, Japan’s outpost for anti-Soviet aggression:
“Preliminary negotiations”, says the report, “have been concluded between President Hatta of the South Manchurian Railway and Andre d’Olivier, a representative of French capitalists”. – N.Y. Times, October 18, 1933.
The anti-Soviet front is forming fast.
In the face of these developments, the futility and the criminal self-deception of the Stalinist “Non-Aggression Pacts” becomes remarkably obvious. A real defense of the Soviet Union is imperatively necessary. The stupid quasi-practical policy of the Stalin regime in foreign affairs is due for a collapse. A realistic appraisal of the conditions in the Soviet Union, a corresponding raising of the standards of living of the workers and a strengthening of the alliance between the working class and the peasantry is just as necessary as a reversal of the foreign policy. The Soviet bureaucracy is incapable of accomplishing either one of these tasks. It prepares the road for Thermidorian reaction. That has been shown by the entire past.
 
The International Workers’ Front
The preparation for a resistance on the part of the international working class to the imperialist war plans likewise depends upon a rejection of the policy of the Stalinists. No “Anti-War Congresses” composed of pompous intellectuals, without a stable social basis and impotent because of their individual isolation, will ever serve to weld the proletarian front against imperialist war and attack on workers’ Russia. The Einsteins, the Dreisers, the Upton Sinclairs and Sherwood Andersons are already deserting the Stalinist Banner. Only the united front of workers’ organization, from top to the bottom, can accomplish this task. To achieve this, the Communists must go to the masses, entrench themselves in all organizations in which workers gather en masse. Both the preparation against attack inside of the Soviet Union as well as against imperialist war in all the capitalist countries demands the support of the line of policy of the Bolshevik-Leninists.
Time is short and events are moving fast. The Bolshevik-Leninists must live up to their task.
 



Abolishing Unemployment
Every week in this hectic period brings new social thunderstorms. Last week rickety capitalistic Europe threw a fit over Hitler’s bolt from Geneva.
It’s the turn of younger, crafty, conniving American capitalism this week. The farmers out in the Middle West are threatening to upset Mr. Roosevelt’s New Deal applecart.
* * * *
Besides the farmers, there are the steadily enduring, industrial strikes, growing and broadening out. The compliance boards of the NRA are overwhelmed with complaints of code violators. The first snowfall promises to bring the unemployment tension to a high pitch.
A veritable bag of ill-winds are being let loose on the heads of the North American colossus.
* * * *
Along comes a new and hardly heartening admonition. The well-known economic publicist, Mr. Stuart Chase, writing in the November Current History, presents some startling facts.
Given a 40 hour week work, says Mr. Chase, the year 1934, in spite of all the government and Nira optimism, will still find 12,200,000 men out of jobs.
Given a highly exaggerated figure of 10% increase in production, the number of jobless would still amount to 9,400,000.
Granting more than that, allowing for a decrease in working hours to 35 per week, 9,000,000 men would still have to crowd the streets in futile search for a livelihood.
* * * *
Mr. Chase’s statistics are carefully considered, weighed very cautiously. The farm laborers, the miners, the professional classes are not taken into reckoning, although the same fate is in store for them. His figures are computed on the basis of established facts, hunted up and correlated by numerous and reliable economists and statisticians.
* * * *
What is behind this realistic picture of a miserable working class future? Mr. Chase and his fellow economists will tell you: “technological unemployment” Seventy men in 1933 can do the work of 100 in 1926. The machine is replacing the workers.
What is this horrible monster, the machine, in reality? It is and was always meant to be an aid to man. Born out of the unique ingenuity of man in the animal kingdom, the tool and the machine were produced to help him overcome the obstacles of nature in his struggle for a happy existence.
The thinking worker who knows this will not be fooled. No, it is not the machine that is the monster. The private exploitation of the machine, its utilization for the heaping up of profits for the few – capitalism – that is the threat to a decent human existence.
* * * *
“Technological unemployment” will exist as long as the capitalistic system exists. Replace the system of production for profit by the system of production for social use and “technological unemployment” becomes transformed into: greater leisure, better health, higher intelligence and happier, fuller life for the vast mass of humanity.
* * * *
The workers of America have not yet fully grasped this idea in their great majority. They are just nibbling at it. They want to hang on to life, merely.
They are striking in great number now for a somewhat shorter work-day, for a somewhat higher living wage.
Yet that monstrosity, the class of the bosses who possess all under capitalism, mobilize police, government and press against them. Yet the rulers will not cede an inch to the workers.
It is inevitable that the American workman will, with ever growing speed and strength, organize en masse to fight not only for a higher wage and a shorter workday, bin against the looming prospect of permanent unemployment for millions in their ranks.
* * * *
Wage strikes are not enough. Unemployment insurance must come next.
 



The League of Nations as an Example for the NRA
The leading article of the New York Herald Tribune Sunday Magazine, last week, makes an eloquent plea for “No More Strikes”.
“One of the ironies of the day in this country”, it says, “is that one of our greatest organized efforts, one which has always been the loudest in the denunciation of war between the nations, is insisting on its own right to use force in settling its difficulties.”
* * * *
And then it goes on to quote William Green on the right to strike. (Another of the ironies of the day, by the way). The argument runs as, follows: The nations (sic) have found that force is wasteful, futile. They have set up Kellogg Pact and a League of Nations to banish war from their midst. Why can’t the workers take an example from that?
There is the NRA. The NRA is concerned with the welfare of the workers as the League is with that of the nations (sic). Why not let NRA replace the strike as the League has replaced war?
* * * *
Still another of the ironies of the day! Even while those words were being printed, the noble example, which the American workers were to follow – received such a dislodging shock that there remains very little to follow. Germany split from the League of Nations with a “bombshell”. War talk and war preparations are again seizing a feverish world. A most unfortunate example.
* * * *
While the example is hardly worthy of pursuit, it does no doubt offer a resemblance. It is a resemblance worth a worker’s attention. Both the League of Nations and the NRA were born out of the despair wrought by wasteful destructive capitalistic competition. In the first case, among the various capitalist nations. In the second case, among the different capitalists in the United States. They were both meant to serve as a sort of a regulator of this competition.
* * * *
When the League was formed, the powerful capitalist United States refused to join. It believed it could contribute to the “welfare of the nations” on the outside, without international control.
When NRA went into effect, the richest single capitalist in the United States, Henry Ford, refused to join. He thought he could contribute to “industrial welfare” on the outside, without national control.
* * * *
Japan and Germany, two of the major powers, have bolted from the League. How soon will it be before the big capitalists will be bolting from NRA?
Why is the League blowing up? Because it is bound by the very laws of capitalism. Capitalism means ruthless competition. Capitalism is war, war of all against all. Capitalism signifies the perpetuation of the use of force. How could the League help blowing up? How can NRA help blowing up?
* * * *
The argument is really in favor of the use of the strike. As long as capitalism exists, peace among the nations is insecure. As long as capitalism and wage slavery, the demands of competition and the production for profit exist – just so long must hire and fire, unemployment, insecurity exist for workers. What better way has the worker to gain any measure of security, any degree of protection and improvement than by the collective, organized effort with his fellow workers – by the strike?
* * * *
In spite of the eloquent plea, in spite of the supplications of the NRA boosters, the workers are continuing to strike. They draw their conclusions from past examples. Some day they will draw a final conclusion. They will learn that there is no way of gaining welfare and of banishing war than by sweeping away the whole capitalistic system, with all its camouflages, with its League of Nation and NRA’s, with all its reign of force and terror. And they will do that by force. That will constitute one of the ironies of another day.
* * * *
And speaking of ironies, the greatest of all is perhaps the fact that the No More Strikes article in the Herald-Tribune is signed by none other than Ida M. Tarbell, the author of the History of the Standard Oil Company, a crusading muckraker and anti-Rockefeller campaigner of a past day ...
 



Said the Mad Hatter
When you hear about the great need of killing 1,000,000 hogs to help the Drive toward Prosperity, you will, no doubt, look up and wonder. A sneaking suspicion will grow within you that there is something cockeyed with a system that requires such waste to keep going.
* * * *
You look around you. Eleven million hungry men are still pounding the pavements, unemployed. The bright fellows in the government’s brain trust keep on thinking up all kinds of plans to keep the grain crop down, to curtail the live stock. They have to. The leaders of this system that we call capitalism tell them we have too much.
* * * *
That’s the big trouble with us. We have too much. That is why eleven million men must starve.
* * * *
Odd enough, every worker will admit to himself, and keep wondering. But sometimes the Mad Hatters of capitalism carry their crazy talk and topsy-turvy ideas so far that the worker can’t just stop with mere wondering.
* * * *
The other day, for instance, Mr. Gerard Swope, a big bun among the boss class, the head of General Electric and a member of the NIRA board, was caught thinking aloud. He was comparing the NRA with the Russian five year plan. Said Mr. Swope:
“The Soviets started from scratch. They had no industry, no financial structure, no problems of overproduction such as we had to deal with ... Their economic problem is comparatively easy.”
* * * *
The Soviets, under Lenin and Trotsky, took over a country forlorn, neglected and backward, the ruins of an empire misruled by medieval despots. Its industry lay fallow and devastated, the wreckage of a criminally futile and disastrous war. A hostile capitalist world surrounded Workers’ Russia. When that world could not put it down by force of sword, the international boss class tried to cut off Russia’s credits, its sources of economic life, it was still another attempt to throttle it. In the cockeyed world of Mr. Swope ... “Their economic problem is comparatively simple”, but ...
“But over here we have an overdeveloped economic and industrial pattern ... That has been a colossal task with which Russia never had to be bothered.”
* * * *
The United States entered the world war a debtor nation. It came out of it the outstanding creditor nation, the dominant world power. Its industries surpassed in wealth and technical progress those of all other countries. Its rulers became the real dictators in a war-ridden Europe. Its resources – unlimited. A whole world stood ready to do its bidding. It had everything. “That has been a colossal task with which Russia never had to be bothered”.
* * * *
Help! We’ve got too much, cries this loon. And you’ve got to do more than just wonder this time. Because there is some reason in his madness this time. Says Mr. Swope – of the Soviets:
“When they need more coal they expand their mines, put more men in them and produce. The same is true of mills and other industrial structures.”
They do the job.
* * * *
But over here, in NIRA America “with all the natural (?) human jealousies that go with it,” “different groups strive for different advantages, and in many cases with little regard for the general good.”
* * * *
Here you can’t do the job. You’ve got all the tools and all the materials, but you can’t do the job “Different groups strive for different advantages, and in many cases with little regard for the general good.”
* * * *
Mr. Swope knows his capitalistic system, the system of profit and greed, of wasteful competition and industrial anarchy.
That is the big difficulty over here. That is what stands in the way of solving the problem in the U.S.A. And Mr. Swope tells you – that’s the only the thing that stands in the way. In so many words.
 



Mr. Revere Reveals
If you’re in the working class or of it you’re bound to get a headache wading through the boss press. Especially now – under NRA. The high pressure salesmanship methods of the recovery administration – always profuse with their great, passionate love for the laboring masses – are simply overwhelming.
When you’re lucky enough to survive the intoxicating ballyhoo of the front page and the stultifying hypocrisy of the editorials, you will, however, find a good sobering bromide in the financial columns. They usually tell the unadorned truth. They’re got to. Because they constitute the only part of the paper that’s actually written for the boss – minus the ballyhoo and minus the embellishments.
And here is what we found on the financial sheet of the N.Y. Herald-Tribune recently:
“With the strong arm of government around the wage earner”, says a certain C.T. Revere (of the firm of Mund’s, Winslow, and Potter), “the labor unions are displaced as guardians of the toiler ... The basic reason for the labor union as we have known it in the past no longer prevails.”
This is Mr. Revere’s government. He speaks of it knowingly. And he is addressing his kind, on the forum of his class. He has no need for camouflage and subterfuges here.
The Herald-Tribune, appropriately enough, sums up his remarks in the headline, “Blow to Unions Seen by Revere in NRA Plans”. That tells the whole story in a nutshell. And as if he were anticipating the argument of the recent strikes and the big, successful unionization drive, the gentleman from Wall St. adds:
“Economic forces (?) work out their solution in inexorable fashion even against the intimidation of the working masses.”
If we know anything at all of economic forces (sic) and if the present widespread and far-flung testimonials of strike militancy mean anything, Mr. Revere may yet discover that there is nothing quite so inexorable as the workers’ march to power, as the economic solution of the working masses.
We might add ... even against all the pious “class peace” wishes of the labor fakers and all their persistent servility.
Mr. Revere knows what his class wants and needs, and so does the awakening worker.
The proof? The first plank of nearly every strike action in the growing working class upsurge and the major objective of nine tenths of them has been – union recognition!
That’s what the workers think of the “strong arm of government!”
* * * *
Let Him Whistle
“In Pittsburgh, 3,000 to 5,000 miners, singing as they go, request Carnegie steel workers to join a ‘holiday movement’ with 85,000 other steel and mine workers in three states.
“Carlyle said: ‘Give me the man who sings at his work!’
“A strike seems hardly a thing to sing about!” – Arthur Brisbane
For all of our sympathy with Mr. Brisbane’s outraged ... esthetics, and in spite of his rather impressive appeal to Carlyle’s authority, we cannot nevertheless understand why he should begrudge the workers a “holiday” – the bankers only had one of their own not so long ago.
It is only just, and even Carlyle had a warm spot for justice.
Still, if the eminent sage of Hearstdon finds strike holidays “hardly a thing to sing about” in his capacity as major share-holder of a profit-mad enterprise, he ought to compose himself as a member of the Fourth Estate.
We can well understand that he cannot sing over a strike. Just let him whistle ...
* * * *
There’s Gold in Them Thar Hills
“Green Backs Plan for U.S. to Assist Jobless Mine Gold” – Newspaper Headline.
Having clad the employed working class in codes of ermine and led them into the promised land of the New Deal, the great American Labor Leader prepares to bring down a shower of gold manna (or are we getting it mixed up with NRA?) upon their less fortunate brethren, left behind in the wilderness of unemployment.
 



Outstanding in the week’s news for the working class is the powerful new push to the Right in German politics. The Bruening cabinet, the cabinet of bourgeois uncertainty, whose main sup. port was the “toleration” of the reformist mass organizations, the Free Trade Unions and the social democratic party, has collapsed.
The downfall has come about as a result of the refusal of the industrial bourgeoisie and the landowners to comply with the plans of the Clerical Centrist chancellor, namely, to balance the budget with new taxes and to allay the unrest of the ever-growing unemployed army with the scheme of a back-to-the-farm movement which involves the breaking up of the big estates of the East Prussian Junkers.
The bourgeoisie is determined not to cede a single step more, to go the full length of its fight for self-preservation by a ruthless life and death struggle against the proletariat.
According to well informed bourgeois press circles, the dismissal of the cabinet was plotted by military cliques with an understanding reaching out to the Hitler forces. The new cabinet, headed by the notorious Hohenzollern militarist Lieutenant Colonel Von Papen, is a typical army-Junker combine of the purest reactionary stripe. It has not the slightest basis of parliamentary support and appears to be what is generally termed a stop-gap government personally selected by the Prussian Field Marshall, President Von Hindenburg. It is generally conceded that it is a temporary set-up destined to a short-lived existence. But even this temporary existence is condition by toleration on the part of the Nazis in the Reichstag, which body is to be convoked shortly. The “toleration” of the Fascists is openly avowed to be based upon three conditions. First, that it call for new Reichstag elections within the shortest possible time. Secondly, that it raise the ban on the Nazi Storm Troops, recently proscribed by ex-Minister of the Interior, Groener. Thirdly, that it will impose no new taxes and no new emergency decrees which might hinder the broad propaganda activities of the Hitlerites. It is indisputable that all these conditions will be fulfilled.
The call for new elections is inevitable, since, with the elimination of Bruening and the Centre party from power, no government with parliamentary support can be found. That the second demand will be complied with is evident already from the ruling of the Reich’s Supreme Court on the evidence submitted by the Prussian Ministry of Interior, gathered in its March raids on the Nazi headquarters. The ruling exonerates the Hitler party completely of “illegal or subversive” activities and in this manner prepares the lifting of the ban on the Storm Troops.
The Von Papen cabinet will easily agree to the third condition as well, which is apparent from its composition and from the necessity to present a united Right wing front before the foreign powers at the Lausanne conference.
The Junker government is, therefore, the direct harbinger of Fascist rule in Germany. It is the government not merely of the preparation, but of the most immediate organization of the National Socialist seizure of power. The Nazis are jubilant everywhere. Forgotten are the bitter hostilities between their chief and the old Field Marshall in the recent presidential elections. Cries of “Hail, Hindenburg!” mix with cries of “Hail Hitler!” in their demonstrations. Der Angriff, the Berlin organ of the Brown Shirts greets the action of Hindenburg as a banner day for National Socialism.
The new move, which makes the Fascist overturn an imminent danger, has cut the ground entirely from under the feet of the reformists. The talk of the “lesser evil” is exploded by facts. The social democratic leaders have arrived at an impasse just as the full blast of the Fascist attack is about to be fired. Still the overwhelming majority of the workers are under their sway. The masses are as yet to be found in the organizations of the betrayers, whose line of class collaboration, of kowtowing to the masters, has prepared the road for the Fascist reaction.
The bankrupt social democracy must be pushed against the wall and forced to show its full face to all the workers, if the catastrophe is to be averted, if the Fascist onslaught is to be repulsed by the German working class. There is only one way in which this can be done. That is by an offer of the party of the working class, the Communist party, to the social democratic and trade union organizations for the immediate formation of the proletarian united front of direct struggle.
The German party has been prevented from taking this step all along by the stupid Stalinist theory of “social Fascism”, by its isolationist, ultimatum policy of the “Red United Front under the leadership of the Communist Party”. The disastrous experiences of the recent elections have, however, awakened broad sections of the membership to the isolation and self-obstruction resulting from the Stalinist policies. A half-turn in the direction of the policy proposed by comrade Trotsky and the Left Opposition has been forced upon the Thaelmann leadership, as we reported in the last issue of The Militant. Rote Fahne, the central organ of the C.P.G. wrote editorially on April 26, after the Prussian elections:
“The main thing now is to assemble all the class forces of the proletariat and the working masses in the red united front and again go into an offensive against the capitalist dictatorship and defeat Fascism.
“We publish today at the head of our newspaper the appeal of the C.C. and the R.T.U.O. Committee in which the party and the R.T.U.O. express their willingness to join with all lower union functionaries and shop-committee-members, with all organizations which wish to fight honestly against reduction in wages, to carry through common measures for the struggle for workers’ demands in the shops.
“While we are in sharpest struggle against the government of Braun-Severing, against the policy of emergency measures dictatorship and their clearing the road for Hitler, we Communists stand as mortal enemies of Hitler fascism. We will do everything with the help of proletarian class forces in order to block its way to government power, in order to break its terror and through a new red advance of the working class to give it a decisive blow”
The party leadership has pledged itself to do everything, then, to block the way of Fascism to government power. It has declared its willingness to join with all organizations who honestly want to fight for this end. If the turn is in any way to be sincere and fruitful for the party, it must draw it to its logical conclusion and pose the question of common struggle before the reformist leaders as well as before the organizations.
There can be no doubt that the workers in the social democratic organization honestly want to fight together with the Communists against the Fascists, against wage reductions, for the workers’ demands in the shops. If their honest desire is to be transformed into forceful action, the test must be put to the leaders whom they have given their mandate. Whether the S.P. leaders accept or reject a sincere united front appeal from the Communists is immaterial. In any case, the workers in their following will be drawn closer to their natural leader, to the Communist party in the course of common action. Therein alone lies the solution for the workers in the present situation.
The decisive hour is very close. No time is to be lost. Not only the fate of the German proletariat, the fate of the fortress of the world revolution – the Soviet Union – the fate of the international working class is at stake. We warn again: the reaction engendered by the coming into power of Hitler will not confine itself to the boundaries of Germany. It is the task of every Communist to strive with might and main that this should not come about.
 



Several weeks ago, when we carried an article in The Militant entitled The Right Wing International on the Verge of Collapse, the Lovestone sheet waxed indignant, confounded us together with the genuine liars fom the Stalinist camp and in a feigned gesture of contemptuous pride, stuck out its chest – upon which, alas, blows are soon to pound in loud repentance ...
 
A Damaging Admission
Three weeks later – we can hardly believe our eyes – the columns of the Workers’ Age itself carry statements to this effect:
“The International Communist Opposition (read: the international Right wing – Ed.), considered as a political unity, as a cohesive, smoothly functionary international faction in the C.I., has failed to measure up to the tasks which the situation in the world labor movement and in the Comintern has placed before it. The International Communist Opposition (read: the Right wing – Ed.) today is in a serious crisis, political as well as organization.” (Workers’ Age, June 25)
But even more damning than these admissions, which the Right wing leaders are forced to make before their alarmed and awakening rank and file, is their confession that there never actually was anything like an organized international Right wing. The Resolution on the International Conference, from which the above passage was quoted, tells us that “except for the transmission of correspondence between the various groups, the International Center has hardly functioned.” (!) That this was the case all along we have never doubted and we have more than once pointed out that the Right wing were merely drawing thereby the logical practical conclusions flowing from the theory of socialism in one country.
The Resolution on the International Conference is Lovestone’s Declaration of Bankruptcy. Seen in the light of recent developments, it represents an attempt of Lovestone to square himself with his taskmasters of tomorrow by cutting himself away from his allies of today.
“The chief manifestations of this crisis ...”, the resolution says, “is the fact that the substantial unanimity in principles (?) upon which it (the Right wing international – Ed.) was built up has now to a considerable extent been reduced to merely agreement on tactical questions.”
Here we have, then, on black and white, an avowal from the lips of Lovestone himself that his international alliance has no principle basis. But – there remains the basis of agreements on tactical questions. What tactical questions? Is it the tactical question of reform of the Communist International or the establishment of a new International? His resolution itself tells us that “There are some (Swedish Opposition) who regard the present crisis in the world Communist movement as essentially incurable on the basis of the rehabilitation of the existing Communist International ...”
Is it the tactical question on how to negotiate for readmission into the Communist International? Let us see. While Lovestone carries on negotiations with Comintern representatives in America, his erstwhile allies in Germany, the Brandlerites, write in their resolution:
 
Brandler’s View
“The International Communist Opposition (Right wing – Ed.) and the organizations belonging to it reject the maneuvers of the officials of the C.I. and their sections in approaching individual national organizations, local groups or individual members for the purpose of rejoining, so far as to play them off against one another”. (Gegen den Strom, June 18, 1932)
This declaration on the part of the Brandlerites gives the lie, by the way, to the Lovestones contention, in their “answer” to us referred to above, that “the unity moves ... which the C.P. Majority Group (Lovestoneites) have made, have been made with the full knowledge an approval of the German Opposition (Brandlerites) ...” Workers’ Age, May 21) But this is just another typical trick of the Lovestone fakers and does not surprise anyone who knows them, Lovestone pulled his followers into the Brandlerist camp in the dark of night. There is no reason why he should be expected to pull them out of it by any different methods.
Is it perhaps, we ask ourselves in exhaustion, the tactical question of the attitude towards the Left Opposition that the Right wingers agree on. Even there, no agreement exists. The Lovestone resolution tells us: “In general, only a few of the Opposition groups have worked out a definite viewpoint on the question of Trotskyism”. But it does admit that “in the now expelled minority of the German Opposition and in the group around Neurath in the Czech Opposition, definitive and avowed Trotskyist tendencies have become manifest”. He merely forgets to mention that the reason why “only a few of the Opposition groups have worked out a definite viewpoint on the question of Trotskyism” is that they are not quite safe with their rank and file on this point.
Finally, the resolution informs us,
“There is not sufficient agreement, on the question of Centrism (the Left wing reformists) and the relations of the Opposition towards it ... In the discussion which arose in the International Communist Opposition (Right wing), the existence of certain unclarity on and even toleration of centrism in a number of Opposition groups became visible.”
The fact that Centrism has been tolerated in a number of groups with which he has been associated for nearly two years does not, however, restrain Lovestone from giving the following, altogether baseless, estimate of the relationship between the Left Opposition and Centrism.
 
A Right Wing Lie
“... Trotsky himself has initiated a deliberate policy of political rapprochement (sic) with the Centrist organizations, a move generally welcomed by the latter. It is not an altogether unfamiliar role for Trotsky to play as the crystalizing force for various Centrist tenencies as a grouping. The political platform of this new Trotskyist alliance can be clearly seen from recent developments (which developments?): Trotsky lends the Centrists the much needed mantle of revolutionary integrity, while they agree to operate as the West European supports of the Trotsky faction in the C.P.S.U.”
Truly conceived according the traditional Lovestoneite horse-trade criterion. But comrade Trotsky and the Russian Opposition will thank Lovestone very kindly for this very Lovestonish “political platform” and remind him that we – the Left Opposition have got an International Center and that it does function and not only “for the transmission of correspondence between the various groups.”
* * * *
The only thing that stands out clearly in this confused, equivocal, characteristically opportunist Resolution on the International Conference is the resumption by Lovestone of the fight with all the necessary flourishes, aganst – “counter-revolutionary Trotskyism”, in this document, still – the “counter-revolutionary phase of Trotkyism”. The hazy charges of “Thermidorian accusations of Trotskyism against the Soviet State and the C.P.S.U.”, with which the Right wing fishermen hope to hook their rank and file bait. The talk about our “scepticism as to the possibilities of socialist construction (!) in the U.S.S.R. – is beneath reply. And so on.
Lovestone must ingratiate himself once more with the top sergeants of the Stalin faction. There is no better way for him to do this, there is nothing more palatable of flattering for these subalterns in the cloaks of generals than sustenance in the fight against Trotskyism. And Lovestone is an expert in this.
The negotiations for the re-establishment of the Right-Center bloc are going on full blast. The Right wing is toppling over. No time must be lost.
And so Lovestone makes haste, digs up his old clothes – “principles” and “tactics” – rushes over to the pawnshop of Uncle Stalin, gets the pure coin of a new assignment in the fight against “Trotskyism” and a new lease of political life for himself. But these are hard times. And who knows how long this coin will last?
 



The entire Lausanne Conference, looked upon with the greatest anxiety by a European bourgeoisie caught in the throes of impending convulsions, has so far stood under the sign of the Hoover proposals on disarmament. The power of the American colossus is more in evidence than ever. The Germans see in it the hand of a magnanimous benefactor against the adamant French enemy. The French in so far as they are inclined to view it favorably, hold it up as a prop for the maintenance of their cherished Versailles Treaty. As is known, the Hoover plan proposes the reduction of armaments by one third pressing for a reduction in the arms output of the Gallic rival for European domination and at the same time restricting German war preparations to the present limit.
As was to be expected, the Conference has yielded no results. The only positive thing it has achieved, is the indefinite prolongation of the Hoover moratorium which was to end on June 30. The French are holding out, using the old lever of “security necessities” and holding fast to their refusal to consider cancellation of German reparations. In the struggle between the Americans and the delegation from the Quai D’Orsay, the Von Papen delegation grasps a good opportunity to jockey for position, with an eye on the requirements of foreign aid from all quarters in the event of a Fascist seizure of power in Germany and the prospect of bitter and protracted civil war that this envisages.
While the German reactionaries are negotiating for the best possible conditions for future domestic and foreign imperialist aims – they talk of revision of the Eastern frontiers – steering a course that heads for a generally approved aggression against the country of the Soviets, the government at home proceeds with drastic force against all opposition forces at home.
The protests of the local governments – Bavaria, Baden – against the lifting of the ban on the Nazi Storm Troops have been of no avail. The Von Papen cabinet is sticking to its guns. In the meantime, the Fascist forces are forging ahead with full speed and with the best wishes of the present rulers. Attacks upon workers’ organizations continue unabated. The toll of proletarian victims of Hitlerite attacks is mounting skyward. The Brown Shirts’ pressure upon affairs – domestic as well as foreign – goes on in all openness and with remarkable success.
The Communist press is already half suppressed. The Nazis are demanding the suppression of the Communist party. But the onslaught of the black hundreds is wedging in on even the more moderate opposition. A late dispatch reports that the Federal authorities have demanded of the Prussian government the proscription of the Berlin Vorwaerts, the central organ of the German social democracy and – of the Rhineland organ of the Catholic Centre party, the Koelnische Volkszeitung.
These further indications of the dark intentions of the Von Papen regime make evident the need of haste in countering the action of the Fascists’ scouts. Once more, it must be emphasized that a successful repulsion of the reaction – which is spreading its fangs towards the borders of the Russian Workers’ State – depends only upon correct and timely united front action on the part of the German Communist Party and the Communist International.
The Communist International is maintaining an ominous silence. At a time, when black dangers face the European working class and the whole proletarian revolutionary movement of the world, the Communist International, the general staff of the revolutionary forces, finds it possible to do without a word of advice, without a word of direction to the international ranks that are behind it. Workers, Communists, demand in your organizations that the Stalinist leadership speak up. Demand that they tell you what they intend to do in this all too fateful situation!
 



WHAT NEXT? by Leon Trotsky
Translated from the Russian original by U. Vanzler. 200 pages
Pioneer Publishers, New York, Paper, 35¢; Cloth, 65¢
Events are moving with dazzling rapidly in Germany. Within a brief two years span, government control has passed over from the hands of the socialist coalition under Hermann Mueller and into the hands of the Junker dictatorship under Von Papen. Only a few months ago, the main popular prop of the government – then led by Bruening – was constituted by the reformist trade unions under the control of the social democracy. Today, the government of Germany leans for its mass support upon the motley following of Hitler and the Fascist party.
 
From Harzburg to Von Papen
As late as December of last year, the French jingoes were still howling blue murder because the Harzburg meet of the Hitler-Hugenburg Opposition had been permitted by the authorities. In these days, when nationalism runs rampant in Germany, when Minister of the Reichswehr Von Schleicher announces disregard, in the future for the armament provisions of the Versailles Treaty, the Paris press appears to forget all its fears for “French security”. Von Papen even suggests “occasional conversations between the general staffs of Germany and France” to Premier Herriot (Interview of Von Papen, N.Y. World Telegram, July 27, 1932.)
A year ago, Bruening appealed for aid from American financiers against the threat of “Right wing radicalism”. Today, the Junkers call for help to fight against Communism.
Dark doings are going on behind the scenes of international politics. Dense, black clouds hang over the heads of the peoples of all nations.
What Next?, by Leon Trotsky illuminates this sombre situation with the brilliancy of an acetylene lamp. It penetrates into the deepest background of recent happenings. It supplies the thread that links them with the social developments of the past. It brings out with utmost clarity and sharpness, the staggering implications of the facts we have seen with our own eyes.
This latest pamphlet by the great international revolutionist gives an appraisal of German political life in the incomparably lucid terms of Marxist thought. What are the causes for the rise of Fascism, what is the social composition of the movement, what is its specific role in the capitalist system, what does Fascism mean in so far as the workers are concerned, what are its international connections – all these questions are treated with Trotsky’s characteristic incisiveness. The problems, the reactions, the reflections evoked by the German situation are painted on the broad canvass of historical continuity. Each event, every factor is seen as part of an all-embracing whole.
 
Lessons of the Past
German political developments of the present day are tested on the touchstone of past experiences. No lesson of the past, whether it be connected with the rise of Mussolini in the Italy of 1920-21 or the crushing of the reactionary Kornilov in pre-revolutionary Russia of September 1917 is left out of account. The whole post-war period of world political development, is deftly utilized to set off the struggle of the classes in Hindenburg-Germany, in bold relief.
A scathing analysis of social democratic activity in the last 18 years, beginning with the vote of socialist Reichstag fraction for the war credits in 1914 and coming down to their policy of the lesser evil, serves to lay bare the putrid and decadent character of the reformist movement of our times. Trotsky exposes the inexorable logic of the collapse of the social democracy by voluminous quotations from their press, by citing an abundance of incidents and actions which strike at the very core of this diseased and outlived political organism. But even more convincing than the bare facts – which are enlightening enough – is the Marxian explanation given to them as they are woven into the texture of declining German and European capitalism as a whole. The puny soul of this withering reformist pillar of backsliding capitalist Germany – the social democratic functionary – shrivels and shrinks into insignificance before the masterful sociological and psychological scrutiny of Trotsky’s eye: The question of the struggle against the social democracy is posed on the following premises: “(a) the political responsibility of the social democracy for the strength of Fascism; (b) absolute irreconcilability between Fascism and those workers organizations on which the social democracy itself depends.”
 
A Critique of Stalinism
On the basis of these premises, the Bolshevik leader proceeds to a thoroughgoing criticism of the Stalinist leadership of the German Communist Party and the Communist International. The hopeless blunders of the Stalinist bureaucracy, their theoretical confusion – “social Fascism”; their disastrous slogans – “For National and Social Emancipation of the German People”, “People’s Revolution”, “Down With Versailles”; their self-discrediting actions – the support of the Fascist referendum in Prussia during July of last year; their hapless policy of the “Red United Front under the leadership of the Communist party” – all of which have kept the German Communists from measuring up to the tasks imposed by the needs and possibilities of the hour, from uniting the working class for a victorious struggle against Fascism – all these are traced through the zigzag course of the post-Leninist Comintern to their roots, to the principle political character of the Stalin faction and its basic tenet: socialism in one country. The why and the wherefore of the Stalinist policies, their flesh and blood expression stands out as clear as daylight after a reading of What Next? These sharp and penetrating lenses of historical research and theoretical analysis are all focused on the present German scene:
“The contradictions within German capitalism have at present reached such a state of tension that an explosion is inevitable. The adaptability of the social democracy has reached that limit beyond which lies self-annihilation. The mistakes of the Stalinist bureaucracy have reached that limit beyond which lies catastrophe. Such is the threefold formula that characterize the situation in Germany. Everything is now poised on the razor edge of a knife.’’
 
The Leninist Program Unfolded
In this poignant, epigrammatic rhythm, the leader of the International Opposition unfolds the Communist program for the German crisis in full. His criticism is positive as well as negative. There is not a trace of pessimism in his words. Every line breathes an inspiring, optimism. And if his negative criticisms have the effect of stinging needle points, his positive proposals react like hammer blows. We read:
“... involuntarily the question arises: Won’t it be altogether too late? And each time one answers oneself: No! The armies that are drawn up for battle are too colossal that one need fear a simultaneous settlement of the issues at the speed of greased lightning. The strength of the German proletariat has not been drained. Its powers have not been brought into play. The logic of facts will make itself heard more imperiously with every passing day.”
The propositions are put forward. The manner of correcting the mistakes of the Communist party leadership. The methods of establishing the united front of the entire German working class. The role of the Communists to leadership and control of the class. The ways of international revolutionary cooperation in the proletarian solution of the epoch-shaping social crisis in Germany. We have before us an outline of Communist action as precise, as concrete, as complete as a military campaign plan.
What Next? is the book of the hour. No other work on the German events exists, as informative as instructive, as thought-provoking as this masterpiece by Leon Trotsky. For the Communists everywhere it is an indispensable source of education and training, a guide to Leninist action. For the world at large, it is a clarion call to rally against the inevitable relapse into barbarism that a prolongation of the capitalist system entails. It is the voice of historical truth speaking.
 



Contrary to expectations, the European powers did manage to come to at least a temporary agreement on reparations at Lausanne. Faced with tho perspective of a bankrupt and politically tottering capitalist Germany, the Allied vultures have agreed for the time being to release their claw’s grasp from the throat of their Teuton competitor.
The German Junker delegation at Lausanne spoke hard words and came off with a sigh of relief. The governments of Great Britain, France, Italy and Belgium have decided to give German capitalism a breathing spell on the external front so as better to be able to entrench reaction within the country and to prepare the crushing of the internal enemy – the awakening German proletariat.
 
What the Agreement Consists of
The agreement arrived at by the diplomats in the conference reduces the original reparations sum demanded of the Reich – $33,000,000,000 – to a mere $750,000,000. $8,000,000,000 of the original sum had already been paid under the Dawes and the Young plans. The payment of the remaining $750,000,000 is to take the form of bond issues which are not to be redeemed for more than three years. The Germans are thereby granted a greater concession than ever before. A new alignment of the imperialist forces is in the offing.
It is well known that American pressure had a great deal to do with the accord finally achieved. Herriot, the leader of the French delegation has admitted as much in his report before the Chamber of Deputies. American private capital has some $6,000,000,000 dollars at stake in Germany not counting various trade advantages, concessions, etc. The action of the European powers was, in this sense, a gesture to draw out of the Wall St. government a compromise with regard to their own war debts, amounting to some $10,000,000,000 at this date.
But the continental imperialists do not restrict themselves to gestures, nor do they store great hopes in the good faith of their American creditor. Perhaps even more sensational and more important than the settlement made at Lausanne is the new entente that has been formed or rather, reformed by Great Britain and France “in the spirit which has inspired the Lausanne agreement”. The entente provides for coordination in the efforts of each country to obtain a favorable deal on war debts from Washington. It further proposes to find a common “solution for the disarmament question which will be beneficial and equitable for all the powers concerned”. That is, it advances the idea of a united front of European governments in opposition to the hypocritically pacifist (for the other powers) plans of the Hoover administration. Finally, the official statement announcing the entente expresses the “hope that other governments will join them in adopting their procedure”, an obvious feeler extended to the Germans, considering that this organized cooperation will also preoccupy itself with the “practical preparation of the world economic conference”.
 
The Significance of the New Entente
Just how serious this newest step of the diplomats actually is, can be gathered from the manner in which they proceeded. Immediately after the adjournment of the Lausanne gathering, rumors of a Franco-British accord began to spread. At first, there were vigorous denials by both parties concerned. Things went so far that even the parliamentary bodies of the two powers were not informed of the affair. Only one hour before Parliament was dissolved for the summer period did Sir John Simon, the British Foreign Minister inform the House of Commons of the action taken, so that no debate would be possible. Immediately after Sir John’s announcement, all sorts of “interpretations” came pouring in from Downing Street. In Paris, a similar atmosphere was created.
All these indications point to the conclusion that the European front is being organized against the American ration master. As a confirmation of this conclusion can be considered the fact that the official announcement of the new Franco-British entente followed only after the American Secretary of State had denied any and every sort of participation of the Washington administration in the agreement accomplished at Lausanne. It was really Stimson’s statements that called forth the publication of the treaty.
It is altogether unlikely that the European united front against Yankee capital will reach the point of realization. The conflicts on the continent are too deep-rooted and much too dependent upon national consideration for a solid international front to be established. The American colossus still holds the fate of many of the lesser countries in the balance. An agreement like the present can be prompted merely by temporary necessities. The Lausanne accord still remains tenative to decision by the various national legislative organs. It is only the threat of proletarian uprising, with Germany as the power house, that forces the imperialist robbers to bring their heads together in parley. The German working class has gained nothing by Lausanne. There is not a thought in the minds of the German reaction to release their stranglehold on Germany’s workers. The lease of life which German capitalism has received on the international front will surely instigate an even harder drive than before to push Fascism into power.
The struggle of the German working class against the Fascist menace is a struggle of international significance. The victory of the German working class alone will open the road for a solution of the impasse on the continent by paving the way for a Soviet United States of Europe. Only a Soviet United States of Europe can help the old world to ward off the shackles of Wall Street domination and save it from degeneration into barbarism.
 



The events of the last week have brought about a very noticeable shift in the relationship of forces among the powers involved in the recent struggle centering on the Far Eastern question. The unexpected and rather remarkable resistance put up by the Chinese at Chapei has vexed the Japanese aggressors considerably. And the rather cool reception given the French delegation at Geneva, has not served to encourage Tokio any either. The French imperialists have up to the present been the only ones to play the role of apologists for Nipponese militarism.
The bold stand taken by Tardieu has, if anything, only been of service in the consolidation of Wall Street influence in Europe. Isolated internationally by their strong-headed drive for a sharp solution, the French reactionaries have suffered an internal defeat, through a combination of circumstances, by the downfall of the Laval cabinet. The inevitably more moderate regime that will succeed Laval, will not fail to take into account the desires and demands of the Washington government in continuing, under a new guise, the traditional French struggle for European hegemony. After all, the money bags will remain the determining factor in imperialist politics.
Japan, weakened already by her Far Eastern adventure and losing ground continually in her diplomatic disputes with the West, finds herself entangled in a net of strangling contradictions. On the one hand, the Manchurian expedition and the attack on Shanghai have already proved to be extremely expensive, have sapped her resources like a suction pump. A protracted stay in China can only mean the collapse of her financial structure. Discontent at home is maturing rapidly. Despite the censorship, reports of anti-war demonstrations in Tokio and in other cities have found their way into the press. The economic crisis and the unemployment it brings can only aggravate this situation for the Mikado’s ministers. On the other hand, the Chinese boycott of Japanese goods has already piled up heavy losses for her industries. And it is primarily the breaking of the boycott that Tokio is concerned with at present, after the first flush of victory and the ravenous ambitious accompanying it have dimmed. And even then, it is questionable if the imperialism of the East could repair its losses by merely lifting the boycott, as the situation stands today. At any rate, it may be safely assumed that in the coming weeks, the diplomats at Tokio will be much more “reasonable” in their negotiations with the U.S., Great Britain and the others until new factors intervene.
The temporarily successful defense of Chapei has no doubt raised the morale of the Chinese troops. That the Kuo Min Tang politicians attempt to exploit this situation is only natural. But it is not their intention to make use of it by rallying the masses for a real struggle. For them, it simply constitutes capital in the bid for the support of American financiers. Washington is not at all reluctant to come to the aid of the Chinese bourgeoisie. The centralization of China and its transformation into a stable market for American goods, has always been one of Wall Street’s dreams. Any opportunity to realize this dream will be taken advantage of by United States imperialism.
But the Kuo Min Tang has not yet succeeded in establishing a stable bourgeois power in China. All the experiences of recent years have helped to strengthen the hatred of the masses of the people against the foreign robber powers, America included. They will undoubtedly look upon the Kuo Min Tang’s flirtations with Wall Street, with suspicion. This fact cannot help but increase the opportunities of the Chinese Communists to build up their influence and to take the lead in the struggle, supported by the prestige and the backing of the Soviet Union and the world proletariat. Rumors have been spread about relative to a supposed entente between the Soviet government and the Japanese with regard to the transportation of troops on the Chinese Eastern Railroad. Despite the disgustingly non-revolutionary stand of Litvinoff at Geneva, dealt with elsewhere in this issue, despite the fact that this position at the Disarmament Conference only constitutes another step in the Stalinist degeneration, it is, nevertheless, inconceivable, that there is any truth whatsoever in these rumors. Any such entente could mean only one thing in betrayal of the most elementary duty of a proletarian power – that of intransigent antagonism to the imperialists and their designs against the oppressed colonial masses.
The imperialist powers are busy preparing their households for the coming test of strength. Just how imminent this clash is may be gathered from the parleys going on at Geneva in the antechambers, away from the din of oratorial bombast. These discussions have for their subject the very prosaic matter of restrictions in the use of aircraft bombing on civilians, the distances to be established between battle lines, etc. The utmost watchfulness is required of the international working class. We, too, must be prepared. The tension in Germany, in the face of the March elections, may well give vent to an explosion that will shake Europe. The outcome of the class struggle in Germany will serve as a signal for imperialist action. It is the task of the Communists to lay the ground for a successful counter-action of the proletariat. The first requisite for that is international solidarity. And it is on this point, that the Stalinist leadership in all the parties of the Comintern, and especially in the Soviet Union must be called to order.
 



The imperialists are shuffling their cards once more at Geneva. Despite all the bourgeois press comment to the contrary, it appears, nevertheless, that the French proposals are the real trump. Wall Street statesmanship has always been known for its “pacifistic”, for its “democratic” gestures. At the disarmament conference now in session, it runs true to form. The antipathy of the American delegation to the Tardieu offer is easily understood in this light.
In the general comment on the presentation of France’s delegate, a great deal of attention was devoted to the complications in the problems of “eastern Europe”. And it is not idle talk, as the bourgeois press feigns to believe, to say that the French proposals are directed In the first instance against the Soviet government and against an eventual upheaval of the German workers. One needs only to bear in mind the French applause of the Japanese actions in Northern Manchuria, the various diplomatic plots sponsored and initiated by Paris, to realize this.
It is not at all surprising to find Wall Street and American imperialism opposed to the French plans. An “international police force” under the control of the League of Nations, would inevitably have to act under the hegemony of Gallic imperialism. The French army is the strongest and best equipped military force in capitalist Europe. France is, of late, one of America’s most powerful rivals. Wall Street can have no interest whatsoever in a compact European army under French direction. The same holds true for Great Britain, especially if we consider the recent financial obligations of that government to the United States bankers.
 
Common Action Among Imperialists
However, while we are disinclined to schematically outline a united imperialist front in advance, as the Stalinists do, it does remain important to point out the possibilities of common action among the robber governments in the event of a war against the European working class. While the Americans have not concealed their discomfort and vexation in the face of Tardieu’s proposals, the head of the Washington delegation, Ambassador Gibson, does find it possible to say in its name that it “is perpared to consider any form of military limitation and reduction which promises real progress toward a feeling of international security, protection against surprise”, etc. It is clear that this statement is a reservation on the part of the Hoover regime with regard to the French proposals. And it will be remembered that the United States imperialists once before joined the European vultures in an attack on the U.S.S.R. That was in 1919, although the “Polar Bear” division of Wilson’s troops was sent to Vladivostok without any definite instructions to cooperate with the other Western powers. One could hardly expect less from Hoover than from Wilson.
In liberal bourgeois circles, it is being said rather apathetically, that the current Geneva Conference will be the last before the next war. And, in view of the developments in the Far East and in central Europe it must be admitted that there is a great deal of truth in the contention. The Japanese in the Orient, who can hardly afford the all too costly extension of their Chinese looting expedition, proposed to the other powers the demilitarization of the main Chinese ports, or in other words, a repartitioning of China, The Americans naturally find this Japanese design unacceptable. What they need most is a centralized China, to serve as a reliable market for the inflated American industries. All indications point, however, to some sort of an agreement, between Tokio and Washington, on the one hand, and between Washington and the Quai d’Orsay, on the other.
It is quite indisputable that the most serious danger at present is that of a war against the working class of Germany and against the Soviet Union. As the political crisis develops, the oppressed masses of the Asian continent will look more and more to the European proletariat, for succor. Upon the leadership of the revolutionary European proletariat devolves a role of the foremost historic and world magnitude. To trifle now with a mocking intransigence toward the social democratic workers’ organizations, to heedlessly overestimate the importance of the Red partisan movement in China, to subordinate everything today to the needs of the Five Year Plan alone, means to head for irreparable losses, to drive blindly towards an epoch-making defeat.
The working class of the world must be aroused to the danger facing it. Only international action on its part can save the Soviet Union, can keep the achievements of the heroic struggles of the Russian workers intact and carry them further, beyond the boundaries of the capitalist world to do this, the possibility must be created to speak to the broadest sections of the masses. Every “little” mistake, every obstacle lightly put in the way of reaching the masses, is bound to prove extremely costly not only nationally, but internationally, not only for a year, but for a whole epoch.
 



While Japanese warships are continuing to bombard Shanghai, at the same time hanging martial law over Nanking and laying waste the Chinese Woosung fortresses at the mouth of the Whangpoo River, the imperialist government at Tokio is tenaciously clinging to every inch of ground it has seized since the start of the Manchurian adventure.
The brigand powers of the West have quite naturally become alarmed over the enormous advantages gained by their Eastern rival during the last few months. Under the sanctimonious mask of the Pact of Paris – the United States, of course, leading – four powers drafted a “peace formula” pretending to have the interests of pacifism at heart, but whose sole aim was to create a check to the successful robber activities of the Nipponese competitor.
Was it at all strange that Tokio refused to accept the now famous “Point 5” in the peace formula – “to settle all outstanding controversies between the two nations”? It was, as a matter of fact, to be expected. Japan considers the “outstanding controversy” in Manchuria settled. And Tokio said as much, slyly offering a “satisfactory” apology for the Chamberlin incident, replacing the naval command at Shanghai with the more acceptable Admiral Nomura and deftly withdrawing her troops from the U.S. “Marine Zone”. Interference with her already well established conquests, she will not, however, tolerate.
With the exception of a few ultra-jingoist papers, notably the Hearst press. American “public opinion” is hardly inclined to kindle the war spirit against the imperialism of the East just yet. The present line-up of the powers is hardly a stable one. France, of late one of the instigaters of the Japanese adventure, Great Britain, the traditional ally of Japan, are hardly to be counted on. Their interests are not at one with those of Wall Street. But England does need the aid of American finance for the time being. That explains her role as mediator in the present tension.
A flare-up in the current Far Eastern tangle is not excluded. But the relationship of forces we are witnessing now, will have to go through a rather sharp transformation, before matters come to a head.
In the meantime, the outcome of the class conflict in Germany remains, as before, of decisive importance to all turns of world politics. And it is interesting but sad to note that this determining factor is left altogether out of sight by the official Communist press, which instead, indulges in all sorts of tortuous acrobatics around those poor “growing contradictions”, which they are unable to understand.
The 17th Conference of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union is meeting in Moscow. There was a time when the Communist Party of the Soviet Union justified its leading position in the Communist International by far more than the fact that it possesses state power. That was in the Leninist period, when it was the veritable leader of the world proletariat.
Today, when the flames of social conflagration are spreading from West to East and from East to West, the Stalinized C.P.S.U. has nothing more to offer the international working class at a Conference – than the latest figures on the Five Year Plan. (To which we shall yet come back!) The oppressed and plundered masses of China, the starved and restless proletariat of Germany, are waiting for a word from the Soviets, from the land of light. Stalin has nothing to say to them.
The toilers of the world will not forget this. The workers will begin to demand an accounting. It is to take care of this task that the International Left Opposition under the Leadership of Leon Trotsky is preparing itself.
 



In the February 19–20 issues of the Daily Worker, there finally appears the American edition of the latest Stalin tragicomedy – entitled For Political Decisiveness and Clarity in Our Anti-War Activities (the European title was something like Against Rotten Liberalism, Against Trotskyism – the Vanguard of the Counter-revolutionary Bourgeoisie) a version rendered by one, Sam Don.
The cast has not yet, it appears, been selected. But it should not be difficult to find a few native talents, American Slutskys, and even Yaroslavskys, what with the unemployment raging everywhere and the dramatic industry, we gather, not being excluded. For the present, however, we shall restrict ourselves to the text.
The prologue which constitutes part of the monolog given by Stalin himself at the Sixteenth party congress of the C.P.S.U., still leaves us fairly cold, the accompanying comment reminds us somewhat, by its structure, of the ancient coribantes. It is unclear just what is being driven at until we read (at last) “To disarm and dissipate the revolutionary forces, the bourgeoisie brings into play and makes use of ‘Trotskyism – the vanguard of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie’ (Stalin)”. Being interested to an extent, we wonder: just how does the bourgeoisie do all this? We do not have to wait long for an answer: The Militant, in the pre-conference theses of the American Left Opposition, says that the Soviet Union is not immune from the convulsions of the world crisis!
“What is the class meaning of the above statement?”, soliloquizes our Don. “To carry out the main aim of our class enemies, the armed intervention against the Soviet Union!” Nothing less. Isn’t it clear? Clear as mud.
As a contribution to “political decisiveness and clarity in our anti-war activities”, these profound words probably have no equal. Every worker will grasp this: not the Japanese looters, not the French reactionaries not the gentlemen brigands of Wall Street, but Trotsky and the “Trotskyites” – “the vanguard of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie (Stalin)” – are the war-mongers to be feared by the whole proletariat.
And how does “Trotskyism” – “dissipate and disarm the revolutionary forces”? Simple. By pointing out the Thermidorian danger involved in the theory of socialism in one country – while Stalin and Molotov find a place for Groman and Ossachi and Ramsin in the economic councils of the Soviet State. By pointing concretely to the danger facing the Soviet Union in the event of a Fascist overthrow in Germany – while the Stalinist press chokes itself on unintelligible and confused abstractions, and doesn’t mention the German situation by as much as one word. By analyzing the factors making for revolutionary solutions to the critical situation in the Far East – while the Stalinists lull the masses with the legend of a still to be achieved Soviet China.
But, enough of this. Does Don think he is fooling anybody but himself, when he takes quotations from The Militant out of their context, when he picks on half-sentences and isolated phrases? Is it not a sign of the weakness of his own political position that he finds himself incapable of coping with the complete idea of an opponent? Why should he avoid explaining the lines accompanying the quotation he makes from our thesis, why doesn’t he complete the quotation? That part in our thesis (The Militant, July 25, 1931) reads:
“The Soviet Union, too, which has not and cannot be liberated from the pressure of world economy has also felt the effects of the international crisis, to a far more limited extent than the capitalist countries it is true, but it has been influenced by them, nevertheless. The radical international decline of commodity prices has seriously affected Soviet exports, that is, its growing connection with the world market which becomes an increasingly important factor in the development of its machino-facture.”
Can Don prove that this is not true? Is it an act of dissipating and disarming the revolutionary forces, when on the basis of this fact, as well as on the basis of the fact that “Yet, the successes and advances of the Soviet Union stand out even more prominently in contrast to the universal anarchy and decline of capitalists economy ... the advances toward the socialist ideal are being made clear to ever greater millions throughout the world” (same thesis), the Left Opposition proposes to the American working class the slogan of a demand for long term credits to the Soviet Union? The Dons and the other sycophants of the Stalinist court have only one answer: What we say is against the theory of socialism in one country. And that is quite true. For it is this same theory that prevents our Communist International from utilizing the tremendous opportunities offered by the present situation for revolutionary action. It is this same theory which acts as a paralytic stroke on the entire Communist movement, in the face of impending social convulsions in Germany and the Far East. It was the theory of socialism in one country that was responsible for the opportunist Anglo-Russian Committee and the subsequent betrayal of the British General Strike in 1926, and that is something very hard to forget.
And it is this same theory which makes Stalin and all his little Dons so violently antagonistic to the Communist slogan of a Soviet United States of Europe. All of Europe has been wracked violently by the reparations problem, by the tariff conflicts ever since the war. For the past two years especially, has this problem been in the forefront of continental politics. The capitalist powers have shown themselves incapable of coping with the problem, the American stranglehold on European economy has been tightened, the only result of the efforts of the bourgeois powers has been an advance in the preparations for a common attack against the Soviet Union. But, nevertheless, if we believe the Dons and their master, the slogan for a Soviet United States of Europe is counter-revolutionary. Why? Because “the Union of the Socialist Soviet Republics ... is the central problem of world politics today”, is the very enlightening answer of the Stalinist scrivener. Why? – Because the disorientated Stalinist apparatus, smitten with the dreadful disease of national socialism, fears a social upheaval in Western Europe, lest it should infringe on the Five Year Plan in Russia. But let them beware! Treachery to the cause of the world revolution can only be paid for by an inevitable failure of the Five Year Plan and socialist construction in Soviet Russia, which can be guaranteed by an extension of the proletarian world revolution alone.
Finally, this despicable scribbler, whose masters gave actual aid to Chiang Kai-Shek in the crushing of the Chinese proletariat in 1925–27 by the infamous “bloc of the four classes”, while Trotsky was being shouted down as an ultra-Leftist for demanding the creation of Soviets, dares accuse the closest comrade of Lenin, of being “against a Soviet China”. Cheap slanders cost these people nothing. For concrete analysis, they can very easily substitute a quotation from Stalin; for Communist arguments, they can easily substitute a few of the “great master’s” pet epithets. Just why Trotsky’s slogan of a Constituent Assembly – issued as an immediate demand for the purpose of once more rallying the Chinese masses after their crushing defeat by the Kuo Min Tang (with the direct aid of Stalin-Borodin-Martynov) – is a “counter-revolutionary thesis”, our Don does not bother to explain at all. Nor does he as much as utter a word of explanation as to why the Chinese proletariat, up in arms against the imperialists in 1926, is not to be found leading the struggle against the Japanese plunderers. It is much more comfortable and a great deal less embarrassing to resort to the legend of a “Chinese Soviet Republic” and to exaggerate the strength of the “Chinese Red Army”.
These slimy and excitedly incoherent attacks against “Trotskyism” are part of a renewed and wide-spread campaign by the Stalinist faction against an evil they have a thousand times over again declared dead and buried. It is Stalin’s treacherous answer to our question regarding his attitude towards the White Guard murder plots against the organizer of the Red Army. It is Stalin’s manner of encountering the mounting current of sympathy for the ideas of the Left Opposition everywhere, and especially in the Soviet Union, But he will not succeed. All the tens of thousands and even millions of posters “Against Trotskyism – the vanguard of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie” will not stem the tide of rising revolutionary conviction in the Soviet factories. Great social developments, tremendous opportunities for Communist action are unfolding before the international proletariat. “Trotskyism” – Leninist Bolshevism will live and come into its own once more, despite the desperate and helpless efforts of the Stalinist revisionists. The new wave of the world revolution will sweep away the Statins and all the dungheaps of Dons and. Browders with them.
 



The latest dispatches from Berlin report the long expected announcement of Hitler’s candidacy in the coming presidential elections to be held on March 19. The New York Times of February 24, 1932, in its editorial comment on this subject, chides the German reactionary bruskly for his “tactical mistake”. “By lining up with the venerable president of the Reich”, the Times goes on to say, “he would have added to his dimensions as a responsible statesman without surrendering anything of his prestige as a crusader.” It is quite plain that Wall Street is rather vexed with the developments in German internal policy. Reconciled for some time now with Fascist ascendancy it nevertheless dreads the thought of social convulsions conjured up by the picture of a break with “legalism” by the Nazi leader, to whose popularity with international reaction it has, of late, contributed not a little. In a combustible political atmosphere like the present, what with the rumbling of the cannon still in full swing in the Far East, every abrupt turn in the situation of any of the outstanding European countries is a cause for the greatest anxiety on the part of American capitalism already dizzily spinning in the whirlpool of the world crisis.
But, in Germany itself, it is not only the National Socialists who are orientated for sharp and open class warfare. The entire bourgeoisie is prepared for it, knows that it must come, and lends the most direct aid to the Fascists in their aims. Only a short two weeks ago, Groener, Hindenburg’s Minister of the Reichswehr lifted the ban against National Socialists in the army, an act equivalent to an open offer of military collaboration with the Hitler hordes. A German newspaper, the Spandauer Volksblatt, brings an even more interesting report:
“For weeks, intensive military exercises are being held on the parade grounds of Doeberitz (near Berlin). The participants in these exercises are National Socialists. As many as 3,000 men have been counted at each field day in the course of the last few weeks ... The exercises take place on the property of the Reichswehr. In front of the entrances, soldiers stand on guard. These are entrances bearing signs to the effect that civilians can pass only with the permission of the commander ...”
In addition to all this, there is, of course, the Nazi terror in the proletarian quarters, which goes on unabated, without any interference on the part of the police. On the other hand, all attempts of the working class to take measures against this terror, are put down without much ado, no matter from what section or tendency they arise. In one of his proclamations to the army, the same Groener declares:
“I will never tolerate the preparation of an auxiliary militia, as it has been spoken of in certain Reichs Banner (reformist) circles ... Such organizations lead in the last instance, to workers’ and Soldiers’ Councils and similar revolutionary formations.”
It must be remembered, in passing, that the Reichs Banner is not even as exclusively working class organization by the composition of its membership. But the fact alone that the Reichs Banner does include a great many social democratic workers, makes it insufferable to this minister of the “democratic German Republic”, for which the Scheidemanns and the Eberts saw fit to destroy the flower of the German proletariat in 1919.
While the Fascists are feverishly preparing for their attack behind the scenes, the attention of the entire German nation is occupied by the forthcoming elections. The Fascists have selected Hitler, the Centre and the middle parties Hindenburg, and the Communists Thaelmann for their respective presidential candidates. The social democrats are chiefly concerned with ways and means of making the former Hohenzollern Field Marshall acceptable enough for the workers in their ranks, as the defender of democracy! This despicable aim of the social democrats, which falls in line with their entire tradition of working class betrayals, is one that stands open to successful attack on the part of the German Communism. The social democratic workers are just about nauseated with the shilly-shallying of their leadership, who by their tactic of piece-meal capitulation to the Bruening-Hitler policies have lost nearly everything that still held the workers in their ranks attached to the social democratic party. A very great part of the social democratic electorate will undoubtedly vote for Thaelmann in the elections, regardless of the decisions of their leadership. And this fact is of great importance for the Communists, provided they can link up the extra-parliamentary struggle for the social democratic workers with it.
Unfortunately, the German Communist Party, bound hand and foot by the utterly false tactics of the Stalinist leadership, with its disastrous theories of “social Fascism” and the “united front from below”, has not been able to progress very far in the struggle for the reformist workers in the factories. Despite the enormous increase in the Communist vote during the elections held in the course of the last two years, with the S.P.G. losing ground continually, the situation in the factories still remains well within the hands of the social democracy. 83.6 out of every 100 Works Council seats still go to the reformists, while only 3.4 per cent go to the Communists. Without an advance in the factories, all the gains in the parliamentary election will have no meaning. But in order to push forward in the factories, the German party must give up its false, un-Leninist conception of the united front, cast aside the obstructionist theory of “social Fascism” and reorientate itself along the lines of a broad proletarian struggle against genuine Fascism, as outlined by comrade Trotsky and the Left Opposition, instead of persisting in its ostrich policy which amounts to a surrender to the class enemy without a struggle.
The presidential elections, considered not as a decisive struggle, but as an opportunity to rally the workers and to force the breach between them and their reformist misleaders, offers another great opportunity to the Communist Party of Germany to make up for lost ground.
 



PITTSBURGH. – Friday evening, Nov. 11, the United Front Hunger March Conference of Pittsburgh was held at Walton Hall. According to the report of the credentials committee, 69 delegates representing 22 organizations were present. The report said these organizations were such as the ILD, the IWO and also mumbled something about A.F. of L. locals.
But the names of the organizations were not given. From the faces of those present, it was, however, easy to ascertain that the vast majority were party members or members of organizations directly controlled by the party. Aside from the two delegates of the Communist League (Opposition) we know of only the two delegates of a single Unemployed Citizens Committee (Musteite?) as being non-party workers in attendance there. This is sufficient to characterize the “united front” nature of the conference as well as the new and latest turn toward “genuine united front work” made by the recent Stalinist plenums on a national as well as on an international scale. Characteristic also of the caricature “united front” was the fact that in this heart of the steel industry the “representative of the steel workers” was a frail girl comrade, who herself told us that she comes from – the Hill Section, that well-known citadel of steel production ... She was the delegate of the party’s Steel and Metal Workers Union, the only one to speak in its name at the conference.
 
The Left Opposition Takes the Floor
After two very matter of fact reports, dealing with practical directives rather than with the outline of a political program of action, by comrades Kearns and Myerscough, discussion was opened. The discussion dragged along at a slow tempo for about half an hour, the participants dealing with minor questions, which though important in themselves, were in place at practical committee meetings rather than at a united front conference. It was not until the delegates of the Left Opposition took the floor that the conference became alive mainly due to the anxiety of the party bureaucrats to drown out the Leninist united front proposals of the Opposition.
Comrade Gordon took the floor for the Communist League of America (Opposition) and in the brief time allotted to him greeted the conference in the name of our organization, pledged support to its work and outlined in concise form the Leninist united front policy of the Left Opposition on the unemployment question. After criticizing the official reporter for not drawing the highly important lessons of the Chicago hunger march, explaining the latter and calling for their application in Pittsburgh, the delegate from the League closed with a presentation of the unemployment platform of the Leninist Opposition (immediate relief, supplemented with the demands for unemployed insurance, the six-hour day without reduction in pay, long term credits to the Soviet Union, etc.). He repeated the pledge of loyal cooperation with the conference and its committee, in spite of differences in policy, and took his seat amid vigorous applause from the other delegates.
Immediately, the party fraction started with its organized attack. A certain Menken made himself ridiculous with the charge that the Opposition wanted to cooperate with the treacherous Bill Green and by slinging with some asinine slanders about the local group. A whole string of others followed with the same half-hearted and lame arguments, all of them calculated and discredit the Opposition and all certain to reflect more purely on the stupid and servile character of those who made them, as the everyday struggle continues to prove the correctness of the Leninist position of the League. Finally, the discussion was summed up by Myerscough, who softly side-stepped all the political issues, and, forced to defend himself for forgetting altogether about the great lessons of the Chicago incident resorted to picking up the cheap slanders of those who preceded him. No votes on policy were taken. Resolutions were relegated to the last point in the order of business.
 
29 to 1 – An Insufficient Majority for the Bureaucrats
Against the Leninist Oppositon
Next, the conference preceded to elect an executive committee. Comrade Jim Sifakis, of the Pittsburgh branch of the C.L.A., was nominated among others. Immediately another flurry started among the party members. The committee was supposed to consist of 25 members. 25 were nominated and accepted and a vote was in point. But Sifakis was among the 25 and it was impossible for the bureaucrats to stomach even this lone Left Oppositionist on the conference body. The “leaders” immediately got into a huddle and hit upon this clever maneuver to keep the League out of the committee: There were not enough women workers on the committee! And with this, nominations were once again opened. Once the nominations were re-opened, representatives of the National Student League, the Musteite Citizens Council and any number of other organizations were asked to add their representatives to the committee. And then the fight against the Opposition’s nominee began in earnest. The Stalinist representatives did not shrink from the worst methods of slander, provocation and demagogy in this fight, in which the security of the Stalinist “line” was threatened – on a committee of 30 – by a single Communist League militant! Significant enough.
Comrade Sifakis took the floor to defend his candidacy. Again the Lenin policy of the Left Opposition was brought before the conference, our comrade reminding the delegates, many of whom knew him from the past, of his long record of militancy in the Pittsburgh revolutionary workers movement. The party speakers, under Stalinist influence, were then forced to grasp – as to a last straw – on the word “Opposition” in the official name of our organization, to make a demagogic appeal to the sentiments of the audience, stressing that “Opposition” means – a desire to disrupt.
Comrade Gordon again took the floor, to tear down the veil of demagogy and to bring the discussion once more up to a political plane. He reiterated the Left Opposition’s unemployed platform, stressed again our loyal desire to cooperate in the work of the conference committee, in any case, and called upon the delegates to put the Communist League to the test in actual everyday struggle, to judge it and its policies on that basis.
Myerscough once again summed up the discussion. Forced at first to argue politically, he repeated the Stalinist myth of the “united front from below” as against the Opposition’s Leninist united front policy. Heckled and forced to retreat there, he stopped to an attack upon our Illinois comrades. Interrupted in his slanders there, he finally resorted to sterile demagogy borrowed from the previous Stalinist speakers, revolving around the slander about the word “Opposition”. This closed the discussion and a vote was taken. In spite of all the efforts of the Stalinists, they were able to obtain only some 30 votes against Sifakis, most of the others abstaining and 7 voting for the Left Opposition candidate.
In spite of all these provocations, the Left Opposition was the first to pledge a definite sum in financial support of the Unemployed Conference. The conference then adjourned with a hasty reading of resolutions. Others wanting to propose resolutions were magnanimously invited to bring these to the committee’s headquarters.
The Left Opposition’s action at the conference will not remain without effect on the revolutionary workers of Pittsburgh. An important wedge for the Leninist regeneration of the Communist movement and for the progress of revolutionary labor movement in Pittsburgh has been driven.
 



The Prussian elections of April 24 made the National Socialist Party of Adolf Hitler the strongest party in that German province, which by virtue of the fact that it contains nearly two-thirds of the entire population of Germany and holds within its boundaries the most important industries in the country, represents the key position to the Reich as a whole.
The Fascist victory signifies not only an advance over the last Landtag elections (their success there has been properly described, as phenomenal – a rise from 9 seats to 159), but also a high point in their steady increase of strength as a whole. In the run-off elections for the presidency on April 10, they received some 32 per cent of the total vote. Last Sunday they received 35 per cent of all votes cast.
The Hitler forces are flushed with victory. It is inconceivable that they should not exploit the moral strength of their success for decisive actions. While keeping up the mockery of legalism, Hitler is already warning the government itself against ... illegal actions. How Hitler will proceed with the seizure of power, whether he will be able to establish a coalition with the Catholic center party or whether he will resort to a coup d’état is inconsequential. He is determined upon drastic measures. He is on the threshold of fulfilling the task assigned to him by the needs of the German bourgeoisie – that of throttling the working class of Germany.
 
Wherein Lies the Responsibility of the Social Democrats?
In its editorial on Tuesday, April 26, 1932, the Daily Worker poses the question as to who is responsible for the menacing advance of Fascism. It comes to the conclusion that the social democracy with its theory of the “lesser evil”, with its support of the notorious emergency decrees of the Bruening government, with its deceit and systematic misguidance of the workers, has paved the way for Hitlerism. Is this true? Unquestionably true. No one who claims to be a revolutionist can deny it. But can anything else be expected from the traitors of August 4, 1914, from the henchmen of Noske and Scheidemann? Hasn’t it been an ABC fact for Communists that the social democrats can play no other role than that of selling out the working class? And isn’t it precisely the duty of the Communists to break through the deception and the betrayal of the social democracy in order to rally the working class against Fascism, against the class enemy?
The Stalinist scriveners of the Daily Worker blame the social democrats for Hitler’s forward march. We consider the treacherous preparatory work of the party of Wels and Breitscheid as a matter of fact.
“... a new argument is brought forward”, writes the Daily Worker editorialist, “–– the argument that the Communists are responsible because we do not form a united front with the social democrats. This new position is also supported by the ... Trotsky-Cannon renegades.”
And he goes on to show that Norman Thomas also uses this “new” argument. But he omits one little thing: That we start out on the premise that the social democrats are established betrayers of the working class, on the premise that it is necessary to wrest the millions of workers still under their influence away from them – which can only be done by means of a united front struggle in which the workers themselves can judge – whereas Norman Thomas and the other social democratic lackeys merely utilize the mistakes of the party leadership to achieve the function assigned to them: namely, to lead the workers to the slaughter under the sign of the “lesser evil”. That the social democrats will try to exploit the shortcomings and errors of their Communist opponents is. only natural. But how does this fact in any way excuse these errors and shortcomings? That is something that yet remains to be explained by the Daily Worker.
The proletarian Communists in the ranks of the International will not much longer allow themselves to be confused by the demagogic comparisons the Stalinist leadership makes between the social democrats and the Left Oppositionists. They will call the slanderers to order, they will demand a political answer from them. The events themselves are opening up the eyes of the workers.
They want to know, why – with all the undeniably favorable objective conditions for revolutionary progress, with all the betrayals of the social democrats – their party, the Communist party has not been able to rally the masses for decisive and determined action. They cannot be led around much longer by their noses. The enemy is at the gates.
But what is important now, is not the question whom to blame. The fight has not been lost yet. The thing to do now is to exert every force to make up for lost time. This requires a thorough re-examination of the policies of the German and the International leaderships. This needs an evaluation of the theory that the Fascists in power will rapidly disintegrate. The practical fruits of this theory (which is nothing less than the Stalinist version of the “lesser evil”) are already altogether too abundant and there is a lesson for the Communists to learn from them, from the “red” referendum last year in Prussia and this year in Saxony. The headless competition of the Thaelmann leadership with the nationalist slogans and demagogy of the Fascists must be scrapped. Only in this manner can the road be cleared for an earnest approach to the rest of the working class, to the social democratic rank and file. Instead of the empty epithet “social Fascist” the tactic of the united front must be applied to drive the reformist fakers to self-exposure. This is the road the Communists in Germany must adopt if they are to lead the masses successfully against the impending Fascist onslaught.
 
What Does the Left Opposition Propose?
As a first step in this direction, the Left Opposition of the C.P.G. proposes the convocation of an extra-ordinary part congress to review all these questions. It demands that these questions be discussed on the basis of party democracy, that the worker Communists be allowed to voice their opinions. The harm already done can thus be dispelled rapidly and conclusively.
The capitalist press reports a semi-turn in the German party already. According to a dispatch in the New York Herald-Tribune of April 27, the Communists have decided to fight to the end against any form of Nazi government in Prussia. Furthermore, the dispatch says, the Communists have changed their view that the party leadership no longer regards the social democrats the chief enemy as before, but the Fascists. United action of the Red workers with the trade unions is foretold. There are indications of a change also in the editorial in the Daily Worker quoted above. It is significant that the social democrats are not once referred to as “social Fascists”. If this information proves to be correct a good part of the urgent proposals of the Left Opposition have already broken ground for themselves.
 



Ghandi [1], V. Patel, J. Nehru have been arrested by the Indian authorities. As a protest, the cotton, the bullion, the piece goods, the seed and the stock exchanges in Bombay and other cities have been closed. The boycott against British goods is in full swing. Civil disobedience is the slogan of the nationalist leaders.
On the surface, the above incidents give a fairly comprehensive characterization of the present situation in British India. Strikes of workers are, as yet, not on the order of the day. The Hindu hartal or patriotic strike, still dominates the political scene. For the time being, the nationalist bourgeoisie still holds the reins firmly. The revolutionary masses are still spell-bound by the shrewd and soothing voice of the “Mahatma”. And it cannot be doubted that the personality of Ghandi still represents an enormous factor in the political life along the Ganges.
 
A “Shrewd Mahatma
In a recent interview with Parisian newspapermen, Ghandi expressed the opinion that in the event of “sudden” emancipation, a free India would not very well be able to dispense with a regular standing army. Yes, the Mahatma said this. The newspapermen showered questions on the saintly man and he answered nearly all with saintly patience and. serenity. There was one question, however, which he evaded with the sleekness of an eel. That question was in regard to his attitude toward the Russian revolution. “I am too humble”, the Mahatma replied to this question, “to pretend to omniscience. Consequently I must declare that I do not know what to think of the Russian revolution”. The “Mahatma” did not appear pleased at all by the suggestion of a comparison between the Indian revolution and the Russian.
Would it be too rash to assume on the basis of all this that the great principle of Oriental ethics – non-violence – is in the last analysis, only a cloak for the fear the Hindu bourgeoisie has of the armed masses? Hardly. The Russian bourgeoisie (and the Spanish bourgeoisie in its turn today) shouted at the top of its lungs that its revolution was “bloodless” and covered its fear of the people with less effective, to be sure, but nevertheless just as guarded ideological ceremoniousness. The Russian bourgeoisie was faced with war times that accelerated the march of events and with a resolute and firmly established working class party. Its end came rather swiftly. The course of the Indian bourgeoisie, which kowtows no less to the foreign imperialists, will probably, considering the times and more than that – the geographical situation of the country – be a much lengthier one.
The colonial character, of India makes its revolution dependent to a large extent, upon the attitude, the aid rendered it by the British working class. In the course of events, the attachment between the seasoned proletariat of Great Britain and the youthful proletariat of India, which is historically inevitable, will no doubt develop into the determining influence in that country’s future. For the present, however, both the British as well as the Indian workers are still to be found in the background of the scene. The further progress of the German revolutionary movement in Europe and of the Chinese in the Far East will, sooner or later, serve to set the former two into motion.
 
Signs of Militancy
In the meantime, a few signs of rising militancy are already visible on the periphery of the new movement. At, Srinigar, a crowd estimated at 12,000 persons attacked the police station and liberated three prisoners. Despite the manifold assurances by the nationalist leaders that the masses would abstain from violent action, the British police forces have taken all possible precautions. The viceroy of India, Lord Willingdon, has unleashed a savage system of repression all over the country. Police and soldiery have been armed to the teeth. An ordinance has been issued outlawing all meetings of groups of more than five persons, The gentlemanly Willingdon, quite a hand with a cricket bat himself (the papers say), seems of late to have become an enthusiast of the native “lathi”, applied by his troops with utter abandon to the skulls and bodies of demonstrants in the public squares. The British soldiery have recently been increased to fully 68,000 men, the native to more than 175,000. They are apparently expecting serious trouble.
Just how soon the activity of the masses will rise above the heads of their nationalist leaders, it is hard to tell. The Communist party, young and weak as a result of the Menshevik policies of Stalin-Bucharin in the Far East up to 1927 and due to the entire loss of revolutionary perspective since, is almost without any influence at all. The Garni Kamgar textile workers and the railroad workers of the G.I.P., who have already made Indian history in the past, have not yet been heard from. But they are sure to figure more prominently in the near future. The lathi, after all, does not distinguish between the masses, it strikes and hurts them all. But it is not likely that the workers of India will long be fascinated by whatever it is that “Mahatma” Ghandi is spinning – in his cell or out of it. The workers, once they are started, will act, and act forcefully. For the Communists, the present situation in India represents an excellent opportunity to approach the masses, to build up their cadres and to consolidate their influence and their following for the more decisive struggles to come.

Note by ETOL
1. Following the original print version we use the spelling “Ghandi” rather than the more usual “Gandhi”.
 



Behind the social volcano of present day Germany, there is unfolding a political scene that has many elements of a farce in it. And that is not at all strange. Times of revolution, days pregnant with human convulsions, always show up the ruling classes and political personalities as a whole in all possible and impossible shapes, like a refraction mirror. So it was in the Russia of 1916–1917 with the buffoonery of the Rasputinade and the equally risible counter-play of the liberal bourgeoisie. So in Spain since last April, with the solemn comedy of the “Workers Republic” and the trials of the “responsibles”. In the current uncertain political situation, before the masses have had the opportunity to have their say, we are witnessing a similar scene in the Reich.
 
Hitler and the Weimar Constitution
Hitler is defending the Weimar Constitution, the barge of glory of the “criminals of November 1918”! Answering the appeal of the Weimar Centrist Bruening to agree to an avoidance of popular elections by extending the term of President Von Hindenburg by Reichstag decree, the new defender of Weimar and constitutionalism just bubbles over with indignation:
“The Weimar Constitution,” he says, “is the legal basis of the German Republic. Article I states that Germany is a republic deriving all power from the people (sic). Article XLI states that the President shall be chosen by the entire electorate.
“To substitute the Reichstag’s verdict for the people’s voice would be a manifest contradiction to the Constitution ... Our self-respect alone, Herr Chancellor, obliges us to decline your proposition to agree to the prolongation of President Von Hindenburg’s term of office by a two-thirds majority of the Reichstag.”
Thus spoke Hitler, whose legions are already lying in ambush, ready to throttle the working class – that same “people”. No further bargains with the vacillating parties of the “democratic” bourgeoisie. Tenseness marks the moment. The high praetorians of the German master must put up a front of resoluteness, of intransigence. They know what that soon they will have to strike. And they are not underestimating their enemy.
 
Why Hitler Promises Private Debts Payment
The Austrian adventurer also knows, that in that battle the aid of the foreign powers would be indispensable to him. And that accounts for the other face of the farce: Hitler reassuring the international capitalist that private debts will be paid, while the “greatest German diplomat since Bismarck”, namely the clericalist Chancellor bluntly declares that reparations will not be paid.
The leader of German Fascism is no fool. He realizes very well that a fulfillment of his “traditional” policy would mean isolation for a government of the “Third Reich”. And isolation is just precisely what he fears most, no matter how much the clownish Feders prate about – autarchy. To crush the German proletariat tomorrow, Hitler will not hesitate for one moment, to embrace his “arch-enemy” of today.
And, to be sure, that is just the direction the foreign policy of the Nazis is taking. In the same document addressed to Bruening, the National Socialist chieftain, in taunting his bourgeois opponent, remarks:
“Only when Germany can offer something, will she be given something.”
 
For Attack on the Soviet Union
What Hitler wants to offer the world bourgeoisie, is no secret. He wants to offer it, a defeated and spineless proletariat, a Germany that will take the lead in the inevitable imperialist offensive against the U.S.S.R. That is the devil’s bargain that Fascism is ready to conclude. And that is the basis on which the French, the British and the American robber governments will agree to meet it half way.
A huge slaughter is being prepared for the working class of Germany, for the workers of Soviet Russia. Doubtlessly, the understanding of this immediate danger is growing among the masses of the affected countries. The will to fight is rising. But misfortune of misfortunes: the leadership is not at its post. It is acting the role of the slacker. At a time in which the ground is cut beneath the feet of reformism by the events themselves, the revolutionary leaders, the official Communist party finds itself unable and impotent, fails to rally the resolute and determined masses of proletarian fighters for the unpostponable struggle against the armed and arming class enemy. The Thaelmanns and the Remmeles and all of their sorry ilk dabble in sterile theories, attempt to theorize themselves out of their hard pressed position. The Stalinist incompetents offer nothing, absolutely nothing, to bring the workers into motion. They are much too occupied in covering up their own tracks ...
 
Thaelmann & Co. Prepare for Capitulation
Unfortunately, the shakiness, the spinelessness of the official leadership is also sowing apathy and helplessness into the ranks of the Communist workers. In a series of articles in the New York Evening Post, H.R. Knickerbocker, one of the more reliable and more independent of the bourgeois newspapermen, writes from Berlin:
“I asked a German Communist: What will you do when Hitler comes in?
‘We will try, he answered, to get the social democrats to declare with us a general strike and run Hitler out the way the general strike ran out Kapp in 1919.’
‘But,’ I objected, ‘Kapp took the government by force and the social democrats were clear in their minds that as democrats, they had to defend the democracy. The social democratic government in 1919 itself declared the general strike. Will the social democratic leaders go with the Communists now to declare a general strike if Hitler comes to power legally?’
‘Not much hope’, he admitted.
‘You have 6,000,000 Communist voters. It only took 50,000 Bolsheviks to make the Russian revolution. I know the conditions are entirely different. But why can’t your 6,000,000 oppose Hitler by force?’
‘We haven’t got the guns’, was the sententious reply. ‘The Soviet Union is not ready for a German revolution. We think if Hitler comes in he will run the country down so fast that by next autumn we can take power.’
‘But Hitler will then have all the guns.‘
‘Yes, Hitler will have the guns’ ...”
It is not amiss to bring the above quotation in its full length. For it is a revelation of the real state of mind the criminals of the Stalinist faction with the national-limitedness of their perspective have managed to produce among their rank and file. The bourgeois reporter too, does not fail to see the situation clearly and the questions he asks are certainly appropriate. The workers of Germany are being deserted in their struggle by the usurpers of leadership in the German Communist Party and the Soviet Union. Thaelmann and Company are capitulating under the pretext that the social democracy influence in the working class must first be wiped out. In the meantime, the Nazis are laughing up their sleeves. Weakness, indecision, cowardliness on part of their enemy is just what suits them most. They are preparing to seize all the guns.
 
Fascists Prepared for Struggle
Knickerbocker tells us in the same article that he asked a National Socialist:
“What will you do when you get power?”
“He might have launched a long discussion of the party program”, he says, “but his only reply was: ‘Keep it’.”
The Fascists are not theorizing now. They are preparing for action. And action, decisive and determined, is the only thing that will save the working class. Elsewhere in the present issue of the Militant we are publishing a document of our German sister section. In it, the German Left Opposition (Bolshevik-Leninists) propose a concrete, brief and clear program of action to the Communist Party of Germany. It is worth while studying, Every member of the American party, every conscientious Communist ought to read it carefully and draw his conclusions. Time flies, it is necessary to act. The duty of every revolutionist is clear. Let their voices be heard everywhere. The present course of the Stalinist leadership must be stopped if the working class of the world is to avoid disaster.
 



Outstanding in last week’s news is the diplomatic Incident around the American consul, Culver B. Chamberlin, in Manchuria. Many versions of the story have appeared in the press. There are already “official” Japanese versions and “official” American versions. Developments are not moving with the speed characteristic of such incidents, it is true. The cloud-burst following Sarajevo was much more prompt. But that is not at all sufficient reason to interpret the slowness of procedure in the vulgar and watered manner of the Stalinists, who attribute it solely to the imperialists’ anxiety not to spoil the solid (?) front against the Soviet Union. For the Stalinists, the internal contradictions of imperialism constitute just one more hollow phrase with which to adorn a “thesis” or a manifesto, nothing more.
Every serious observer, every serious revolutionist could not help but see the growing dissatisfaction of the Western capitalist brigands with the Japanese invasion of Manchuria. In a world economic crisis like the present, gripping industry as tightly as it does, every scrap of market is the subject of the greatest avarice and envy for every one of the robber states. All the more so, When it concerns so promising and so valuable a market as China. It would be rank stupidity to assume for even a minute, that the United States, Great Britain and the others would so readily cede such a treasure to the Nipponese. On the contrary, a revolutionist, a disciple of Lenin cannot doubt at all that conflicts of a high order among the imperialist powers are bound to result. The tempo in which these conflicts are sharpened and the forms that they take on are controlled by other factors in the world situation, with which we shall deal further on.
At the present time, the United States State Department appears to restrict itself to the invocation of the Nine Power Treaty and the policy of the “Open Door”, in its struggle against the Japanese. There has been talk of action along these lines for some time. The Chamberlin affair has merely served as the pretext for giving this line of action the necessary impulse. The State Department is calling upon Great Britain and France to support its side of the conflict. It is doubtful, to say the least, whether France would give its aid. Strained relations between the bourgeoisies of the two countries in the past few months confirm us in our doubt. The British are confronted with rising revolutionary activity among the Indian masses and in jockeying for position might be more amenable to American plans, especially due to the temporary decline of American “sympathies” for Indian independence. For the time being, American-Japanese relations are characterized by less active hostility than would normally be expected. Imperialist alignments in days of economic stress like the present are fickle things. But it is only a matter of time tor the lines to be drawn.
The community of interests between the working class of the world and the oppressed colonial peoples of the Orient, is the lesson taught by political necessity. Today, this becomes clearer than ever. The imperialist powers are preparing to strike. While centering our attention on the struggle in Germany, we must not forget the danger threatening from the East. The coordination of the aims of the imperialists will undoubtedly be achieved by devious routes.
 
Clarity on War Danger!
Yes, the Soviet Union is in danger. The capitalist world is desperate. For the present, this danger is most acute on the Western frontier, to be more precise in the menace of Fascism facing the German working class, which is an invaluable ally of the Soviet Union. It is there that the greatest watchfulness is necessary. It is there, that the whole Communist movement is standing a test that will be decisive for the working class and for the oppressed peoples of the entire world for many years to come. But historical development does not proceed along one straight line. Any “incident” is bound to serve as a spark with which to set off the explosive forces inherent in world politics today. That is why all Communists must pay the closest attention to the turns in imperialist policy, that is why they must not underestimate them, distort their importance. The Chamberlin incident and the further progress of Japanese-American relations requires the utmost attention of the workers, not as an incident in itself, but as a factor in the world situation as a whole.
 



As we go to press, the wires are still humming with the latest dispatches of the Japanese seizure of Shanghai. Battles between Nipponese and Chinese troops are in full blast all over Chapei, the native part of the town, and Japanese reenforcements keep on marching toward the scene of the fighting. After 13 hours of fierce skirmishes and air raids, one report says, the occupation is not yet completed. But one thing is certain The crux of the Sino-Japanese conflict is already here.
 
Undeclared Open War
The minions of the Mikado have been steadily proceeding southward for weeks ever since their first easy successes in Manchuria. This time, China proper is the object of the imperialists’ operations. The game of the Japanese has been to lop off one territory after another, while protesting against breaches of the treaty of 1915, while declaring the absolute altruism of their motives. At this rate, the official declaration of war ought to come just about at the time when the Nippon capitalists are ready to sign the peace treaty.
So far, the other imperialist powers have shown extreme restraint and caution in dealing with the hardly delectable demarches of their Oriental competitor. In such a heated atmosphere as the present, even the fact that several American worships have been ordered to Shanghai, appears to be a mild form of indignation. But it would be foolish to think that this has been so because of their good will, or because of pacifist scruples. Nothing is further removed from that.
The reason why the Western powers are refraining from prompt and drastic action to curb their yellow brother-under-the-skin is that, the present world situation is as combustible as a powder magazine. Unemployment driving millions to a choice between extermination and bitter, uncompromising struggle. Germany on the verge of social eruption. Unrest in Poland, class fighting in Spain, turmoil in Austria, Hungary and the other central European states. That is what the capitalist world is faced with today. A “working agreement” for the time being, or at least an “entente” is the most natural thing to expect among the various national master classes. The throttling of a social conflagration and the victorious subjugation of the fortress of the world revolution – Workers’ Russia – is the immediate and common objective of all the powers that be.
 
Anti-Soviet Advances
The Rengo News Agency (Japanese) reports the seizure and operation of the branch line between Harbin and Changchun of the Chinese Eastern Railway by Japanese train troops! Add to this the planned invasion of Jehol valley and Mongolia by the notorious Russian White Guard general, Ataman Semionov, an adventurer definitely known to be in the pay of the Mikado’s government, and you have as arrogant a provocation against the Soviet Union as can possibly be hatched up. The signal for an attack against the light-house of the international proletariat is being given in the East.
The government of the Soviets is watchful and cautious. And in a situation such as this, it must be. But, if we are to believe quotations from Pravda and Isvestia in the capitalist press, the stress is being put altogether and exclusively – for the present, at [least] – on the danger at the Eastern frontier of the U.S.S.R. That danger is hardly to be underestimated. It can and probably will serve as the spark of an [all-]round attack.
But, for a revolutionist with open eyes it cannot help being clear that the real and the main danger is in the West Developments in the Far East generally drag, must drag, because of the physical character of the land, because of the lack and inadequacy of transportation facilities, because of natural difficulties. Should Fascism, however, succeed in crushing the German proletariat, and thereby pave the way for a combined effort of imperialist reaction, this menace would increase at a furious tempo. On the Western frontier, the position is entirely the reverse. A few weeks of successful military operations by the European imperialists would place in their hands the Ukrainian granary and the heart of Soviet industry. Not to speak of depriving the Soviets of the aid of its most powerful and most valuable ally, the European and, more immediately, the German proletariat.
 
Chinese Experiences Not Forgotten
That is what every Communist worker to whom proletarian Russia, to whom the world revolution is dear, must keep in mind. This is what the Russian worker, especially, must keep in mind. And it is precisely for this reason that the policy of passivity and inaction of the Stalinist leadership of the Russian Communist Party and of the Communist International in this situation is criminal and treacherous.
It was these same people, who masque trading as intransigent dortrinaries whose principles do not allow them to force struggle agreements against German Fascism upon the social democrats (the “social Fascists”) – who were responsible for the slaughter of the flower of the Chinese proletariat by Chiang Kai-Shek in 1926–1927. Then – under the banner of the Martynovist bloc of four classes. All the futile and empty shouts of the Stalinist press about the “Chinese Red Army” and the “powerful Chinese Soviet Republic” (Daily Worker, 1-29-1931) cannot cover up the fact that the impotence of the oppressed Chinese masses in the face of the imperialist aggressors today is the retribution for the crime of 1925–1927.
 
All Out On February 4!
The Left Opposition, under the leadership of comrade Trotsky issued its warning then. It is warning the party now. Only an acute turn of policy in the Communist International, only an immediate reorientation toward the old Leninist line of international proletarian action can save Soviet Russia, can prevent the pillage of the downtrodden of China, liberate the working class and the oppressed colonial peoples from the yoke of capitalism and imperialism. Enormous dangers are facing the workers of the world and tremendous possibilities for successful action are opening up for them. Every day, every hour, every minute wasted – can bring unforetold consequences at this stage of developments.
The official party is calling upon all workers to voice their protests against the Japanese invasion of China at the nation-wide demonstrations on February 4. Let all workers, all revolutionists turn out in mass at these demonstrations. Let every Communist bring pressure upon the party leadership to wake it up to the danger in Germany as well as to that in the Far East. Let every sincere revolutionist help the Left Opposition bring back the Communist party, the vanguard of the working class, to the Leninist path, to the path of proletarian victory.
 



The stormy and more or less spontaneous opposition of the representatives in congress of the petty bourgeoisie to the new revenue bill has found a loud echo in the country at large. The House line-up on the revenue bill reveals a pretty thorough-going disruption of the old party lines. Democrats and Republicans of the middle class type joined hands in fighting against a big bourgeoisie coalition of these same parties, whose chief objective at the present is to put over a tax measure – a direct sales tax ranging from 2.25 to 5 percent – to balance the budget at the expense of the lower and middle classes. The official machines of both traditional bourgeois parties united in a defense of the money bags and revealed the absolute uselessness of maintaining their separation. Both showed that they represent one and the same class – the big bourgeoisie. The dispute on the sales tax crystallized a not unexpected and fairly deep rift in the political make-up of present day capitalist America.
The increasing difficulties of balancing the government budget, due to the rapid decline of foreign and domestic trade brought about by the prolonged world crisis, was bound to pose the problem sharply: at whose expense? The official party machines, after shedding a tear over the “financial principles” they had to drop, very quickly came to an agreement not to disturb big business with this problem, since, they argued, that would only cripple its investment power and thereby prolong the crisis. They thereupon came forward with an innovation in American methods of taxation: the sales tax. The whole burden of making up for the budget deficit was in this manner to be shifted to the smaller business men, and indirectly to the consumer as such. It could not help rousing the already impoverished petty bourgeois to action.
In congress itself, the perturbance of the small business men opened up great possibilities for the demagogy of such notorious tribunes of the people as representative La Guardia, who rallied an opposition of Democrats and Republicans against the machine coalition in a sortie on the revenue bill. The La Guardia opposition has already achieved several parliamentary successes. It has managed to muster a majority for two measures to counter the sales tax proposal, passing on a surtax for incomes of over $500,000 ranging up to 65 per cent on Friday, March 18 and on an increase in the estate tax up to a maximum of 45 per cent, applicable to net estates of more than $10,000,000 on Tuesday last. In addition, the opposition has defeated a measure relieving corporations paying taxes to foreign governments of regular taxation. La Guardia is talking radical, speaking of “conscripting wealth”, etc. The parliamentary movement has in addition, received wide-spread support from a great number of petty bourgeois organizations, which, according to one paper, include some 50,000,0000 people.
To get a picture of the petty bourgeois character of this movement, here are a few of the organizations that have rallied behind the congress opposition: The Farm Bureau Federation, the National Grange and Farmers’ Educational and Co-operative Union, the National Consumers’ League, the National Association of Retail Grocers and other retailers’ organizations; the American Federation of Labor, the Railroad Brotherhoods; the People’s Lobby headed by Professor John Dewey, etc. The scope of this movement is not to be underestimated, it signifies the first large scale attempt to give a political form in the America of the present epoch, to the differentiation within the ranks of the bourgeoisie. As was to be expected, the American reformists, the A.F. of L., find a prominent place in this movement of the Left wing of the bourgeois class. La Guardia, by the way, in his statements replying to his big bourgeois opponents, such as the Democratic House leader, leaves the door wide open for the participation of the labor misleaders through a flirtation with some social reforms.
It is an old axiom for Marxist revolutionaries, that the petty bourgeoisie cannot lead an independent political life. It can go only with the big bourgeoisie or with the proletariat – the two chief contenders for power under the present system of society. Where La Guardia and the other leaders of the current movement intend to go is indicated by the former’s answer to Rainey’s – the “Democratic” House leader’s – charge that the actions of the House opposition are a move in the direction of Communism. La Guardia replied that it is precisely in order to serve as a bulwark against Communism that the House opposition is carrying on its policy. There is no doubt that within a relatively short time, this “revolt” too will be harnessed to the cart of capitalism as a whole. With the prolongation of the crisis, the growing misery of the workers and the impoverishment of the middle classes, it is not excluded that the bourgeois regime will seek a new support for itself in a popular movement of petty bourgeois reform such as this. The events around the revenue bill will serve to raise false hopes in the petty oburgeoisie for a way out of its plight. The fading away of these hopes may well give way to despair and political reaction in the form of an American type of Fascist movement. In the meantime, the road is open for activities of a large scope on the part of the petty bourgeois demagogues. Their political transformation, the crystallization of these demagogues into distinct political types is bound to follow in short order.
For the Communists, this differentiation within the ranks of the bourgeoisie, represents a perspective for rapid growth, provided a correct policy is pursued. The half-measures of the petty-bourgeoisie and the reformists, once they are carried out, are bound to show up all their weakness, all their hopelessness, with especial clarity. It is in practice that the masses learn most quickly. By a clear and intransigent propagation of the working class issue out of the capitalist dilemma, by a correct utilization of the conflicts bound to develop in the future within the enemy camp, by pressing the demagogues to the wall, by forcing them to take a definite position, the Communists will be able to consolidate the more decisive sections of the masses and in the first place, the increasing sections of class conscious workers’ around their banner. To hammer out such a policy of revolutionary advance, to prepare the American masses for revolutionary action, it is, however, necessary to clear away all the eclectic confusionism of Stalinist theory and to bring the Communist movement back to the path of Marxism-Leninism.
 



The day’s news hails the acceptance by Japanese imperialism of the armistice proposals made by the League of Nations. That this “peaceful” gesture is merely a continuation of the aggressive policy of the Tokio statesmen along new lines, cannot be mistaken. And it is especially the Wall Street spokesmen at Washington who know this fact and bring their actions in accord with it. A Japanese acceptance of the truce can only take place under conditions favorable to the invaders. Tokio does not conceal these intentions, it is simply putting into play a diplomatic maneuver which it is confident the French reactionaries and a “strong pro-Japanese Tory group in the British cabinet” – actually the backbone of the present conservative government – will support.
It is only natural that the Hoover regime is disgruntled with this state of affairs. One thing is certain: the conclusion of the truce, if it should get as far as that, will hardly mean the end of the Far Eastern episode, but will much rather bring it more closely within the framework of a broad struggle among the world imperialists themselves. The United States, through the mouth of Stimson, in his letter to Senator Borah, has already expressed its determination not to recognize any new transactions, involving China, that will break the boundaries set by previous treaties (The Nine Power Treaty, etc.). The Japanese militarists will not pay any attention to them.
They have already too much at stake. They started out on their Manchurian adventure because they saw an opportunity in the present unstable economic positions of the other powers, to get some badly needed markets for their own hard-pressed industries. In view of the belated arrival on the scene of Japanese capitalism, that was only to be expected. In the meantime, the boycott of its goods in China and the rapidly growing war expenses are further devouring the resources of Nippon’s industries. Already the various organs of the Tokio government – the Privy Council, the cabinet – are very wary to make further levies on the population for the conduct of military operations, especially since the latter have hardly met with the desired success. But it is impossible to conceive of anything like a “peaceful” retreat on their part.
The American gentlemen-brigands, whose aim it has been, ever since the inception of the present crisis, to find a solution for it by a vast extension of its foreign market, specifically in a centralized bourgeois China, look with great concern upon Japanese machinations. More immediately, American industry has already sustained losses in its recently increased exports to China (brought about by the creation of a demand for American products, subsequent to the devastations of last year’s flood) through the siege at Shanghai, which hardly improves the attitude of Washington. The concentration of the United States fleet in the Pacific, and the maneuvers attending it, are especially significant when viewed from this angle, although not in a direct sense.
In China itself, the valiant fight put up by the Nineteenth Route Army in its defense of Chapei has not brought forth the nation-wide response that many expected. In the absence of a resolute and conscious class to lead it, the Kuo Min Tang bourgeoisie has for the moment succeeded only in making a football for the imperialists, of the Chinese nation. The most progressive class in the Chinese masses, the proletariat, suffered a frightful defeat at the hands of its own bourgeoisie during the Chiang Kai-Shek–Borodin–Stalin alliance in 1925–1927. The slaughter of the flower of the Chinese working class by Chiang Kai-Shek and the frightful depression following it could only be counter-acted by a slow and patient regathering of its scattered forces, by a wide-spread struggle for the most elementary rights, as was proposed by comrade Trotsky and the Left Opposition at the time. The failure of the Stalinists in control to realize this Marxian tactic and their persistence in sowing illusions about the Red peasant movement in the rural districts, which was only a faint and belated echo of the immense revolutionary upsurge of the earlier years, is again largely responsible for the impotence of the Chinese working masses in the present situation. Its revolutionary rebirth will most probably come with a new wave of proletarian struggle in the other countries, and not in the last place, within the Japanese empire itself. At present, it is first beginning to recover from its tragic defeat, under very difficult conditions.
The events in the Far East and the sharpening conflicts among the capitalist nations cannot be considered in themselves. They are part and parcel of the entire economic and social development of the epoch we live in. The world crisis has brought the course of this development into bold relief. The anarchy of capitalist production, based on the profit system alone, can only be maintained by a widening of the market for each capitalist nation. But a widening of the market, in so far as the capitalists are concerned, can only mean the acquisition, in an economic sense at least, of foreign territories. The fact that all territories outside of the capitalist world have already been distributed into col- [line of text missing and 2 lines repeated] such new “acquisitions” can only be achieved by sharp struggles among the various imperialists. The conflict between Japan and the United States at the present moment is the most recent illustration of this development. War under our present system can only benefit the imperialists. The workers have no interest in it. While American imperialism is waging a struggle for markets on the one hand, it is making an assault upon the standards of living of its own working class on the other. These two methods represent the two levers of the capitalist solution of the economic crisis, The solution of the working class can only be that of persistent and intransigent struggle against its own bourgeoisie, against its war aims and against its wage-cutting drive.
The capitalist antagonisms, between Japan and the United States, between the United States, France and England, cannot help but lead in their further course, to social convulsions, to revolutionary situations. In the meantime, it is the task of the class conscious workers to prepare themselves, to understand what is going on about them, and to act accordingly.
Alongside with the danger of a war among the imperialists, and not at all in contradiction with it, is the danger of a war against the Soviet Union, against the workers’ fatherland. For, aside from being the outpost of the world revolution, which is most odious to the entire capitalist world, the Soviet Union also represents a potential market for capitalist exploitation, while the first danger is most prominent in the Far East, the second centers around Germany. The prerequisite for a capitalist attack on Workers Russia is the crushing of its most reliable ally, the German working class. And that is why the class conscious worker must pay particular attention to the Fascist menace in that country, the success of which can only mean the destruction of the German proletariat and an immediate attack upon the U.S.S.R.
Sharp solutions of the crisis in the Far East and of the class struggle in Germany are inevitable and close. The first task of the Communists in preparing for the revolutionary situation that will result is to entrench themselves and the influence of Communism among the broad masses of the workers. This can only be done by means of a Leninist united front policy. By patiently explaining to the workers, by sincerely striving for unity in action on the issues of the day, by forcing, their reformist leaders into the struggle so that their true. and treacherous character will become apparent to the workers – this is the way to prepare the ground for effective action in the revolutionary situation to come, this is the Communist road to the masses.
Secondly, it is necessary to educate the American workers to class consciousness by the concrete example of socialist construction in the Soviet Union. This can best be done by linking up the magnificent successes of socialist planning In the U.S.S.R. with the struggle against the misery brought about by capitalist anarchy, by linking up the absolute need for international solidarity in the work going on in the Soviet Union with the fight against unemployment in this country. The Left Opposition for this purpose long ago proposed the slogan of long term credits to Soviet Russia, with which to buy machinery needed for the fulfillment of the five year plan, and which in turn means Soviet contracts for American factories and a considerable measure of relief to thousands of American unemployed workers.
Thirdly, it is necessary to exert all forces to imbue the working class with militant internationalism. To constantly stress that only the international fighting solidarity of the proletariat can once and for all free it from the yoke of capitalism. Concretely, to explain to them every day what it is that binds their interests up with those of the Soviet Union, of the oppressed peoples of the Far East, with the success or failure of revolution in Germany.
The differences that exist on these questions between the Left Opposition and the Stalinists are differences of historic importance, questions of life and death for the revolutionary movement. To fight against the reactionary theory of socialism in one country which cripples that international solidarity without which the workers in America as well as those in Russia are doomed to defeat; to fight against the Centrist policies and tactics of Stalinist Centrism (“united front from below”, “social Fascism”, etc.) which abandon the working masses to the reformist fakers; to unfurl the banner of Marxism-Leninism as the guiding light of the revolutionary vanguard, today; when it is being dragged in the mud – the Left Opposition is ready to undergo all the hardships in the world. The persecutions and slanders of the party bureaucracy cannot for a moment hinder us in our historic struggle, in the struggle for a Leninist party, without which there can be no proletarian victory. Confident of the future, the Left Opposition will patiently continue its course, which is the course of regenerating the Communist movement. It is the hardest and most important task of the moment.
 



Last Sunday’s presidential elections In Germany were breathlessly watched by a world torn by economic crisis and apprehensive of social convulsions. For the bourgeois philistine, for the addict of parliamentary cretinism, the elections constitute a fait accompli, an established fact. Thus, for instance, the American press, in its comment on the results of Sunday’s poll, sees a decisive repulsion of Fascism and a permanent victory for the “inherently conservative character” of the German people. Hitler’s inability to muster a larger vote than Hindenburg to them spells Hitler’s defeat. For the revolutionary, for the Marxist, the elections constitute merely a gauge of social and political developments. It is therefore only natural for us to regard the bourgeois press comment with a grain of skepticism. With them, it is a case of the wish being the father of the thought. The American bourgeoisie fears social unrest, abroad as well as at home, worse than the pest. An advance of Fascism can only mean an outbreak of civil war in Germany. To hush away the chimera of such a civil war, its press prefers to overlook the facts.
To be sure. Hitler only rallied 11,500,000 votes to Hindenburg’s 18,000,000. But when we consider that the Fascist gain amounted to some 5,000,000 votes more than the 6,400,000 they received in the Reichstag elections in 1930, and when we look at this fact objectively, dispassionately, we cannot fail to come to the conclusion that the elections reflected a tremendous and absolutely menacing advance on part of the Fascists. To be sure, it appears that the Fascists have very little resources left for further progress by purely legal means. The percentage of their vote is considerably lower than in the partial elections in 1931. But that only increases the probability of a forceful attempt at the seizure of power by the Hitlerites. The very character of the social composition of the Hitler camp, the fact that it is subject to violent fluctuations in political sentiment makes the thought of a “peaceful” growing into power of the National Socialists improbable. No one knows, this better than Hitler himself. It is only natural to assume that Hitler will act accordingly. The menace of Fascism hangs more heavily over the head of the German working class than ever.
How did the working class forces fare in the elections? The only working class candidate in the field, the candidate of the Communist Party, Ernst Thaelmann, received a total of 4,900,000 out of the 37,000,000 votes cast. All in all, a gain of some 350,000 over the 4,587,000 votes the Communist Party received in 1930. When we compare this gain with the 5,000,000 gain of the Fascists, when we keep in mind the fact that Thaelmann was the only working class candidate in the field – the social democrats renounced a candidacy of their own in favor of the Hohenzollern Field Marshall – and finally when we consider the sharpness of the economic situation, we can only admit that the Communist candidate suffered a disastrous defeat in Sunday’s elections. That is the bare fact. The entire import of this fact must be realized by every Communist fighter, by every sincere revolutionist. The lesson of the election must be brought home to the class conscious workers the conclusions must be drawn from it before it is too late before the decisive blow has been struck.
The election defeat of Thaelmann does not mean a defeat for the working class, a defeat for Communism. That is not decided by election, that is decided in open struggle, in the factories, in the streets. It does mean a debacle for the Stalinist policy of the German party leadership. It should serve as a warning to all serious and devoted worker-Communists in the ranks of the official party. Let us review the facts. The Hindenburg-Bruening-Groener regime has been represented in the eyes of all German workers, the social democratic as well as the Communist workers, as the dictatorship by emergency decree, as the government of increasing misery, of wage-cuts carried out by cabinet order; of the reduction of unemployed insurance to the point of starvation; of the abrogation of the most elementary working class rights; of the introduction of National Socialists into the army. No worker could possibly overlook these facts.
The Social democracy, versed in the ways of working class betrayal, called upon its followers to vote for this regime in the presidential elections, nevertheless. More than that, it was actually able to rally its followers behind this hunger-regime almost to a man. That is astonishing at first, but it must be understood. Why did the social democratic workers vote for Hindenburg? The social democratic misleaders called upon their worker-followers to vote for Hinderburg as the “lesser evil” against Fascism. Did the social democratic workers actually believe that this regime of hunger and starvation for the working class will fight against Fascism? Hardly. Why, then did they nevertheless vote for Hindenburg? They voted for Hindenburg because the situation seemed hopeless to them, because it was the only choice left to them outside of the united front of the working class.
Whose fault is it that the proletarian united front was not established? Can the social democratic leaders be expected to establish the united front. Never. Their entire composition, their character as lackeys of the capitalist class, as agents of the capitalists within the ranks of labor, makes such a step on their part unthinkable. Yet, what all the workers really desired was a fighting united front against the menace that was directly threatening them, against Fascism. Both social democratic and Communist workers had fallen in the slaughter brought about by the Nazis in their punitive expeditions into Brunswick, both reformist and revolutionary workers were victimized in the daily attacks made upon working class meetings, groups and colonies. It was only natural for the workers to feel the necessity of fighting first and foremost against this danger.
The task of creating a united front of active struggle against Fascism could only be carried out by the Communists, by the revolutionary party. It was the duty of the Communists to force the social democratic leaders, already under pressure from their rank and file, into this united front, to put them to the test before their own followers. That was duty clearly devolving upon the revolutionary party from the general situation. What did the Stalinist leadership do instead. It rejected any united front whatsoever with the “social Fascists” and called upon the social democratic workers to join the “Red united front under the leadership of the Communist party”. By the rejection of the Leninist conception of the united front, the Stalinist Central Committee of the German party repelled the reformist workers, left them helpless in the face of the treacherous machinations of their leadership. It was in this manner that the social reformists were able to swing the bulk of the German proletariat behind the candidacy of the Bruening hunger regime.
The result of the German presidential elections is a warning against the nefarious tactic of the German Stalinites. If it is not heeded, the working class of Germany faces disaster. If it is taken into account, the tactic must be changed immediately. More than that, the theory of “social Fascism” which is the source of all these disastrous developments, must be uprooted. It is this theory, which throws all opponents of the revolutionary party into one pot, without distinguishing between them and without exploiting the various conflicts among them; which bears all the earmarks of the Lassallean theory of the “single reactionary mass” condemned and refuted by Marx in his Criticism of the Gotha Program; it is this theory that has left a trail of confusion in the minds of the Communist militants and one of disaster in the development of the class struggle.
The main danger seen clearly by every worker in Germany today is the Fascist danger, is the Hitlerite danger. Every worker regards this question as one of life and death. The Communist party of Germany must realize this fact, if it is not to pursue its road to destruction, if the working class of Germany is to avoid extermination at the hands of Hitler’s butchers.
The tremendous vote rolled up by the Fascists last Sunday, far from being a setback for the Nazi forces, is only a step in their march toward the seizure of power, toward the open attack against the proletariat. The coming weeks and months will no doubt witness more daring and more impudent assaults upon the workers’ organizations by the Fascists than ever before. The workers are bound to feel the Hitlerite cudgel even more sharply than before. Their reactions toward the threat and their feeling for the need of working class unity are going to be much more profound in the future. The tactic of the united front will he on the order of the day more than ever.
 



Leon Trotsky
The History of the Russian Revolution; Volume 1: The Overthrow of Tzarism
Translated by Max Eastman
Published by Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York. – $4.00
With the enforced leisure imposed upon him by the Stalinist faction for the past four years, the organizer of the Red Army, the comrade-in-arms of Lenin, has forged another great weapon for the international working class in its struggle for a higher form of society, for liberation from the capitalist yoke. And that is precisely what his History of the Russian Revolution is. A weapon, a manual of action for the proletarian revolutionists the world over.
If the Russian revolution in itself served to inspire in thousands of proletarian fighters in every country the spirit of Bolshevik Internationalism, then this History of the Russian Revolution, by the scientific analysis of its inner processes, will teach these fighters how to put that spirit into practice.
Without for one moment leaving out of sight the broad historical outlines of the event, Trotsky displays a painstaking devotion to detail, a penetrating preoccupation with the minutest shadings of action, policy and thought such as only a craftsman is capable of. The whole gigantic scene, all of its complicated mechanism, rises before the reader with the whole lucidity of its deep internal logic. Neither the intrigues and counter-intrigues of the reactionary camarillas within the decrepit Romanov monarchy, nor the nuances of policy among the representatives of the big bourgeoisie, nor the squirming and vacillation of the petty bourgeois leaders are left out of account. Each is accorded its proper place and weight In the continuity of the narrative, each is evaluated from the point of view of the tactics of the revolutionary party.
The major place, however, is of course ceded to the chief actor in the immense drama – to the masses. “The most indubitable feature of a revolution is the direct interference of the masses in historic events.” And It is the study of the revolutionary consciousness of the masses in action that makes the book doubly valuable for the Communist militant. Here, the masses are shown marching ahead with determination while their “leaders” turn and twist and attempt to avoid struggle. Here the masses are shown smashing. through the hardened shell of the conservative ideology accumulated by them in the course of peaceful times by bold, revolutionary, everyday activity.
The picture of the masses streaming into the streets in February to proclaim the downfall of the Romanovs, while the “democratic” Miliukovs plead with the doomed dynasty for a “constitutional regime”; the picture of the masses demonstrating openly for the dismissal of Miliukov in April, while Kerensky and Tseretelli and the other conciliators tremble lest the bourgeoisie leave all the power to them; and once again the picture of the masses rallying to the Bolshevik banner against the “offensive” in June, while Kerensky and Tseretelli prepare to outlaw the Bolsheviks as German spies, are only a few of the impressions that will help bring home the lesson of the tremendous historical importance of the masses to those who are dedicated to lead them in the struggles to come.
The masses are not to be trifled with. In the last analysis, it is they who decide, who and what shall prevail. And it is this fact that the Communists, who are needed by the masses just as much as they need them, must understand. “For better or worse, the revolutionary party bases its tactics upon a calculation of the changes of mass consciousness.” Just to talk about the masses and their role, is not enough. It is necessary to understand what is going on in their minds. “However, the processes taking place in the consciousness of the masses are not unrelated and independent ... consciousness is determined by conditions.” To understand these conditions and their reflections In the mind of the people, a revolutionary, Marxist party is needed for “the active orientation of the masses by a method of successive approximations”. Without a Marxist understanding of the character of the Russian revolution, of the relationship of class forces within it, and; of the specific period of time in which it broke out, a successful conclusion was unthinkable. And it was just this understanding that Lenin brought to the Bolshevik party in April 1917, when the Bolshevik leaders, along with the other political chiefs, lagged behind the consciousness of the masses.
Lenin’s rearming of the party is regarded by Trotsky as the most important factor in shaping the course of the revolution. Just as the “Interference of the masses” formed the unmistakable general feature of the revolution, the rearming of the revolutionary party, and the orientation of the masses subsequent to that, lent it its specific, ultimate character. In the chapter, Rearming the Party, the role of the proletarian vanguard and that of the revolutionary leadership as a whole, is expounded with convincing precision. The personality of Lenin, his indispensable value for the progress of the masses to power, is cast in its true light His great historical significance is enhanced by an objective Marxist evaluation. Lenin’s was the power of determining the conditions of the consciousness of the masses and of “actively orientating the masses by a method of successive approximations”. (And it was this power of Lenin’s, combined with the “interference of the masses” of the party itself in the rearm ing of the party (up to then disorientate) by Kamenev, Molotov and Stalin) that brought the Bolsheviks to the fore as the veritable leaders of the revolution.
Of especial value to the theoretical considerations involved in the estimate of the February revolution, is the appendix to the chapter Peculiarities of Russia’s Development. The dangerous practical implications of a schematic conception of the dialectics of economic development are pointed out in all their sharpness. Without a realistic, Marxist view of the specific character of Russia, without applying the Marxist theory of the permanent revolution to it, it is impossible to grasp the logic of the events of 1917. How can the impotence and the amazingly rapid elimination from power oif the Russian bourgeoisie be understood without it? How can the dominating role of the young and numerically weak Russian proletariat be conceived of, from a different point of view? Those who are inclined to consider his characterizations of Kerensky, Miliukov and the other protagonists of the big and the petty bourgeoisie as caused by personal malice only fall to give the slightest attention to Trotsky’s scientifically grounded analysis of the social basis that produced them. Trotsky cannot be held responsible for the ridiculous spectacle of the Kerenskys and Miliukovs any more than he can be held responsible for the precarious position of the Russian bourgeoisie In 1917. That was merely due to the peculiarities of historical development. And the same holds true for the portraits of Stalin, Tseretelli, Kamenev and the others, as well.
The chapter of The Peasantry is particularly significant in so far as it explodes the myth of the Stalinist epigones of an eternal alliance between the proletariat and the peasantry – as though it were created in heaven. It was certainly not Lenin who developed this disastrous theory which has since his death produced such frightful results in China and elsewhere. Lenin’s conception of the alliance with peasantry like Trotsky’s, was based on the temporary relationships of forces within the country. It was precisely the weakness of the bourgeoisie and the immature development of capitalism in Russia, Trotsky points out, that made the peasantry – always incapable of independent action – more amenable to an alliance with the proletariat. The agrarian problem of the Russia of 1917 and the actual attitude of Lenin towards it, are presented with telling proof.
* * * *
The History of the Russian Revolution is a challenge to the bourgeois historians, it is a challenge to the social democrats and the Stalinists as well. Retracing the events step by step, illuminating each step with irrefutable facts and documents, Trotsky builds up the Bolshevik resume of the February revolution, and flings historic truth in the face of all the slanders and distortions to which this great event has been subjected in the past. It once more proves that only the Marxists can afford today to say what is, to speak out the truth. Without feigning historical impartiality, beneath the cloak of which reaction so desperately attempts to spread its deadly poison, Trotsky gives a fearless and objective account of events as they took place. The right to draw his own conclusions from the facts no one can deny him. That is his revolutionary duty. But in order that his conclusions may be most effective for the progress of the revolution, the Marxist knows that he must base them upon reality.
The great work of comrade Trotsky is so packed with action, so closely cemented with documents, so impregnated with powerful revolutionary lessons, that a brief review like the present cannot, by far, even attempt to do it justice: The History of the Russian Revolution is not merely a new publication, it is a creation that will become part of the life of future revolutionary generations. We shall come back to it again from time to time.
 



The past week has marked several aggressive steps of the German bourgeoisie on the foreign front. The pronunciamentos of Von Schleicher with regard to the military plans and ambitions of the Junker government have created quite a stir among the world powers. Nevertheless, the reaction against Von Schleicher’s aggressiveness has not been too sharp. It is being taken generally as an attempt at bargaining by the German monopoly capitalists. The Reich imperialists naturally figure on propping up their military world positions while the situation is most favorable for them.
 
Temporary Neutralization of Social Forces
The temporary neutralization of the social forces in the country – working class versus Fascism – has lent the Junkers a certain balance, which they intend to exploit in their negotiations for concessions from the other governments. To be sure, the main aim of the German bourgeoisie remains the same; in the words of Schleicher – first of all to “settle accounts with the internal Schweinehund” – that is, with their working class enemy.
The capitalist class of Germany knows full well that to settle accounts with its proletariat, it will be immediately dependent upon its basis of mass support: the Nazi movement. And here too, capitalism is trying to force concessions. It is unwilling to give up its political independence entirely to the. Hitler forces. It wants to strike a bargain with them. Hence we witness a situation in which the big bourgeoisie, while denying full government power to the Fascists, nevertheless stoops to some of their most outrageous demands. Thus, for instance, in the case of the five Nazi murderers of the worker Piezcuck, whose death verdict has been commuted to life imprisonment.
 
The Maneuvers of the Hitlerites
The Hitlerites, for their part, are content to wait. They realize that a direct and violent attack at the present time would incur, not only tremendous resistance on the part of the broad working classes in one form or another, but opposition of large sections of ruling finance capital as well. On the other hand, they feel that they have amassed great power and they are disinclined to squander it recklessly. They prefer to hold out in all readiness until the big bourgeoisie sees itself forced to resort to them. And of that they can be quite sure.
In the meantime, the National Socialist are counteracting the attempts of monopoly capital at wringing concessions from them, by parliamentary horse-trades with the Catholic Center. Hitler announces very boldly that he will unite with any other party in votes of non-confidence against the present government and that he will not be stopped by ever so many consecutive dissolutions of the Reichstag. But behind the scenes, negotiations have already been set afoot to receive, government support for the full assumption of power by the Nazis in the provinces of Prussia and Thuringia,.
 
Domestic Actions of Von Papen
The Von Papen government, in addition to its drastic measures in external policy, is also forging ahead with its reactionary program on the domestic front. There are definite rumors abroad of the complete abrogation of the Weimar constitution. The voting age is to be raised to 25 years. An upper-and-lower house system is to be instituted. Vote by ticket based on proportional representation is to be replaced by vote for persons, etc. On the industrial front, “labor service duty” or compulsory labor is to be introduced. All this with the active collaboration of the social democracy and the reformist trade union leaders of the A.D.B.G. (The German General Labor Confederation). The reformist leaders of the “Iron Front” are utilizing the conflict between the Junkers and the Nazis to spread new dangerous illusions among the masses about the possibility of defeating the Fascists with the cooperation of the Von Papen government.
 
New Betrayals of Social Democracy Opportunity for Communists
The new betrayals of the social democracy and the temporary conflict among the bourgeoisie offer the Communists another excellent, opportunity to rally the whole working class of Germany for united action, to prepare the proletariat for the deathblow against capitalism. Will the German Communist Party take advantage of the situation. That depends.
In the first place, the whole Stalinist confusionism of “national and social liberation” must he thrown overboard. Instead of Thaelmann’s dangerously nationalistic “People’s Revolution Against Versailles”, the German Communists must us the military formula of the conscious bourgeoisie – Schleicher’s phrase about “first settling accounts with the internal Schweinehund” – against the capitalist foe. Now, more than ever “the main enemy is in one’s own country.”
Secondly, the German Communists must realize that it is high time to return to the Leninist united front tactic and to give up the bureaucratic ultimatism of the Stalinists.
Thirdly, international solidarity must be aroused in the widest possible forms, the Comintern must be brought into action. The need of the moment is a world congress of the Communist International with the participation of the Leninist Left Opposition.
 



The Reichstag elections of July 31 were a reflection of the unstable and extremely precarious position of the present German state. They resulted in a political stalemate in so far as government power is concerned and definitely proved that no durable solution can be found for the political crisis of the country on the parliamentary plane. No single party, no bloc of parties exists, capable of ruling along the lines of the Weimar constitution.
The Fascists, of course, rose to the crest of their wave, but showed no appreciable increase in their vote over the amount Hitler received in the run-off elections in April. Both votes stand around the 13,000,000 mark. The resources of popular support for Fascism have thereby been drained. National Socialism, the party of Hitler, if it is not to disintegrate piece-meal, if it is to utilize the following it has amassed by vociferous promises, by tall talk about a radical transformation of the economic and social life – has but one way out: The immediate and forcible seizure of power.
 
On the Eve of a Coup d’État
When we remember that the .Hitler movement is in a very specific sense indispensable to the further existence of German capitalism we can draw the necessary conclusion? Germany is standing this very day before a Fascist coup d’état.
The social democracy fared badly, as was to be expected, in last Sunday’s poll. The S.D.P.G. of all parties lost the largest number of votes. This fact is fully consistent with the general decline of this party. Based on a platform of reforms – which have been shorn to shreds from day to day in the past few years; and of kowtowing to bourgeois democracy – which the bourgeoisie itself considers outlived, the social democratic betrayers of the working class cannot be expected to continue very long to hold on to the huge mass following which is growing constantly more dissatisfied with it, ever more auspicious of the reformist leaders.
 
Communist Gains
The Communist party alone made definite gains in the elections, receiving the highest vote yet cast for Communism in Germany – 5,278,094. The small but very significant and heartening parliamentary victory of the C.P.G. is full of lessons, full of indications. According to an International Press Correspondence dispatch to the New York Daily Worker, the largest increase in the Communist vote took place in Berlin and the area around it. It must be remembered that it was specifically in the province of Berlin-Brandenburg that the Communist party leadership recently made offers of united front action to the heads of the local social democracy. The S.D.P. leaders rejected the united front proposals of the Communists and it was in Berlin-Brandenburg that the Communists in this manner began to expose the treacherous, splitting character of the social democracy before the workers. The big increase of the Communist vote in Berlin-Brandenburg is a victory for the application of the Leninist united front policy, hitherto disregard, ed and trampled under foot by the Stalinist leadership of the C.P.G.
 
“The Defeat of the Trotskyists”
When the Daily Worker (August 1, 1932), greeting editorially the election advance of our German brother party, calls it “a defeat ... for the followers of Trotsky ...”, it is lying miserably, it is consciously deceiving the Communist workers. The election advance was, on the contrary, nothing more clearly than a confirmation of the correctness of the line of the International Left Opposition headed by comrade Trotsky. For it was the Left Opposition, which by its tireless propagation of the Leninist united front tactic against Fascism, by its unremitting criticism of the harmfully confusing and stupid theory of “social Fascism”, by its timely evaluation of the political factors involved in the German scene – it was the Left Opposition, we repeat, which more than anything else contributed to the happy change in the course of the Communist Party of Germany, reflected in the united front actions at Berlin. This, at a time when it was slandered for its criticisms as “counter-revolutionary”, when the Stalinists taught everywhere that the social democracy were “social Fascists” and that united fronts cannot be offered to “social Fascists”; when the Stalinists (Remmele-Thaelmann) proclaimed everywhere that Fascism was not really a menace, that the Hitler movement would rapidly fall apart and collapse – But the Left Opposition does not content itself with pointing out the correctness of its policies in the past. Our chief task still lies ahead of us.
The Fascist bands are murdering workers, revolutionists in the streets of Germany. Raids are taking place on the Communist headquarters in town and hamlet. The leading proletarian militants are massacred by Hitler’s Brown Shirt assassins (remember Koenigsberg!). The white terror is in full swing. From his Munich citadel, the German Mussolini is planning the march on Berlin.
The economic crisis tears on unabated. The ranks of the unemployed are still swelling. The productive apparatus of German capitalism is choking in its own vise. Utter subjugation of the wage slaves – that is the slogan of the German bourgeoisie. That is why capitalism in Germany depends for its life on the daggers of Fascism, directed against the German proletariat.
 
Fascist Demands
The Fascists are demanding the suppression of the Communist party already. Von Schleicher, the de facto dictator of the Reich, the man who controls its military, is reaching out a hand to his Fascist friends, to help them into power. Civil war, war against the working class is on already. Fascism in power can and will only legalize it, unfurl it in full and extend it to the borders of the Soviet Union with the aid of the world imperialists.
The Hitlerite coup d’état – the form, whether “legal” or open, is of secondary importance – is the threat of the hour. The establishment of the fighting unity of the German proletariat is a question of do or die. United working class action against Fascism can and must be achieved. The task of achieving it rests upon the shoulders of the German Communist Party alone.
The lesson of Berlin-Brandenburg forebodes success for the Communists in the application of the Leninist united front tactic. The Leninist tactic must be carried out in full. Not partially, not in isolated cases, but all over and everywhere. Not only in Berlin-Brandenburg, but on a national scale. Not once, but at every step and stage. The social democratic betrayers only last week urged “order and discipline” upon their followers, urged them to “concentrate upon the elections”. The elections have solved nothing for the workers and they know it. The influence of social democracy in the German working class has been shaken as never before. For the workers realise that determined class action, militant and forceful, is the demand of the hour.
 



WITH HIS MESSAGE TO CONGRESS, the president proved that he stands second to none in that brand of vituperation against the bankers which is at the same time very popular with the broad middle strata of the American people as well as conveniently inexpensive to the vituperative politicians themselves. Such language, coming as it does from the lips of the chief executive standing at the rostrum of the national legislature, makes the amateur demagogues like the Reverend Father Coughlin look like woeful pikers.
* * * *
Mr. Roosevelt classed the bankers in category (a) among the criminal element of the country. While the menace of the bootleggers and high-jackers, (category b.), he felt, was already being offset by the 21st amendment, “stringent preventive measures” were yet required to take care of the former. Yet! – half a year after the much publicized clean-up of the Senate investigation.
* * * *
An interesting comment on Franklin D.’s latest anti-Wall Street tirade was that of Kingfish Huey Long. The Senator from Louisiana is a fellow knight templar in the same crusade and he ought to be in the know. In reply to a question, Huey remarked: “It was alright ... not very specific”.
* * * *
But Mr. Roosevelt could not very well afford to be specific with “stringent preventive measures.” Such measures to be genuinely effective, would have to strike at the roots of that self-same social and economic system which the president himself represents and defends. Of this system of private property and production for profit – “modern society” as he calls it – the head of the government also had some very sharp critical words to say. Also, nothing specific insofar as a solution is concerned. He would eliminate waste, the “ruthless exploitation of labor”, speculation with other people’s money. He would save “mechanical invention, industrial efficiency, etc.” Public works would take care of the millions of unemployed in a generation or so ...
* * * *
A MORE SPECIFIC indication of how all this is to be done is offered in the example of the wood pulp industry, regarding which a bill is to be introduced in the current session of congress. We quote from the press:
“The plan involves putting all our domestic wood-pulp companies out of business for ten years. Their employees would be taken over by the Government to do reforesting instead of deforesting during that period. The companies themselves would be compensated by payments from the Government equal to their average annual earnings for the past ten years ...
“Then the government would import wood pulp from Russia ... These imports would not be paid for in cash but would be credited instead against the Kerensky or such other pre-Soviet debts as the Soviets choose to recognize ...
“Final step: The government sells its Russian wood pulp at a price sufficient to cover the costs of the plan ...

“Expected results:
“(1) Conservation of natural resources in the grand manner.
“(2) Recognition and part payment of debts everyone thought were dead.
“(3) The wheels of Russian trade speeded up.
“(4) American pulp companies would get more money for doing nothing (thereby joining in a body their various presidents, vice-presidents, etc. – Ed.) than they have earned in the past few years.
“(5) The labor involved to be employed in constructive projects.
“(6) The plan doesn’t cost the Government a penny ...
“(7) American newspapers will get their newsprint cheaper ...” (Evening Post, New York, December 28, 1933.)

* * * *
If the above plan works out, it can then be applied to the debts of the other European countries and provide a solution for all the other industries. “Expected result”: Our economic needs being thus taken care of and permitting our retirement from the respective professions, those of us who cannot like the wood pulp workers go in for horticulture and botany, can – to while away our time – take up ping pong, solitaire or Walter Lippman’s lectures on the New Deal.
* * * *
As for the Russians, they can have their fun running those Five Year Plans of Industrial construction. (Though, from the example of the wood pulp industry, it cannot be precisely told what they would get out of it.) And Stalin and Molotov may go on, for our part, leading the Soviet congresses in cheers for the propagators of such ... “courageous” plans.
* * * *
And the American newspapers – who will “get their newsprint much cheaper” – they can make a go of such a handicap and continue printing such solutions which will always remain, we fear, even much cheaper than the price of newsprint.
 



At the beginning of June, the Social Democratic Party of Germany held its convention at Leipzig. Like the convention of the French socialists meeting simultaneously at Tours, it was a manifestation of the crassest sort of parliamentary cretinism. The actual problems confronting the German proletariat were painfully avoided. All the sessions were occupied in the main with inner party machinations.
The organizational report presents us with a picture of a big reform party, strengthened and consolidated in the years of revolutionary ebb, on the back of the disastrous defeat of the proletarian upsurge in 1923 – and at the cost of the vacillating, adventurist policies of Stalinist centrism. A party one million string, and what is for us even of greater import, proletarian to the extent of 50 percent of its composition. This great, organized proletarian mass is a decisive factor in the German class struggle and one with which the Communists must reckon. During the period of reaction, the defeated, scattered proletariat has been able to slowly collect its forces again, to rebuild its political and trade union organizations. Fatigued by the heavy defeat the working class was open largely to a reformist ideology, to contentment with wresting away mere crumbs from the table of the resuscitated and rehabilitated bourgeoisie. The social democracy took advantage of the situation.
Today the bourgeoisie is once again gripped by a crisis. The “generous” American imperialists who gave it a helping hand in 1924, are themselves in the midst of an economic debacle, the Hoover “moratorium” does not enjoy the support of France, herself facing a growing economic slump, as did the Dawes plan. The German bourgeoisie is on the offensive against the workers. It is trying to hold itself erect by taking it out on the bodies of the proletarians. Social legislation, the puny gains of the workers in long years of patient, tenacious struggle is slashed out of existence under the knife of the ruthless capitalist class. For the workers it is no longer a question of “snatching crumbs”, but of retaining them. And this desperate defensive light is inseparably bound up with the struggle for existence itself. The social democrats by their entire “policy of tolerance” toward the reactionary, anti-working class Bruening government are playing their customary role of ignominious treachery against the workers who follow it. What is this policy based on? Every concession must be made to Bruening so as to avoid the onslaught of fascism! In order to avoid the institution of a formally fascist government, every act that directly prepares and paves the road for a victorious, unresisted fascist overturn is sanctioned. The class consciousness of the workers is lulled to sleep, the rising spirit of class revolt dampened. The Leipzig convention indirectly, but with an overwhelming majority approved this policy of stabbing the working class in the back.
The social democracy itself is slipping down more and more from its shamefully gotten government posts. Bruening is extending the government base to the extreme Right. But the socialists are still cowardly exerting every effort to keep their workers back from open resistance. Bruening cuts and slashes the last vestiges of working class legislation. The socialists are behind him. Bruening instead, uses the budget for the construction of armored cruisers. The socialists give their acquiescence. Now, an entire party convention is devoted to chastising the nine “Left” social democratic deputies who refused to vote for the armored cruiser “B”, because they see the influence of the “party” damaged by this act in the eyes of the workers. And here even “the nine” capitulate.
“The unity of the party must be preserved at all costs”! Unity for what? Unity in the attempt to uphold the crumbling capitalist regime, to act as “physicians to the sick bourgeoisie”, as Tar-[?] now declared in the main report before the convention. “Is the working class prepared for struggle?”, asked one of the delegates. He was answered with a thunderous roar of yes. Then why all this cautiousness? Why all this fear of struggle? Because the proletariat in struggle spells the bankruptcy of the social democracy and the conciliation of the proletarian mass with the Communist vanguard.
The social democratic mass is fermenting with revolt. The working masses are no longer inclined to suffer the abuses of the hostile government. The latest “Emergency Decree” of the Bruening government was met with volleys of stormy protest from every section of the country. The more enlightened bourgeoisie realize its danger. Thus, the Berliner Tageblatt pathetically appeals to the great “stable party of the German citizenry” to cease its policy of tolerating the Bruening government to head off the tempestuous revolt of the masses. But the social democratic lackeys are even more reactionary than these layers of the bourgeoisie, they are determined to go to the last ditch – for their capital[ist masters.]
Already the rebellion within the very ranks of the social democracy itself is deepening. While the convention was in session at Leipzig, the former Reichstag deputy Jacobshagen and numerous local groups of social democrats and social democratic youth declared their adherence to the Communist party. In the galleries of the convention hall at Leipzig, the voice of the social democratic rank and file made itself heard more than once, in the almost unanimous applause for the isolated delegates of the extreme Left, in the cheers at the mention of the Soviet Union, etc. The social democratic workers will not tolerate the treacherous, kowtowing passivity of their leaders much longer. Their last conquests are being wiped out by the government of fascist preparation. Unemployment insurance cut in half. The burden of taxes heaped higher on the workers’ backs. The Schiele Wheat Laws make the cost of living unbearable. Democratic rights are summarily suspended with the full collaboration of the social democratic police commissioners. At Leipzig, the S.P. fell victim to a decree against demonstrations promulgated by their “own” police commissioner, Fleissner. Against all this, the social democratic workers are prepared to fight with the rest of their class, despite and, in due time, even against their ignoble leaders.
The way to unite all workers in common struggle lies in the united front under the leadership of the Communist party. The social democratic workers cannot be won over for united struggle by Thaelmann’s denunciation of their leaders as social fascists, nor by empty appeals to break with Breitscheid, Wels and Co., to join the C.P.G. They can and will be convinced of the correctness of the Communist positions, and lined up for the red front of proletarian victory, by united action against the outrageous decrees of the Bruening government, by united struggle against wage reductions and for economic collaboration with the U.S.S.R. Up to the present the Communist party, hampered by its centrist baggage, has been unable to take full advantage of this promising situation. The sooner the German Communists rid themselves of their confused and vacillating Stalinist leadership, with their slogans of “national liberation” and the “people’s revolution”, with their theories of “social fascism” and their splitting tactics in the trade unions the quicker will the mass of workers still under the influence of the social democracy be liberated from it, the quicker will they become attached to the Communist vanguard, the quicker will the road be cleared of all reformist obstacles for the victorious upsurge of the proletarian revolution.
 



The latest reports arriving from Germany Indicate that the adoption of the Hoover plan has not achieved the task it proclaimed for itself. The internal situation, instead of being relieved has been greatly aggravated. The delay brought about by the negotiations between the Americans and the French has called forth an unprecedented flight of capital from Germany, nearly $500,000,000 leaving the country within the period of the last few weeks. The collapse of the Danat Bank, the financial institution most intimately bound up with the rise of German imperialism and the subsequent bank holiday have brought in their wake something resembling a little earthquake in central European finances. The mark is not being quoted at all on several exchanges. In Belgium, Hungary and other European countries, especially in Central Europe where national banks are also crashing, German currency is not accepted for payment. What the adoption of the Hoover plan did perhaps achieve, is the postponement of the formal and immediate downfall of the Young Plan which would have brought into sharp view a whole series of international entanglements of a catastrophic nature. As matters stand at present, the Bruening government, feeling that for the time being its external hardships are over, is preparing for an intensified campaign on the internal front. The relief brought about by the suspension of reparation payments, has been amply offset by the withdrawal of foreign private credits and by the continued export of capital. The situation in the Reich is even more serious than it was a month ago.
All hope of foreign aid is gone. The government is concentrating every effort towards the exploitation of internal “resources” by extending the already existing emergency decrees. Despite the promises made on the basis of the moratorium, the decree reducing the last crumbs of Unemployed Insurance stands and a whole string of even more outrageous anti-working class political measures are being contemplated, involving all round wage cuts, more indirect taxation and more reduction of social benefits. In view of all these planned steps, the Bruening government has already, within the last few days suspended all Communist publications, according to dispatches, and prohibited all open air meetings. The reactionary Hjalmar Schacht, the former president of the Reichsbank and an avowed representative of the Hugenberg-Hitler National Bloc is being mentioned for the post of extraordinary Finance Commissioner, to be especially created for him. That this means a decisive step toward a dictatorship cannot be disputed. Whether the United States capitalists would consent to the establishment of a German Fascist dictatorship, with all the neo-imperialist German ambitions that it involves and all the unrest that would inevitably follow it on the scale of the entire continent, is another question entirely.
In the meantime, the crisis is tearing on at a high pitch. All the political factions are re-arming feverishly in the contest for state power. While the government is steering to the Right, the population as a whole is moving toward the Left. The fascists are devoid of any stable mass basis, the social democracy, which has followed at the tail of the reactionary Bruening government for the past sixteen months, is regarded with suspicion by broad sections of the working class. The Communists who, according to the admissions of the capitalist press itself, are the only political group with a definite plan of action, are once again, as several times in the past, facing the test: Can they make their program, the program of the proletarian dictatorship that means an end to all imperialist treaties and agreements, that institutes the socialized planning of industry and abolishes crises and unemployment – can they make this program the program of the oppressed and disinherited masses?
 



In the political complex which constitutes the heritage of the World War, Germany has consistently occupied the most valuable position in European capitalism. As a consequence of this, the eyes of the world have always been concentrated on Germany affairs. German conjuncture has played an effective part in the lives of all the capitalist nations. The Dawes plan, the Young plan, the Hague Conferences, the Hoover Moratorium – all involving immediately the fate of this war crippled country – have been milestones in post-war history.
Today we are witnessing in Germany a regime barely short of Fascism, comparable only to the most desperate war-time administration among the bourgeois governments. By official decree, the wages of the workers are cut ten percent, prices are submitted to regulation by a dictator appointed to this office, interest rates are reduced, etc., etc. Needless to say only the wage-cut decree actually remains effective. There is no tool so pliant in carrying out the orders of the Bruening Government as the reformist betrayers in the Trade Unions. The American press generally admits as much and skeptically smiles at the other decrees.
 
How the Bourgeoisie Copes With the Crisis
Police force and war ministry are united in the hands of one of Germany’s “strong-men”, the Hohenzollern General Groener. Street meetings are prohibited. Indoor political meetings can only take place in the presence of an “officer of the Law”. Groener raids Communist headquarters, suspends Communist newspapers, and encourages the “marching Nationalist Youth” of the Hitler forces in their murder expeditions through the proletarian quarters. Freedom of the press is denied not only to Communists but even to the radical bourgeois intelligentsia. Carl von Ossietsky, editor of the radical Weltbuehne and one of his fellow journalists have recently been convicted of “espionage”, for an article published some two years ago! The reactionary supreme court at Leipzig, in the formation of which Fritz Ebert and other Social-democratic worthies played quiet prominent parts, have discovered “literary high-treason”, with which to incarcerate ... novelists and fiction writers sympathetic to the working class. The unemployed army has grown to the five million mark and there is talk of instituting the Nazi propagated “Zwangsarbeit”, a practice similar to that of the chain-gang – so very popular in the South of the United States – as a solution to the unemployed problem.
This is the way the bourgeoisie is attempting to cope with the crisis at present. It is quite well known at this time that it enjoys the loyal support of the social-democratic “opposition” in the Reichstag. The Social-democrats are, namely, “tolerating” the Bruening regime as the “lesser evil” in preference to an openly fascist regime. As a result of this there is a great deal of commotion in the ranks of the social-democracy and its electorate. That the Communists have not been able to benefit by this situation to the full extent, is to be ascribed entirely to the stupid and obdurate tactical mistakes of the leadership, receiving their instructions from the Comintern. The Nazis however have been the greatest profiteers of the general situation, roping ever-greater numbers of supporters among all the declassed elements, by their political mimicry: the golden mean of their compound of nationalism and “socialism”. All the local elections confirm this trend completely.
 
The World Imperialists and German Fascism
American finance and business, heavy investors in Germany since the days of the Dawes Plan – the present state of United States investments in Germany has been under discussion in the bankers’ testimony before the Senate Finance Committee this last week – have in the past been inclined to cast a not altogether favorable eye on Hitler and National Socialism. There are too many sacrifices at stake under a Hitler rule and American Imperialism has always been accustomed to play the hypocritical democrat. But less than two weeks ago we were faced with a veritable Hitler boom in the American press.
How is this to be explained? Quite simply: For weeks there have been strong rumors of a “Socialist-Communist alliance” in Germany, based probably on the many spontaneous and semi-spontaneous united front actions of reformist and revolutionary workers against the fascist terror und no doubt also on the demagogic offer of cooperation made to the Communists by the Social-democratic leader, Breitscheid. That all this happened under the pressure of the rank and file workers is indisputable. One has only to be acquainted with the daily anti-Bolshevik tirades of the Berlin Vorwaerts to realize this. The rising sentiment for united action in the German working class, the threatened crumbling of reformist influence, aroused the American imperialists to a now orientation for a moment. With the apparent dissipation of the rumored possibilities of united working class action, the Hitler boom once more subsided. As long as reformism and social-democracy can prevent militant, united action on the part of the German working class, the American imperialists will withhold complete support of Fascism. In the meantime, however, the Hitler forces are steadily increasing, a continued menace to the very existence of the as yet divided German working class.
Hitler’s Nazi Party has recently made a turn towards “legalism”. That is, they are staking their cards on a “peaceful” entry into the government either by full control or in coalition with Bruening, with the Clerical Party. Hitler is not troubled by any theories or principles. His strength lies in adapting his reactionary motives to the currents in the mass. His penetration into
tho proletarian camp has not met with any degree of success similar to the one he has enjoyed among the declassed bourgeois elements. Hence, the “socialist”, the “revolutionary”, elements in his program have practically been shelved for the time being. Having succeeded in rallying the pauperized petty-bourgeois masses around him, he quite naturally appeals to outside help to throw its weight into the balance. His aggressive tone, so familiar in referring to the French “arch-enemy” has calmed down considerably. He is negotiating, bargaining for a compromise with the foreign imperialists.
In an interview with a New York Times correspondent, Hitler cynically poses the question whether “the world” would not “prefer German universal military service” – that part of the Hitler program hardest to digest for the foreign imperialists – “to a German Red Army”? In England, his emmisary Rosenberg, according to another Times dispatch, openly speaks of “a Germany ... throwing her whole weight for the conquest of territory needed for her colonization in Eastern and Central Europe.” And more bluntly even, he predicts that “southern Russia will be thrown open to German colonists”. All of this, only to show the trend of Nazi “foreign policy”. At one time, it should be remembered, when the Nazis were still very weak and fishing in all waters, they even spoke of an “eastern orientation” against the enemy across the Rhine.
 
Hitlerism: Farce or Menace?
There is a tendency among German radicals as a whole to laugh off the Fascist menace, to regard the whole Hitler movement as pure quackery. Hitlerism is a sort of “German Science”, a witty journalist once remarked. When one considers the Teuton Cult, the fantastic brand of anti-semitism and the other ideological embellishments of Hitlerism, one is inclined to agree in part. But how is it possible to forget the generous funds of German heavy industry backing Hitler, how can the wave of reaction in Great Britain, its strength in France, in Italy, be left out of account? And it is just these factors that ultimately motivate the Hitler policy.
Unfortunately, this light attitude with regard to German Fascism, this confidence in its inevitable corrosion from within has also been shared by the leadership of the Communist Party of Germany and has served to disorientate many workers along the path of fatalism. There is a widespread apathy in the ranks of the proletariat. And this is precisely what accounts for the deadlock between the forces of revolution and reaction in Germany. It is on the basis of such a situation that Bruening is able to remain in power for any length of time.
The official Communist Party, with its utterly false strategy of awaiting the coming into power and the subsequent collapse of Fascism, has become entangled in a net of strangling contradictions – it has attempted to outwit Hitler by imitating his national slogans. “Peoples Revolution”, “National and Social liberation of the German people” have been inscribed on the banner of the German Party. The necessity of casting off all this national-socialist rubbish has been gradually if not quickly enough impressed on the Party by reality itself. The prophet of this reawakening is Thaelmann, the leader of the C.P. He writes in an article in the theoretical organ of the Party, Die Internationale:
“For every Marxist-Leninist, it should be self-evident, that the first requisite of Communist policy is the struggle for the winning over of our own class, of the proletariat. Only after we have won over a proletarian majority for Communism, can we realise the further tasks of attracting the allies of the proletariat in the middle classes to the anti-capitalist front of struggle and thereby create the premises for a popular revolution in the sense of Marx and Lenin. Every attempt to distort these principles, every attempt to deny the preponderance of the struggle for our own class, means a rupture with Marxism, with Leninism”.
 
The Significance of the Thaelmann Article
It must be added here, that this article is heralded in the Communist press as a sort of revelation. Thaelmann is not, of course, speaking in the abstract. He is attacking mistakes in the past, and he is attacking persons, in the quite customary terms of the Stalinist bureaucracy: The General Line was absolutely correct, it was applied in the wrong manner. It is significant, however, that this time not only the fourth and fifth line functionaries are under fire, but even some of the top leaders, as well.
For the time being, anonymously, under the cover of the Party’s organ for the functionaries, the Propagandist. The editors of the Propagandist are accused of considering a social democratic coalition government more anti-working class than an openly Fascist Dictatorship; they are accused of under-estimating Fascism in the manner of the Social-democrats, of lulling the masses to sleep; they are accused of “sectarian fatalism”, etc. It must be stressed “once more that the Propagandist is the Party organ for the functionaries and consequently the mouthpiece of its highest body. Thaelmann, therefore, appears to mean serious business. Whether this is just another factional maneuver on the part of a Stalin henchman or a really sincere move remains to be seen. But the situation does demand an ideological rearming of the German Party, in the first place. Any step that would aid it must be welcomed.
Thaelmann does not as yet, despite the correct restating of the principle of winning over the majority of the proletariat, demand that the tactical mistakes be corrected; that serious efforts toward fruitful united front action with the reformist workers be made. In fact, a Breitscheid is still allowed to take the initiative to such action without the slightest intention of going through with it. It is true that it is hard for the Party to extricate itself from the octopus hold of its rotten past. But if it realizes the seriousness of conditions, then it will not do for it to conceal the same tactical fallacies under the cloak of a correct statement of principle.
The tactic of the working class united front is at the center of the political scene in Germany. It is a question of Communists reaching the masses over the backs of the decrepit social-democracy and all its centrist by-products – like the newly formed Socialist Labor Party – or of a victory for reaction that will not stop at the borders of Soviet Russia. An enormous responsibility rests on the shoulders of the German Communists. Upon their action or inaction depends the fate of the world revolution.
 



The last census figures record more than six million workers out of a job. Considering the usual disparity experienced in the past between the official data and the actual numbers, this means in reality, close to ten million unemployed. 10,000,000 workers without jobs. With their families, additional millions are condemned to a starvation diet. Meanwhile, industry still remains clogged up, the crisis keeps on swelling, drawing more and more branches of production into the jam, and no outlet is in sight. Another capitalist country, only recently said to be going through a period of “belated capitalist bloom” – France – has entered the ban of the world wide depression. There too, the unemployment figures are mounting, misery and discontent are growing. The world market “has shrunk.”
One country alone shows signs of bustling economic life. That is the Soviet Union. While capitalism is on the down slide, while capitalist anarchy once more, and to a far more serious degree than ever the fore, upsets the already shaky balance of the existing social conditions, planned, socialized industry in Soviet Russia advances by leaps and bounds, pointing out the inevitable road that world economy must take in the future.
On the one side, we have world unemployment, an expression of the failure of the capitalist system. On the other, we have the Five Year Plan, an example of successful socialist construction.
In the capitalist United States, the last census figures tell us that new millions of workers have been thrown out of industry. In Soviet Russia the latest statistics show that nearly a million new workers have been introduced into industry, in the course of the execution of the Five Year Plan. The second year shows that the plan has been far surpassed in the oil output, and has registered enormous rises in steel, machinery and electro-technical production. The collectivization of agriculture, which, according to the figure given, has reached 50 per cent in the grain area, has enabled the Soviet Union to export threefold the amount of grain exported in pre-war years. The seven hour day has been established for 43.5 per cent of the total number of workers and the average wage has been increased by 12.1 per cent for the period of the first two years of the plan. All in all, an especially pointed proof of the superiority of the socialist system of production over the capitalist methods, particularly offset by the depression and decline of world economy.
These indisputable successes stand firm. The Five Year Plan has confirmed the expediency of socialist production and has guaranteed successes for the future. But the Five Year Plan cannot be carried out without the aid of the outside world. The backwardness of Russian industry cannot altogether be wiped out. Finished products (shoes, clothing, etc.) are needed to raise the living standards of the workers, to replenish the energy, the material resources of the Russian workers who have spared no sacrifice in their enthusiastic execution of the plan. Light machinery must be imported in large quantities to supply these needs.
The basic product of Soviet export is grain. The collectivization of agriculture, based on high class technique, can bolster up the grain export immensely and thus greatly increase the purchasing power of the Soviets with which industrialization, planned economy would receive new, more stupendous impulses. For this purpose too, large imports of agricultural machinery are required.
At present, the capitalist governments, despite the deep-going depression that is undermining them, are unwilling to facilitate these imports to the Soviet Union, which would give work to thousands upon thousands of workers in their own countries. They prefer to divert the workers’ discontent away from the real causes by fairy tales of “Soviet dumping.” They want to force the workers’ state to retreat from its hard-earned socialist positions. They fear the great sweep that the Five Year Plan gives to international revolutionary action.
Soviet Russia, despite its great achievements, is not an isolated, self-sufficient economic unity. It is bound up by the threads of world economy and must act as part of it, utilizing its strengthened positions as a weapon of the world revolution. The Soviet Union needs the aid of world economy for the success of the Five Year Plan. The capitalists are reluctant to grant this aid. The workers of the capitalist countries are out of work in large numbers. Soviet orders from their countries means work for thousands of them. The workers are the ones that must fight for long term credit grants to enable the Soviets to buy machinery with which to assure the success of the Five Year Plan.
Soviet orders to the United States, even under the limited credit possibilities of the present, have already given work to thousands of American workers, who would otherwise have been thrown into the gutter. “Had it not been for these Russian orders [for machine tools]” writes the Cleveland Plain Dealer, “many Cleveland factories would have faced a shutdown when automobile orders temporarily stopped.” “Employment for several hundred additional men will be furnished ... in filling a contract ... to recondition thirteen steamers recently acquired by the Soviet government from the U.S. Shipping Board.” The last, an item from the Boston Herald.
Tractor factories, automobile plants, transportation enterprises and all sorts of industrial undertakings have been kept going by Soviet orders. A group of American business men is even now negotiating with the U.S. government for credits to the Soviet Union. Their leader, Col. Cooper, the engineer of the Dnieprostroy Power Station in Russia, stated in a speech before the American-Russian Chamber of Commerce recently, that “It requires but a small amount of study from my point of view to visualize the not far distant time when we can be exporting to Russia at least one billion dollars per annum”.
And he gave quite Substantial reasons to back up his contention. Yet, even if his estimate were a bit optimistic, there cannot be any doubt that the possibilities for Soviet purchases here would offer serious relief to large sections of the unemployed here in the states.
What then is the task of the Communists under these conditions. The task of the Communists is to link up closely this demand for the extension of long term credits to the Soviet Union with their general struggle for unemployment relief. To concretize before the workers the possibilities that these long term credits offer for their immediate relief, in the shape of filling orders required by the Five Year Plan. To make clear to them on this opportune occasion the superiority of the socialist system. And to mold on this basis their international class solidarity with the workers of the Soviet Union. In this popular and concrete manner of revolutionary propaganda, supported by facts and by a clear Marxist principle position that recognizes the international character of the working class movement at all times, unheard of progress can be made in the way of developing the class consciousness of the American workers and advancing the class struggle in the United States as well as in every other capitalist country.
But what is the official party leadership doing in this direction? Absolutely nothing. The aid that the Five Year Plan can be in relieving unemployment in the capitalist countries, finds no explanation, no place in the propaganda of the party around the unemployment problem. Why? Because such propaganda is in direct contradiction to the Stalinist theory of the building up of socialism in one country, which rejects the close international bonds between the construction of socialism in Russia and the class struggle in the rest of the world. Instead of asking the aid of the proletariat of the West to obtain credits for Soviet industry, Stalin deals with the capitalists behind the backs of the workers under the shameful un-Marxist and anti-revolutionary banner of “the peaceful cohabitation of capitalism and Communism.” The workers of Europe and America are not drawn into the concrete every day struggle of the heroic workers of Soviet Russia. The tasks of the Communists in the capitalist countries are considered isolated and apart from the tasks in Russia – if they are not held to be altogether insignificant. International revolutionary action is precluded by the narrow un-Leninist policy of national socialism. The Stalinist leadership in the U.S.S.R. and in the Comintern looks upon the international proletariat not as upon the indispensable allies in the struggle for the construction of socialism as part of the world revolution, but rather as upon admiring spectators who will some day, somehow be moved to emulate the example of Soviet Russia.
What happens under such circumstances? A recent event in Germany serves as a good illustration. A group of German capitalists, after a visit to the Soviet Union decided to grant the latter credits to the extent of $250,000,000. Immediately, the Berlin Rote Fahne, the central organ of the German Communist party, follows this with a headline “Five Year Plan Gives Work To Tens of Thousands of German Workers”. What part was played in this matter by the German Communists? Absolutely none. That is not at all. The credit grant has come up before the Reichstag for ratification. The reactionary Brüning government, supported by the yellow social democracy, refuses to guarantee the credits in sum, but proposes on the contrary to take up each case of credit extension seriatim: a process that delays the shipment of machinery absolutely necessary to meet the requirements of the Five Year Plan. But in all this, the Communist party is caught off guard. Opportunities come and go without being utilized, without being exploited to revolutionary advantage.
The Five Year Plan, executed without an international revolutionary perspective and in the well known bureaucratic manner of the Stalinist adventurers, has been considerably endangered in the past. The “one-hundred-percent collectivization” policy weakened it greatly on the peasant front. The irresponsible excesses on the industrial front, carried out in the name of “the Five Year Plan in three years”, inflicted considerable damage in the way of bringing about a definite and dangerous lagging behind the program, which the Pravda recently points out under the title: “Alarm Signals”. There is a great shortage in finished goods. The material conditions of the workers are not keeping pace with the rapid strides in industry. The Five Year Plan needs help. Already the Centrist bureaucracy under Stalin is preparing to capitulate before the difficulties by a Right wing turn in the direction of a “Neo-Nep”. All Communists must be on guard against the return to the opportunist swamp and fight against it.
The slogan of long term credits to the Soviet Union must penetrate the broadest layers of workers and unemployed in the formation of a solid united front of struggle. The fight around the slogan of long-term credits to the Soviets is a fight that eventually results in mutual benefits to the workers of both the United States and Russia. It cements the bonds of working class solidarity on an international scale, based on the actual needs of the moment. The slogan of long term credits to aid the execution of the Five Year Plan unites the workers of America and of Europe with the workers of Russia in a combined struggle against capitalism and for the victory of world socialism. It is the duty of the Communists to carry it deep into the masses.
 



The American working-class faces the year 1931 with heavy losses behind it and with long, hard and militant struggles in front of it, If it is to resist successfully the savage onslaught against it in the future. In one of the country’s foremost bourgeois economic reviews, we read:
“We estimate that the current rate of annual income of all workers, exclusive of those in agriculture and Federal employ, is approximately 35 billion dollars, as compared with a peak rate in 1929 of about 44.6 billion. This represents a decline of 9.6 billion, or 21.5 per cent. The most severe reductions have occurred in the building and metal trades. In manufacturing industries, unusually severe declines have been registered in most branches of textiles and iron and steel, and in lumber, leather, brick and tile, glass, brass and bronze, automobiles, agricultural implements, electrical equipment, pianos and organs, rubber products and automobile tires.”
 
The Decline in Workers’ Income
This decline in the workers’ income is hardly transitional. As was pointed out in the last issue of the Militant, it is the expression of a definite trend in boss class strategy and has only reached the first stages of development. With the fall in the purchasing power of the masses, the economic crisis continues to deepen. According to the bourgeois statisticians, business has dropped about 30 percent “’below normal.” Despite all of Hoover’s optimism, despite the promises of the politicians and the mockery of the “buy now” campaigns, sales have descended to new lows, regardless of the continuous downward curve of commodity prices.
An extremely interesting computation has been made by Dr. Lewis H. Haney of the N.Y.U. Bureau of Business Research (see the statistical table printed below):



 


 


Nov.
1930


 


Oct.
1930


 


Nov.
1929


 


Oct.
1929


 


High
1929


 


Low
1927




Manuf. Products


83.0


  86.0


105.0


117.0


128.0


  99.0




Employment


76.9


  79.0


  95.5


  98.8


101.0


  93.2




Automobile Prod.


61.0


  51.0


  98.6


130.2


175.0


  61.2




Machine Tool Orders


49.0


  71.1


145.2


254.2


305.9


103.4




Sales, Finished Steel


60.3


  73.5


  82.4


127.0


169.9


  92.9




Unfilled Orders


—


  70.9


  88.4


  86.7


  97.7


  75.2




Stocks Manuf. Goods


—


123.1


118.9


119.0


113.8


116.6




Wholesale Sales


77.0


  85.0


  98.0


102.0


103.0


  92.0




Dept. Store Sales


98.0


102.0


108.0


112.0


114.0


104.0




Payrolls


73.9


  77.5


102.9


109.1


112.5


  99.2




Composite


72.4


  78.1


104.5


131.3


151.2


  93.1



Highly significant are not only the composite figures, which are comprehensive enough, but also those for machine tool orders, which Dr. Haney terms “barometric”. The difference there is one of more than 95 points between November 1929 and November 1930, with 1926 as “normal” or 100. To predict a quick recovery on the basis of these figures is beyond all reason. Even the rise in automobile production is characterized as “of doubtful significance ... In our opinion, consumer purchasing power [payrolls, Ed.] has been so reduced that automobile producers must remain close-reefed during the first half of 1931.” This abysmally low ebb of production in the basic industries, combined with the perpetual, cancerous agrarian crisis has had similarly disastrous reverberations on the stock market. The World Almanac for 1921 tells us that:
 
The Bank Failures
“Total listings [on the Stock Exchange] increased nearly one-third at 1,296,845,244 shares, had a market value of $55,025,710,617 or an average of $42.43 per share, on November 1, 1930 as compared with $87,073,680,423 or $63.06 per share, for 1,048,359,362 shares on October 1, 1929.” While the number of shares has risen by about 250,000,000, their value as a whole has fallen by close to $33,000,000,000 within the last year or to nearly one half their value per share. “In banking, outstanding credit has been reduced by $5,000,000,000 ... Fully $16,000,000,000 to $18,000,000,000 of our member bank funds continue tied up in loans on securities and in investments.” With the results that: Failures of banks in the U.S. in 1930 were more than double in number and more than four times greater in liabilities than in 1929.” With “the number of failures as 934 and the liabilities as $908,157,788 compared with 437 involving $218,796,562 in 1929.” (Report by R.G. Dun and Co.)
The failure of the Bank of the U.S. at the end of the year was by no means a culminating point in the process. On the contrary, it was simply proof that the bigger banks would not escape the ravages of the crisis and that the future will further undermine their solvency. A Washington dispatch to the New York Times of January 8, states:
“The daily average volume of Federal Reserve credit outstanding during the week ending Jan. 7, as reported by the Federal Reserve banks, was 11,355,000,000, a decrease of $44,000,000 compared with the preceding week and of $220,000,000 compared with the corresponding week in 1930.”
The shrinkage of credits extended by the Federal Reserve Board, coupled with the tie-up in funds – in loans on securities and in investments – involves a whole series of new bank crashes very shortly, and all the attempts of the government to execute mergers, to intensify control, to force through a system of separate “thrift accounts” and restrict loans, as well as all other preventive measures of a similar nature, are bound to hit against the wall of inner contradictions of the profit system, especially aggravated by the crisis.
It is the duty of the Communists to point out these developments and their consequences, as well as to propagate them. To compete with bourgeois demagogues in organizing the petty-bourgeois bank depositors for the “struggle” around their bank books and grocery stores, by inflaming all their petty and futile property-instincts – as is being done so disgracefully by the official Communist party leadership – is to make a caricature of revolutionary tasks, and to compromise Communism in the eyes of the class-conscious workers. The task of Communists in respect to the small bourgeoisie, is to explain and convince them of the absolute inevitability of the collapse of capitalism. Politically, to neutralize and detach them from the bourgeoisie. As to the workers who are hit by these events, their struggle bears a very distinct class character but the tasks before them are concentrated on an entirely different front.
To think that the capitalist system has already reached the precipice, however, is utter self-deception. The flight of American capital to foreign enterprises, the opening up of the Chinese market by a stabilization of the silver standard in the Orient (in which American capitalists are taking the initiative), further rationalization at home and above all the extension of layoffs and wage-cuts, these are the ways by which stricken capitalist economy is attempting a solution. The degree of their success or failure depends in very great part, upon the militancy of the American workers.
The official organ of the labor skates, who only last year sang eulogies of the bosses and their “rugged American individualism” (for workers only) concluding class truces with them and lulling labor into inaction, reports “with alarm”:
“Figures for dividend payments of all corporations for 11 months of 1930 were above 1929 by $346,600,000 – 11 percent ... Adding interests payment to dividends, the figures are $7,287,600 for 11 months in 1930 against $6,882,300,000 for the same period in 1929, an increase of $405,300,300. Standard Statistics estimates the decreased in wage payments in all industries this year has been $8,800 million.” (American Federationist, January 1931.
But are the bureaucrats of the A.F. of L. thinking of struggle even now? Hardly. They merely ask, in the voice of the timid, boot-licking lackeys that they are, “whether the profits of the recent prosperity have been wisely spent.” They whiningly plead that pittances granted to the workers from these profits “would be a sustaining force not only to business but to the social standards [sic!] of our whole nation.”
While the labor fakers strive to keep down the proletariat by their zealous services to the bosses, the task of the Communists is to expose them and to rally the workers for struggle by a broad united front on a basis of immediate demands such as the thirty-hour week without wage-cuts, recognition and credits to the Soviet Union, social insurance paid by the bosses and their government. The organization of real mass unemployment councils on an industrial basis, uniting the workers and the jobless must be carried out without the methods of mechanical control which only serve to abort them. The main danger to the revolutionary movement lies in a relapse into opportunism, so illuminatingly revealed by the recent election and petition campaigns of the Stalinists, who today pretend to advance the Communist party. A broad united front led by the Communists must unfold the defensive of the workers and train them in collective struggle for class solidarity and the successful offensive.
 



As the present world crisis grows in scope and intensity, gripping one industry after another furrowing its way to the very core of the complex capitalist structure, a good deal of ideological hardware undergoes a process of rapid corrosion. Not so long ago, “American” rationalization, “scientific management” and the “technical revolution” were the inspiration of the entire capitalist world. This wave of enthusiasm undulated from the desperate Right wing of the bourgeoisie, the Fascists to its most servile Left, the Social Democrats, who pointed to America as the “workers’ paradise”.
Today when the super-capitalist Arcadia has blown up, with millions of workers pounding the pavements with an unprecedented tie-up in trade and an overloading of warehouses while countless families go unfed, unclothed and unprovided for – a different song is being sung. Capitalist spokesmen today speak with alarm of “technological unemployment”, ask themselves “whether technical and managerial improvements do not cause unemployment after all,” etc. A few simple figures tell the story:



 
Year


 


Vol. of Indus.
Produc. Index


 


Vol. of Fact.
Emp. Index.




1923


101


104.2




1924


  95


  96.2




1925


104


  99.6




1926


108


101.4




1927


106


  98.8




1928


111


  97.2




1929


118


101.8



In the six years between 1923 and 1929 the index of production rose 17 points, the index of employment, at the same time fell 2.4 points! So striking is the contrast, so telling the consequences that even among the capitalists large number are seized with panic. Senator Wagner, for instance, quoting these figures before the Senate, concludes:
“Into every home that the problem of unemployment has entered it has brought with it a doubt as to the validity of an economic system which permits such catastrophes to happen. It is as yet only a doubt, but if we do not take the action that seems obvious and essential that doubt will mature into an adverse conviction.”
Discounting the interplay of politics directed against the Hoover administration, the fear expressed and the concern with the problem of “technological unemployment” remains genuine nevertheless, and are doubtlessly shared by the capitalist class as a whole. What the Senator does not make clear is how the bosses intend to find an issue out of the straits imposed upon them by this crisis. Theoretically the bosses’ plan of action has been voiced very clearly by one of the most prominent representatives of German capital, Dr. Friedrich Lemmer, in the Deutsche Wirtschaftzeitung of last February.
 
The Theory of Capitalist Offensive
“Rationalization” wrote Dr. Lemmer, “means substitution of labor costs ... Since the productive apparatus is today overdeveloped ... further progress in rationalization ... is unthinkable.” Invoking the “law of diminishing utility” he concludes that “rationalization becomes ever less and less profitable”, and urges as an antidote to the ills of rationalization – a wage cutting drive all along the line.
This is the basic strategy of the bosses in the present crisis: to utilize the division of forces and the demoralization brought into the working class by unemployment in order to shift further the burden from their own shoulders by slashing the wages of the workers still in industry. This is their plan in Germany, this is their plan here and everywhere. In Germany the wage cutting campaign has already assumed huge proportions in the recent past. The strikes in Mansfeld, in the Northwest the recent Berlin metal workers’ strike, were all part of the weak resistance organized by the treacherous reformists, which the campaign has swept aside.
In the United States, despite the fake industrial conference called by Hoover last year, despite the promises made by the bosses to “retain the high living standards of the workers” the wage cut drive, though still cloaked, has already made terrific inroads. Only Green and the high priests of the A.F. of L. have kept their part of the bargain, by doing their best to obstruct and prevent anything resembling a struggle on the part of the workers.
The Department of Labor announces alongside with a 2.5 percent drop in employment a 5.1 percent slump in payroll totals, or a 2.6 percent wage reduction for the month of November alone. “Per capita earnings in manufacturing industries,” the report reads, “in November 1930 were 3.5 percent lower than in October.” Still more serious are the general index figures for the entire year of November 1929 to November 1930:



 


Employment


 


Pay-totals




Nov. 1929


94.8


95.1




Nov. 1930


76.5


68.5



While employment fell 18.3 points payroll totals dropped fully 26.8 points. A discrepancy which indicates the cut that the bosses have already made into the living standards of the American workers, and which reveals the seriousness that this trend will assume in the future.
Against this careful and well-planned offensive of the bourgeoisie only a solid and compact united front of the workers and jobless can be effective. Every step, in order to strike back must be organized on the broadest possible scale. If ever the slogans of the class struggle could be brought home to the American proletariat it is now.
But this cannot be accomplished by simply expecting the workers to rush to the revolutionary banner under the threat of being denounced as fascists or social-fascists but by going to the workers, by entering every mass organization in which they are to be found, by fighting for their support, by pointing out the way to them constantly and persistently. The only way to encounter the bosses’ offensive now is by organizing the fighting defensive of the workers.
 



Every day brings new indications of well prepared attacks against the working class by the leaders of American capital, by the so-called “captains of industry”, if attention is given to the development of this campaign of attacks, the line of boss strategy, will become as clear as daylight before all workers, and the organization of their defensive struggle will thereby become more effective and strike its mark.
The burning need of the hour, in the face of the torrentous onslaught of the old, experienced and crafty bourgeoisie, is the hermetic unity of the working class, which has yet to be achieved. Equally important is the ever watchful alertness of the party of the class, of the Communists, in directing the forces of the defensive.
 
Double Responsibility
Incomprehension of the perspectives facing the working class, a false analysis of the situation, failure to grasp the tasks involved, faulty preparations, are bound to prove costly not only to the Communist leaders of the proletariat, but to the entire working class as a whole. This double responsibility staring us in the face, these circumstances that constantly keep every revolutionist on edge today, alone force the Left Opposition to stress before the membership of the Communist party, one hundred fold the importance of the Leninist united front tactic, the necessity of returning to the principles of the International of Lenin and of Trotsky, and to increase our criticism of the Centrist bureaucrats blindly following the Stalinist apparatus, with all the greater impetus.
A working class divided, is an easy prey in the claws of the capitalist vultures. The fighting unity of the workers spells their end. The struggle for the conciliation of the backward laboring masses with their revolutionary vanguard is a struggle on many fronts.
Aside from the necessity of uniting the reformist with the revolutionary workers, there are a good many other problems involved in constituting tho workers’ front. We shall deal here with only two aspects of the question of unity.
The bosses aim at breaking up the ranks of the proletariat is being carried on under various forms. One of the most vicious forms is that of pitting the white against the black workers. How they go about this is most easily demonstrated by a few Unemployment statistics. The Monthly Labor Review of the U.S. Department of Labor quotes the following from a report on an investigation made by the Urban League:
“Wherever figures were given, the percentage of the unemployed among the Negroes exceeded their percentage of the total population and in some cases, the disproportion was very marked. Thus, in Baltimore they formed 17 per cent, of the population and 31.5% of the unemployed; in Charleston, S.C. 49% of the population and 70% of the unemployed in Chicago, 4% of the population and 16% of the unemployed, in Philadelphia 7% and 25%, in Pittsburgh 8% and 38%,” etc.
Not only are Negro workers the first ones to be fired when personnel is reduced, but very often they are replaced by white labor. The boss, by playing on the race instincts of the white workers in this manner tries to set up a barrier between white and black, from which he alone ultimately gains. Now the Negroes make up about 10 percent of the entire population of the United States. In very many industries, their percentage is even far weightier. In resisting the attacks of the bosses, who live from the labor of the white and the black workers alike, the inclusion of the Negro toilers in the ranks of the struggle is indispensable. The unity of Negro and white workers is a matter of do of die. The task of the Communists is not so much to make the Negro worker race conscious, which all the blabber of the Stalinists about “national minority” and “self-determination” drives at, but much rather to expose the class character of the oppression against the Negro before the Negro himself as well as before the white workers. That is the only way of achieving the solidarity of the white and the black workers against the capitalist enemy. All the frame-ups, all the lynchings, all the massacres of Negro workers in the street must be explained and combated from this angle. The fight against Negro persecution and for the unity of the white and the Negro workers can only be carried on under the banner of the class struggle.
 
Foreign-Born Workers
Another method of dividing the workers against themselves is the campaign to deport foreign born workers. The labor faker Doak, as secretary of Labor in the Hoover cabinet, announces 20,000 deportations of foreign born workers within the period of a few short months and hopes thereby to arouse the basest national instincts of the native workers. When the native born worker considers, however, that the percentage of foreign born labor in the United States amounts to about 15 per cent of the entire industrial population and more, it becomes clear to him that this whole business of deportations is merely a reactionary ruse. Here are a few figures of the percentages of foreign born is different industries:



Iron and Steel manufacturing


 


58%




Bituminous coal mining


61%




Woolen and Worsted m’f’r’g


62%




Cotton goods


62%




Clothing


69%



The question of the unity of native and foreign born labor, is therefore, when we remember that foreign born labor amounts to about 9,000,000 workers in good, round numbers, a question of vital importance in the resistance of the American working class to the onslaught of capital. These hard figures are convincing enough to drive out primitive prejudices from the minds of the American worker. They mean: Hanging together or hanging alone. When the American worker understands this, he will undoubtedly raise his voice against the system of deportation, the cruelty and barbarism of which is enough to even make the conservative bourgeois intellectuals on the Wickersham Commission filled with disgust.
 



BOSTON – At its last meeting, the Malden branch of the League of Struggle for Negro Rights, upon the suggestion of comrade Dubin, one of its members and a known member of the Boston Left Opposition, voted to have comrade S. Gordon lecture before them on the Negro and Unemployment. As soon as this leaked out to the party district office, orders were immediately issued to mobilize the party fraction of the L.S.N.R. to prevent Gordon from speaking at all costs. The fraction thereupon instigated the branch secretary to notify the rank and file of the organization that the lecture had been called off, without any previous decision by the branch or any other such bothersome “bourgeois” procedure.
The meeting was attended by about half a dozen party members of the fraction and only two non-party Negro comrades, while the organization is supposed to have a membership of more than forty, mainly Negro workers. Immediately, the party fraction put through one of its members, Pizer, who had not attended a single meeting since the formation of the branch, but who had been sent down for the special purpose described above, to preside at the meeting. He quickly rattled through the business end, and then, concerning the decision passed previously, he declared brazenly (after the nth turn towards workers’ democracy in the mass organizations) that the branch in Malden had no right to choose who should speak for it, the L.S.N.R. is an organization closely affiliated to the Communist party, there is a United Front Scottsboro Committee in Boston, all speakers must be approved by that committee before they can speak before the branch (!). Amidst protest this tool of the bureaucracy proceeded, as chairman, to make an amendment to the motion passed invalidating it. Amid further protests, the party fraction rushed the amendment through in such a whirlwind fashion that a number of sympathizers who had gathered to hear the lecture just stood there dazed.
Comrade Dubin, after some difficulty, obtained the floor, denounced the maneuvers of the nether bureaucrat, and demanded that Gordon be allowed to make a statement before leaving. The chairman shouted him down, arousing the indignation of a non-party Negro comrade present, by the name of Hindon, who got up, expressed the purpose of the organization as a united front organization to be a struggle against the capitalists and not a fight against others who want to participate in this united front, and also demanded that Gordon be given the right to make a statement. This comrade too was shouted down by the chairman, and councilled in a threatening manner “not to allow his sentiments to get the better” of him (!). The pretty trick of the bureaucrats had been carried through, disruption and confusion had been thrown into another “non”-party “mass” organization, with the sole end in view of preventing the Opposition from making its voice heard before the workers.
Some of the party fraction tried to provoke the comrades. We interfered, calling out loud that we leave all fighting to be turned against the bosses, among the workers we demand only discussion, and we’ll get it yet! It is quite clear that the only achievement of the whole tactic pursued by the party, is further discreditment, further isolation from the masses, further confusion of the ranks of the revolutionary workers. The incident is very typical. Our answer, the answer of the Opposition, to such wretchedness, must be: a tenfold increase in our activities, a powerful concentration of our efforts to penetrate the ranks of the party, to put a stop to this suicidal policy which is leading the party and the revolutionary movement to destruction. Many and heavy tasks are facing us, the objective situation presents enormous possibilities for real and rapid advance to the revolutionary goal. We must not allow this petty violence, this dissipation of the forces of the revolutionary vanguard to go on. The life of the movement depends on this. We must gather our forces quickly and act soon and effectively.
 



Once again, a member of the ill-starred capitalist efficiency cabinet of the great engineer has dropped a few “indiscreet” remarks. Hoover’s Lamont has unintentionally given away the secret preparations of the bosses for an organized – and that is about all that is real in the social democratic myth of “organized capitalism” – campaign for deep-going nation-wide wage-cuts, ranging from the pivotal steel industry to coal, textiles, manufacturing, all along the line. What Lamont blurted out has not been unknown to the Communists, who were the first to predict the inevitability of a concerted offensive action of the bourgeoisie in the attempt to disentangle themselves from the economic crisis which they and their system have brought about – at the expense of the working class, by whose toil and sweat alone they are able to subsist.
 
What Is the Situation of the Workers at This Juncture?
Of course, Hoover and his Secretary of Labor Doak who got his training in deceiving and misleading workers from his days in the Railroad Brotherhoods, immediately came out with denials, asserting that the government still remains firm in its stand against wage cuts and rejecting all responsibility for Lamont’s letter to Condon. But, too late. The beans have been spilled. The New York Times, the mouthpiece of Wall Street, if any, gently chides Lamont for his rashness, deplores the “lack of cooperation” in the government and proceeds ... to explain the necessity, yes even the inevitably of wage reduction, all in one editorial.
And how do things actually stand at the moment. To what extent has the attack on the workers advanced? This may be gathered from figures published in the June number of the Monthly Labor Review by the Department of Labor.
The figures are extremely interesting and should be studied attentively by every worker.



Per Capita Earnings
(involving some 5 or 6 million workers)




Industry


March
1930


February
1931


March
1931




Manufacturing


$24.30


−1.3


−  9.4




Anthracite Mining


  25.14


−2.2


−  9.2




Bit. Mining


  18.86


−1.6


−16.2



We notice a particularly sharp downward trend in per capita earnings during the month of March in the current year, and when we keep in mind that the figures for the manufacturing sector include 54 industries, we can easily picture the universality of the trend. Later on we shall show that this drop in average wages is quite out of proportion even with the growth of unemployment and has a cause behind it, wage cuts already carried into effect. From the mining figures it becomes quite apparent why the strike struggle wave has found its inception in that industry.
From February to March 1931, unemployment among the railroad workers increased by 1.4 percent, while payrolls fell 8.1 percent. Taking the figures for. the same month in 1929 as 100, the figures for March 1931 are:



Anthracite


  


Bituminous




Empl’m’t


Payrolls


Empl’m’t


Payrolls




81.2


70.1


88.8


65.2



In the iron and steel industries we find:



Employment




1930


1931




April


Feb.


March


April




91.9


72.0


72.6


71.9




Payrolls




1930


1931




April


Feb.


March


April




92.8


60.4


62.0


60.7



In 54 manufacturing industries including textiles, clothing, etc., unemployment increased 16.7 per cent and payrolls decreased 24.6 percent. Aggregate figures involving more than 5 million workers, show that between March and April this year alone, payrolls dropped 1.5 percent as compared with a 0.2 percent drop in employment.
Everywhere we see constant growth of joblessness, continual decrease in wages. No matter how great the ravages of unemployment are, or rather because of them, the men on the job suffer the onslaught upon their conditions just as well. Unemployment and wage cuts go hand in hand. The wide disproportion between the figures for employment decreases and payroll drops display this convincingly.
This is how things stand today with the American working class. What of Green’s agreement with the bosses at the Hoover Round Table Conference of 1929 the worker in the A.F. of L. is bound to ask himself. And if he considers these figures seriously, there can be no doubt left in his mind, that this whole sorry business of “peaceful” agreements with the bosses is a sham and a fraud and that the only result it achieves is: giving the capitalists a chance to gather their forces and throw the workers off guard.
The workers in the reformist trade unions are confronted today by the burning question: Class collaboration or class struggle? Green’s agreement with the bosses, faithfully carried out by himself – he has not raised as much as a finger to put the A.F. of L. workers in motion against the cloud burst of wage-slashing threatening them – and quite naturally disregarded by the bosses, should teach them a sound lesson in class politics. That they will awaken from the dark years of lethargy, brought about by the “prosperity” ruse is certain. Can they be harnessed together with the rest of the workers for effective class action – this depends upon another important factor: Upon the ability of the Communists, the front rank fighters of the proletariat, properly to size up the situation and to act accordingly.
We know that the bosses in the steel industry are prepared to cut the pay of every one of the hundreds of thousands of workers in their employ. But they are wary. The company (U.S. Steel Corporation), we read in the Times, on July 30, 1931, “does not contemplate any movement for the reduction of wage scales covered by contracts with organized labor at this stage.” Notice: “with organized labor” and “at this stage” The wages of the unorganized have already undergone a good cut, that is visible from the figures we quoted above. And why not “at this stage”? Because the steel bosses know the sentiment of struggle among the workers only too well. Because the coal industry, in which a fierce struggle, extending over Pennsylvania and Ohio, the steel centers, a strike struggle led by the militant National Miners’ Union, is already on. Because the steel kings fear the solidarity of the steel workers with the striking miners and because it is well known that a steel strike will be the signal for strikes on a nation-wide scale.
The exploiters in the C.S. Steel and Bethlehem corporations are waiting for the collapse of the miners’ strike. They know their strategy. And if the leaders of the National Miners’ Union and of the official Communist party know theirs, they will strive with might and main to extend the strike and to stop sabotaging the Leninist united front tactic.
We ask again: Will the party leaders continue to miss opportunities, or will they begin to employ the united front tactic which drives the fakers out of the labor movement and unites the fighting masses with their Communist vanguard? The time to decide is today.
 



The fusion of the British Trotskyist groups into a single organization, the Revolutionary Communist Party, coincides with a mounting crisis of the British ruling class. This is not a mere coincidence. The most advanced representative of the rising working class grows and gains cohesion concurrently with the disintegration of the old stratum of rulers. To set this highly important unification and its attendant events into a proper perspective, at least a sketch of the general background is necessary.
England is today on the verge of great revolutionary events. Its economic system, long the pride of the capitalist world, is shot through with gangrene. War, which puts all economies to the supreme test, has proved British capitalism to be inefficient, wasteful and corroded.
England, the first capitalism to rise to ascendancy, has retained a large part of its antiquated structure and now finds herself in a condition bordering on collapse. Lacking the tremendous resources of the United States, the ruling class has not been able to cover up its bankruptcy by the same sort of forced marches in production.
A measure of England’s economic crisis is the coal situation. Production fails to meet quotas set by war demands. The coal barons and their government even risk great miners strikes, which imply a further drop in production, rather than grant the basic demand of the miners: nationalization of the pits. The rulers are caught in this dilemma: endanger the military situation or open the sluices of nationalization—and thus threaten their whole system of private property. The issue is too “controversial” for Parliament to deal with, says Churchill ...
For the miners, and for the rest of the workers as well, real improvement in their miserable, ever-falling standard of living is directly tied up—in this declining economy—with outright nationalization of the means of production.
The negligible wage “concessions” are inadequate to the needs. Strikes are bound to increase. The class struggle is bound to sharpen. Just as its uncertain international position has created rifts in the ruling stratum so the deteriorating domestic situation will create still further schisms at the top.
 
The Education Bill
The issue of “mine nationalization” was too “controversial” for the government to act on, said Churchill, postponing it to some future general election when, he hopes, its acuteness will not be so glaringly illumined for the masses as in the flames of war. Churchill preferred to have his labor lackies handle the issue by betraying the miners from within and by “nationalizing” labor from other industries for the coal pits (the “Bevin boys”)—apparently only nationalization of mine property is “controversial.”
However, the domestic crisis found another means of obtaining parliamentary expression. In March an apparently harmless Education Bill came before the House of Commons. It contained a provision to equalize the pay of women educational workers with that of the male teachers. The Government opposed the provision. But, a majority of the Commons, including a sizable section of the Prime Minister’s own Tory party, passed it.
No one paid much attention to this minor setback of the Cabinet. But Churchill made it a major issue. He demanded a reversal of the vote as a test of confidence in his government. The whole country rang with the controversy. Finally, the Prime Minister got what he wanted.
Equal pay for women—and only in a white-collar segment of the working class at that—became an issue on which the government of British imperialism demonstratively made its war leadership dependent! Not a single sluice of social progress must be left open, the British rulers announced thereby. So great is their fear of the threatening social avalanche.
Churchill got his vote, to be sure. But the result was such a surge of resentment among the masses that, for the first time since 1940, the Tory-Labor coalition was seriously shaken.
 
Crisis in the Labor Party
Under pressure from below, the Labor party executive announced in April that “it recognizes that the Coalition government cannot function for post-war reconstruction and will end it when divergencies with the Tories on social legislation become sharply clear” and further that while the Coalition continues to function for war purposes, it will contest by-elections on its “own social program.”
The immediate cause for this step was the Education Bill incident. But a mass demand for labor to break the coalition has been sweeping the trade unions for the past two years.
The Labor party which, before 1939 was gaining by-elections steadily from the Tories, has seen by-election after by-election go to independents and to the newly formed, “radical” middle-class Commonwealth party. The labor leadership has so compromised itself that posters issued by petty-bourgeois outfits like the “Free Trade League” can nowadays appear with impunity in Labor strongholds in London, denouncing—“Labor Fascism.” Nor has the fact that the hated Fascist Oswald Mosley gained his release from prison, through the instrumentality of the Labor minister Morrison, helped halt the decline of popularity of the Labor party among the masses. This reluctant first half-step to appease the mass demand that it break the coalition merely means that even the myopic traitors in the Labor Party leadership are beginning to see the handwriting on the wall. The crisis is rotten-ripe.
 
The Treachery of the Trade Union Officials
While the first indication of a break in the political coalition becomes apparent, the trade union fakers have intensified their craven subservience to the capitalists on the economic field—where the masses have directly burst through the shackles of “national unity.” Not sham opposition is the task that the labor fakers have set themselves here, but a blindly fierce mending of the shackles. With hundreds of thousands of miners out on spontaneous strikes, with the strike fever growing, they resorted to desperate measures. Their pie-cards are directly at stake.
History will record to their ever-lasting shame that the trade union officialdom of Great Britain begged the ruling class to impose a new law against strikes and against the support of strikes. History will also record that the ruling class entrusted this task to Ernest Bevin, Minister of Labor and erstwhile “leader”—and betrayer —of the General Strike in 1926.
Under the new “Bevin Law,” as it is called, the despotic outrage of outlawing sympathy strikes—the infamous Trades Dispute Act of 1927 which sealed the defeat of the General Strike—is multiplied over and over again. Imposing penalties of up to five years imprisonment, the law makes it a crime to talk in favor of a strike anywhere outside of an official union meeting in the industry or plant affected. A crime to support an “unofficial” strike in the press. A crime to send financial aid to such a strike. The papers openly gloat that the trade union officials called on the government for aid to hold in line the union members whom they can no longer control.
A few days after the promulgation of the “Bevin Law,” thousands of members of Bevin’s own union, the General Transport Workers Union, responded by going out and tying up all bus traffic in the busiest districts of London. The same week thousands of workers in the municipal gas plant walked out in Manchester, leaving that city without gas for seven days.
 
The “Communist” Party
In all these developments the Stalinist party invariably plays the auxiliary strike-breaking role. The main job is, of course, left to the trade union and Labor Party fakers. The appeals of the Stalinists against strikes are larded with pious references to the needs of supporting the military effort of the Soviet Union. They make a show of opposition to the crasser of the anti-labor acts which have aroused universal wrath among the workers. Thus, for instance, they advise Bevin that there are already adequate laws to deal with “Trotskyist strike instigators” without resorting to a new law such as the Labor minister espouses. Like all mass organizations in England and unlike its American counterpart, the “Communist” Party is still constrained to use socialist phraseology as a demagogic concession to the deep-rooted traditions in the working class.
Among the trade union bureaucracy, particularly in the mining and engineering industry, a strong section inclines to the newer, more energetic and more polished methods of betrayal that the CP espouses. It is among them that the Stalinists have obtained weighty support for their projected entry into the Labor Party—which the leaders of the latter still oppose—as well as for their “Left Unity” campaign, designed to revive and form the basis of a more “solid” Popular Front project. The Stalinists strain every effort to help in the betrayal of the workers, but are not appreciated or trusted by the powers that be sufficiently to be given a leading place. Among the miners, where they once had their strongest base, their influence is steadily declining.
 
The Labor “Lefts”
The so-called Labor “Lefts”—Aneurin Bevan, Laski and Co.—call every shot in the treachery of the bureaucrats and in the nefarious plans of the bourgeoisie. But—their support of the war leads them to cowardly submission every time! Bevan goes to his miners district, speaks to strikers, agrees that all their demands are correct and just, castigates the coal barons and the government for their crimes, and winds up—by urging the miners to go back to the pits because the strike hurts the war conducted by the very criminals he castigates. In spite of his old popularity with them, the miners wave him aside no less unceremoniously than the Stalinist Horner or the old-line bureaucrat Lawther.
Nevertheless, this very discreditment among his constituents pushes Bevan and his ilk into a more vigorous collision with the Labor Party heads. So much so and with such impetus that not only does the party bureaucracy want to “discipline” him but—finds that very difficult. In a recent parliamentary caucus such an attempt failed by a considerable margin.
It is safe to say that this group, despite all its gyrations, will remain what it intrinsically is—the “Left” face of the rascally bureaucracy.
 
The Independent Labor Party
As against all the other old and established working class organizations, only the ILP has held its prestige and even grown. The secret of its success is not hard to discover: it maintains an anti-war position, although with typical centrist trappings, and not too loudly or clearly.
However, it dissociates itself whenever it can from the Trotskyists. Its leaders hobnob politely with the parliamentary crowd. Half of them are really pacifists at heart. They are always ready for a jolly get-together with the bureaucrats. In short, no one in the ruling circles takes them seriously as a revolutionary threat. As a matter of fact, the ruling circles value them as parliamentary colleagues, perhaps with an eye to the future ...
Such in brief outline is the political background against which, in the middle of March, the Workers International League and the Revolutionary Socialist League held a joint convention at which these two organizations fused and took the name of Revolutionary Communist Party.
 
The Fusion Conference
The fusion resolution, adopted by the conference, places the new Revolutionary Communist Party squarely on the granite foundation of the principles and program of the Fourth International.
The name Revolutionary Communist Party has turned out to be highly successful. The bulk of the party’s new recruits comes from the Stalinized CP and its periphery. The Stalinists are trading on a name with which they have nothing in common politically, but one that is becoming ever more popular with the masses in Great Britain. The new party has thus seized the banner which is rightly theirs from the hands of the usurpers who besmirch it.
Needless to say, the Stalinists have reacted with wild fury to the new Trotskyist party name. They even have large posters in front of their headquarters calling attention to the situation, setting forth in huge letters that they are “the Communist Party.” This frenzied indignation is indirectly a good measure of the effectiveness of the RCP name. Of course, the RCP is no less anxious to distinguish its identity from that of the Stalinists, to whom they refer as “His Majesty’s Communist Party.”
Made frantic by the growing domestic crisis and impotent to deal with the rapid succession of sporadic strikes, the ruling class and its bureaucratic partners-in-crime take their revenge—by pouncing savagely on consistent revolutionists, the Trotskyists. The Trotskyists spend their time, not in apologizing for anybody or anything in the twists of official politics. Nor in hobnobbing with traitors. They go sounding the tocsin around the country, exposing the fraud perpetrated by the imperialist war on the masses; denouncing the hypocritical treachery of the labor lackeys of capitalism; baring the manifold ways devised for the cheating of the workers; and aiding to the best of their ability every effort of the toiling masses to improve their lot and awaken to their historic destiny.
The basic motives for the attack on the Revolutionary Communist Party have already been indicated. Here we shall deal only with the immediate cause and developments ensuing.
The actual charges against the Trotskyist leaders, Jock Hasten, general secretary of the RCP; Roy Tearse, national secretary of the Militant Workers Federation; Ann Keen, northeast (London) district secretary of the party and Heaton Lee are: violation of Trade Disputes Act (of 1926) in connection with the recent great strike of engineering apprentices in Scotland.
In the case of the apprentices, mass resentment grew against the Bevin order drafting these young men—many of whom had nearly completed their 4-year apprenticeship acquiring the mechanic’s skill for a life-long trade—into coal pits, where they saw no future for themselves and only another obstacle to the miners’ fight for nationalization, with which they sympathized.
“We refuse to carry the burden imposed on the industry by the lust for profit and inefficiency of the coal-owners. Since they are directly responsible for the coal crisis it is against them that compulsion must be directed,” says the Statement of the Tyne Apprentices Guild, January 1944.
Open defiances swept the ranks of the apprentices. They were resolved not to become “Bevin Boys.” When one of their number received the draft order, the Tyneside Apprentices Guild sent a letter to Bevin demanding exemption from compulsory mine labor for all apprentices in the “industrial engineering trades.” The Minister of Labor failed to reply. Thereupon the Guild called its 5,000 members out on strike. A few days later they were joined by 20,000 others in Glasgow and elsewhere. (The various local machinists unions, expressed support; even the Executive of the national Amalgamated Engineers Union expressed sympathy with their cause; although organizational relations between the latter and the Apprentices Guild were strained.)
The strike was rather wide-spread and appeared well-organized and coordinated. It gave the ruling class a particularly bad scare, because it came from a new and unfamiliar quarter of the working class.
The RCP supported this strike, and the just grievances of the apprentices. The apprentices guild is a new organization. It grew up as a matter of fact in conflict with the established trade union machine which in its complacency refused to organize the young workers or take them under their wing—leaving them pretty much to their own devices.
The raids against the RCP conducted by Scotland Yard were to primarily obtain “proof” which dealt with the apprentices’ strike, among other things. Theirs is the first case to be tried under the Trades Dispute Act of 1926 and this in itself is an indication of the unpopularity of that Act among the masses. Furthermore, the new implementing Bevin Act—openly proclaimed and directed against the Trotskyists—is, if anything, even more unpopular.
The Labor “lefts”—alleged friends—only see the “numerically insignificant” group. They treat the attacks, the raids, the arrests of the Trotskyists—against which they, to be sure, protest—as a farce. The bureaucrats, the Will Lawthers, the Bevins, in the wake of the bosses, are more circumspect. They see the powerful ideas of the Trotskyists. They see a serious menace in the prospect of a convergence of these ideas and the great stirring mass of miners, ship-builders, engineers. They can’t see the joke. They are in deadly earnest. The British Tribune of April 14 reports:
“Mr. Lawther, the leader of the miners, is said to have stated in a speech that the Trotskyist organization must be taken seriously and that the amendment of the law under consideration [the ‘Bevin Law’] is on the request of the miners leaders themselves.”
The growth of the British Trotskyists and the unification of several groups into a single, centralized section of the Fourth International, is an event that this enemy cannot help but note. And, with apprehension.
Meanwhile, the RCP is having difficulties in obtaining the release of the arrested comrades on bail. Meeting halls for defense rallies — due to Stalinist interference mainly—have been barred to the RCP and it has had to hold its initial London meetings in the open, at Hyde Park.
 
Immediate Effects of Attack
The attack on the young party, fraught as it is with great danger to its existence, has other sides by way of compensation.
The new Revolutionary Communist Party has at once become a factor of first importance in the political consciousness of the country. The press, the radio, are teeming with news about it.
Great sympathy has been aroused for Trotskyism among masses of miners and other workers who for the first time have heard of this party and who have heard it identified with their own eruptive militant action.
In the organized labor movement, workers moving leftward now have a new, dramatic banner before their eyes as a rallying point.
Thousands of communist workers, betrayed and disillusioned with Stalinism, see the cherished communist ideal reborn in new form, awakening glorious memories.
In the ILP, among the Labor “Left,” the rank and file evince immediately spontaneous solidarity with the persecuted Trotskyists. The leaders, forced to go along, make uneasy jests, and try to avoid mentioning the new party and its papers in their own meetings and in their own press.
A broad defense committee has already been organized with the participation of the ILP and Labor “Lefts”. Those who have already joined the national committee of the “Anti-Labor Laws Victims Defense Committee” include:

James Maxton, M.P., John McGovern, M.P., Walter Padley, and Fenner Brockway of the ILP; Aneurin Bevan, M.P.; Rhys Davies, M.P.; S. Silverman, M.P.; Rev. Sorenson, M.P.; W.G. Grove, M.P., of the London Workers’ Committee; V. Sastry, Federation of Indian Associations; Ted Grant, Revolutionary Communist Party; M. Kavanagh, Freedom Press; G. Pittock-Buss, Bob Turner, Arthur Ballard, D. Beech, D. Ballantine.

The assault of the ruling class on the new party cannot help but cement the unity and invest the membership with a strong sense of party loyalty and party patriotism from the very first. All reports indicate that the fusion is an accomplished fact and not merely a formal decision.
 



The outcome of the Cuban elections of June 1, 1944 can be understood only as another, highly important manifestation of the reawakening anti-imperialist struggle that has recently been sweeping Central America and the Spanish speaking countries of the Western hemisphere. The victory of Ramon Grau San Martin and his “Autentico” Party (Partido Revolucionario Cubano) over the Government coalition of Batista and the Stalinists shows that the masses of the island Republic are as eager to rid themselves of the rule of Wall Street’s puppets as the masses in other Latin American countries.
This does not, naturally, mean that by the election of Grau as president they have made positive headway in the direction they actually desire. For, Grau is formally pledged to support the war of the “democratic” imperialists and his old reputation as an anti-Wall Street warrior – already suspect by that very fact – has still to stand the practical test of a term in office.
The election result must be taken, rather, as an indication of the growing revolutionary anger against the redoubled exploitation which colonial and semi-colonial peoples are forced to suffer under the war-time conditions of the imperialist world.
 
Immediate Economic Causes
As in most Latin American countries, the war has entailed an increase in the cost of living and a corresponding downward sweep of living standards far more severe than similar phenomena in the United States. Curtailed imports of necessities, and an ever stricter confinement to the one-crop (in Cuba: sugar) system foisted by imperialism on most Anglo-Saxon colonies in the Carribean, have raised prices of primary commodities beyond the reach of most of the population. The increase in nominal wages during the early war years – for which the Stalinist leaders of Cuban Confederation of Labor (Confederation de Trabajadores Cubanos) like to take the credit – has long since been outraced by living costs and now, as in the United States, wages have been frozen – something which the Stalinists do not like to, but unquestionably can also take “credit” for.
Added to their economic misery, which the masses correctly ascribe to Yankee imperialism and its war – a war they cannot find any tangible reason to be enthusiastic over – are the burdens imposed by graft, corruption and political oppression under the eleven year old “democratic” dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista.
The Stalinists have the dominant position in the Confederacion de Trabajadores Cubanos, organized a few years ago, which embraces most of the working population of the island. Their present position is due primarily to their former anti-imperialist and militant role. They organized the trade union movement in their radical past. Since “people’s front” days (1935) they had been flirting with Batista. Since June 21, 1941 they have actually become a government prop. In turn the Batista government has done all it could to integrate the Stalinist trade union leadership as part of its quasi-totalitarian machine.
With the CTC membership getting out of their control as the Stalinist march toward reactionary politics accelerated, General Secretary Lazaro Peno and his henchmen found new means of maintaining and entrenching themselves. Assisted by Batista’s Ministry of Labor machinery, they have not only been able to flaunt a few fake concessions to cover up their miserable strike-breaking role (such as the government seizure of the Bacardi firm, a stunt on the style of Roosevelt’s Montgomery Ward “seizure”) but more ominously, to gag and purge internal trade union oppositions. For their part, the Stalinists have rigidly enforced the no-strike rule and virtually transformed the trade union apparatus into a veritable auxiliary police force of the government.
 
Composition of the Two Electoral “Blocs”
Sweeping resentment made itself felt in many unauthorized strikes as well as in mass demonstrations. The Batista regime felt compelled to hold an election which, considering its past record of terror and intimidation, was relatively free.
Arrayed in the election struggle were two blocs. One, the government bloc, called itself the Democratic Socialist Coalition. It was composed of the Liberals and the Democrats, parties long associated with Batista’s dictatorship, and the Stalinists, who recently changed their name to “Popular Socialist Party.”
The other, the opposition bloc, rallied around the Cuban Revolutionary Party, known popularly as the “Autenticos.” This party played a leading role in overthrowing the regime of General Gerardo Machada in the anti-imperialist revolt of 1933. Its leader, Grau, was one of the provisional presidents in the interregnum that followed the revolt. His few months in office during 1934 were marked by several anti-Wall Street acts, the best known of which was a decree requiring all business enterprises to employ at least 50 per cent native Cubans.
In order to understand the evaluation made by the Cuban masses of these two blocs it is necessary to go beyond the surface issues and platforms. According to the press reports, Grau declared for “Cubanidad,” (Cubanism), asserted the need for “collaboration of all classes,” proclaimed “fair treatment of foreign capital” and hailed “collaboration in international relations rather than blind nationalism.” All these vague and ambiguous aims could equally be found in the platform of the Government coalition in somewhat different language.
He also accused the Batista regime of “mismanagement of the war economy,” of causing inflation and food shortages and of tolerating the black market. While these latter issues undoubtedly struck closer to home among the masses, in themselves they could not have been decisive as long as both contestants approved of the war, which has been used to justify their hardships.
The decisive factors in the Cuban masses’ election verdict can be found only in the experiences of the past eleven years. The wartime conditions only served to accentuate and dramatize these experiences for them. A brief review of this past is therefore in order.
 
Review of the Political Background
In 1933, under the impact of the world economic crisis the proletariat and the students, the agrarian masses and the petty functionaries overthrew by a popular revolt the dictatorship of General Machada, whose regime applied in Cuba the general line of Wall Street: to shift the burden of the crisis – through wage cuts and reduction of the budget – on the lower classes of the population under its control.
Labor organization, political life, national and anti-imperialist sentiment swept the country under the provisional regime of Grau San Martin, a university professor at Havana who led the uprising of the students.
American imperialism was alarmed. The Roosevelt New Deal started out on its vaunted “Good Neighbor” policy ... by refusing recognition to the revolutionary Cuban government early in 1934.
The Army, in which the uprising was reflected by a “sergeants’ revolt,” remained a doubtful factor. Through Ambassador Sumner Welles – yes, the self-same the latter-day liberal saint – Yankee capitalism negotiated with the leader of the military insurgents, Sergeant Fulgencio Batista and won the army over against the revolution. Batista became Wall Street’s “strong man,” who upheld the hand of the successive puppet presidents to whom Washington deigned to grant recognition.
The Cuban army, 18,000 strong in peace time, could not but play a first rank role in the life of a country with a population of approximately 4,000,000. Together with the political police and the rural constabulary, all tightly controlled by the General Staff, this disproportionately large armed force could not be supported financially by an impoverished colonial people. From the first, the Washington powers had grasped this situation and, by manifold manipulations, they have fostered it as a reactionary tool to serve their interests. Even in the midst of an economic depression loans were found with which to maintain and even expand the Cuban army. Batista became entrenched.
Rule by decree became the law of the land. Strikes were prohibited, trade unions persecuted, political propaganda suppressed. The revolutionary masses, frustrated in their aims, seethed. The working class party which might then have welded them together for another successful assault, the young Communist Party of Cuba, was engaged in the ultra-leftism and divisive tactics characteristic of the “Third Period.”
The Trotskyists, expelled from the CP only a year or so previously, did all they could to contribute political cohesion to the movement but with their meager forces could not overcome the preponderance of the adventurist petty bourgeois politics that dominated it.
 
The General Strike of 1935
In March 1935, the Autentico Party of Grau San Martin called a General Strike for which a united front “Committee of Proletarian Defense” was set up. The Stalinists called a General Strike under their own auspices and denounced the former as “social fascists.” With the insurgent forces thus split, preparations inadequate and action premature, the strike was foredoomed to failure.
Batista declared a state of war. In three days of terror and bloodshed, the army crushed the strike. A curfew was proclaimed for nine at night. Not more than three persons were permitted to gather in the streets at any time. The trade union headquarters were raided and padlocked. The government admitted taking a toll of 30 dead among the strikers, among them the Trotskyist Crescencio Freire, and 900 prisoners. Six to ten year sentences were imposed upon trade union leaders, among them over a score of Trotskyists. The very carrying of a trade union card was made subject to imprisonment.
As an aftermath to the strike, Antonio Guiteras, the Autentico leader of Joven Cuba, the Left Wing youth organization which had been in the vanguard of all the revolutionary developments, was assassinated by Batista’s thugs as he was about to embark for a trip to Central America. Guiteras had come out of the upheaval with tremendous prestige. A brilliant and courageous leader, he had grown politically from the experience and was at the time of his assassination moving close to Trotskyism.
The brutal suppression of the General Strike and the assassination and imprisonment of its outstanding leaders concluded the revolutionary period and opened up the period of reactionary “stabilization” under the Batista dictatorship. For five years the country was ruled by dictatorial decree. With “stabilization” assured, Washington gave the signal for a “democratization” of the regime. A war was coming and democratic illusions were on the order of the day for imperialist policy.
In 1940 Batista promulgated a constitution and began to restore civil rights in piecemeal fashion. During the elections held that year under the new constitution, Batista succeeded in getting himself elected over Grau for the presidency. The masses had not yet had much of an opportunity for political life and Batista’s new turn undoubtedly gained him a certain popularity among the masses after the years of dictatorial rule.
 
Political Revival After 1940
Labor organization flourished under the new conditions. For the first time a single centralized trade union federation was organized in Cuba. Subsidized by the Comintern, the CP naturally had more powerful means of maintaining an illegal existence than the other opposition parties suppressed in 1935. It was therefore not surprising that when trade unions and political organizations were once more legalized, the Stalinists emerged with the greatest organized strength and were able to capture control of the new Cuban Confederation of Labor, the CTC. Control of the trade unions, the base for expansion in many other fields of mass organization, made the Stalinists a powerful political factor in the country. With the entry of the Soviet Union into the war in June 1941, it became evident that collaboration between Batista and the Stalinists was inevitable. Stalin’s war policy denoted support of Wall Street’s puppets. Batista needed a mass base. At the same time, a sharp cleavage between the masses of trade union workers, particularly those under Autentico influence, and the Stalinists became just as inevitable.
Soon after the Stalinist Juan Marinello entered the Batista government, following its declaration of war on the side of the “United Nations,” the CTC was given “official status” by presidential decree. That signified the incorporation of the CTC leadership and its policies into the Ministry of Labor. A government lottery to subsidize the new, $200,000 headquarters of the CTC was another payment made by Batista for Stalinist support.
The Stalinists, for their part, proclaimed their “no strike” policy and proceeded with characteristic thuggery to apply it against the recalcitrant workers. Among other things, they engineered the assassination of the popular Autentico trade union leader Sandalio Junco. Where their terrorist methods didn’t work out so well for them, the strong arm of Batista was always there to lend aid.
Thus, in May 1943, a strike of Autentico railroad workers in Guantanamo, in which Trotskyists played a leading role, proved to be too stubborn for the Stalinists to break by the usual means. The workers stood firm in their demand for a 50 per cent increase in wages to meet a 300 per cent rise in living costs. The strike even began to spread and threatened to take on the form of an area-wide general strike. At this point Batista rushed in troops to man the trains. The strike was finally broken, the leading militants – among them the Trotskyists Juan Medina and Luciano Garcia – were victimized, but the government felt itself compelled nevertheless to grant increases of from 15 to 20 per cent.
 
Preliminary Clashes
In numerous other struggles of a similar nature, the lineup for the election contest was similarly foreshadowed. While the Stalinists were still able to maintain their sway over a considerable section of the workers and the population as a whole – in part through their bureaucratic job control and in part because of the prestige of the Soviet Union with which they tend to be identified in the popular mind – the most militant sections of the working class had turned decisively against them, against Batista and, of course, against the policy of supporting American imperialism common to both. Opposition to the Stalinists and to Batista was naturally associated with the great struggles of 1933, 1934 and 1935. Out of those struggles against imperialism and for national and social liberation, the political figure of Grau San Martin arose with the least blemish and with the greatest prestige. It was not for the miserable “platform” of Grau, but for the revolutionary banner of 1933-1935 and against “continuismo” – the tendency of the Batista regime to perpetuate itself – that the Cuban masses cast their decisive majority in the presidential elections.
This analysis is substantiated by the result of the elections for the two houses of the Cuban legislature. There, with nondescript political groupings and personages aligned with both blocs, the so-called Democratic Socialist Coalition elected a majority of Senators in four out of the six provinces and obtained a majority in the lower house over the Autentico-Republican coalition. There the Stalinists also obtained a slight increase in votes.
Grau’s main base of support, as already indicated, lay in the masses of Autentico workers who have been in continual conflict with the Batista regime and the Stalinist leaders of the CTC. It is therefore not surprising that one of the first declarations of policy by the President-elect has dealt with the trade unions. In it he openly proclaims his intention of intervening by state means in the CTC against Stalinist control. The latter have opened a campaign on this subject, hypocritically protesting today against government intervention in the unions, which they invited and welcomed only yesterday. They make a big show of being for trade union democracy now, with “fullest rights for every political tendency” – yesterday they were carrying on a violent drive (unsuccessful to be sure) to run the Trotskyists out of the labor movement.
 
Grau Adopts a Batista Policy
Grau’s announced “trade union policy” provides grave cause for apprehension – but only because it follows in the well-trodden footsteps of Batista. A struggle against it, which is vital to the task of reestablishing the independence of the unions, is unthinkable, however, without a concomitant fight against the Stalinist originators of this reactionary policy.
What the new president intends to do to live up to his anti-imperialist past record is not known. If he has anything in mind, he has kept it secret. But it has been rumored that “American interests” are discouraging plots for coups d’Etat hatched by Batista’s military camarilla. (One such plot was quickly exposed and its sponsor, a Batista-made general, fled by plane to ... Miami). Apparently Big Business has a little scheme to housebreak Grau – if not as yet an understanding with him.
For the Stalinists, the election has undoubtedly been a heavy blow. If the Autentico leader goes through with his declared plans, they stand to lose many government posts as well as their strangle-hold on the trade union apparatus. Their whole powerful machine (it is more ramified, richer relative to the size of the country, and far more influential than the US Stalinist machine) stands in danger of cracking up. Although they accuse Grau of being a tool of the Falangists (what is true is that he did receive editorial support from such organs as the Diario de la Marina, the reactionary Havana daily which has been known to espouse the cause of the Franco-inspired Fascists) that should not deter them from doing all they can to make a deal with him. Indeed, in the Daily Worker (July 14), a report informs us that the Stalinist leader Blas Roca, secretary of the “Popular Socialist Party” can see “no obstacle to united work with Grau should he show himself willing to accept unity.”
Both the interests of the Cuban Stalinist bureaucracy and that in the Kremlin dictate such a line. Only a falling out between Grau and Washington could seriously change it.
The future of the anti-imperialist trend indicated by the elections and the strike struggle preceding it will not, however, be decided by the actions of Grau or of the Stalinists – though their capacity to impede it cannot and must not be underestimated. The masses are on the move and their voice will, it can be expected, be heard in ever greater volume in the coming political life of the Island republic. The success of their aspirations is tied up with the ability of the conscious vanguard of the working class – the Trotskyists – to place themselves at the head of the struggle and to pursue the tested policies of the Fourth International in the course of its development.
 
The Trotskyist Movement in Cuba
The Trotskyists in Cuba are known as the Partido Revolucionario Obrero or Revolutionary Workers Party. First appearing on the scene as an independent political grouping in 1932, they grew rapidly in the stirring days of 1933-1935. But they were completely outlawed and decimated in the terror that followed the defeat of the Autentico-sponsored General Strike. Since then the organization has slowly recuperated, working illegally and semi-legally, and only recently regained its place as a factor in the political life of the country. After years of a stifled sectarian existence underground, these valiant comrades have with great hardship and many sacrifices, established a firm mass base, particularly in the Oriente and Guantanamo provinces, where the Trotskyists enjoy considerable trade union influence, primarily among workers, the majority of whom still follow the Autentico leadership politically.
Trotskyists came as delegates to last year’s national congress of the CTC and there defeated decisively the Stalinists’ attempts to oust them from the unions. Aside from their successful self-defense, they played a great and prominent role in the deliberations of the Congress as a whole. They put forward resolutions embodying the Transitional Program of the Fourth International which received wide minority support. They took the leading part in preventing a split of the trade union movement proposed by the Autentico leaders on provocation from the Stalinists, who mismanaged credentials and used their other well-known machine tricks to impose their line on the Congress. The Autentico workers upheld the Trotskyists against their own leaders in the caucuses and togather with them formed an organized Revolutionary Trade Union Opposition to combat Stalinism within the united Confederation. (A full account of the events centering around the Congress can be found in the August, 1943 issue of the Fourth International).
As a result, the prestige of the Trotskyist trade unionists was greatly increased, and their influence has been growing steadily.
In the current elections, the PRO attempted to get on the ballot at least for the municipal contests. The Supreme Court, after a legal struggle, denied them the right. The party then held a write-in campaign for Mayor and Alderman in Guantanumo. As its candidates, it ran comrades Juan Medina and Luciano Garcia, the two militants victimized for their part in the railroad workers’ strike the year before. In spite of the wide-spread illiteracy of the workers in that provincial city, the party’s standard bearers received over 1,000 officially counted votes!
 
Criticism of PRO Election Policy
Unfortunately, the PRO could not participate in the presidential or the national legislative elections with candidates of its own. The central committee, therefore, decided to give critical support to Grau San Martin. Indeed, the support was much more critical than “support.” Nevertheless, the mere act of endorsing the candidacy of Grau deviated from Bolshevik policy in election tactics. Trotskyists have supported candidates of other political organizations 1) when they represented another working class party against capitalist party candidates; 2) when support of such candidates would further the objective of independent labor political action or 3), in the case of colonial countries, when the candidates ran on an unambiguous and uncompromising anti-imperialist platform.
Grau’s candidacy did not fall into any of these categories. On the contrary, in his “platform,” he declared for collaboration with the imperialists of the “United Nations.” His electoral bloc, moreover, included bourgeois nationalists hostile to labor. Under such conditions, support of the Autentico leader was impermissible.
In their declaration on the elections which appeared in the official organ Revolucion Proletaria (May 1, 1944) the PRO comrades correctly evaluate Grau as follows:
“Grau’s turn to the right and to conservatism, which is most clearly expressed in the vice-presidential candidacy of Raul de Cardenas, figures prominently in the domestic reaction, the unconditional abandonment by the Autentico leader of the anti-imperialist struggle in favor of “democratic” imperialism and finally, the presentation by the Partido Revolucionario Cubano of confessed Machada followers as its candidates – such as Aquilino Lombardi and Deldo Nunez Mesa – are proof of the Autentico leadership’s liquidation of all revolutionary manifestations of the party; they indicate how the leadership has broken with the aims and interests of the masses which continue to remember the glorious events of 1933.”
However, from this correct appraisal, they drew the following erroneous and confusing conclusion:
“We do not propose support of Grau San Martin as a ‘lesser evil’; we give him critical support in conformity with the Leninist theory, as a tactic in fighting the immediate enemy of the working class: that is, the military police dictatorship of Batista, disguised under the trappings of the Socialist Democratic Coalition.”
Unquestionably the masses’ first desire was to get rid of the self-perpetuating Batista regime. And unquestionably, that is why they rushed pell mell to the illusory hope represented by Grau’s Autentico banner. But, that is precisely why it was the task of the revolutionists to clearly dissociate themselves from that treacherous banner and, in the best way possible to make heard the voice of genuine anti-imperialist struggle.
Under the circumstances, that was a most difficult task. The masses, in the heat of the election contest, would not perhaps have paid much heed to the party voice. But, in the stormy days to come, such a stand would undoubtedly have redounded to the greater prestige and strength of the party which alone refused to join in upholding the treacherous politicians of either camp, and which traced the clear and correct course while all the others vied to confuse and deceive the masses.
The PRO is now engaged in a discussion and reevaluation of its electoral policy, in which co-thinkers in other countries are participating. By virtue of mutual and comradely criticism and aid, the young PRO will gain in theoretical strength, solidify its already important progress in mass influence and learn to overcome the manifold and complicated obstacles that confront it on the road toward establishing itself as the party of the Cuban proletariat. Its responsibility is enormous. For, only with a party grounded in Marxist theory and Bolshevik tactics can the Cuban revolution hope to conquer.



My Native Land
by Louis Adamic
New York, 1943. Published by Harper & Brothers. Price $3.75.
One of the central problems of European politics today presents a paradox: While national consciousness has been raised to unprecedented heights in the wake of unparalleled imperialist oppression, national liberation is less than ever possible on a national plane.
The Nazi technique of “depopulation” has at one and the same time carried grist to the mills of nationalism and swept the various nationalities together into a community fighting an international struggle. In the course of the experiences of the various nationalities themselves, the concept of national freedom has been transformed into an element of a policy whose application overflows and even obliterates the old national divisions and frontiers of Europe.
In My Native Land, Louis Adamic undertakes to demonstrate how this process unfolded in practice. He starts with a premise and concludes with an evaluation that is thoroughly nationalistic. It is well to bear this in mind. For, drawing in the main on the twists and turns of the struggle in Yugoslavia, Adamic deals with developments which have much wider ramifications. Sensing this, the author even ventures to speculate:
“The Loyalist-Franco war in Spain had been defined as a rehearsal for World War II; was there not danger of Yugoslavia’s becoming to World War III what Spain was to World War II?” (Page 18.)
Adamic’s opening chapters take as their point of departure the simple, yet deep national griefs and aspirations of Slovenian folk, one of the several component nationalities of pre-war Yugoslavia. With evident approval if not in self-identification, the Americanized Slovenian writer quotes Bozha, a girl compatriot whom he befriended on a visit to his homeland in 1932:
“We are not the way we ought to be, the way we could be, we Slovenians,” says Bozha, “Our land is beautiful; so far as I know there is no lovelier place on earth – but it’s a trap. We live here, a small people surrounded by stranger nations, and we are trapped ... We have a thousand years of foreign misrule and oppression behind us. Right now four hundred thousand Slovenians are under Fascist rule in Italy. Our men have had to fight in dozens of wars through centuries, not for themselves, but for people they had nothing in common with and for a long time there hasn’t been enough to go around. There hasn’t been enough to eat and many Slovenians have gone away to North and South America ... Yes, I know that this is pretty much true of all Europeans, probably of people everywhere, but it is more perhaps true to us Slovenians, of us Yugoslavs. There are so few of us, we can least afford it.” (p. 9)
The same theme, translated into the language of theory, is treated in Adamic’s paraphrase of Kulturne Problemi Slovenstva, a pamphlet written by Josip Vidmar, one of the intellectual lights of tiny Slovenia. Vidmar’s pamphlet is a polemic published in 1930 against Pan-Serbian politicians and a group of Slovenians who were in favor of declaring the native language as a dialect of the Serbo-Croatian tongue, arguing that Slovenians would in this way cease to be a paltry nation of two million and become part of a large people of fifteen million. It is worth quoting the central idea from the paraphrase.
“Vidmar assembled historic facts proving that good things come in small packages. The as yet unsurpassed culture of the Old Greeks was the product of a few hundred thousand people. Christianity was a gift of the small and despised Hebrew group. Italian culture was higher in the days of small republics (Dante) than after the unification of Italy. The same was true of Germany, which after unification, followed by centralization, produced no figure comparable with Goethe ...” (p. 133)
In other words, according to Vidmar Slovenia’s real future lay in remaining “little Slovenia.’’ Politically, the pre-war program summarizing the feelings of the Bozhas and the thoughts of the Vidmars was equally narrow in its horizons.
“We Slovenians,” Adamic quotes Vidmar as saying as late as 1939, “are now in three countries – a million three hundred thousand of us in Yugoslavia, a half million under Italy because Britain and France sold them out in their secret treaty with Italy in 1915, and close to a hundred thousand in Austria, part of the Third Reich, because Versailles did not honestly adhere to Wilson’s principles of self-determination of nations. At any rate we’re all chopped up as a people. And this fact plays the devil with us in nil sorts of ways ... Before we can have a possible future we must all of us attain political oneness and freedom and independence in a state of our own. This state must be accorded membership in the council of nations on the basis of equality. Then, as soon as we attain oneness and our freedom and independence, we shall be ready and eager to get together with the free Croatians, free Serbians and free Bulgarians and work out with them a fair and honest agreement for a federation of national states with broad autonomies.”
A few months later Hitler invaded Poland and World War II got into swing. Two years later Yugoslavia was invaded by the Axis. The conquerors began to meet with resistance. To cope with this resistance the Nazis granted “national independence” to the Croats, another of the component nationalities of former Yugoslavia. The “depopulation” technique began its work of destruction. The Croat “state” of Ante Pavelich organized wild slaughter campaigns against the Serbs, the dominant national group in the old South Slav set-up. Pan-Serbs in the refugee Yugoslav pro-Allied government boosted the resistance movement headed by Drazha Mikhailovich and encouraged, with Anglo-American backing, the counter-slaughter of Croats engaged in by Mikhailovich’s “Chetnik” forces.
By 1942 the name “Partisans” began to grow in the public mind as still another resistance movement, locked in unrelenting battle not only with the Axis and the Ustashi detachment of Pavelich’s Croat “state,” but also with Mikhailovich’s Chetniks. The Partisan military forces and their civilian counterpart – known as the “Liberation Front” – have been denounced from all sides as “Red,” “Communist,” etc.
This has not prevented them from gradually gaining universal recognition as the strongest fighting force among the nationals of former Yugoslavia. Nor from winning over the “Croatian Air Force” organized for Pavelich by the Nazis (AP dispatch December 15, 1943). Nor from penetrating and inundating, under the very noses of the Allied command, the “token army” of Yugoslavia, kept in the Middle East. (AP dispatch January 5).
Adamic reports that Bozha, the little nationalist girl, fell as a medical officer in the service of the Partisans. Vidmar is Chairman of the Liberation Front of Slovenia, a section of the movement headed by Tito and at present composed not only of Serbs, Croats and Slovenians, but Bulgars, Rumanians and even Italians!
If we quoted at length the words of Bozha and of Vidmar, it was with the intention of underlining their ultimate fate. For much more than their fate as individuals is involved here. Bozha and Vidmar, as Adamic rightfully points out, are symbols for the nationalities that intermingle and clash in the maze of present-day Europe. Starting out with the limited, rather formal outlook of pre-war nationalism they, like the vast mass of their countrymen, wound up in the international movement of Partisans that is sweeping Southeastern Europe.
What makes this Partisan movement tick? What is its program? Its origin? Its course of development? What logic forced the Bozhas and Vidmars in their million-headed mass to join in this international phenomenon, departing as they did from a nationalist base?
That is what the author undertakes to find out. Adamic is not a Marxist and doesn’t pretend to be. But his investigation, even as far as it goes – and for Marxists it naturally does not go far enough – provides sufficient material to understand the revolutionary import of this development; and to evaluate it scientifically as it affects European politics in general.
What is the program of the Partisan movement? Adamic writes:
“The Partisan movement was a year and a half old before any part of its political program was written down. But an unwritten program formulated itself in fighting action, in talk between battles, in physical and spiritual agony. It was very simple:
“1. South Slavic unity on the basis of equality and mutual respect for all national groups and all religions.
“2. Fight against the domination of one nation over others.
“3. Down with Chauvinism.
“4. Economic and social advances for the masses of people – the common man after the war.” (p. 84)
“Down with Chauvinism!” A curious slogan to use in a “national” struggle! Yet it is beyond doubt that its use – from the first – guaranteed the success of the Partisans. For it was under the banner of “Down with Chauvinism” that the Partisans won over not only the mass of the common people, but even elements hitherto identified with “ultra” Croat and “Pan-Serb” ideologies, the Croat air force and the “token army” of King Peter – events recorded after the publication of My Native Land. So attractive has this slogan proved to be that it has brought detachments of Bulgars, Rumanians and even Italians under the Partisan tent, the Italians being remnants of the regular Fascist army in Dalmatia.
The author gives a sample experience to illustrate the attractive power of the Partisan policy.
“In normal times the city of Focha, in eastern Bosnia, was about half Serbian and half Croatian. In May 1941, the Ustashi came there and killed all the Serbians who had not got away. Five or six months later a Partisan unit, made up of both Serbians and Croatians, seized Focha. They tried and executed all the Ustashi they caught – in punishment for the crime of killing the Serbians. They did not touch any Croatian because he was Croatian. Then the Chetniks defeated the Partisans and capturing the town, killed every Croatian who had not escaped into the mountains. They killed them because they were Croatians. The people, just people, Serbians and Croatians, naturally went over to the Partisans.” (p. 84)
It does not require extraordinary powers of the imagination to envisage how swiftly the Partisan slogan “Down with Chauvinism” could, under favorable circumstances, spread far beyond the confines of the Balkans, from Bulgars to Rumanians, to Hungarians, Czechs, Poles ... Yes, even to Germans and – Soviet Russians.
 
“Down With Chauvinism!”
“Down with Chauvinism” – the answer to the national question in its most burning aspect – is however only one phase of Partisanstvo (the Partisan movement). The program cited above contains also [Point 4]. “Economic and social advances for the masses of the people – the common man – after the war.” It would be somewhat pedantic to lay stress on this last phrase, “after the war,” or to assume that it has anything in common with the “after the war” promises of the imperialist demagogues. For, insofar as the conditions of seesawing warfare permit, the Partisans are already carrying out “economic and social advances for the masses of the people.”
Adamic recites instance upon instance of temporary seizures and distribution of land among the peasants, the capture and communal operation of mines, the re-nationalization of forests previously handed out as private grants to foreign lumber interests, the confiscation of banks, not to speak of “food from army stores captured by guerillas ... distributed to the needy population ... Flour distributed among starving peasants ... Peasants (receiving) lumber for building without charge.” (p. 180) The author sums this phase of the program up as follows:
“This was resistance against occupation, but also something else – revolutionary activity clearly aimed at the traitors to the people, at those who collaborated with the enemy and its Quislings, including the Chetniks, and less clearly, but just as surely, at the economic system of pre-war and war-time Yugoslavia which allowed huge individual holdings in the face of mass poverty and permitted the vast raw resources of the country, particularly mines and forests, to be exploited by foreign capital and its native servants and by the hierarchy of the church.” (p. 178)
If point 3 of the “program” answered the strictly national question, then point 4 – as worked out in practice – is beginning to answer the agrarian problem and is even approaching the broader economic solution – nationalization. The latter is somewhat obscured, or rather, relegated to the background in these predominantly agricultural South Slav areas. The far greater emphasis that this aspect of the program would take on with the spread of the movement into industrialized sectors of Europe is self-evident.
Another phase of Partisan policy, not treated in the “program” quoted above, is that dealing with the regime, the political organization of the state. A document, introduced by the author as evidence of the repeated attempts of the Partisans to come to terms with the Chetniks and establish at least a patched-up national unity against the foreign oppressor, sheds light on this phase.
One point in this document, which forms the backbone of the contention, so to speak, and on the basis of which negotiations broke down irremediably, reads as follows:
“6. A provisioning authority which would feed the population, oversee the economy, supply the means of warfare, and organize public safety and order (should be set up). In our opinion it would be a grave mistake if in the present liberation struggle any of these functions should remain in the hands of the old county commissioners, communal executives, gendarmes, etc. To rally the population for the struggle against the occupation it is necessary to install public officers who ... would be personally close to the people and therefore in position to assume responsibility. The old gendarmes, police and county apparatus as well as the old community officials do not answer the need. The old personnel has been in the service of the occupation and is infested with enemy elements and influences. It does not enjoy the people’s confidence and is unsuitable for this critical period. We believe the national liberation committees which the people themselves have begun to establish are currently the most appropriate public representation ... These national liberation committees should be elected by the people regardless of political beliefs. In places where it is impossible to hold elections, committees should be appointed by representatives of all political groups which favor the fight for liberation. We also consider it essential to create a Central National Liberation Committee for all freed territories; and in order to maintain public order and safety we propose the organization of a people’s guard in towns and villages.” (pp. 68–69)
As is well known, this proposal – rejected by Mikhailovich’s Chetniks – has since been put into practice by the Partisans themselves, who now directly challenge the authority of the “regular” refugee Yugoslav government and demand recognition in its place. What we have here is no longer just dual power but an actual reorganization of the whole state apparatus on a new social base. In other words, a revolution.
What kind of revolution? The word Soviet remains, to be sure, unmentioned. But, if this reorganization of the state is taken in context with the rest of the program of the Partisans can there be any doubt that it represents a sector of the coming proletarian revolution in Europe already in its initial stages in predominantly agrarian territory?
From fragmentary news reports, Soviet-sponsored broadcasts, smuggled documents and private letters, Adamic has pieced together a picture of Partisan program and policy that is, if not ideally, yet adequately clear. Adamic’s picture of the origin of the movement is neither precise, nor well-documented. He quotes a former career official who escaped from Belgrade in 1942:
“The Communists were the only people in position to exploit the chaos which ensued upon the enemy’s arrival. They forthwith spread among the people numerous capable men and women, who were especially effective in Serbia where, devoting themselves to entire counties, they mobilized the peasantry ...” (p. 123)
“Communists” is not a very precise designation. Bourgeois press reports, referring to the first evidences of Partisan resistance in 1941 spoke of “Trotskyist” Communists and “Stalinist” Communists as well as of left Socialists, anarchists, etc., among the political forces participating in its organization. Adamic does not even mention these reports. If the “Communists” referred to in the Belgrade official’s story were Stalinists, then the question arises: how is it that Yugoslav Stalinists organized fighting resistance against the Nazis at a time when their French fellows, for instance, were still trying to collaborate in one way or another with the German occupation authorities? The Kremlin was still resting complacently on the laurels of its pact with Hitler. The Comintern – if that could be considered a factor in the situation – had not yet been dissolved. The exact facts are still shrouded in obscurity by the wartime censorship. And even so competent an investigator as the author of the volume under review has not yet been able to penetrate it. There is, of course, the possibility – indicated by Adamic’s silence about the early reports of “Trotskyist” Partisans – that he may in this instance, be lending support to the general obscurity.
But, even if we assume that the “Communists” who organized the Partisanstvo were indeed only Stalinists, it is hardly likely that they simply acted under Kremlin orders. More probably, cut off at the moment of invasion from direct Kremlin control, they entered into independent activity and – under the impress of actual struggle – developed a position more closely reminiscent of their early training in the Leninist International than the later corruption under Stalinism.
At any rate, up to the summer of 1942, by Adamic’s records, neither the Soviet broadcasts nor the Daily Worker in New York had made any notable mention of the Partisans. Presumably like Adamic himself they had “fallen victim to the Mikhailovich legend [1] along with everybody else.” (p. 65)
 
Effects of Soviet Victories
The actual inter-relation between what later transpired in Soviet Russia and the subsequent development of the Partisan movement is described as follows by the Belgrade career-official already quoted:
“Russia’s entrance into the war followed by Hitler’s failure to destroy the Red Army, gave the Partisans an enormous plus in the eyes of the people, to the detriment of all other guerrilla forces ... Russia’s martial successes became Partisan successes. Their propaganda said that the Partisans were the new movement, the bearers of a new idea whose immediate aim was liberation. And God knows that most of our people – the great majority – were tired of the old and had longed for something new ... Soon Partisan units began to score victories of their own ... Russia’s successful winter offensive added new prestige to the Partisans ... I must admit that as I got out of Yugoslavia (May 1942) the trend was strongly Red ... Large sections of the natsionalni elementi have ceased to count on Mikhailovich. They doubt that help can come soon enough from England and America to stop the roll of the Red wave ...” (pp. 125–126)
The program of the Partisans became more popular with the growing power displayed by the Red Army. The masses identified the two. Partisan victories began to appear as extensions of the Red Army’s victories. While Mikhailovich’s Chetniks made pacts with the Italian occupation authorities and the Nazi Quislings, the natsionalni elementi – the nationalist popular movement – went over en masse to the Partisans, attracted by this snow-balling power which has its roots in the October revolution of 1917.
Adamic devotes quite a number of pages – among the best writings in this book – tracing the mental metamorphosis of the pre-war nationalists who turned Partisan. He takes the case of Vidmar as a prism.
The reader will recall that on the eve of the war, the present Chairman of the Slovenian Liberation Front demanded the creation of an independent Slovenian state – “political oneness” – as a prerequisite for any further Slovenian interest in Balkan (or European) affairs. Here is how Adamic describes Vidmar’s further evolution. It is worth quoting at length:
“One nation’s demand for certain boundaries may be completely reasonable from its angle, but unreasonable from that of a neighboring country, or impossible in a wider international view. It may be that in 1939 or later, Josip Vidmar the nationalist came to this same impass in his own thinking.” (p. 142)
What should Slovenians do? Become “Pan-Slovenians” as the Serbians had become “Pan-Serbs”? The danger here was in arousing counter-actions among the neighboring nationalities. The danger was that like other chauvinists, Slovenians would begin to seek boundaries for economic rather than “ethnic” reasons, that they would themselves go in for the predatory politics Vidmar detested.
“At what point did a nation’s struggle for survival shift from the cultural to the ... predatory? Vidmar’s thoughts must have retraced this vicious circle. Wherein then lay the answer to Slovenia’s problem, the problem of the small nation? Time and again his thoughts must have turned to the Soviet Union ...”
“... Perhaps the basis for a sound approach to the problem of small nations was really through economics, through some big economic-political upheaval like the Russian revolution ...”
The inter-relation between economics and national culture began to appear to Vidmar in a new light.
“... Perhaps big, rich, well-developed countries like Britain and the United States could afford capitalism indefinitely ... Their great resources and technics had given them the jump on backward parts of the world ... No overwhelming outside power could interfere with what the British or American industrialist wanted to do, nothing except their own cut-throat rivalry or the objection of their countrymen would frustrate them.
“This was not the case with small countries ... A small-nation capitalist was utterly dependent on foreign capital and on ‘contracts’ with foreign agents and international racketeers-financiers; and his government, on which he also depended, was usually under foreign influence or control. The interlocking pyramid forced him, for his own survival, to support the regime In power in Belgrade or Sofia or Bucharest or Athens or Warsaw; and since the national and international set-up worked only for its own aggrandizement, his own interests inevitably worked against the interests of the people of his country. He had to share the corruption of everything in and around the small nation’s government. He had to help in the deepening of cleavages, the stirring up of chauvinism, Pan-Serbianism, ultra-Croatianism.” (p. 144)
Adamic has here traced not only the mental processes of a thoughtful nationalist. He has laid bare to the roots the whole process of the bourgeois betrayal of national interests. A process which could just as easily be traced in the recent history of France, or of Italy, as well as Yugoslavia.
Where could the South Slavs turn? According to Adamic, Vidmar answers as follows:
“Naturally the Western countries would be loath to give up the advantages that accrued from the exploitable set-up of small nations. The finance-power people in those countries would fight to keep the set-up or restore it after the war. The peoples of the big democracies would be inclined to back them, naively believing that restoration would be the democratic course. But for the small nations a return to the status quo ante was out of the question. Where to turn then? Russia, no matter What her deficiencies, had in her multi-national organization the sole answer that could possibly interest them. The Soviet Union was the only country strong enough, should they come within her sphere of interest and influence to check a return to the prewar pattern.” (p. 145)
The consistent nationalist, who sees his aspirations betrayed by the whole interplay of Western monopoly capitalist economics, turns to the Soviet East for a solution. Undoubtedly both the Red Army’s unprecedented victories, and the frightful result of chauvinist politics at home, helped in practice to put the finishing touches to his inevitable decision. And that decision, in turn, means for him: Joining forces with the revolution in action, the proletarian revolution in Europe.
It doesn’t matter whether Adamic’s analysis of what went on in Vidmar’s mind during this metamorphosis is actually true. For Adamic speaks for himself as well. And Adamic is sufficiently immersed in the problems of European politics, to serve as well as any one else as an example of what motivates the mass of the people on that unhappy continent.
As a nationalist, Adamic has of course made a tremendous advance in choosing Sovietization and the USSR, even in its degenerate form under Stalin, in preference to Anglo-American imperialism. But as a social analyst he is too backward, too inconsistent, to be taken seriously.
The same Adamic who so murderously exposes the whole scheme of Anglo-American exploitation of the nationalism of Europe’s small countries winds up this book “thanking heaven” for Churchill and imploring Willkie, Wallace and Roosevelt to give leadership in an American foreign policy which will “mean victory” in “Bikhach, Bosnia”!
This student of European politics who realizes that the “finance-power people” in the Western countries will fight to keep or restore the old Balkan set-up, nevertheless, hopes and thinks it possible that they will tolerate an East European federation that “would go Left socially and economically and would follow the Soviet multi-national cultural policy.”
Perhaps Adamic has been so deeply engrossed with events in Yugoslavia that he has had no opportunity to follow Amgot’s policy in North Africa and Italy, where American and British “democrats” have already provided us with a few samples of what they intend for the rest of Europe.
Moreover, Adamic omits to mention just how he reconciles the Partisans’ “Down with Chauvinism” with the Stalinist campaign of chauvinism which accompanies the Red Armies in their advance against the German military machine.
He speaks of the example of the Soviet multi-national policy, but what thoughts does he have on the Stalinist “abolition” of the Volga German republics, the alleged Siberian settlement of several million Poles, not to speak of the Stalin-Hitler pact that violated the national independence of Poland and gave a weapon to Polish chauvinists? Or the manner in which the Kremlin conducted war against Finland in 1940 and presented all the imperialists with the pretext for posing as champions of small nations? Of all this there is no mention in his book. And yet, the very onward march of the Red Armies will soon raise all these questions in Europe as burning issues, on which sides will be taken and answers made.
However, Adamic is not, for all of his pro-Soviet – more correctly pro-Stalinist – orientation, altogether at ease with the prospect of the future development of Kremlin policy. He says:
“No one knows how strong Russia will actually be after the war. If she is not strong enough to challenge the reactionary forces in Britain and America if they push their way to the top, as they well might, then she may be forced into reaction herself. Back on her defensive, she may try to become a little like the western powers – in anything but the best sense. I think that Joseph E. Davies and other big capitalist-Industrialists who are making up to Russia have this in mind. I think Churchill is hoping that Stalin will become one of the boys.” (pp. 471–472)
But, Adamic does not attempt to go beyond these conjectures, into a political analysis of the Stalin regime. As a matter of fact, he has become one of the pillars of the Stalinist front organizations in this country. No matter what his own personal future may be, Adamic’s My Native Land does tell the story of the Partisans. And this story indicates the road of the European revolution in the making.
For Marxists this story is a striking affirmation of the correctness of the slogan, “Socialist United States of Europe” as the central rallying cry in that revolution. That slogan implies that the solution of the national question in Europe must be sought, first and foremost, along internationalist lines, in an intimate tie-up with a thorough-going class-struggle policy.
“For National Independence!” is an empty slogan which demagogues can fill with a false and even dangerous content. Democratic demands, the demand for constituent assemblies, for elections, for parliamentary government may or may not play an important role in the development of the revolution. Revolutionists will of course support and raise these demands when and where they can become pivots of the struggle against imperialism. But the slogan of “Socialist United States of Europe,” with its inherent support of the right of self-determination of peoples and the demand for power to Workers Councils will and must be raised by revolutionists from the first. This slogan serves not only to distinguish the Marxists from the nationalist fakers of all shades, but also to express the deep-rooted aspirations, both national and social, of the masses of the continent as they face the declining power of the Nazi occupation and the rising might of Yankee imperialism.
In the end, the insurgent European masses rallying to this struggle will overpower not only these two colossal oppressors. They will also, by the very logic of their development overcome the Stalinist attempt to corrode and corrupt the revolution from within. As this movement spreads and takes on its positive form, reaching the heart of the continent, it will sound the death knell not only of imperialism in Europe, but of Stalinism in the Soviet Union as well.
* * *
Footnote
1. Adamic describes in detail how this “legend” was manufactured and fostered by Allied intelligence and propaganda agencies (pp. 39–46); and continually refers to its misuse in efforts to combat the rise and popularity of Partisanstvo. But Adamic slurs over the role of the Stalinists in Moscow and abroad who themselves aided at the time in spreading the “Mikhailovich legend.”
 



They Who Wait
by Robert Guerlain
New York, 1943. Published by Thomas Y. Crowell Company.
The publisher’s blurb informs us:
“The man who calls himself Robert Guerlain fought in the French Army, was captured in the Battle of the Somme, was released under the Vichy Armistice terms. He made his way to Africa, then somehow to South Africa and at last to this country. He is fighting the Nazis once more – this time with the Fighting French.”
The author is a French patriot and this book is an account of his experiences and impressions in German prison camps. Despite, or rather, because of his avowed convictions, this account is all the more significant for internationalists, for class conscious workers.
There is, to be sure, the usual account of Gestapo atrocities that we find elsewhere. But here the false note of propagandistic blare is missing. The atrocity stories have the same authentic ring as the stories of confused but good-natured German medical officers, for instance, and precisely because the two types are linked in an effort to tell the many-sided truth. Guerlain has an ax to grind. Make no mistake about that. He propagates French patriotism. But he has not just sat in a newspaper or government office all his life. He has gone through the bitter, indelible fate of a rank and file prisoner of war. Something compels him to tell the truth.
Here is the record of the efficient utilization of millions of war prisoners and “volunteers” from the occupied countries by the Nazi regime into a gigantic slave army. But here also is the record of an inter-bureaucratic struggle in the vaunted “modern slave state” that is not only reminiscent of the much-attacked New Deal chaos, but even makes the latter look picayune. Just one sample:
“Herr Oberregierungsrat Braun of the Landesarbeitsamt may have needed five hundred men for an urgent piece of work, so urgent that he collected them from the barracks without notifying the Kommandantur.” (p. 105)
Or another:
“The S.S. Standartenfuehrer Mueller ... coming across a Kommando party doing a job which he considers superfluous, takes it upon himself to transfer these men to another location, where more important work was to be done – for instance, to his own farm ...” (p. 106)
Or, there is the story of the Nazi official who, for 5,000 almost worthless francs, “transformed a prisoner of Jewish origin into an Aryan,” or a white officer into a colored private to be repatriated to Morocco.
Everything is meticulously indexed and cross-indexed but “never reflects the true state of things.” The military blames the Gestapo; the latter the Labor ministry, etc. “But there is nothing they can do about it. Things are not so enormously different in this model of slave efficiency from what they were in the Habsburg regime of the Good Soldier Schweik’s day.
The author has a characteristic “French” explanation. The system works well with the Germans, who react with some mystic rigidity to perform orders given and refrain from what is verboten. It breaks down when it is applied to the spirited Frenchmen and to non-Germans in general. But the internal evidence of Guerlain’s own narrative shows how hollow this “explanation” is. For he recounts innumerable instances that contradict it. On the one hand, there are the quite numerous French “slavers” as he calls them, prisoners like himself who work themselves into the Nazi machine with great proficiency and who are more rigid about orders and “verbotens” than their German prototypes. Guerlain devotes a whole chapter to them. (pp. 22–31) On the other, there are types also not negligible in number, like Herr Unteroffizier Weberstadt, who act on the fundamental axiom “of his belief: In a choice between my own officers and the enemy, I’m more afraid of the officers.” He winked at regulations, rarely appeared in the barracks which he “largely abandoned to the administration of the French non-coms.”
No, the explanation is much more simple. The system works in “normal” times, when the masters have complete sway over the “slaves.” The vicissitudes of war loosen their control more and more and give the “slaves” untold opportunities to contravene it.
Perhaps the most interesting and pertinent account in the book deals with the prisoners’ experiences in the factories, where they are sent as Arbeitskommandos because of the extreme labor shortage. It is worth quoting at length.
“In many factories, a real ‘collaboration’ has grown up between the German workers and the French prisoners, a collaboration, however, which is far removed in spirit from that which exists between Berlin and Vichy. Tacit or open agreements have teen entered into not to exceed a certain speed of work. This is a fact which prisoners returning from German factories have been unanimous in emphasizing, that on the part of older German workers particularly in the metallurgical plants there is a very manifest tendency to slow up the rhythm of production. It is only secondarily caused by the frank opposition to the regime, its principal aim is a fight against the lowering of wages, against the decrease in rates for piece work. And this lack of zeal is not only obvious but involves a real drop in production; every prisoner familiar with the trade can easily see that the output of this type of German worker is vastly below that which had been the general rule during peacetime in similar factories of French industry.” (p. 86, our emphasis)
Shades of the struggle against the “Little Steel” formula! Shades of the myriad unauthorized strikes of the British workers!
No wonder (as the Office of War Information in Washington has established) that Hitler’s radio keeps completely mum on American strikes! No wonder that the General Marshalls, in their broadsides against American labor, keep mum about these German class struggles!
In a very real sense, the “collaboration” established between German workers and French prisoners extends much further than Guerlain realizes. It extends to the pits in Newcastle and to the plants in Detroit.
The author has many more heartening messages. The discussions among the French prisoners themselves, which he reports, reveal the class cleavages. Souhard, the little shoe manufacturer from Limoges “understands” the “plight” of Petain. Vandamme, the worker from Maubeuge, in his deepest despair doesn’t give a damn whether his country is ravaged by German masters directly or through French lackeys. He can’t “understand.” And so on. But to the revolutionists it is the author’s preoccupation with the state of mind of the German workers that is most absorbing.
“The majority of German workers who remain in the factories belong to a very special category: they are older men, men too old either to have been contaminated by Nazi ideology or to bear arms. Moreover, their special technical qualities, by making them indispensable to the war economy, also allow them a measure of free expression, and give them a kind of nonchalance, further augmented by the fact that they feel secure among themselves in their workshops, among men, with whom, in general, they have been working for years, sometimes for decades. Most of these workers knew each other at a time when they were still unionized, when they still belonged to the leftist parties. They are fully aware of those among them who have become suspect, those who must be watched – but why bother to hide their thoughts from others, and especially from the prisoners?” (pp. 85–86)
These are the men who organize the “slow ups.” Let the faint hearts who see only the power of the “modern slave state” and the “atomization” of the working class in Germany and Europe stew in their moods. For revolutionists, this is just another confirmation of their confidence in the inexhaustible and irrepressible strength of the class struggle.
In addition to the 1,600,000 Frenchmen, the author states “are millions of other prisoners – Poles, Yugoslavs, Belgians, Dutch and Russians – and more millions of voluntary civilian workers coming from all parts of subjugated Europe. These men often work beside Germans who have little enthusiasm for the regime, and even beside German political prisoners.” (p. 88)
Can there be any doubt as to what this experience will mean for the European working class? Can there be any doubt as to which will be the victor in the struggle between chauvinism and proletarian solidarity? Against this powerful trend toward an all-European workers’ revolution, is it any wonder that the Kremlin bureaucracy twists and tosses like a man in a fever? There is another incident reported which is very quotable. It is from a conversation between Weberstadt, the German steel worker in a non-com’s uniform, and Vandamme, the French proletarian, who is his prison charge.
“D’you think I’m any better off than you? We’re all prisoners; You, your friends, I and all the others,” says Weberstadt: He goes on to relate the “fruits” of the last war in which he served: lifelong scars and injuries; unemployment for five years after 1918; no job again between 1931 and 1934; a wife who had to toil to feed him and the kids in those times; and now – three sons and himself again soldiers in a war. He then says:
“It’s like in 1914-18, only worse. I can’t tell you everything: There are spies everywhere even among the Frenchmen, men who not only denounce their own comrades but also the German soldiers ... War! It’s always the same and it’s always the same people who profit. Why don’t they fight each other and let us alone? Let Hitler fight Churchill by himself, if he wants, or Roosevelt; the others – you and I and the rest of the world – will just look on and when it’s over we’ll go home and hang the ones that are left!” (p. 138)
Weberstadt is an old Social Democrat. Obviously he doesn’t share the enthusiasm of his exiled “representatives” for the fathers of the Atlantic Charter. But, to go on. Vandamme answers:
“Germans who think like you should understand that an Allied victory against Hitler will help them too. For if England wins you’ll be rid of the Nazi regime.” (p. 139)
The French worker who, the author tells us, in 1939 and 1940 could not summon up any enthusiasm himself for “his war” has obviously lost his class bearing somewhat in the years of his suffering as a Nazi prisoner.
“Well, yes,” the German answers, “that’s what I thought in the beginning. But it often seems to me that they’re not fighting the war against Hitler at all. D’you think Hitler could have become what he is without foreign assistance? And are the same foreigners who financed him, who supported him both before and after 1933, going to rid us of him today?” (p. 139, our emphasis)
The author reports no reply from Vandamme, who had been flogged by a Nazi swine previous to this conversation. He doesn’t attempt an answer of his own. He merely reports that Weberstadt proffers a bag of sweets to his French friends. “Eat the drops; they’re from my wife,” he says. Vadamme says nothing. “With an abrupt movement, the latter stuffed Weberstadt’s ridiculous present into his pocket.”
The gestures seem to be symbolic. If the gift seems “ridiculous,” we can be sure that the accompanying arguments are not so at all. For the German’s unanswerable thoughts and the Frenchman’s understandable silence profoundly reflect the European present and indicate its certain future.
Guerlain writes of the period ending just before the attack on the Soviet Union. The stormier unfolding of the situation since then must be left to our imagination for the time being. But his testimony, because it comes from one who is remote from any association with our ideas, is for all that an even more invaluable weapon for the Marxist program.
 



The minor effects of the world crisis which French industry has already come to experience (textile, wines, etc.) and the pessimistic perspectives created for it by the recently adopted U.S. protective tariff, do not as yet lead the French bourgeoisie to seek methods of despair (“fascisation”) as the Party here would have us believe. It senses trouble for the future to be sure, It knows that the crisis is not going to leave France economically immaculate. And for this very reason it strains every effort to reinforce and consolidate its present political domination in the country. A stable bourgeois bloc, purged of all “extremist” elements, is its chief aim.
This was clearly, demonstrated by the recent speech of Tardieu at Dijon. By threat and by persuasion he hopes to win over the Radicals to his Republican Concentration, because it is these that he needs to assure stability to his class-government. He openly admits that there are serious problems facing his class (the agricultural crisis, financial disorder, etc.) and he makes a strong plea for cooperation to the different bourgeois parties – on the basis of what he has already “accomplished.” As a major part of his “accomplishments” he cites his strong-handed suppression of Communist influence! This Communist influence, two, three years ago, was menacing. Today it is impotent! Now, he sees as the task of the government: “positive” achievement.
 
The Party up a Blind Alley
The Party writers pass over in painful silence this enemy class estimate of the movement. For, it is the solemn truth. The First of May, the inaction displayed in the campaign for the 13 martyrs of Yen-Bay attests it. Yet nothing stirs the leadership from their philistine complacency. Vacant, optimistic phrases are still the substitute for effective class action. As long as the Party will not realize that a strong, solid working class resistance must be assembled to oppose the concentrated power of the bourgeoisie, its influence is going to decline still further. And such a working-class resistance cannot be achieved by “third period” antics, by mechanical control of the mass organizations, by bureaucratic execution of the trade union work, by leaving the basis of reality. By these methods, it only drives the workers into the arms of the reformists of all shades socialists, popists or syndicalist minoritaires. By these methods it discredits Communism as a whole in the eyes of the workers. The masses have to be educated through all possible phases of collective struggle for their historic class task and not by light-headed optimism and talk.
 
Opposition Growth
With all this tragic sterility of the Party leadership, the situation is, however, by no means hopeless. The Left Opposition is always there, watchfully exerting its pressure, struggling to revitalize the Party. The progress of the Left group is increasing. It was the Ligue Communiste which in conjunction with a majority of Annamite Communists here (who, after having, carefully studied the events of the Chinese revolution know where to find proper Communist guidance for their own) organized the first, real protest demonstration against the executions of Yen-Bay, before the president’s palace. This demonstration and the impression it made upon the bourgeoisie contributed a great deal to awaken the membership of the Party to the insufficiency of the leadership and to force the Party itself into (belated) action, governmental measures striking our comrades heavily (expulsion and prison).
In the North of France a strong detachment of the regional C.G.T.U. has joined the Opposition Unitaire (which rallies about the political program of the Left Opposition and the Verité.) The C.G.T.U. Left Opposition is rapidly developing, parrying successfully the calumniating attacks of the both the Stalinist majoritaires and the syndicalist minoritaires (“Committee for Trade Union Independence”). In the Party itself, different nuclei and subsections (Tours, 13th Arrondissement, Paris etc.) have started a struggle against the false policy of the leadership, backing and declaring their full support of the Left Opposition. The struggle for the Party and for the reestablishment of a Leninist line has only begun.
 



The Communist Party of France and the French revolutionary trade unions have had, ever since their foundation, a considerable handicap in the struggle for influence among the workers. The powerful wave of post-war revolution carried an enthusiastic majority of the old Socialist Party over into the ranks of communism, at the scission of Tours. The splitting, bureaucratic policy of the Jouhaux-led C.G.T. drove still more workers toward the revolutionary trade union center, the C.G.T.U., born under the United Front slogan. Thus, organizationally, the original post-war conditions favored the revolutionary movement, gave the Communists a considerable advantage over the yellow reformists.
 
The Stalinist Course in France
However the vacillating, equivocal, adventurist character of the Comintern “line” after Lenin’s death, initiated, as elsewhere, in France too, a serious disintegration of the revolutionary ranks particularly as far as the political side of the movement is concerned. The membership of the Party has been almost decimated. (From well over 120,000 members after Tours, there remain now from 15 to 30,000.) The influence of the press has immensely fallen. The socialists have been able to recover and strengthen their positions – at the expense of the Communists.
An example of passive reaction among the rank and file, was offered to view on the First of May. The Party and the C.G.T.U. issued a manifesto, calling for a “Day of Struggle” appealing to their adherents to come “All into the Streets”. What actually happened, was this:
In Paris and in the suburbs several hundreds of thousands of workers struck, obeying the call, not only of the C.G.T.U. and the Communists, but also that of the C.G.T. and the S.P. There were, however, no demonstrations, no meetings, whatsoever,
At the Grange-Aux-Belles, the C.G.T.U. headquarters, only the flics (cops) were to be seen in appreciable numbers. Rue Lafayette (the Party office) was likewise deserted. At the Sante prison, where the Party called for a demonstration in the evening, there was instead a veritable demonstration – of flics ...
 
Rise of Left Opposition
Why this inactivity, why this apathy among workers organized in hundreds of thousands in mass revolutionary organizations? The apparachiki, the greater and the lesser bureaucrat, explain this away with “self-criticism”. They didn’t make a “bon boulot” (good job) of the preparation! They are in general imbued with an entirely non-Communist, non-Marxist spirit of subjectivism. Revolution to them is merely an administrative affair, a matter of stereotyped routine. As a result: Among the youth a positive abhorrence for theory, a strong inclination for “revolutionary gymnastics”, for the many times over discredited and unmasked “Hervéism”. Among the adults, slavish execution of “instructions”.
The more serious, the more sincere elements in the Party and the League have, however, lately begun to be affected by the meager results of their work. They are beginning to think things over. In the C.G.T.U. these element are rapidly developing into a principled, pro-Party. anti-bureaucratic opposition, grouping themselves about our comrades of the Verité and the Ligue Communiste. Among the youth, a similar process is taking place,
The Stalinist apparatus-men have, in fact, become alarmed already. They are now groping about for a suitable label to tag on to these new oppositionists, before proceeding with the customary suspensions and expulsion measures. And this groping about displays a pitiful intellectual confusion, a true reflection of chained intelligence.
The editorial of the May number of the Cahiers du Bolshevisme sets itself the task of “analyzing” the new opposition. The objectives that guide the “analysis” are clear. One, to discover a scape-goat upon which to cast the guilt for the errors committed by the bureaucrats themselves since the inauguration of the “third period” – and lately condemned by the infallible Manuilsky-Stalin. The other, to discredit the real opposition as much as possible in the eyes of the workers.
The second objective produces only a barrage of abuse and slander, which the workers will hardly tolerate. The new oppositionists are called “centrists”, allies of the “Popists”, “hidden opportunists”, “agents of the reformist minoritaires” and similar epithets. But it is well known, that the militants of the new C.G.T.U. opposition have always fought the syndicalists and opportunist tendencies of the Monatte group as well as of the Rights. Comrades like Aulas, Douemanget, Villatte possess a prestige among the workers for that. After “analyzing” the opposition “currents” into “pessimists” and “left phrase mongers” (the discovery, then, of some ephemeral “Merker” group in France?!) the editorial writer proceeds with illuminations.
 
Finding a Scape-Goat
“As to the latter,” he writes, “they displace the practical work by bombast and by mechanical procedure (!) and surrender themselves to Leftist demagogy (exaggeration of the crisis (!!) slogan of the conquest of power as a practical task (so!) etc.).” A perusal of the Humanité of the “third period” in any arrangement of days whatsoever would enable anyone to call these mysterious “latter” by their real given names. But – it seems – the “texts” were, nevertheless, correct; the question here deals, with such “latter” phrase-mongers, who “... interpreted the texts, falsely denatured our estimations” etc. It is clear that” this to date non-existent ultra-Left “group” is to be picked in the main from the conscientious lower layers of functionaries who simply took the slogans issued by the directing organs on good faith. To those are to be attributed all the sins of the “Left turn” in the first section of the third period just finished.
However, it is extremely difficult to find an “important” personage who has gained the disfavor of the council of the All-High, to attach to this group as a sort of a lodestone. Even Vassart, among the leading until recently in the Party and the C.G.T.U. can only merit the label “pessimist” (despite his well-known attack against Chambelland of the “forty years of social peace”). This is a real dilemma for the analyst. Yet, the new opposition has been “proven” an ally of the Right wing: Vassart as “skeptic” and “pessimist” has been created a confederate of Chambelland, in the Party ranks and even those ephemeral Leftists are some sort of opportunists anyway. And so, our writer trembling for his own hide (as Lovestone, for instance, did for his, in the days of our own Trotskyist Right danger) concludes:
“In our Party we cannot speak of two battle fronts (this is already sacrilege) as among the youth (reference to Manuilsky). The few Left errors, which might have been committed by good revolutionary workers ought to be eliminated, but they should not to be confused with the ‘Left’ bombast of several braggarts (!) who by that means attempt to disguise their opportunism. There is only one opportunist front with different shadings which we have underlined above.”
 
The Perspectives
This confusion, this uneasiness in the ranks of the bureaucracy, marks an impending crisis. Couple this bureaucratic uneasiness with the growing dissatisfaction among the better rank and file elements who watch in pain and despair, the fluctuation and the diminution of the Party influence, who begin to recognize the disrespect, the neglect of revolutionary theory, as the source of the evil, and we perceive the dawn of a fierce inner struggle in the French Party, an important opportunity to lead to the rehabilitation of the Party as the party of the proletariat. The French section of the International Left Opposition, under the leadership of L.D. Trotsky and the Russian Leninist-Bolaheviks, will be at its post in the days to come. Under the banner of Leninism, it will fight to lead the French Parly on to the correct Communist path, as part of the struggle for the renovation of the Comintern.



Paris, May 10


S.G.



 



The German working class is now going through a far severer period of economic and moral depression than even the most pessimistic tables of statisticians can describe. It takes an insight into the conditions of the average proletarian family to establish this. Vegetable-butter (margarine) is found everywhere at the workingman’s table instead of butter. The diet is entirely devoid of eggs. Only the most meager portions of meat find their way to the worker’s stomach. Malt coffee has displaced bean coffee, and so on without end. In short, the working class diet consists in large measure of what was termed during the war and inflation periods ersatzlebenmittel (substitute products).
Professor Kucsinski, a bourgeois economist has figured out that the worker receives in wages only 85% of what he needs for a minimum standard of living! This at the same time that German industry increases its production by leaps and bounds. And yet the reformists, still backed by a majority of the working class, shout: Accumulate! Accumulate! For them the way out of this working class misery lies in the accumulation of capital in Germany. There are more than 3,000,000 unemployed in the Reich, more than half a million in Berlin alone. There is hardly a family in proletarian Berlin that hasn’t its stempelbruder. Unemployment insurance, of which the ‘’social” state, Germany, so proudly boasts as against the unsocial U.S., is hardly enough to keep its recipient alive. The result is that the unemployed fill the “welfare offices” and “aid societies” day after day and are forced to degrade themselves to virtual beggars. The moral effects can be imagined.
The coalition government of the Reich is very shaky. It has done its work. It has brought about the reduction in unemployment insurance and the arbitration clauses through Wissel; it has cast the burden of the taxes on the working class through Hilferding. Severing’s anti-Communist “Law for the Protection of the Republic” completes the circuit. Finance capital is preparing the boot for its social democratic lackeys. It needs more “resolute” servants for its purpose in the period to come.
The entire German economic system of the immediate future will live in the shadow of the recent Wall Street crash. A German economic journal writes on this: “It is probable that at least partially the economic cooperation of similarly constructed concerns of the countries involved will take place of the formerly customary loan grants, namely, those made to the large industrial states like Germany, for instance, which (economic cooperation) powerful American capitalist enterprizes will finance.” (Zeitschrift d. Deutsch-Ameri. Wirtschaft, Ver., December 1929) ... The favorable German industrial conditions, to be made yet more favorable by the greater depression of the German working masses soon to follow, now attract all the capital that formerly went to the prosperity-promising American industry. This means an advanced internationalization of industrial capital and a firmer grip on the latter by world finance capital (Morgan and Co.). How this works out in Germany may be gathered from the growing dictatorial strength of Morgan’s German representative, Hjalmar Schacht, the president of the Reichsbank. Herr Schacht is the man who tumbled Hilferding from his ministerial chair, because he was not far-reaching enough in his “reforms” and because, for reasons of political demagogy, he didn’t go in energetically for immediately carrying out these reforms. Schacht is also the leader in the movement for the “decommunalization” of Germany, i.e., for the abolition of communal expenditure. An example of ringing success of Mr. Schacht’s plans was shown recently in Berlin, where the city council voted a Christmas surplus for the unemployed, which the magistrate, under Schacht’s direction immediately repudiated.
In German politics, the situation finds a mirror and barometer. The coalition government is nearing the end of its string. Its prospective collapse is on the order of the day. The national “Right” is in a deep crisis. Those elements backed by heavy industry, like the Landbund and Stahlhelm, are breaking way from the irreconcilable Rights around Hugenburg and Hitler and are going in for a policy of supporting the status quo of the republic, because “it is developing In a direction towards us”. Even Hitler is willing to “listen to reason”. His papers are full of praise for Schacht, and despite all their radicalism and sham “revolutionary socialism” they write that they are for such a payment of reparations as the “nation finds bearable.”
The C.P. of Germany is thus facing a very serious but promising state of conditions. Its victory in the Berlin elections was a real one, all the more significant because the Party campaign program was altogether out of proportions to real affairs – to the “Left”. It is no exaggeration to say that a considerable majority of the Berlin proletariat is behind the Party and places all its confidence in it. Whether the party will be able to hold this mass and increase it depends entirely upon how much sanity it will apply in its tactics in the trade unions and towards the increasingly disillusioned workers who still follow the S.P. while discontent within the reformist organization is growing, while rebellion against the treacherous leadership is brewing.
As a whole, the party seems to have sobered a good deal lately. The calls to arms echo very faintly in the press today. In the trade unions as well as in the party itself, the stress is being laid on organizational work. But the ultra-Left tactic of “revolutionary” kampfleitungen (struggle leadership) and separate factory council lists has not been given up and may still do it much harm. In many factories (e.g., Ullstein, Siemens) where the largest Communist nuclei exist, these nuclei have pitted themselves almost unanimously against the party tactic. In the question of “social fascism”, the Communist workers have solved the problem in their own way. They explain to the S.P. workers in discussion that the word is applied only to the social democratic leaders, to the “comrade”-ministers, etc.
The campaign of terror which the authorities and the bourgeois press have been conducting for some time against the party and the militant sections of the class is taking on ever greater proportions. Falsification, slander and provocation fill the air. The revolutionary masses are increasingly aroused to counteract violently to this terror, and the party functionaries sweat blood to keep the people in check at demonstrations and public meetings. The party’s effort to connect the active discontent of the unemployed with solidarity actions of the workers in the factories is to be applauded. But here too it will not do to restrict oneself to phrases alone.
* * *
On the occasion of initiating a formal “Stalin cult”, the Rote Fahne has not overlooked any opportunities to make personal attacks upon comrade Trotsky. It is significant to note who the attackers are, and how they attack. Heinz Neumann, accused by the social democrats and the Brandlerites (without any refutation up-to-date) of being in close connection with the German police is the star – using the occasion of a review of Willi Munzenburg’s latest book Die Dritte Front. He pits Munzenburg’s “collective” spirit against Trotsky’s “gnawing egotism”. This is just too ridiculous, even when we overlook the incongruity of the comparison. For, as you know, upon Munzenburg’s head hang the following charges made by Herzog, the editor of Das Forum: breaking the foreign trade monopoly of the Soviet Union, speculating with goods sent to relieve the Russian famine in 1921, misappropriation of W.I.R. funds – all for personal purposes. As far as I know Munzenburg has not as yet made answer to these charges.
While Willi does a thriving business with his newspaper concerns, and lives in princely luxury in his home at “In den Zelten,” comrade Trotsky, the “egoist” lives the life of exile in backward Turkey, refused a visum by the rest of the planet. Perhaps Heinz Neumann will make us believe that this ban is due to nothing more than Trotsky’s “gnawing egotism”. The workers know better. They know that in Trotsky the bourgeois world fears the personification of that “haunting specter” that is rocking the foundations of the capitalist system, of victorious Communism.
* * *
The Brandlerites have had considerable success lately – in a material way: they have finally begun to publish a daily which appears in Leipzig. In Berlin, their publications have to be sought for with a searchlight.
How Brandler goes about in organizing his international faction may be seen from his article on the amalgamation of the three Czecho-Slovakian opportunist groups. Brandler was present on the scene of action. His role can only be imagined. He writes, among other things:
“Only when the united opposition applies the united front tactic wrongly will the confederation (amalgamation) be, not a step forward, but a retreat. But there is no occasion to assume this, despite (!) the false formula of ‘class conscious parties’ (referring to united front with the social democrats – S.G. – See last issue of Militant – Ed.) in the unity resolution.” (Gegen den Strom, No. 1, 1930)
Brandler reprints Lovestone’s articles on the International, which are only an echo of his own and Roy’s articles. Where Roy writes: “It is unfortunate that the factional struggle in the C.P.S.U. lost such valuable revolutionaries as Trotsky for the movement”, Lovestone, for his own purposes, substitutes Zinoviev for Trotsky, and Brandler adds a little note, remarking that after Lenin’s death, Zinoviev never played an independent role in the International. A similar instance of “differences” is Roy’s “polemic’’ against Wolfe, in which he criticizes the latter’s theory that the resolutions of the Sixth Congress were correct, but were revised at the Tenth Plenum. Here too, the theory is made to fit “national” purposes.
I visited a Brandler meeting recently. Brandler gave a pretty accurate appraisal of conditions in Germany, from which there was much to learn. When he was asked in the discussion part how the Communist Party and the International came to be in such a position of impotence at present, he simply answered that this condition is due to the failure of the revolution to arrive in the rest of Europe and to the increasing difficulties in the building up of socialism in Russia. Almost in the form of asides, he remarked that the failure of the revolution in Germany in 1923 was due to the threat of the Entente to come to the aid of bourgeois Germany (!) and further:
“Even the skilled leadership of Marx and Engels was not able to hold together the First International, built on centralized direction. Its decomposition showed that it is necessary that the proletariat of each country work out its own problems in the struggle for power.”



 
Berlin, January 10, 1930


S. GORDON



 



Berlin
The past few weeks have evidenced new surges in the unemployment wave. Each month adds at least 40,000 new recruits to the army of the jobless. But the work is still in the stage of ascent and has not at all reached its high point as yet. No one has any illusions about this. Quite the contrary:
The statistical publication of the Institut für Konjunkturforschung reckons with an enormous growth of unemployment in the spring, due to the matriculation and introduction into industry of about half a million young workers, apprentices. This is aside from the regular conjunctural increases (seasonal, etc.). It adds: that in order to keep unemployment from becoming menacingly critical, Germany would have to increase its exports at the present rate of 100 million Reichsmarks per month. Which looks quite impossible at present.
Another issue of the same periodical reports a semi-monthly decrease of 0.1% in the consumption of nourishing foods among the working class population. When we keep in mind the recent fall of prices in eggs, milk, butter, meat, “colonial wares” (cocoa, etc.) and in food products in general, we can realize the importance of even such a “harmless” figure to its full extent.
Unemployment, and the reduction of maintenance for the unemployed (Hilferding only prepared the ground for a steady procedure towards the liquidation of the maintenance) in direct proportion to each other and – inversely with food consumption. Three million unemployed – with their families this means: nine million beings on starvation rations. This means the most gruesome misery for one-seventh of the population, a fate that awaits millions more in the period to come.
 
Bourgeoisie on the Offensive
So intrenched has the ruling class become with the aid of their reformist lackeys, that it has resolved to discard them completely from their employ in politics and to subjugate them completely in their service as trade union agents. The bourgeoisie are out for the whole booty. In a recent number of its official organ, the Arbeitgeber, it demands of the A.D.G.B. leaders, half in threat, half in entreaty, full subordination. It demands that the reformist bureaucracy surrender the “American” ‘theory that high wages bring prosperity’; it demands of them (who have shown such concern for the “recuperation” of “German” industry, for the promotion of the “national” export trade, etc.) a promise not to ask for a wage increase when most of the wage-agreements in the metal and textile industries terminate (in the spring and fall of this year). Because, they entreat: all the benefits that you and we, in our concentrated efforts to “unburden industry” by recoiling from all mention of industrial increases, by stuffing the Young plan obligations upon the “broad” shoulders of the proletariat – because, all this noble work which we have accomplished for the “national weal” – will be spoiled by such a demand.
 
Social Democrats Continue to Sell Out Workers
And they hold up the shining example of sacrifice that Bill Green and the other darlings of the American bourgeoisie made lor the “common good”, when these A.F. of L. fakers, in the now famous conference with Hoover and the bosses, promised not to “annoy” the latter with similar demands in “the period of national crisis”.
The reformists will capitulate here too – according to precedent. For the ultimate good of their economic philosophy is the accumulation of capital for the promotion of the export trade and the capitalist import. No sacrifice, no working class sacrifice, is too great for these reptiles who still have the audacity to call themselves representatives of the workers. (In their zeal for betrayal they are far to the Right of even some bourgeois liberals, like the well-known economist, Prof. Bernhard, who sees a solution to the capitalists’ troubles in price sinking in the domestic market, in place of what he calls wasteful dumping on the foreign market.) The main things for them are the government posts and their salaries. For the sake of these, everything else will be surrendered. Amsterdam and the A.D.G.B. have moved so far in the direction of Mathew Woll, that it becomes really difficult to find the least distinction between them. Each delivers the goods to the national bosses. Each according to the local needs.
 
The Attacks on the Workers’ Organizations
Naturally, the economic offensive of the bosses is only the axis of an offensive all along the line. While the unemployed are being robbed of their last support, the bourgeoisie are feverishly arming the soldiers of civil war, the police. The state budget “cannot” meet its slightest obligations to the starving, but it can and does proportion enormous sums for the equipment of churches and for every other means of strangling the working class. But the hungry masses can’t and won’t let themselves be intimidated by the blackjacks of the police, by lead balls, or by horses’ hoofs. There is a limit to silent suffering.
The bosses and their social-democratic police sergeants think that by slandering the Soviet Union, that by jailing the editors of the militant labor press, that by dissolving the proletarian defense organizations and by driving the leader of the working class, the Communist Party, underground, they will stifle the angry protest of the hungry nine millions. They will be sadly disappointed.
The party, overpowered and made impotent by its hazardous course of empty phrases, is struggling to disentangle itself from the self-imposed shackles. It is having a very hard time. It has lost many positions in the trade unions; a rebellion has spread among its own functionaries.
 
The Opportunism of the Brandlerites
Now that the militant spirit of solidarity has really impregnated a broad layer of workers and unemployed, with and without the aid of the Party, the Brandlerists are very reticent with “positive proposals” for action, of which they usually have their mouths full. The 6th of March they don’t consider worth noticing. Instead of making any move for a united front (desired or not) with the Party, to exploit the favorable situation for immediate action, the programists, the apostles of “mass work”, are concentrating all their attention to win the trade union rebels of the Party for their factional platform. Their “emergency program” is an opportunist piece of work. It appeals for a broad proletarian defensive struggle, for immediate demands for relief and unburdening of the masses. Very good. But it does not point out a single guiding principle, by which the social democratic, Catholic workers can find their way after the experiences of the impending struggles, into the red front of the proletarian revolution, into the ranks of the Communists.
 
The Need For a Clear Left Communist Opposition
The Communist Party is in agony. The leaders are helpless. They have shown themselves as pitifully incompetent as theoreticians and, consequently, as organizers. A strong left opposition, clear in principles, homogeneous in its own ranks, equipped with a real bolshevik platform and an unequivocal attitude toward the role of the Party, could fill a burning need in Germany at present. The masses are ready to begin the struggle, which is to mold them into a solid phalanx against the tottering capitalist order.



 
March 2nd


S. GORDON



 



The outcome of the German elections has been a violent – though not unexpected – political shake-up, an indication of the rapid shifting of class forces that has been taking place for some time – to be precise since the adoption of the Young Plan. The enormous Fascist victory and the quite substantial gains of the Communist Party are only the beginning of a radical trend which German politics will follow in the days to come. We may yet witness many vacillations in the degree of influence of the Fascists and the C.P.G. during the course of developments, but with the increasing enslavement of the German proletariat through unemployment, taxation and wage cuts; with the progressive impoverishment and deceasing of the small bourgeoisie due to the ruthless attempt of the capitalist class to force the burden of the reparations on the lower classes, the dilemma: Fascism or Communism, is definitely on the order of the day in Germany. With such a perspective before us, it would be well to review the progress of the German Communist Party, to inspect its forces and fighting ability. The elections brought the Party a gain of over 1,000,000 votes, not be overestimated in importance when we consider the almost octupled increase of the Fascists (over 5,000,000!), but nevertheless a great advance, especially taking into account the gains in such a strategic center as Berlin, where the Communists surpassed the social democrats and became the strongest party. However, we must ask ourselves: How did the Party face the elections? How did it appeal to the workers on this occasion? These questions are indispensable for a real accounting.
 
The C.P.G.’s Programmatic Declaration
And here we receive as an answer the amazingly shameless document known as the Programmatic Declaration of the C.P.G. on the National and Social Emancipation of the German People: It is a document whose very title betrays it to be a petty bourgeois electioneering device, an unscrupulous means of competing with the demagogic “national” slogans of the Fascists, the Hitlerites. It points out the social democracy to the masses not so much as the agent of the German bourgeoisie, but as “the voluntary agents of French and Polish imperialism”; it speaks of their “high treason” in almost the same tones as Hitler does; finally, it sees the “point of departure of the enslavement of all German workers” in the “Versailles robber treaty”! Not the class rule of the German bourgeoisie, but the Versailles treaty, which is the summary of the struggle between the German and the Allied imperialists has become the “point of departure of the enslavement of all German workers”! As a consequence, the necessity of the struggle for immediate demands against the capitalist offensive at home is shelved or reduced to insignificance, the entire election campaign is centered around the irresponsible and all too general slogan: “In the event of our seizing power we shall declare null and void all obligations arising out of the Versailles Peace”. A very strong echo of the “national-Bolshevik” deviations of the German infantile “Lefts” of 1919 (Laufenberg-Wolfheim) and of the Brandlerites in 1923.
Lenin gave the “national-Bolsheviks” and the infantile “Lefts” of 1919 the proper Marxist reproof. It still holds good today for the Thaelmanns and Neumanns, and all those who carry out the Centrist, nationally limited line of Stalin in Germany.
 
Lenin’s View
“We Communists,” wrote Lenin, “are not at all bound to repudiate the Versailles treaty – or what is more, to repudiate it immediately. The possibility of successfully repudiating the treaty depends not only upon the German, but also upon the international success of the Soviet movement.” (Left Wing Communism)
The election campaign, with the crassly nationalist note that accompanied it, was the purest expression of ultra-Left opportunism. At a time when the oppression of the masses is heading for a crisis, when it is necessary, in a campaign of broad struggle to break the ground for the decisive blows against the class enemy by a sharply outlined, patient and sober campaign to win authority and leadership among the workers, the German Party leadership offered nothing more than the as yet vague slogan of a Soviet Germany.
That this slogan of necessity expressed the immediate reaction of over four and a half million German workers is gratifying, to be sure. But what guarantee is there that these workers, who thus voiced their dissatisfaction with the existing regime and their desire for a workers’ Germany, will follow the Party in the struggle beyond the ballot box? Do the recent economic struggles, perhaps, offer such a guarantee? No, indeed! The defeats of Mansfeld and the Northwest in July of this year, the latest in a whole string of strike failures since the Ruhr fight of 1928, bespeak the contrary.
In a moment of splendid opportunity for mass work in the factories and in the broad working class organizations the Party leadership present an ultra-Left sounding parliamentary spectacle to the German working class, hiding its real impotence to cope with the situation as a Bolshevik Party should. The nationalistic mimicry of the Fascists, heaped upon the general confusionist theories of “social-fascism” and the “immediate revolutionary situation” with all their subsequent isolationist tactics, keep the Party corralled, bound, unable to carry out its historic task.
 
The Capitalist Offensive
Immediately after the papier-mache “victory” of the elections, the fierce, all-round offensive of the bourgeoisie is only coming into its real swing, is gaining its full amplitude. A Times dispatch, dated Berlin, September 26, reports:
“The conscription of labor probably will replace the system of unemployment doles in the government’s new program of financial reforms, and it will be only one of several innovations to which recourse will be taken in a final attempt to prevent the collapse of Germany’s financial structure.
“The government’s plane include also an increase in the number of indirect taxes in the move to reduce direct imposts ... In keeping with its scheme for cuts in production costs and retail prices, the government intends to reach an agreement with the trade unions providing for a reduction of 10 percent in wages.”
The drive of the capitalist class against the standard of living of the working class, for the abolition of even the meager “dole” is coming to a head. The social democracy, in the Mueller coalition government, in the yellow trade unions, has supported this drive by the most revolting acts of treachery and deception. But as yet not even the most elementary steps have been taken to organize the proletarian defensive which, would reveal the true countenance of fascism and social democracy before the workers.
 
The Role of the Thaelmanns
Confined in its stifling atmosphere of self-deception and illusion, the Party leadership has failed to do its duty. It is not yet too late to regain lost time, to repair the Party and prepare it for the historic battles to come. Our German Opposition comrades are leading in the fight to unmask the incapable epigonic Thaelmann-Neumann leadership before the Party, to instigate the membership to throw off the shackling theory of “social fascism” and all its tactical deductions, as well as the whole dangerous playing with “national-Bolshevik” phrases, to rehabilitate and reconstitute it as the weapon of the working class, now more indispensable than ever.
The struggle to follow, the fight against unemployment, for the seven hour day, for credits to the Soviet Union, for a broad defensive against wage cuts, will in Germany, as here and everywhere, prove the justice of the policy of the Left Opposition. We, the Leninists of the entire world, know the import of the coming class struggles in Germany. It is for this reason that we look ahead with such anxiety towards the progress of the German Party, fighting for its renovation and the Comintern’s, in order to help that “international success of the Soviet movement” which alone can forever tear up the Versailles Treaties, the Young Plans and every other remnant of capitalist class rule.
 



Why the Renault Strike Brought on the Crisis and How It Took Place
The strike movement launched by the Renault strike in May spread quickly in Paris and to the provinces. It toppled the old Ramadier government. It brought about the elimination of the Communists (Stalinists) from the cabinet. It caused a rapid change in policy of the Communist Party of France and the General Confederation of Labor. It divided the Socialist (reformist) party of Blum down the middle. It brought new political forces to the fore on the arena of mass action. And, according to all reports, the results threaten to affect political life thoroughly not only in France but in other countries on the Continent, such as Italy, Belgium etc.
How and why did a simple strike for a 10 franc an hour increase, by some 30,000 workers, assume such convulsive proportions? What was the causal chain that produced it? What perspective does it pose for France, for Europe in the period ahead? We shall attempt briefly to explain the background, situate the course of the strike process itself and indicate the perspective it opens up.
When the Nazi occupation army fell apart upon the invasion in the Summer of 1944, the workers of Paris and of all of France were armed and in the vanguard of the struggle for the liberation of the country from the yoke of the Hitlerite oppressor. Factory committees were in charge of the plants and the streets were held by the workers’ army which the Communist (Stalinist) leadership misnamed “Patriotic Workers Militia.” The masses who, before the war, were in their majority reticent to join the CPF (Communist Party of France) because they thought it too radical, now turned to it in overwhelming numbers precisely because they thought it revolutionary. They wanted to put an end to bourgeois rule, to do as the Russian workers did in 1917. They were thoroughly instructed in the reality of “national unity” as it existed before the war by the overwhelming “collaboration” with the Nazis on the part of the French capitalist class.
They thought of the Communist (Stalinist) Party of France as they remembered it in the past, when it was a revolutionary party. They thought of the USSR as the Russia which in 1917 put an end to capitalism. That is the example they wanted to follow.
A relatively small section of the workers, mostly those who had persistently followed the pre-war party of Blum known as the SFIO (French Section of the Second—or Socialist—International) because of the confusing zigzag policy of Stalinism, remained true to this party, which had become thoroughly petty bourgeois in composition, because of the continued zigzags—this time more and more in a right wing direction—of the CPF.
To these masses, ready to put an end to capitalism and looking to it for leadership, the CPF, headed by Maurice Thorez, brought the slogans of “national unity” under a new form in which Communists (Stalinists), socialists (reformists) and the bourgeois Catholic Popular Republican Movement (MRP) shared the governmental power; of “nationalization” in which the profits of the capitalists were left intact; of “production first” in which the workers were asked to sacrifice wages and conditions in order to “reconstruct” the economy which remained capitalist. Everything the workers wanted would be achieved this way, Thorez promised, the “democratic” way, without violence. Not by workers’ militias, not by mass action, but by parliamentary arrangements with the MRP and the other bourgeois parties, would the revolution the workers wanted come about. De Gaulle was in power by the grace of the Stalinists and reformists. He demanded that the workers lay down their arms. With a correct instinct, they demurred. It was only on the word of Maurice Thorez at the end of 1944, when in return for his services de Gaulle signed a Franco-Russian pact and absolved him of being a “deserter” as well as made him a Minister, that the “Patriotic Workers’ Militia” turned in its arms. The workers returned to everyday life. They awaited the results of the policy proffered to them by the CPF whom they had come to trust.
The years since 1944 have been years of constant frustration for the French workers. They laid down their arms, transformed their factory committees into trade union locals, produced and toiled. What happened? The bourgeois army under de Gaulle reestablished itself on the old reactionary model, provoking war against the peoples of the old colonies of French imperialism such as Indo-China and Madagascar and North Africa, who were awakened to struggle for their own independence. The bourgeois “collaborators” returned to their posts of ownership and management in industry. The rotten pre-war politicians like Daladier and Reynaud and Co. returned to their seats in parliament. The “nationalizations” preserved the wealth of the 200 families of France.
Production increased 8-fold, workers’ wages only 3-4 fold in the midst of continual inflation.
Still the Stalinists continued to shout “national unity,” “production first,” “strikes serve only the trusts” etc. For years, bitter frustration was the lot of the deceived French workers. Only a relative handful organized in the Trotskyist Parti Communiste Internationaliste (Section of the Fourth International) denounced the betrayals of the Stalinists, called for the disruption of the fake “national unity” with the bourgeoisie, for nationalizations without compensation and with workers’ control, for a sliding scale of wages to meet the inflation, for strikes and mass actions, for a workers and peasants government based on this program, concretized in the slogan: CP-SP-CGT to power!
Towards the end of 1945 and the beginning of 1946, the French workers began to show the first signs of restlessness and dissatisfaction with the course imposed upon them by the Stalinists and their reformist partners in the tripartite government. In January 1946, the Paris printing trades launched a strike for wage raises which tied up the entire press of the capital for a week and was a contributing factor in the decision of de Gaulle to quit the presidency of the Provisional Government. In the first elections to the Constituent Assembly in October 1945, the tiny Trotskyist PCI had run only two lists of candidates in Paris—it received the astonishing amount of 13,000 votes for these two candidatures. These were first symptoms.
The printers went back to work without a decisive victory, but with some gains. A period of lull followed with isolated sporadic strikes, which were quickly squashed. In August 1946, the workers of the Postal, Telegraph and Telephone services in all France went out in a general strike. Unlike the printers’ union, traditionally syndicalist, the PTT workers’ union was Stalinist-controlled. A strike committee was elected which challenged the Stalinist CGT leadership for authority and ran a strike for several weeks which, although inconclusive, brought some gains too. Moreover, the movement served as a focal point for the organization of a strong “revolutionary minority” at the annual CGT convention which followed shortly thereafter. In June, the Trotskyist PCI, running 12 lists in various parts of France, gathered 45,000 votes around its banner which, calculated on the basis of the 80-odd lists put out for the various departments of the whole country, indicated that there was a reservoir of some 250,000 revolutionary workers upon which the Trotskyists could already count for support against Stalinism and reformism. The symptoms become more distinct and more significant.
There followed sporadic strikes and stoppages, including some already in the decisive metal industry in Paris, but they still remained isolated. In the November elections for the permanent National Assembly, the PCI running 18 lists got 60,000 votes, and more or less held its own. The Stalinists began to use a little more radical phraseology. The CGT under their control adopted the Trotskyist slogan of the “minimum vital” or Basic Wage of 103,000 francs per year (or 9,000 per month) at first, later reducing it to 84,000 per year (or 7,000 per month). The Blum government issuing from the new parliament rejected all wage increases—the economy “can’t stand it,” which is quite true if it is to remain capitalist and compete in its shaken war-worn form with US and other capitalists—and proposed instead a “price roll-back campaign” of first 5% and then 10%. The Stalinists agreed to withdraw their demand for “minimum vital” wage and await the results of the “Blum experiment.”
That took place in January 1947. Meantime the Ramadier government relieved the Blum government, the tri-partite coalition gave way to a quadripartite coalition which included the discredited pre-war “Radicals.” The “price roll back” made for a great deal of psychologic effect, but the workers’ pockets remained as before. Frustration began to turn to anger. Stoppages increased.
 
The Storm of Anger
By the end of March, sporadic stoppages in the metal plants became more frequent. In particular, agitation among the workers made itself felt at Renault. A “Study Circle” was transformed into a “Committee of Struggle.” At the beginning of April, this Committee drew up petitions for a general assembly in two departments, Nos. 6 and 18. The assembly was held. Strike action was proposed, a vote taken. The vote was virtually unanimous for the strike. A joint strike committee of the two departments was elected by the assembly. On Friday, April 25, the two departments walked out with all their 1,500 odd members.
The following Monday, a mass meeting called by the strike committee at the Place National in the suburb of Billancourt where the Renault works are centered gathered thousands of workers who listened to its spokesmen explain the issues. A representative of the “revolutionary minority” organized a year ago around the paper Front Ouvrier and developed during the postal strike and the CGT convention last year was invited to speak. Lambert, the speaker, explained the treacherous course of the Stalinist leadership of the CGT, called for a general walkout in support of the two departments and, contrary to the advice of anarchists and Catholic speakers, urged the workers to take over the powerful CGT themselves by pushing for a new election of all factory section representatives as a beginning. The speech was hailed by a thunder of applause. The speaker then went on to explain the issues in the strike and how it could be won.
By Wednesday all the 30,000 Renault workers were out. On Thursday came May Day. The Stalinists “adopted” the strike and distorted the issues in order to prevent an even greater immediate eruption. They were forced to oppose the wage-freeze in the cabinet. The crisis ensued and they were out.
The democratically elected Central Strike Committee of the Renault workers called for a 10 franc an hour increase in basic wages. The Stalinists called first for a 3 franc, then a 10 franc increase in incentive pay. That is, the Stalinists wanted to tie any increase in pay to increased production, in line with their whole past policy of “production first.” The Government led by the “Socialist” Ramadier, representing French capitalism, cannot afford either kind of increase because of the dilapidated state of French capitalist economy which can only “revive” on the backs of the workers. The Stalinists’ solution is an attempt to conciliate between the needs of capitalist economy and the demands of the workers by means of a new speed-up drive, which has been the purpose of “incentive pay” policy from times immemorial. The capitalists want the speed-up, but not the increase. The workers want the increase, which they need to face constantly rising prices, and not the speed-up. In the differences around this central slogan of the 10-franc increase, the whole social crisis thus finds a focal point. That is why the Renault strike found such a great sympathetic response among all the angry workers. That is why the Stalinists—anxious to serve the foreign policy of the Kremlin but at the same time to retain their mass support—twist and turn in their policy and finally take the road to “loyal” opposition in the government. That is why the SFIO, fearful of losing its last support among the workers, is divided down the middle. That is why the government continues to rock. That is why it is a source of unrest in all Europe.
The Renault strike met with the support of other metal plants in the suburbs of Paris such as Renaudin, Lavallois and in the provinces such as Saint-Dizier which joined the strike. Agitation mounted in the entire industry for a general strike. The Stalinists, unable to prevent strike votes, resorted to delaying tactics. The two interpretations of the 10-franc demand were put to a vote. Despite all the skullduggery, the votes for the Renault formula found increasing support in every plant. In some plants, the strikebreaking tactics of Stalinist functionaries aroused such hatred that here and there these creatures were physically ejected from the plants—a new phenomenon for France.
The agitation of the Central Strike Committee centered on the following: for a general strike, for setting up inter-factory strike committees on regional district lines, for the 10-franc minimum wage raise in line with the Basic Wage which the CGT itself adopted and betrayed, for the sliding scale of wages, for a new election of all trade union functionaries.
The Renault strike gave an impetus to strikes of government workers in the Customs service, of laundry workers, of tanners and paper workers, and of workers in the vital milk distribution network.
The capitalist government, as well as the Stalinists, still possessing many resources, have been able to temporarily arrest the strike wave. It is, of course, impossible to predict how this wave will unfold in the next period. But one thing is certain: there is no possibility of returning to the unchallenged Stalinist domination. The French workers are on the march.
 



Dear Comrades:
The Party is facing a pretty serious situation. Based on Thaelmann’s estimation of the revolutionary ripeness of conditions, the party press is developing ever more and more a “barrikadenphilosophie”. At the other end, the social democracy, Severing, Zoergiebel and Co., are more than meeting the fighting manifestoes of the Rote Fahne half way. After the general appeal of the party against the prohibition of the Red Front Fighters, the R.F. wrote that “all that the masses need is arms” and the police would be beaten to bits. At the Red October demonstration in Lustgarten the police answered with fighting cordons of Schupo (police) ready to attack. The nervousness of the police and the increasing boldness of the R.F. lead many outsiders to believe that the party has something up its sleeve, especially since it openly and daringly quotes Lenin’s letter of September 17.
But from all that is apparent, the organizational weakness of the party can be felt. The party lost the cable-layers’ strike, it failed to organize a militant resistance to the reduction of unemployment insurance and has not at all reacted on the Young Plan. I can’t put my finger on anything definite, but witnessing demonstrations and meetings gives me the impression that the German Communist Party is not prepared for the task it seems to have out out for itself. I hope I have a wrong impression.
To add to this, there are the scandals in which party leaders or former leaders have had a hand. This doesn’t increase – to say the least – the confidence of the masses in the party. Outside of that there is the struggle in the leadership itself. Neumann and Remmele vs. Thaelmann. A temporary truce seems to have been established but the whole affair breathes ill omens.
Brandler is developing along the lines indicated by comrade Trotsky in his various letters. He has established pretty firm connections with the Czecho-Slovakian, the French (Alsace-Lorraine) and the Austrian Rights, no doubt with Lovestone too. The strength of the Brandlerists here in Berlin is negligible. In the province there may be a different story. Thalheimer is making a great play for the shaky elements among the party members and the left social democrats with his “national program”, which is an opportunist reform platform slightly favored with Leninist phrases. in contrast to the Stalinists, who call it the party of Lenin, the Brandlerists speak of the party of Liebknecht and Luxemburg. This seems significant to me. There lies a grain of their opportunist aims. Further, they bring forth the point that they mean to follow Lenin “in spirit”, i.e., the “spirit” of Leninism, not its words (as – they saw – the Stalinists do, with their long quotations).
M.N. Roy is their Comintern expert. He writes long and demagogical articles, as equivocal as can be, about the leadership In the C.I. and the C.P.S.U., about democratic centralization, organizational problems, etc. On the first point, he is willing to give the C.P.S.U. a “place of honor” in the C.I. and nothing more. He begins by saying that the C.P.S.U. is quite correct in its line in Russia, only to end up with the old Bucharinist arguments about the collapse of the financial system etc.
On the second point, he speaks of each party “working out its own national problems and the collective elaboration of the international problems,” which means leaving a minimum of points for a program of international action, or a revival of the pre-war Second International. Number three: he thinks that since the parties, according to Piatnitsky’s last report, have not been able up to now to build their organizations on a factory nucleus system, they will never be able to do so and ought to give up the idea – which would make room for a broad opportunist policy in the trade unions.
Most generally, the writers in Gegen den Strom (Brandlerist central organ) draw the analogy between the crisis in the First International before its disruption and the present crisis in the Comintern. They seem to predict that just as the First International broke up because of anarchism, the Tihrd will break up because of the ultra-Leftism of the present line which, they say, is akin to anarchism. Then they go on to speak of decades of peaceful growth and the need of mass parties “for which the Second International was founded” and so on ... The birth of the Fourth International? By the dialectical fates it is thus willed! Already Hausen wants the slogan to be issued: We must become THE party and Thalheimer may shout ten times: “We are only a tendency (richtung) in Communism”, but the little speculation about “where the present line may end” breathes unmistakably with Hausen’s words and spirit.
There is much to write about the Leninbund, but at present I’ll confine myself to a few points.
From all appearance, the Leninbund itself and the International Left wing as well are passing through a severe critical period. In such a period it should be the duty of the various Left leaders to strive for clarification, for precision in theory and tactic. Unfortunately, we get no such picture from the doings in the Leninbund.
Aside from the internal weaknesses there is a lack of sharp demarcation from the Rights. In more than one case, articles in the Volkswille might easily have fitted into Gegen den Strom, especially those articles of a critical nature. But to get back to the internal troubles. The muddled theoretical articles of Urbahns in the Fahne des Kommunismus remind me a great deal of the party discussion in the U.S. before the last convention, where the ingenious “apex” and “exceptionalism” theories were ingeniously balled up. The same sort of hash is served us by Urbahns in his theory of the hybrid state (Zwitterstaat). After the attacks of Trotsky and the Leninbund minority, he has twisted and bent it until it looks like a pretzel. Born to defend the unclear and equivocal position he had taken in the Sino-Russian question, the theory is now the basis of the entire line of the Leninbund majority led by him.
He took Trotsky’s theory of the Kerensky up-side-down period as a base. Naturally, we would assume such a period to be one in which government (the representative in this reversed state of the proletariat, as then, the bourgeoisie) is defending “incompetently” the last positions of its class. But Urbahns does not seem to want to think naturally. He leaves Trotsky here and goes back to quote from Lenin against him. Without the slightest understanding and in the best eclectic manner, he draws in the self-evidence argument of Engels, which Lenin discussed in State and Revolution, viz., that even after the revolution, the classes do not immediately cease to exist, that for a long time the economically stronger class remains the bourgeoisie, because of its international connections, etc.
Combining this with the Marxist theory (in a most blind manner) that the state is the organ of the economically stronger class, he produces his Q.E.D.: Stalin represents the bourgeoisie in truth, but only sways between the classes at present for some mysterious reasons. But if the state is the organ of the economically stronger class, and the bourgeoisie, long after the revolution, necesarily remains the stronger class, we can ask the question: Did not Lenin then also represent the bourgeoisie (in reality!)? Which is what the ultra-Lefts actually claimed at the time of the Nep …



 


With revolutionary greetings,
S. GORDON



 



The Militant,
Militants you sent in good order. Thank you very much. As ever, the Militant is full of life, full of vigor, the one positive pole in the sad state of affairs into which the American Communist movement has fallen. Good luck to the Opposition in rallying the confused ranks of the Party membership under the Leninist banner. The mutual unmasking of the Right and the Center leadership certainly offers favorable ground.



 


S. Gordon



 



Regardless of its further course, the war in Korea has
brought a rude awakening to the American ruling class. “It is a war
unlike any we have faced before,” one war correspondent writes, “it is
a political war as well as a military war.” But they are still rubbing
their eyes. While they lecture the soldiers on the battlefields not to
refer to the embattled Koreans, who had been pushing them farther and
farther to the sea, as “gooks,” Warren Austin, their chief diplomat in
the United Nations continues to speak of the North Korean leaders as
“zombies,” “Soviet zombies.” Thereby the rulers of the US show they are
still far from understanding what they are up against.
But they are not alone in this misunderstanding. There are so-called
“radicals” and “socialists,” some with Marxist pretensions, who fail to
recognize the essential character of the war despite the daily flashes
of lightning that illuminate it from all parts of Asia, from the China
of the “Communist” Mao Tse-tung to the India of the bourgeois democrat
Pandit Nehru. If this is a political war it would seem necessary to
determine what its politics are. Instead American public opinion is
being mesmerized by the concept that what is happening in Korea is
purely and simply an element in the warming up of the “cold war”
between the US and the USSR. They fail to grasp that it is much more an
element of the onrushing anti-imperialist revolution in Asia, whose
momentum cannot be arrested by any of the rulers or governments in
power today.
 
I. US and USSR in Korea
It is, of course, indisputable that the Soviet
bureaucracy has from the first regarded Korea, as well as every other
territory to which its Influence was extended by World War II,
exclusively from the point of view of its own narrow national
interests. Stalin’s agreement with Roosevelt at Yalta underwrote the
latter’s Cairo pact with Churchill and Chiang Kai-shek to give Korea
independence “in due course.” This was supplemented by the arrangement
between them, upon the USSR’s entry into the war against Japan, to
divide Korea at the 38th parallel “for the purpose of accepting
Japanese surrender.” The strategic and economic exploitation of the
area north of the 38th parallel—along with the wall of secrecy
typical of Kremlin policy in its buffer zones—followed as a matter of
course.
But the very nature of the Soviet bureaucracy and its historical
roots imposed a different line of conduct upon the occupying power in
North Korea from that pursued by the US occupation authorities in the
South. For, what both powers encountered in Korea, as in all of Asia,
was the stirring colonial, agrarian revolution.
 
The Occupants Introduce Themselves
The difference in approach between the Soviet
bureaucracy and the US imperialists was indicated in the tone of their
first pronouncements to the Korean people. The Command of the Soviet
Army declared at the outset:
“Citizens of Korea! Your country is now free. But
this is only the first page in the history of Korea ... The Soviet Army
has created all conditions to enable the Korean people to embark upon
free, creative work. You, yourselves must become the creators of your
own happiness, etc.”
While Stalin’s generals did not fail to take the usual
credit for “liberation,” they were obviously constrained to recognize
and adapt themselves to the temper of the population. MacArthur, on the
other hand, issued the following order:
“The entire administrative power of the territory of
Korea south of parallel 38 is under my jurisdiction. The population
should unreservedly obey the orders issued over my signature. Those
acting against the occupation or violating order and tranquility will
be mercilessly and severely punished. For the period of military
occupation, English is introduced as the official language.”
To a people rising from forty years of Japanese
domination, under which large-scale revolts flared up regularly every
other year, the calling cards of the two new occupants were bound to be
impressive. If the Stalinists thereafter made full use of this
contrast, that was only to be expected.
 
First Revolutionary Upsurge
Even before the entry of American or Russian troops,
however, local revolutionary committees divested the Japanese
authorities of power throughout the country. The lease to private
entrepreneurs of industrial plants taken over from the Japanese
resulted by 1949-50 in a standard of living below the average of that
under the Japanese occupation; in 800,000 unemployed; in black market
profiteering which undermined the whole economy. The anti-labor laws
deprived the workers of any means of economic betterment by collective
bargaining. The electoral laws virtually placed a political monopoly in
the hands of the landlords and capitalists. The suppression of civil
rights led to continued revolts which encompassed virtually all
political tendencies outside the narrow Syngman Rhee clique.
 
Struggle for Unification
Compounded with all these sources of resentment was that
of the division of the country itself, felt equally strongly by the
mass of the people in the South as well as in the North. The natural
economies of the two regions dovetailed with each other, in agriculture
as well as industry. The South was a great rice bowl, the North a
source of wheat, fish and fertilizer; the South, a consumer goods
producer and the North a center of heavy industry. The artificial
division of the country at the 38th parallel was choking the life-blood
out of the nation. Unification of Korea became a crying necessity,
giving a still greater impulse to the social ferment and placing the
national revolution on the agenda.
The Stalinist bureaucracy, while sharing equal responsibility with
American imperialism for the division of the country, nevertheless
adapted itself in this respect also to the revolutionary developments,
again for its own purposes to be sure. We have already noted how at the
very first, the Soviet Army Command sanctioned the activities of the
People’s Republic set up at Seoul and later dissolved by the US
authorities. In the subsequent course of events, while Washington
sought to manipulate the United Nations machinery for its maneuvers
with the unification problem, Moscow relied on a continued campaign of
negotiations for unity conducted by the North Korean regime. In this
campaign practically all political groupings in the South exclusive of
Rhee and his henchmen came to participate.
Distrust of the US and the UN Commission grew constantly in the
South, as the results became evident to the broad masses: stolen
elections, a balloting system discriminating openly in favor of the
propertied classes, police suppression of civil rights and
organizations, the outright jailing as well as assassination of
anti-Rhee leaders of all opinions. Every attempt of native political
groups to work out unity with the North “drew the fire of the American
command” and the narrow ruling group cooperating with it. Involved in
one such attempt, at a nation-wide conference in 1947—which called
for withdrawal of both US and Soviet forces among other conditions for
establishing a unified government—besides the Northerners, were Kim
Kiusic, chairman of the Interim Legislative Assembly set up by the US
authorities; Choi-Tongo, its rightist vice-chairman; Kim Koo, who had
replaced Syngman Rhee as president of the “Korean Provisional
Government” during World War II; Hong Myungki, head of the liberal
Democratic Independence Party; and Lyuh Woonhyung, chief of the Social
Democratic Party.
 
South Answers with Terror
Even after the election of the carefully gerrymandered
National Assembly of the “Republic of Korea” in 1948, 18 members
introduced a motion for a “North and South Special Unification
Committee” to explore the possibilities with the Soviet-sponsored
regime. It was defeated.
By contrast, the North Koreans continued to press the subject even
as late as the Spring of 1950, offering to unite their legislature
elected in 1948 with the National Assembly elected in the South that
same year. As became well known at the time—although the fact has
since been carefully suppressed in the American press—a delegation
from the North, which came to meet the UN commission on this very
subject at the frontier last May, a month before the opening of
hostilities, was arrested under gunfire from Rhee’s troops and abducted
into his jails.
Mass terror was the response of the US occupation and the Rhee
regime to the agitation for national unity. Three “major round-ups”
took place, McCune recounts. A wave of demonstrations and strikes in
October 1946 supported the unification program of a “Coalition
Committee” headed by Kim Kiusic, the former associate of Rhee, and Lyuh
Woonhyung, president of the short-lived People’s Republic. In the city
of Taegu alone, police trained under the Japanese slaughtered 50
civilians, themselves suffering an equal number of casualties. 1,500
persons were arrested and tried, 150 convicted.
All “left wing” publications were suppressed. In March 1947, 2,718
persons were arrested in a second round-up. In August 1947, right wing.
“Youth Corps,” in collusion with the police, ran a reign of terror of
their own. Among the many victims of assassinations was Lyuh Woonhyung,
who had been considered a compromise candidate for president against
Rhee.
Roger Baldwin, director of the American Civil Liberties Union, upon
returning from a Korean visit in the summer of 1947, summed up his
observations: “By nurturing the police state, we drive moderates into
the Communist camp.” After the withdrawal of the troops by the USSR in
1948 and by the US in 1949, the tendencies displayed in both parts of
Korea under the occupation became more pronounced. The pressures for a
showdown on the national as well as on the economic, on the colonial as
well as the social planes were greatly increased. Whatever the
resultant strategic plans of the big power sponsors of the two regimes,
it is obvious that a brewing revolution was dividing native society,
developing a drive of its own. The social classes and their leaders
were undoubtedly relying upon support of one or the other big power.
But they were girding for a battle all their own, on vital issues
growing out of their own past, which could not have been cooked up in
the diplomatic corps or the general staffs, in either Moscow or
Washington. “An internal South Korean rebellion against the Rhee
government would have occurred if the forces of North Korea had not
invaded,” runs the testimony of an Economic Cooperation Administration
official of the US government and former CIO official, Stanley Earl,
who returned from Korea at the end of last July.

 
II. “People’s War” in Korea
Not to understand the background of revolutionary
torment that preceded the outbreak of the Korean war inevitably entails
a misunderstanding of the character of the war itself. For in this
background alone lies the key to the military operations of an
erstwhile oppressed colonial people which have given serious battle to
the armed might of the great US. Some publicists have begun to
recognize it vaguely as a “people’s war,” that is, a political war
which, to be more precise, has to be characterized as a revolutionary
war.
To speak of the regime conducting this “people’s war” as no more
than a puppet regime of the USSR and of its leaders as “Soviet zombies”
—like the picture of the war itself as a simple episode of the
world-wide struggle of the Big Two—is the height of superficiality.
An interesting sidelight serves to illuminate this question. At the
beginning of the war, the entire body of official public opinion in
this country ascribed the rapid military successes of the North Koreans
to the fact that they were assuredly Russian-led “from the top command
all the way down to regimental units,” as one report put it. After more
than two months of incessant and widespread warfare, with casualties on
both sides as well as prisoners numbering in the thousands, Washington
and Tokyo haven’t been able to offer a single example of any Russian
soldier in the Korean fighting.
But it has become known that the top commanders themselves are
actually Koreans. “Half a dozen such, in positions from division to
corps commanders, have now been identified,” says a dispatch to the NY
Times from MacArthur’s HQ in Tokyo, indicating “that at least
thus far the leaders of international communism have left the Korean
war in the hands of homegrown though foreign-educated Red Koreans.” The
“foreign education” they have received, it appears, is in the Chinese
civil war. Three of those named, Kim Ir Sen himself, Kim Mu Chong and
Choi Young Kun were leaders of major battles in that war, with Kim Mu
Chong identified as one-time commander of the famous 8th Route Army.
All three, it also appears, are graduates of the equally famous Whampoo
Military Academy, which was established in China in the early 1920s
with Soviet aid and whose founder was none other than Chiang Kai-shek.
 
III. Anti-Imperialist Revolution
Like the Chinese civil war which finally overthrew
Chiang Kai-shek, the Korean war is anchored in a revolution which,
challenging foreign imperialism, tends to overturn all of society in
the process. The events in China proved that the revolutionary ferment
produced by World War II had risen to such proportions that the ruling
class, no matter how superior its material resources and how great the
aid obtained from abroad, could not withstand the assault of the
dispossessed. (Chiang is estimated to have received no less than $3 billion
from the USA in the postwar period, while the 8th Route Army is said to
have operated on its territory on an overall state budget of $15 million
annually.) The events in Korea offer the even more startling spectacle
of a relatively new revolutionary army in the Orient not only resisting
successfully but of scoring victories over the better equipped forces
of the most modern imperialist army.
Both phenomena have been recognized as examples of the “people’s
war.” This is a new type of war ;that our soldiers do not understand,
the correspondents warn from the front. The “enemy” is all around them.
He “swarms fanatically” over them without regard for life and safely.
He infiltrates around their flanks dressed as refugees. He rises in
their rear as guerilla detachments. Where does this fanaticism come
from? What accounts for all this?
In Korea, as in China, the war proceeds with a constant division of
the landed estates. The army recruits as it marches forward, the
peasants are only too anxious to defend their newly acquired land, the
population its newly acquired rights. That’s what makes for the
undiminishing mass of soldiers and their “fanaticism.” What makes the
“people’s war” so superior tactically, as Jack Belden has pointed out
in China Shakes the World, is that its soldiers know
exactly what they are fighting for, they have it tangibly before their
eyes. On the other hand, the soldiers opposing them have only the
vaguest notions as to the whys and wherefores of the struggle. At best,
as one of them explained to a front reporter in Korea, “I am fighting
to remain alive.”
The example of China, and now of Korea, cannot help but have its
effect on the rest of Asia. “The promptness with which the North
Koreans instituted drastic land reforms in the conquered areas of South
Korea is an impressive fact for many Asians,” writes Harold R. Isaacs
in The Nation. And this, the writer explains,
undermines the ability of politicians like Nehru, much as they desire,
to carry their countries into an alliance with the US. “If the American
fight against Communist aggression can be successfully twisted into a
fight against needed revolutionary change, the outcome is a foregone
conclusion regardless of episodic military decisions.”
To combat the “people’s war,” the US must yield to the “needed
revolutionary change” which is its driving force, this ex-Marxist
proposes along with all the other liberals. The tiger must change his
stripes ...
 
IV. Stalinism and Asia
The Korean war is, as we have seen, the result of the
unfolding Asian revolution. No amount of UN mummery about North Korean
aggression—and it is hardly clear just what the real occasion for the
opening of hostilities was—can obscure that fact. At the same time
the strategic benefits of a North Korean victory for the USSR are
undeniable. just as the converse holds true for the US. But which is
decisive: the strategic advantage gained by the Soviet bureaucracy or
the revolutionary advantage achieved by the Korean people in arms?
This same question has a direct bearing on the relation of the
Kremlin to the broader problem of the Asian revolution. In undermining
US imperialism, the Asian revolution at present works in favor of the
Moscow bureaucracy in the conflict between the two big powers. Jacob
Malik, the Soviet delegate to the Security Council, speaks not to the
Council but to the people of Asia, the newspapers complain.
And he wins this “propaganda” battle hands down. Of course. But all
this indicates that the Soviet bureaucracy, contrary to the “Big Brain”
in Washington, is aware that a revolution is taking place and is trying
to exploit it for its own advantage. Does that mean that the Kremlin is
promoting the revolution, as capitalist propaganda claims? Does that
mean that the bureaucracy has complete control of it as certain
“radicals” and “socialists” think?
 
The Kremlin’s Record
The whole record of Stalinism in Asia since 1925
presents a veritable avalanche of proof that far from instigating or
promoting the revolution—in China especially—the Kremlin has done
everything possible to throttle it. Up until most recently, including
the postwar period, Stalin has not only not sought control over the
ferment in Asia, but has done what he could to lodge power in all kinds
of coalitions, in which the colonial ruling class would predominate.
China, Indo-China, and Korea itself are outstanding examples of this.
In China, Stalinist policy began in 1925-27 with the
subordination of the Chinese Communist Party to Chiang Kai-shek within
the Kuomintang. After Chiang’s march to the North and the massacre of
the Shanghai workers, whose strikes started the wave of revolution at
that time. Stalinism pursued a similar policy with Wang Chin-wei and
the Left Kuomintang. When this bloc yielded similar disastrous results,
a brief ultra-left period marked by the putsch of the Canton “Commune”
intervened, but for the whole following period the two-class party
(“workers and peasants’ party”) and the “bloc of the four classes”
(bourgeois, petty-bourgeois, peasants and workers) became the essence
of the Stalinist line all over Asia. The whole course of the Chinese CP
and the army and territories under its control was based originally on
this policy.

 
Coalition Policy Fails in China
The war with Japan and the requirements of guerilla
warfare that ensued from it. pushed the Chinese CP ever forward as the
rallying center for the agrarian revolution and widened the cleft
between it and the ruling class all across the vast nation. The Chinese
CP was riding the twin horses of the agrarian revolution,
that threatened to leave it behind, and of the policy of coalition
with the ever more discredited Kuomintang. Moscow itself pursued, a
line of loyal collaboration with Chiang as a war partner, and even as
late as 1949 concluded an agreement with him relating to Manchuria and
Sinkiang province. This was universally regarded as a slap in the face
of the Mao Tse-tung leadership of the CP for Mao was then getting ready
for the showdown with Chiang, who had rejected all compromise
proposals. Clearly, “the Kremlin seems to have been very skeptical of
the post-war possibilities of Mao,” as Belden says.
While Mao had been forced by the Kremlin to seek a practical
solution in negotiations with Chiang at Chungking, the famous “Border
Region” of the Hopei-Shantung-Shansi-onan provinces
was so completely engaged in the revolutionary.process that its leaders
and troops “would not have surrendered the sovereignty ... to the
Kuomintang even at the direction of Mao,” Belden reports. It was the
irresistible spread of this agrarian revolution that made any kind of
compromise with Chiang impossible. The revolution undermined Chiang’s
regime within the very social strata that supported it. By the same
token, the revolution pushed Mao and the CP to the fore as the rallying
center of the new nation being created. For the Kremlin it was a matter
of expediency to shift to support of the revolution, not at all a
matter of policy or aims.
 
In Indo-China
In Indo-China, the collapse of Japan in 1945
swept the CP-organized Viet Minh movement under Ho Chi Minh into
control of virtually the entire country. No other authority capable of
governing existed. Even the former Emperor Bao Dai pledged loyalty to
Ho’s regime. The French imperialists were forced to deal with it. But
the pressure of the Kremlin and of its agents in the French CP forced
Ho Chi Minh and his government to agree to the incorporation of’ the
country, renamed Viet Nam, within the “French Union,” as the French
Empire was then rebaptized.
The French imperialists thereafter only had to wait long enough to
land their own troops in force at the port of Haiphong in order to
abrogate all agreements with Ho, set up a succession of puppet regimes
(the latest one headed by Bao Dai), and to open up full-scale war
against the Viet Minh. Without a murmur of audible dissent from Moscow,
the French Stalinists continued to vote credits to finance this war
organized by the various coalition governments in which they
participated until they were thrown out of office in May 1947.
Only when, despite this stab in the back, the Viet Minh army
continued effectively to challenge the French for control of Viet Nam,
did the line of Stalinism change. Stalin recognized the Ho government
not in 1945, when it had unchallenged control, but in 1950 when Ho Chi
Minh was fighting desperately to regain it. And even then, recognition
by Mao had to be granted first. Moscow was merely bowing to necessity.
 
In Korea
In Korea also, the Kremlin was prepared,
despite its early adaptation to revolutionary events, to provide a
means lor curbing them. At the Foreign Minister’s Conference in Moscow,
in December 1945, it proposed setting up a coalition government under a
four-power trusteeship, US-USSR-Britain-China (Chiang). A Joint
Commission of American and Russian occupation forces was formed to work
out details. Pressure on the North Koreans swung them into line behind
the Moscow proposal, which was of course accepted by the other powers.
The Korean rightist under Syngman Rhee took the initiative to
disrupt the trusteeship plan by a campaign of agitation, including
both mass demonstrations as well as assassinations of supporters of the
plan. Like the Kuomintang in China, the Korean party of the landlords
and capitalists could not countenance the possibility of any government
that was not strictly under their control in the existing revolutionary
situation. McCune explains that the Americans were “caught in a
dilemma: If the rightists were repudiated ... the American delegation
(in the Joint Commission) would have eliminated the largest group of
anti-Communists in South Korea. On the other hand, if the Americans
supported the Korean reactionaries, it was almost inevitable that the
Joint Commission would collapse.” The dilemma was naturally resolved in
the latter way.
As in the other instances, the initiative in breaking up all
possibilities of a bourgeois coalition with Stalinist participation and
imperialist control came—not from the Kremlin, but from the
old ruling classes. Revolutionary struggle was the only recourse left
to the native Stalinists. The Moscow bureaucracy had to adjust itself
to the events.
In all three cases cited, Stalin was interested in crushing a
revolution, not in fostering it; in obtaining a lever within an
imperialist-backed bourgeois government for the strategic protection of
his nationalistic foreign policy—not in establishing control through
a revolutionary government, as part of an internationalist policy.
Events got out of hand. To maintain its objectives, the Kremlin had to
adjust its policies to an unwanted revolutionary upsurge.
 
The Bureaucracy and the Revolution
The line of the Kremlin in Asia, as in Europe, can only
be understood by grasping its essentially conservative character.
Revolution in general, and proletarian revolution in particular, is
anathema to the Soviet bureaucracy. In Europe, where proletarian
revolution threatened, it took a directly counter-revolutionary
position at the outset of the postwar period. For a proletarian
revolution, with its inevitable surge of politically experienced worker
masses, could not long be restrained from taking the road toward
workers’ democracy, an immediate and deadly menace to Stalin’s regime.
In Asia, the revolutionary awakening of the backward peasantry was
bound to be a slower process, within which the bureaucracy saw an
opportunity for maneuver.
But in both cases, the Kremlin preferred a deal with imperialism
which would leave the status quo more or less unaltered, and with it
all the advantages in the Yalta and Teheran agreements. Hence, its
original friendly policy to General de Gaulle as well as to
Generalissimo Chiang. It was only when Wall Street felt that capitalism
had successfully survived the Second World War and had ruled out any
further deals with Moscow, that the Stalinist bureaucracy reversed
engines in both Europe and Asia—its whole strategy in the so-called
buffer zone in Eastern Europe having been determined by its
conservatism and by defensive considerations. The mounting revolution
in Asia merely presented itself as another shield for the Kremlin in
the tug-of-war with Washington.
But the aims of the bureaucracy and the power of the colonial
revolution can be confounded only at the risk of losing one’s bearings.
This confusion is one of the causes of the growing crisis of the
American ruling class. The more experienced, but much weaker British
bourgeoisie understands the distinction better. British Tories speak of
the need “of establishing the West rather than Moscow as the friend of
the great Asian revolution of our time;” they support British
recognition of the Mao regime wholeheartedly and look with dread upon
American policy toward Formosa, for instance, which “if persisted it
means tragedy for her no less than for us.” (From an editorial in the London
Observer)


Peculiarities of Asian Developments
For Marxists, such confusion can be fatal. The Asian
revolutionary wave, more specifically the stormy Chinese revolution
which is at present its powerhouse, has taken shape differently than we
had foreseen, to be sure. The national revolution has overturned the
old colonial society without direct proletarian hegemony; the peasants
have risen, the workers in the cities are still quiescent. The
peculiarities of the law of uneven development, into which the
treacherous role of Stalinism has entered as an objective factor,
brought about a new departure from the anticipated course of
development.
Before the working class could recover sufficiently from the defeats
of 1925-27 to take the same powerful lead in the third Chinese
revolution, the ruling class and its imperialist backers were so
debilitated by World War II and its convulsions that the old order
simply crumbled. The agrarian masses in upsurge moved into the vacuum
thus created under the leadership of a Communist party long cut off
from the proletarian masses of the cities. But this CP led by Mao
Tse-tung, while not a revolutionary proletarian party, was not a
peasant party in the traditional sense either. Although it believed
that the agrarian revolution should confine itself to democratic tasks
and to the capitalist construction of Chinese industry, it did not have
the links to the capitalist class that traditional peasant parties
have. Its revolutionary antecedents of the 1920s and its international
roots, placed it in a position, under the circumstances described, of
heading an agrarian revolution in isolation from the two main
contending classes in present day society.
But the momentum of the agrarian revolution makes such isolation
untenable for any length of time. The revolution must become permanent
or retreat. Solid capitalist support—and that can come only from the
imperialist USA today—could throw back the agrarian revolution and
subordinate the peasant masses to a revived capitalist class. The only
other alternative is its forward development into a socialist
revolution. For that, the worker masses of the cities have to move into
political action. In other words, the third Chinese revolution has to
be transformed into a proletarian revolution. Trotsky, polemizing
against the Stalinists as far back as 1928, formulated the problem in
terms that remain valid today:
“Then China has matured for the dictatorship of the
proletariat? Only the experience of the struggle can provide a
categorical answer to this question. By the same token, only the
struggle can settle the question as to when and under what conditions
the real unification, emancipation and regeneration of China will take
place. Anyone who says China has not matured for the dictatorship of
the proletariat declares thereby that the third Chinese revolution is
postponed for many years to come.” (Third International After
Lenin)
The very rise of the third Chinese revolution poses the
question of its proletarian character and in this broader, more
fundamental sense, confirms again Trotsky’s analysis.
As the revolutionary struggle sharpens in Asia, the old opportunist
formulas of Stalinism—the “bloc of the four classes,” the “two class
party”—are being swept away by titanic social forces. Mao launches a
campaign of recruitment of industrial workers to “enhance the
proletarian character” of the Chinese CP. Kim Ir Sen says:
“The people’s committees represent organs composed of
representatives of various sections of the Korean people and are
founded on a solid alliance of the workers and peasants under the
leadership of the working class.”
We do not need to take these words at their face value
to deduce from them an actual trend: The force of the Asian revolution
itself compels the native leaders to cast off their Stalinist
miseducation and in contrast to Stalin’s policy for decades, to seek
out, however hesitantly and confusedly, the great strategic concepts of
the October Revolution.
The task of Marxists under these circumstances is clear. To place
themselves firmly on the side of the permanent revolution; to
distinguish between its dynamic forces and those of the Kremlin trying
to exploit it; to support the struggles of the colonial peoples against
imperialism in their present complicated form. The successful
prosecution of these revolutionary struggles, we are profoundly
convinced, will bring the insurgent Asian peoples into conflict with
the conservative and counter-revolutionary Soviet bureaucracy and, as
Yugoslavia has shown, will open up the path for the regeneration of the
revolutionary Marxist movement throughout the world.




Campaign Against Trotskyism in Eastern Germany
The weekly Weltwoche of Zurich, Switzerland reports on Jan. 23 that one of the main topics dealt with at the Institute of the Soviet Military Administration located in Koenigswuestrehousen near Berlin is – Trotskyism. Hundreds of Stalinist functionaries, trade union officials and returned prisoners of war from Russia are trained at this institute for high office in Soviet-occupied Eastern Germany. Against America and Trotsky, an article signed Thomas Vandenbergh says, “a much fiercer struggle is waged than against the remnants of Fascism or militarism.”
Although Trotskyism has been declared “dead” for years by the Kremlin, in Germany it appears to constitute a rising threat to the Stalinist bureaucracy. Why? Because only Trotskyism means Communism – every principle of which is betrayed by the Stalinists. And in Germany there are many Communist workers who for ten years and more were cut off from the rest of the world and consequently have not experienced the step-by-step degeneration of the Comintern. To remain true to the principles they have always held, to remain revolutionist, these workers must turn their backs on Stalinism and seek the Fourth International.
 

Awakening Labor Movement in India
Evidence that an independent labor movement is arising to challenge the capitalist government of newly created independent India fills the pages of New Spark, English language paper of the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India (BLPI) section of the Fourth International. In its last issue to be received here, the paper reviews the months since “freedom” was achieved in August. It is a record of extraordinarily violent struggle between the workers and their capitalist masters. Here are some of the highlights:

August: Miners’ strike in Loyabad, 25 killed, 125 injured. Police fire on crowd at Melapalayam (Madras), 3 killed, 7 injured. Police fire on procession of workers in Shahabad, 12 injured. Constituent Assembly confers powers of “preventive arrest” on government.
 
September: Arrests of trade unionists at Assam; of dock-workers’ leaders (after a strike) in Bombay, followed by new strike for their release; Bombay police break up textile workers’ conference; arrest and detain strike committee.
 
October: Police fire on striking Shri Durga Cotton Mill workers in Bengal, several injured, 100 arrested; mass protests bring release of political and class war prisoners by Bombay High Court on grounds of illegal detention.
 
November: Madras government creates Special Armed Units to assist police in maintaining “law and order”; Bombay government uses troops to break dock strike; West Bengal government uses tear, gas to disperse students’ demonstration; arrest and detention of Saumyendranath Tagore and 29 other members of the Revolutionary Communist Party in Bombay, West Bengal and Assam; Communist (Stalinist) Party press served with “gag order.”
 
December: In West Bengal a new oppressive “Public Safety Act” calls forth militant demonstrations of students outside the Assembly. Tear gas, lathis and bullets are poured into the demonstrators with 1 killed, 25 injured, 200 arrested. Police open fire on sit-down strikers at Biria Mill in New Delhi; on workers holding an indoor meeting at Jalpaiguri (Assam), and on peasants “under Communist influence” in Mandigudam with 5 killed and 5 injured.

The New Spark of Dec. 20 reports: 150,000 government employees strife in Madras; prominent Indian Trotskyist and trade union leader, Amarnath arrested “preventively.”
A united front of trade unions, student organizations, women’s organizations, backed by a bloc of the parties of the left (there are several calling themselves Revolutionary, Socialist or Communist, Bolshevik, Republican Socialist, Forward Bloc, etc.), in which the Indian Trotskyists participated prominently, organized huge demonstrations three successive days before the West Bengal Assembly in Calcutta to obtain the revocation particularly vicious “Special Powers Ordinance.”
The Socialist Party, in the past affiliated to the Indian National Congress, had called a one-day token strike against the arbitration machinery set up by the Congress leaders in the Bombay government.
Comrade Ajit Roy, recently returned from a long stay in England, continued his successful tour with a mass meeting attended by 15,000 in Madura, at which a Stalinist attempt to break up the meeting failed miserably with the workers driving off the CP hooligans.
 

Strike Wave Hits “Prosperous” Belgium
Last week a strike wave hit “prosperous” little Belgium. Several hundred thousand miners, textile workers, postmen and gas and electrical workers walked out successively demanding a cost-of-living bonus and wage increases. The government threatened to call out troops and ordered a “civil mobilization” or labor draft for strikers.
Belgium has been played up as the pet of the “free enterprise” system in Europe by Wall Street spokesmen. It was supposed to be an oasis of prosperity on the continent. Its capitalists have been especially favored with American loans since the end of the war. The Belgian strike wave is thus a preview of Europe after the Marshall Plan. American loans have not been able to solve the problems of inflation there any more than anywhere else; the workers are forced to strike in order to get wage increases to meet rising costs.
The official leadership condemns the strikes. Yet there is a strike wave, “wild cat” though it is. The Cominform certainly plays a negligible role here compared to Italy and France. But the mass of the workers in Belgium, as in the rest of Europe, show that they are determined to fight and solve their problems in struggle. The strike wave in Belgium is thus a resounding refutation of all those who try to picture the fermenting class struggle in Europe as simply an emanation of the Kremlin.
 




Move to Outlaw Italian Partisans
Premier de Gasperi’s government last week issued a decree outlawing “all private associations of a military character” and providing “severe penalties” for anyone possessing arms or explosives. The decree was aimed at the National Association of Italian Partisans, controlled by the Stalinists and their allies in the Socialist Party led by Pietro Nenni. The press of the latter attacked the decree violently. But the officialdom of the partisans group formally declared that it would “limit itself in future to welfare work” and “would keep out of politics.”
The government move, which cautiously refrained from naming the organization aimed at, as well as the counter-move of the partisan leaders, which appears so accommodating, are in the nature of election maneuvers. The coming Italian elections are expected to mark an outbreak of the latent civil war. Neither the capitalist government nor the Stalinist leadership cherish the prospect. De Gasperi and Co. – because they haven’t got the military force to cope with an insurgent mass movement; the Stalinists – because they are not sure they will be able to control the workers. But neither is averse to capitalize on the threat for electioneering purposes.
 

British Unions Incensed over Attlee Wage-Freeze
Labor Prime Minister Attlee, following the crisis created by the devaluation of the French franc, proclaimed a new government policy freezing wages and appealing to the capitalists to “hold the line” on prices and profits. Since the government has no machinery to control the latter, the new policy means that the workers are again to bear the burden of the growing economic crisis.
The Trade Union Congress approached the government several weeks before for wage increases, since prices had long outdistanced wage scales. Attlee’s wage-freeze declaration is reported to have aroused great resentment in labor ranks. A serious clash between the unions and the Labor government is expected to result. The British workers, while adamant against any attacks on the government by the Tories, have grown increasingly restive with the Attlee policy. They placed the Labor Party in power because they wanted Socialism. Instead the labor government is busy trying to save capitalism. The union-government clash will thus serve to provide a vehicle for the workers resentment and may result in a political crisis.
 

C.P. Wins Important Local Election
An important local election in the working class suburb of Malakoff near Paris on Jan. 18 showed that the Communist (Stalinist) Party is holding its own, while the de Gaullists lost slightly. The Socialists and Catholics made small gains combining into a “Third Force” bloc.
The Stalinists received 6,283 votes or 48.1% as against 6,181 or 45.8% in 1947 and 6,931 or 48.3% in 1946. Comparative votes for the Socialists and Catholics were 2,427 or 18.5% as against 2,284 or 16.9% in 1947 and 5,064 or 36.3% in 1946; for the de Gaullists, 4,284 or 32.6% as against 4,888 or 36.2% in 1947 and 2,178 or 16.1% in 1946.
The defeat suffered by the Stalinists in the November–December strikes and the ensuing split in the General Confederation of Labor, controlled by them, has not reflected itself in the parliamentary field, these figures reveal. They also show that, while there is no rush of the petty bourgeoisie to the de Gaulle banner, the reactionary movement remains a serious threat.
 




French Workers’ View of Marshall Plan
Not everyone in France is waiting with bated breath for the salvation of the Marshall Plan. And not everyone who refuses it enthusiastic acclaim is an agent of the Kremlin. The way the thinking French worker looks at it is best expressed by an editorial in the current issue of the Trotskyist paper La Verité. Of the 17 billion requested from Congress for all European countries for four years, it says:
“The share provided for France In the course of 1948 is around 1.35 billion dollars, or 162 billion francs ... Let us grant that the best figure will be 170 billion francs for the first year and compare it with a few others. It just about equals the loss in national revenue caused by the strikes last November and December, that is, by the bosses’ and government’s refusal to grant the workers a living wage. It only covers about half of the military budget, a totally unproductive drain. It covers, only on the surface, the deficit in the trade balance with the U.S.”
The writer deduces from this that the figure cited can at best only serve to buy products which are indispensable to maintain -the present low level of production; to prevent an immediate crash of French capitalism, to give Wall Street’s grasping hands greater control over the country’s economy and  –  with the political stipulations attached –  a say in the government’s domestic and foreign policy. Above all, it aims to prop up the decrepit French capitalists against the threat of being overthrown by the restive working class.
 

Sidelights on De Gaulle
The latest mass demonstration of the de Gaulle movement in the city of St. Etienne, where the General proclaimed his “social” program which smacks of the Fascist corporate state, is reported to have cost some 300,000 to 400,000 dollars –  a lot of money in France these days. “Delegations” were transported to it from the most distant corners or the country. It is reported that the General’s eloquence did not get much of a response. After all the fanfare, only some 3,000 attended the indoor meeting that followed.
But the fact that he dared hold an open mobilisation of his forces in one of the big industrial cities is a challenge that the workers dare not ignore, say the French Trotskyists. During the recent strike, de Gaulle did not dare show his face in public; a mass meeting publicised in Paris for weeks by his RPF (Rally of the People of France) was hastily called off.
De Gaulle boasted at St. Etienne that while he was president of France there was not a single strike. The Stalinists, in reply, themselves claim credit for this achievement. For once they are right. But de Gaulle was no more grateful than the master class generally is to treacherous labor leaders.
 

Trotskyism in Ceylon
Under the above title, the London weekly, The Economist of Jan. 3 devoted a full length article which gives an informed review of the development of the revolutionary movement in that- far-off island. It starts out by calling attention to the “curious phenomenon that the-chief stronghold of Trotskyism In the world today” should be there, noting that the Lanka Sama Samaj Party won 10 seats and the Bolshevik-Leninists 5 out of a total of 95 elective seats in the island’s Parliament.
Intentionally or not, the writer creates a bit of confusion here. The Bolshevik-Leninist Party is the Trotskyist party of Ceylon, the official section of the Fourth International. The Lanka Sama Samaj Party is an organization formed by a group which last year split away from the Trotskyists.
The article recounts how the revolutionary workers’ movement there was originally organized in 1935 by a group of young men who had come into contact with Marxist ideas while studying in England. The conditions produced by the world depression “for the first time (made) the people receptive to radical ideas ... It must be appreciated, too, that there had never been any nationalist movement in Ceylon corresponding to the Indian National Congress, deriving its chief strength from the middle classes. There was a moderate reformist movement amongst landed and monied upper classes, whose interests then, as now, dovetailed fairly closely with those of the British, and a very weak labor movement, which, when the depression came, foundered on the rack of racialism and began to demand the repatriation of immigrant Indian labor.”
The article then recounts how,.the original movement, taking the name Lanka Sama Samaj, meaning Ceylon Equal Society, took root in this soil and how the majority in 1938 adopted Trotskyism and adhered to the Fourth International. It goes on to tell of the arrests of the Trotskyist leaders by the British authorities in 1940 and of their escape in 1942 from prison in India, where they aided in creating the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India, of which the framer Lanka Sama Samaj became the Ceylon section. Then it tells of how differences in the leadership developed which led to a split and the reorganization of the Lanka Sama Samaj by the dissident leaders.
Recently the differences between the organizations came out sharply when the Bolshevik-Leninists in Parliament voted against a government motion, while the representatives of the Lanka Sama Samaj Party abstained on the vote. The government motion was as follows:
“This House rejoices that, after many years of subjection to foreign rule, the struggle of the people of Ceylon for freedom has culminated in the attainment of independence.”
The Fourth International Secretariat addressed a letter to the Lanka Sama Samaj Party on this issue, wherein it asks:
“What possible justification can there be for abstention on an issue which poses squarely genuine independence versus camouflaged submission to imperialism?”
 




Political Developments in France
We noted in last week’s column that negotiations were under way for the creation of a new party in France. We enumerated five organizations involved in these steps.
The coming social crisis in France, foreshadowed this week by a new wave of strikes in Northern France, is bound to heighten interest in this new movement. It is worthwhile to examine its component parts and their policies.
1. The best known of the five organizations is the Trotskyist Parti Communiste Internationale (PCI), French section of the Fourth International. The party made a name for itself during the war by its heroic fight against the Nazi occupation and for working-class internationalism. Its work in organizing revolutionary cells in Hitler’s army aroused admiration in the resistance movement.
After the “liberation” its vote in the election of 1945 and 1946 attracted international attention. Facing the Communist (Stalinist) Party at the height of its power, the PCI polled 60,000 votes in the contest for the National Assembly, while presenting only 20 lists of candidates out of a possible 80. Political commentators estimated on this basis that the Trotskyists had a voting strength of 250,000 in the country.
In April, 1947, members of the PCI were among the leaders of the great strike in the Renault automotive plant, which brought on the government crisis that forced the Stalinists out of the cabinet and precipitated the strike wave of last November–December.
“We declare ourselves prepared,” writes LaVerité, weekly paper of the PCI, “to participate in all discussions (with the other organizations involved) aiming at the elaboration of a general platform and a program of action for the coming revolutionary party. We propose that a discussion conference be organized among the various groups.”
2. The Jeunesse Socialist, or Socialist Youth, numbering several thousand revolutionary young men and women, broke away from the Socialist Party of Leon Blum shortly after the Renault strike. Climaxing a long struggle against the reformist leadership, it refused to accept, the discipline of Blum and Ramadier, the “socialist” head of the government at that time.
After preliminary discussions with the Trotskyists, the National Committee of the Socialist Youth adopted a resolution last January which declared: “The fundamental programmatic agreement existing between the JS and the PCI makes possible the fusion within a unified revolutionary party of these two organizations.”
3. The Action Socialiste Revolutionnaire (ASR), or Revolutionary Action Group, split away from the Socialist Party of Blum at a national conference last December, in the course of the strike wave of that month.. They opposed the strike-breaking conduct of the “socialist” ministers, and the splitting of the trade unions, as well as violations of convention decisions. The ASR, which included many industrial workers, made common cause with the Socialist Youth. Both have been collaborating on a joint weekly, the Drapeau Rouge (Red Flag).
The ASR held the same views as the Socialist Youth regarding unity with the PCI.
4. The Bataille Socialiste (Socialist Battle) group was expelled from Blum’s party last month for continuing its long campaign for a united front with the CP in its weekly paper which´ gives it its name. This group has long been headed by a pro-Stalinist leadership, but its rank and file has been attracted to the ASR and the JS rather than to the bureaucratized CP. Since the expulsion, its leaders have replied cautiously to proposals for. unification, but have conducted a violent campaign that smacks of GPU inspiration against Trotskyism. “We refuse,” they wrote in a recent issue, “all discussions with the Trotskyists. Our disagreements with them go back to the period of the (Nazi) occupation. At that time, we aided the resistance, while. they called for fraternization with the Nazi hordes as if it was possible to fraternize with them.”
5. Last of the five is the Regroupment Revolutionnaire Democratique, or Revolutionary Democratic Rally, formed last month by a group of socialist deputies, ex-Trotskyists, the existentialist philosopher, Jean Paul Sartre, and intellectuals, most of whom had been connected with the Paris daily Franc-Tireur. This paper, since its foundation during the resistance, has been close to the Stalinists, but recently aroused Stalinist ire by advocating a united front against de Gaulle between the CP and the SP. Its founding manifesto declared: “In view of the rottenness of capitalist democracy, the weaknesses and faults of a certain type of social democracy, and the limitation of communism to its Stalinite form, we believe that a rally of freemen can give new life to the principles of liberty and human dignity by binding them to the struggle for social revolution.”
The last two developments have caused a temporary halt in the previous trend toward unification of the PCI, the JS and the ASR. At recent meetings of the leading bodies of these last two organizations, resolutions were adopted calling for the immediate unification,, of the three groups, that have left the SP, leaving aside for the time being the question of the others. Strong minorities, however, favored continuing negotiations with the Trotskyists. The Socialist Youth of the Paris region has voted to form a joint organization with the youth organization of the PCI.
No matter what organizational steps are finally taken, it is evident that the question of program will have to occupy a leading place in the discussions. The attack of the pro-Stalinists on the PCI already poses in sharpest form the burning question whether the new party will stand for working class internationalism or for chauvinism.
 




United Front Against Fake “Independence” of Ceylon
In a recent column we reported how the Trotskyist deputies led the struggle in the Ceylon parliament against the fake “independence” bill, by means of which military control of the island is left in the hands of British imperialism. In the ensuing vote, the Communist (Stalinist) Party representatives joined the Trotskyists in opposing the bill.
This was followed up by a United Front of Action.
“The largest political meeting in Ceylon,” we are informed, “was held on Feb. 11 at Colombo, when 50,000 attended the meeting jointly called by the Trotskyists and the Communist Party of Ceylon ... as a counter-demonstration to the ‘independence’ celebrations of the bourgeoisie.
“The magnificent response by the people of Ceylon to the BLPI-CP call,” the report concludes, “is a crushing answer not only to the bourgeois political leaders who tried to palm off the fake independence as genuine, but also to the dissident LSSP (a split-off group of the Trotskyist Party) which contributed its mite to this deception of the masses.”
&nbspP

Left-Wing Conference in India
New Spark, central organ of the Indian Trotskyists, reports: “At a conference held on Jan. 21, in Patna, 25 representatives of 12 left parties and also of other working class and peasant mass organizations decided to build a United Left Front, and issued a joint statement of program, subject to subsequent ratification by the respective parties.
“This program includes complete independence, severance from the British Empire, confiscation of all British and foreign interests including banks, insurances, plantations, factories, mines, etc.; repeal of all repressive laws, release of all political prisoners, right of free speech, press and association, etc.
“On the insistence of the BLPI (Trotskyist) representative, Comrade Ajit Roy, the right of one party to criticize other parties was safeguarded, save on joint platforms of the Front. Although most of the parties were in favor, of including the aim of a Workers’ and Peasants’ Government in the program, this could not be secured on account of the opposition of the Communist (Stalinist) Party. Finally, a compromise formula, standing for the rights of the exploited people,” was adopted.
The Stalinists’ formula was “Democratic People’s Government.”
In the stormily rising mass Movement of India, the Stalinists are forced to participate in united front actions with the Trotskyists. Obviously this is not due to a change of heart on the part of the Kremlin henchmen. It is testimony to the pressure of the ranks and to already deep roots struck by the young party of the Fourth International among the workers peasants of the sub-continent.
 

Dutch Demand Release of Tan Malakka
The Revolutionary Communist Party, Dutch Section of the Fourth International, has issued a statement “protesting against the arbitrary arrest and continued detention in prison of Comrade Tan Malakka, the accredited leader of the Indonesian workers and peasants.” Recalling the unremitting struggle of the Dutch Trotskyists for Indonesian independence, the statement condemns the anti-working-class policy of Mohamed Hatta, Prime Minister of the Indonesian Republic. It calls upon workers’ organizations everywhere to demand Tan Malakka’s immediate release.
 

Viet Nam Delegate Freed
The Viet Nam News Letter, published in New York, reports that Tran Ngoc Danth, President of the Viet Nam Delegation in. Paris, has been released by the French government after being held in “protective custody” since Jan. 29. He was arrested in connection with the French government plans to return former puppet-emperor Bao Dai to the throne of Indo-China.
In a recent column, we carried a press statement by the “Central Committee of Viet Nam Workers in France” which launched, the mass protest movement that obtained Danth’s release. This movement is continuing with united front actions to free Viet Nam (Indochinese) workers in various labor camps in France. A notable united front action was organized for this purpose recently in Toulouse, where the CGT (trade union federation), the CP (Stalinists) and the PCl (Trotskyists) formally joined in a campaign.
 

Trotskyist Movement in North Indo-China
Militant readers are familiar with the story of the Trotskyists’ struggle in Cochin China, the southern part of Indo-China. Now comes a direct report of Trotskyist activity in Tonking, the northern section of the country.
The Trotskyist movement in Ton-king is supported by a large number of workers and students. It has organized many big meetings in which even speakers of the Viet Nam government participated. For instance, at Bach Mai, the meeting was a great success and the population of this region in its vast majority approved the Trotskyist political line. After this meeting, pro-Stalinist President, Ho Chi Minh, secretly gave orders to arrest the leader of the Trotskyist movement in Tonking, as well as other militants of the Fourth International. Nevertheless, he could not halt the publication of the paper, The Struggle, nor prevent Trotskyist participation in the movement, which now has its center in Siam.
The Fourth International movement in Tonking has been able to build up a well functioning organization which is even stronger than that of Cochin China, thanks to the activities of courageous workers and students. But the group is subjected to the same terror as the Cochin China group. A large number of Trotskyists perished during the “resistance period.”
 




Italian Socialist Youth Leave Saragat Party
“We are leaving the Saragat Party because it stands irrevocably outside the Socialist Movement and is moving further and further away from the working class to become a left cover for the bourgeoisie,” Comrade Maitan, general secretary of the Italian Socialist Youth said in an interview to the Rome daily Republica.
Refuting reports circulated by the Saragat party leadership, Comrade Maitan categorically stated that this was not a resignation of the Socialist Youth leadership, but a split which takes almost all the Socialist Youth outside the ranks of the Socialist Party of Italian Workers (PSLI) led by Saragat. He added that all over Italy, regional congresses of left militants belonging to the parent party were taking place, to discuss the regional details of the split and to determine the orientation of the new independent movement.
In the interview published in the daily Republica of Feb. 8, Comrade Maitan likewise defined the class position of the new movement and clearly indicated that the split was not the result of a difference of opinion over tactics, but of a principled incompatibility between a reformism bogged down in the mire of collaboration with the bourgeoisie, and a sincerely revolutionary tendency, placing in the forefront the defense of the class interests of the proletariat.
The Revolutionary Left of the Saragat party drew up their political platform before the Congress which, led to the split. It appeared in No. 3 of their tendency publication Riscossa Proletaria. We publish, below the text of this platform, which specifies the following points after. demanding the withdrawal of the Saragat Ministers from the government:

Return of the party to its proper domain, namely, the class struggle, in order to convince the workers that the PSLI will not serve as an instrument for the consolidation of the capitalist regime, but remain the political instrument indispensable to the workers for the defense of their class interests.
 
Define a clear-cut policy offering the proletariat the alternative of revolutionary socialist initiative as against the Stalinist policy, which is absolutely incapable of defending the interests of the working class, because it is an expression of the diplomatic-military apparatus of the Russian bureaucracy on a world scale.
 
The essential task of a real Socialist Party must consist in an unflinching defense of the proletariat. against the offensive of the capitalist bourgeoisie and its agents, particularly the Christian Democrats, as well as against the opportunism of the Stalinist apparatus.
 
The Ministers in the Christian-Democratic Government who are party members, must leave this government.
 
Presentation of Socialist unity lists at the elections, and where this proves to be impossible, of autonomous PSLI lists.
 
Activity directed toward the unity of the world proletariat, indispensable precondition for a socialist construction, and, consequently, opposition both to the Stalinist position which wants to adapt the policy of the proletariat to the interests of the Russian state, and to the Laborite position, which is openly endeavoring to tie up the activity of international Socialism with the diplomatic plans of the British government.
 
Solidarity with the movements of the proletarians, peasants and toiling people of all categories, which arise from the ever growing misery and increased capitalist oppression. The party must reassume the leadership of these workers’ struggles in order to bring them back to the field of the class struggle and forestall their tactical utilization by the Stalinist party.
 
Struggle for the recognition of. the management councils, and condemnation of all attempts to split trade union unity. Denunciation of the attempts of pseudo-reformists and Stalinists to tie the trade unions to the state apparatus.
 


Viet Nam Workers Arrested in France
We have received the following resume of a statement to the press on the arrest of Viet Nam workers, published by the Association of Viet Nam Workers in France. It speaks for itself:
“On Saturday, Jan. 31, and Sunday, Feb. 1, large police and mobile guard forces in the whole of France proceeded to encircle the camps of the Viet Nam workers and arrested 150 of them, consisting of old and newly elected delegates and rank and file workers.
“Clearly, this is a classical ‘concentration’ in a world of concentration camps, and not, as the communique of the Ministry of the Interior says, a simple ‘regrouping.’ Many of those held have to sleep on the floor. Those arrested at Balfort were only allowed to wear light clothing. At the Bias camp, they are allowed only one meager meal a day. Drinking water is severely rationed. 40 mobile guards armed with sub-machine guns patrol the camp day and night. Everywhere the prisoners are accompanied by policemen, it is the worst form of prison life.
“We Viet Nam workers who are still ‘free’ appeal to the French workers, to all men devoted to the cause of justice and freedom, to join forces with us in order to save the arrested workers from the brutality of the colonialists. Only the international solidarity of all the oppressed can stop the imperialist oppression.
“French workers, from your workshops, your offices, your trade unions, everywhere, send motions to the government to protest against police arbitrariness, against the arrest of the Viet Nam delegate Tran Ngoc Danh, against the incarceration of Viet Nam workers at, Bias, for their return to their comrades!”



 


The Central Committee of Viet Nam
Workers in France
February 8, 1948



 



Under the new Gottwald government, Czechoslovakia is being swiftly and brutally integrated into Moscow’s East European bloc against the threat of the Marshall Plan in the Kremlin’s “cold war” with American imperialism. Czechoslovakia is the western-most of the Soviet “buffer zone” countries and the most highly industrialized.
The pattern of the Czech “alignment” is marked by several significant features which render it distinct from the Kremlin’s course in Hungary. Rumania and other buffer countries.
First, it has been accompanied by a call to mass action, the formation of “Action Committees,” which gives it a “revolutionary” allure. Bucked with the threat of a general strike and an insurrection led by these “Action Committees,” Stalinist Premier Gottwald forced President Eduard Benes to accept his reorganized cabinet last week.
Secondly, it has not called forth open rebellion on the part of the capitalist elements associated with London and Washington as was the case with Mickolajczyk in Poland, Nagy in Hungary, Manin in Rumania, Petkov in Bulgaria. The leaders of Czech capitalism bowed to complete Stalinist domination in the new government and all its institutions.
The businessmen, according to dispatches, remained “strangely at ease” although they “probably had not expected to be able to exist under such circumstances.” Benes and his colleague Jan Masaryk, the Foreign Minister, are said to be congratulating themselves that “the changes had brought no bloodshed and no large sacrifices.”
It thus appears that with the Stalinists in complete domination of the government and with all phases of public life now undergoing a drastic purge, the Czech capitalists have reason to believe that “all is not lost” so far as their basic profit-making privileges are concerned. Evidently another compromise – although far less advantageous than previously – has been reached behind the scenes between them and the Kremlin agents.
Thirdly, the Czech coup has been executed within the framework of parliamentary legality. Before confronting Benes with their ultimatum, the Stalinists assured themselves of the support of the Social Democrats, with whom they have a slim majority in parliament.
These three factors are interrelated, of course. The pressure of mass action was decisive in swinging the Social Democrats into line. This bloc of the two workers’ parties left the capitalists without any adequate cover in an open struggle depriving them of even a plausible appeal to constitutional legality. When the protest of USA-Britain-France against the installation of a “disguised dictatorship” arrived in Prague, Benes-Masaryk joined Gottwald in rejecting it.
One of the first measures announced by Gottwald is the establishment of a state monopoly over all foreign trade.
It is not yet clear just what character and development the “Action Committees” have taken. The “Central Action Committee” at Prague is undoubtedly an airtight bureaucratic affair. But information is still scant about the local committees and the “factory militias.”
There are indications that factory “action committees” may have been taking over industrial plants and land “action committees” seizing estates. Premier Gottwald has promised that 20 million acres of landed estates would be distributed among “those who till the soil. Previously announced was the government intention to nationalize all enterprises employing more than 50 workers. The question naturally arises: Is the government merely legalizing actions already accomplished by the masses?




Czechoslovakia’s political fate hung in the balance last week as Stalinist Premier Klement Gottwald moved to install a new government completely dominated by the Communist Party. The old Gottwald government fell when its capitalist ministers, headed by members of President Benes’ National Socialist Party, resigned in protest against alleged moves by Nosek, Stalinist Minister of Interior, to place the country’s police under exclusive CP control.
Benes at first refused to accept the resignations. He later capitulated. Faced with this stalemate the Stalinists decided to form a coalition government with the Social Democrats, who did not resign. Together these two parties constitute a majority of 151 out of 300 in the Czech parliament and are thus in a position to meet the formal constitutional requirements.
Should this coalition materialize, President Benes and his capitalist supporters would be faced with the alternative of accepting it or attempting a revolt that would open wide the gates to civil war.
Gottwald has charged the National Socialist Party with preparing a coup. The Stalinist-dominated police not only raided its headquarters, but placed other party headquarters, including the Social Democrats, under “protective guard.” Simultaneously Gottwald issued an appeal for the formation of “Action Committees” in all “factory towns, villages and districts” in support of his new government. After some vacillation, the Social Democrats are reported to have ordered their members to join these “Action Committees.”
The trade unions, under Stalinist control, conducted on Feb. 24 a one-hour general strike to back Gottwald in his stand against Benes, with a threat in “case of need” to call a general strike of indefinite duration.
Although the reported police measures serve as the immediate cause of this crisis, its underlying causes go much deeper. They are twofold in character.
On the one hand, the Kremlin is confronted with the need of integrating Czechoslovakia more closely diplomatically and economically with its East European bloc, where, as in Hungary. Rumania, Bulgaria, etc., all oppositional elements have been purged.
On the other hand, continued exploitation of the workers by Czech capitalism, left, intact by the fake “nationalizations,” has produced growing unrest and discontent. The Stalinist party, dominant in both the government and the trade unions, has found it more and more difficult to suppress this discontent, without incurring the danger of losing its mass base.
 
Align with Moscow
The Stalinists, in accordance with the new Cominform line, are apparently trying to use mass action in order to align Czechoslovakia with Moscow as completely as the rest of Eastern Europe.
While the Stalinist leaders are basing themselves on mass action, they arc proceeding with a caution that reveals their fear of its revolutionary impetus. Thus, according to dispatches, the Stalinists have restricted conventions of factory delegates to “establishments with more than 350 employees, nearly all of which were already nationalized.”
This shows how much the Stalinists fear the much more sweeping demands that would come front delegates of smaller and still unnationalized factories.
Should a civil war actually erupt, the likelihood is that the situation will grow out of hand, no matter what the bureaucratic plans. But before this point is reached, the Stalinists will make every effort to arrive at another compromise with Benes and Czech capitalists.
 




New Social Crisis Brewing in France
A new social crisis, overshadowing the events of last November and December, is brewing in France. Both the increased diplomatic tension between US-USSR as well as internal unrest resulting from the devaluation of the franc are bringing matters to a head.
Making a bid for popular backing to set up an authoritarian regime, General Charles de Gaulle said in a speech at Compiègne last Sunday, “we are in one of those periods where everything is going to be decided.”
First dispatches indicate that his demagogic appeal for a “government above the parties” and of “social justice,” coupled with a direct call for U.S. military aid against Russia was received “not with the wild enthusiasm he roused at the time of liberation.” In other words, rather coolly. It is also noted that he “seemed to disdain the elections that he formerly desired.”
Indeed there has been a considerable decline of the de Gaulle movement, particularly in the electoral field. In a recant column we mentioned the by-election at the Parisian suburb of Malakoff as indicating this trend. It was further confirmed several weeks later in a by-election at the city of Versailles. In both the de Gaullists lost heavily. The Communist Party showed substantial gains. Therein lies the reason for the general’s cooling off on the parliamentary offensive he began with his victory in last October’s municipal contest.
The CP forces have also recouped some of their losses in the trade unions. In contests for job stewards held in all the mines and printing establishments, for instance, the Stalinist-led General Federation of Labor defeated by enormous majorities the reformist “Force Ouvrière” Federation.
What the French masses following the CP want is shown by a renewed wave of short walkouts taking place in many industries. All have as their objective new wage adjustments in line with the devaluation of the franc. The government is resisting the workers’ demands. Their slim majority in parliament (the latest tax bill got through by barely three votes last Monday) already threatened. The new wage movement is bound to culminate once again in revolutionary action.
A new social crisis is thus inevitable. The menace of a de Gaullist coup, backed by Wall Street, cannot be dismissed in spite of the movement’s parliamentary decline. This danger is reinforced by the Stalinist policy of chauvinism and inaction on class struggle issues. De Gaullists are reported to be penetrating the “Committees for the Defense of the Republic” organized by the CP in a daring tactic to challenge its “nationalism.” On the other hand, great ferment is reported in the ranks of the CP itself for revolutionary line.
The outcome of the crisis that is brewing depends upon whether a new leadership will be able to risk to challenge the Stalinists for the allegiance of the working class. Recent steps toward the development of such a revolutionary leadership have been reported in these columns. Negotiations for the unification the Trotskyist International Communist party (PCI), the Socialist Youth and the Revolutionary Socialist Action group – both of which split away from Blum’s Socialist Party last year – have been inidei way for some time. Now these three organizations are approaching two new groups for unification. One is the group around the weekly Bataille Socialiste, expelled from the Blum’s party for demanding a bloc with the CP. The other is grouped around the daily Franc Tireur which broke with the Stalinists on the issue of unity with the Socialists.
 

Indonesia
The official French news agency reports opening of a trial of 17 “extremist Republicans” implicated in the abortive uprising of July 1945, the highlight of which was the abduction of Sultan Sjahrir, Prime Minister of the Indonesian Republic at that time. It adds that “the Communist leader of Trotskyist tendency, Tan Malakka, who is considered the main instigator ... does not feature in the trial and is awaiting judgment in the Bjokjakarta prison.”
 

Greece
No. 1 of the illegal Workers Struggle, organ of the International Communist Party (Trotskyist) has appeared. The reactionary Athens government had banned it as well as the party. A letter reports that among the soldiers held “under suspicion” at the concentration camp on Makronisi Island there are several members of the party, including a member of its Central Committed. Three other Trotskyists have been sentenced to long prison terms. The white terror is being intensified in the whole country.
 

A Footnote on Czechoslovakia
In its current issue; one of the Ichabod Cranes of the Shachtmanite Labor Action writes two ranting columns against our coverage of the Czech events. We didn’t follow the line of the capitalist press in merely howling about the “rape” of Czechoslovakia, as they did. Guilty!
Instead, we sought to piece together the underlying class significance of the developments, which were obscured by the Wall Street propaganda machine. One would think this was the duty of a labor paper. But then their paper is misnamed. They should change it to Democratic Action. What else can one conclude from our Ichabod’s final stumping question: “Are you for a democratic struggle against the Gottwald dictatorship, or would you stand with its opponents?”
Which opponents of the Stalinists? That’s the question for us. We stand with the working-class opponents of Gottwald, as of Beirut in Poland. With whom do the Schachtmanites stand? With the Czech equivalents of Mikolajzik? They would do better to look “for their own lost heads and re-read their own issue of March 2, where, at long last, “Mikolajzik’s Role” is “Exposed.”
 





Gestapo Seizes Our Comrades in the Occupied Countries
Our German comrades have been hard-hit by the advance of the Nazi war machine. Norway, Belgium, Holland – these were centers from which our comrades were able to operate. They owed little thanks for that to the governments of these “democracies,” which made life miserable for the German refugees and, above all, for the revolutionary refugees. Almost invariably our comrades had to operate in these countries under illegal conditions, concealing their identity.
When the Nazis came in, the Gestapo demonstrated its dread efficiency. Its stool pigeons appear to have had prepared lists of anti-Nazi Germans. In addition, however, they seem to have seized every German they could find. Let us hope that our comrades were seized primarily in the general dragnet and the Gestapo doesn’t know just whom they have. Because of this hoped-for possibility it is necessary to conceal the names and number of comrades who were in those countries. All comrades and friends please take note.
 

French Trotskyists Sent to Prison by the “Democratic” Government
The French press reports that nine Trotskyists who were arrested on the 13th of February, were brought before the 2nd military tribunal presided over by Colonel Jammes on May 7th.
The following sentences were passed, for “activities of a nature to hinder national defense”:
Charles MARGNE, post office employee, 5 years prison, 5,000 fr. fine; Pierre BOUSSEL, post office employee, 3 years prison, 1,000 fr. fine; Bruno NARDINO, student, 3 years prison, 2,000 fr. fine; Marie COSTS, post office employee, 3 years prison, 2,000 fr. fine; Mineille FOIRIER, teacher of physical culture, 2 years prison, 1,000 fr. fine; Suzanne SIMKHOVITCH, stenographer, 5 years prison, with reprieve; Jerzy MILNYNARZ, tailor, 3 years prison, 100 fr. fine, with reprieve; Andre CORSET, student, 3 years prison, 200 fr. fine; Maurice GUIGNET, turner, 3 years prison with reprieve, 1,000 fr. fine.
Repressions, American apologists for the Allies have said, are being directed only against Russia’s agents. This latest report, coupled with recent prosecutions of leaders of the PSOP – Socialist Party of Workers and Peasants – show what a fraud these apologies are. French “democracy” ferociously persecutes all militant workers.
 

Canada Outlaws “Communism”; Our Comrades Fight On
A Canadian comrade has sent some clippings showing the lengths to which the war-time dictatorship in Canada has already gone. Dated from Ottawa, May 15th, one article states:
“Communism came beyond the pale of the law throughout Canada today ...
“Under the broad powers of the Wartime Defense of Canada regulations, Mr. Justice E.R.E. Chevrier of the Ontario Supreme Court declared formally that the Communist Party of Canada is an illegal organization ...
“The regulation provides that once an organization has in such manner been declared illegal, not only are all persons continuing as members or officers deemed guilty of an offense against the regulations, but anybody advocating or defending the acts, principles and policies of such an organization is also guilty.
“The ban on Communism followed conviction and imprisonment of three Ottawa men on indictments charging publication and circulation of anti-war pamphlets tending to prejudice the safety of the state and efficient prosecution of the war.”
The Socialist Workers League of Canada, section of the Fourth International, was unable to get a printer to publish its paper from the very first day of the war, and has been functioning on an illegal basis since then. But, despite all obstacles, they fight on.
 





British Imperialism’s Hitlerite Regime in the Colonies
The increasing agitation to have the United States intervene on the side of Britain in the present war must be answered by the continual expose of the “democracy” in the British colonial empire. The following items from British labor papers reveal the oppression under which industrial and agricultural workers in South Africa live both in wartime and peacetime.
The paper of the Labor League of Youth, a militant organization of young revolutionary socialists in England, prints this story in its May issue:
“On April 3rd British troops fired on a crowd of Negro workers on strike in the copper mines of Northern Rhodesia.
“These miners had demanded a 25% rise in wages to offset the increased cost of living following the outbreak of war. The attempt of the mineowners to work the mines with blackleg (scab) labor had failed before the courage and solidarity of the workers. When police charges and tear-gas proved unavailing, the mineowners appealed to their agent, the Governor, for military assistance. Troops were rushed from Bulawayo, Southern Rhodesia! 17 workers lost their lives, 29 others were wounded.
“... In 1938, the copper companies produced profit for the British capitalists amounting to £3,100,000. But the total wages bill for 15,000 black miners was only £500,000.
“Such, fabulous profits are possible only because of the imperialist regime which has enslaved the African Negroes, denying them every human right except that of working for the British capitalist class. In the din and slaughter of the world war, it is more than ever necessary for the working youth in this country to understand that there is no difference between the methods of Hitler and the methods of our masters in their suppression of the colonial peoples. They are not fighting Hitlerism; they are fighting for profits.”
 

Serfdom Decreed by British as Way of Life of Natives
George Padmore, Negro militant from the West Indies, now in London, describes the conditions of the agricultural worker in South Africa in the April issue of the Call, another British labor paper.
“... Before 1913 Africans who could find no home in the Reserves [land set aside for cultivation by natives, and usually unsuitable for agricultural and pastoral purposes – P.G.S.] were allowed to rent or work land as sharecroppers.
“... But as industry developed the big agrarians on the one hand and the mining companies on the other, discovered that the system of sharecropping kept thousands of natives off the labor market ... In February 1932, the landowners adopted a Resolution calling upon the Government to make a law to the effect that ‘a native shall have no right to reside on the land of a white person otherwise than as a laborer.’ Under pressure from these big agrarians the Government began to legislate against the squatters.
“All existing contracts between natives and poor white farmers were immediately revoked. On the day of the enforcement of the Native Service Contract Act thousands of Africans who had established themselves on private lands found themselves ruined and homeless. Overnight these independent cultivators became serfs.
“... Under the terms of the new law every native living upon land owned by a European must work for his master for 180 days in the year. The farmer has the right to decide upon which days the native shall work. In order, therefore, to keep the black tied permanently to the farm, owners usually spread the 180 days over the whole year. In lieu of wages the native is usually given a plot of land on which to erect a hut and grow millet and kaffir corn. Any breach of the Service Contract Act makes the native liable to criminal prosecution and imprisonment. Those under 18 can be punished by flogging.
“... But the worst feature of this act is that no native can leave his job without the permission of his employer. If he runs away he can be arrested by the police, sentenced to a term of imprisonment as a vagrant and then returned to his master.”
 

French Dictatorship Imitates Hitler in Creating Concentration Camps
The following excerpt is taken from a letter sent to British friends by French comrades, and published in Workers’ Fight, May issue:
“The military and police dictatorship established in France, even prior to the war, now wages a relentless persecution against soldiers, workers and peasants alike ... The military administration usurps the functions of all local and civil administrations. Parliament meets only to acquiesce to the Government decrees ... The vicious attack on the Stalinist deputies is now extended to all militants and trade unionists. At least 10,000 are already in concentration camps ... A recent decree imposes the death sentence for ‘preparing, furnishing or storing Communist literature.’ For possessing a pamphlet by Marx, Engels, Lenin or Trotsky, the worker is liable to the extreme penalty. Special Commissions have ejected from the factories about 30,000 workers who were previously exempted on account of their special qualifications. Their crime is that they have shown oppositional tendencies ...”
 





British Fourth Internationalists Hold
Successful National Confab
Right on the heels of the Emergency Conference of the Fourth International, we receive word that the Revolutionary Socialist League, British Section of the F.I., has just concluded a successful national conference “somewhere in England.” Naturally, the meeting took place under illegal conditions. It had as the main point on its agenda the problem of combatting the drive against proletarian revolutionists undertaken by the Churchill government in the wake of the anti-revolutionary actions initiated by the Labour Party bureaucracy. The latter anticipated the reactionary moves of the ruling class by banning, on May 2, the Militant Labour League, left wing Labour organization, to whose work and publications (The Militant, etc.), our comrades have devoted their principal attention and effort.
In contradistinction to the pacifists and centrists of the Independent Labour Party, the conference condemned the use of Conscientious Objectors Tribunals as contrary to militant working class policy. It reaffirmed the Bolshevik stand of working for socialist revolutionary aims within the armed forces amidst the masses of drafted proletarians.
“The League had issued a resolution,” the report of the conference in the Internal Bulletin of the R.S.L. reads, “concerning the Russo-Finnish war, which took the accepted line of the Fourth International and had put forward the immediate slogan of an embargo on arms for Finland ... A. brief report on the International was given, including a summary of the American party dispute.” The League’s actions as well as the stand of the Fourth International towards the Soviet Union were endorsed by the delegates. No minority similar in views to that within the American party was in evidence.
In relation to the main practical task, the attitude to be adopted as a result of the ban against the Militant Labour League, the conference voted for a resolution from which we excerpt the following passages:
“1. This conference reaffirms the basic strategical line of the organization in the building of the new revolutionary party. This consists of work in the mass organizations, the Labour Party and the Trades Unions, in preparation for the radicalization of the masses arising out of the political and economic crisis of capitalism accentuated by imperialist war ...
“3. This tactic was based on a Marxist analysis of the current situation and of probable developments in the future. This analysis is in no way altered by the Labour Party ban. What is necessary therefore is not a new strategical line, but a tactic suitable for existing circumstances ...”
In other words, our comrades have decided to find new means of continuing the tested policy of working close to the organized labor movement, instead of, as some dissident groups propose, deserting mass work for the existence of a sectarian propaganda circle. While maintaining relations with such groups which claim adherence to the F.I., in an effort to bring them into the organization, the conference rightfully refused to countenance any compromises with sectarianism.
*

Our Australian Section Outlawed
by Government
From Australian papers we learn that the Communist League of Australia, Section of the Fourth International, has been added to the list of organizations declared illegal by the Menzies government. The action against our Australian comrades was taken without an official decree, the police simply banning them from usual places where they have been holding meetings.
“Members of the Communist League of Australia,” says the June 17 Sydney Telegraph, “were prevented by police from holding a meeting in the Domain yesterday ...
“A crowd of about 15,000 attended the Domain yesterday afternoon. There was a good sprinkling of khaki in the crowd but, for the first time for several Sundays, there was no organized demonstration by soldiers ...
“The police were acting under Commonwealth regulations issued on Saturday declaring illegal the Communist Party of Australia and several fascist organizations.
“The Communist League was not mentioned in the regulations. When its members began to set up their platform in the Domain, they were told by Inspector Fergusson that if they addressed the crowd they would be liable to arrest. The Communist Party had made no attempt to hold its regular Sunday Domain meeting.
“Mr. J. Kavanagh, who was to have been chairman of the meeting of the Communist League, said last night: ‘Our party, followers of Leon Trotsky, was not on the banned list of organizations. We assumed that we would be allowed to speak ...” (Telegraph, June 17)
Of course, the newspapers only give as much of the story as the censorship will permit, and a direct report from our comrades has not yet reached here. But several things are obvious even from the Telegraph’s account: (1) A full-fledged government anti-red drive is under way. In other columns of the paper raids on organization headquarters and homes of individuals are reported. (2) The “spontaneous” actions of “outraged” soldiers did not succeed in breaking up the meetings of our comrades. In a previous issue we had reported that one such action in January was repulsed by a workers’ meeting under the leadership of our comrades with complete success. (3) Apparently, as the figure of attendance shows – 15,000 conceded by the bourgeois press – the meetings of our League were growing to such proportions as to require government action, if they were to be stopped. (4) Our comrades had also, apparently, taken over the leadership of large numbers of workers formerly under the leadership of the C.P. The chairman of the banned meeting, comrade Kavanagh, is, as readers of this column will recall, one of the leading Communist militants who quit the C.P. in the course of the past year.
We are not as yet in a position to know what course of action our Australian comrades are contemplating under the new conditions. But our knowledge of them and of the daring and courage which made possible their recent progress makes us confident that they will know how to surmount the new obstacles on their path, how to retain their contacts with the militant Australian workers, and to find the path toward building the party of the proletarian revolution in Australia. Our warmest greetings of solidarity to the Communist League of Australia!
 





Jewish “Bund” Leaders Arrested by Stalin in Poland
From a New York anarchist paper in the Yiddish language – the Freie Arbeiter Stimme – we learn of the arrest in Grodno, Soviet Poland, of two leaders of the Jewish “Bund”. The “Bund” is the Jewish Socialist Federation which operated for some four decades in what once was the Republic of Poland.
Involved in this case are not old line leaders of the “Bund” who made their peace with the government of the colonels, but two younger militants. Hurvitch and Shifris, the. two arrested “Bundists”, are in their early thirties. Both were active propagandists engaged in the day to day struggles of the workers. Hurvitch had been the leader of the joint fraction of Jewish, Polish and Byelo-Russian socialists in the City Council of Grodno. In the course of his activities, he was arrested time and again by the government of the colonels and spent a good part of the last few years under the republic in Colonel Beck’s jails. Now he has been sentenced to fifteen and Shifris to six years’ imprisonment by Stalin’s “liberators”.
Stalin cannot cover up this crime and the hundreds of others like it by pointing to the nationalization of the land in the occupied territories. Were Hurvitch and Shifris enemies of the expropriation of the landowners and of workers’ control in the factories? Their years in jail are testimony to the contrary. To Stalin their crime lay in their opposition to his bureaucracy. We solidarize ourselves with these victims of the G.P.U. and with the many others who languish in Stalin’s jails for their working class convictions. Their liberation as well as the best defense of the Soviet Union demands a relentless struggle for the overthrow of the despots in the Kremlin.
 

A New Paper Issued by Our Belgian Comrades
Once again the “neutral” Belgian government has come down on the heads of our valiant comrades of the Revolutionary Socialist Party. Jittery over the rumors of an impending German invasion the government has struck ... on the home front. La Lutte Ouvrière, official organ of the R.S.P. is no longer permitted to appear.
Not at all nonplussed by the action, our comrades of the Brussels Federation of the party have issued a new paper, L’Action Socialiste. To rub it in, the first issue of L’Action Socialiste carries an article written by Paul Spaak, “socialist” Foreign Minister of Belgium, in 1933 – when he was still a hot “leftist”. The article is entitled Against National Defense and winds up with the following ringing words:
“In any case, always, everywhere, without weakening, we must refuse to abdicate before the so-called general interest and continue with our propaganda along the lines of this clear and correct slogan: ‘No national defense under a capitalist regime.’”
Incidentally, L’Action Socialiste was also the name of Spaak’s paper in his radical days.
 

Soldiers Attack Meetings of Militants in Australia
From the Sydney, Australia Herald of January 1 we learn of some exciting activity on the part of our Australian comrades.
On New Year’s Day, the Communist League of Australia (Trotskyists) as well as the Stalinist party held mass meetings on the famous Sydney Domain, the center of radical activity in that city. Suddenly an organized group of soldiers and sailors appeared, with a following of about two hundred. The leaders declared their intention openly: they were out to break up the two meetings.
Soon some 15,000 workers gathered on the Domain and a battle ensued. Only the immediate appearance of special details of police prevented the soldiers and sailors from a gruesome fate at the hands of the enraged workers. As it is, several were sent to the hospital.
“Contrary to their usual practice,” says the Herald, “the Communists flew no flags, but from another platform close by banners were displayed by the Communist League of Australia. One sign read: ‘Defend Free Speech’ and another ‘Build Workers’ Defense Guards’.”
Many rank and file Stalinists made common cause with our comrades around their banners. Discussions around the slogan “Build Workers’ Defense Guards” took place for hours after the demonstration had ended. The slogan had apparently gained considerable popularity.
The demonstration itself is testimony to the fact that the workers of the Australian metropolis are continuing to retain their anti-war militancy, which is in itself a highly encouraging sign. That our comrades, mostly young workers in their twenties, knew how to mobilize this militancy is evidenced by the newspaper account and augurs well for the further development of that section of the Fourth International.
 





Purge in the Mexican Communist Party
The Mexican Communist Party is to hold an “extraordinary” convention next month. This convention is being called for the purpose of undertaking a thorough-going purge of the present leadership of the organization.
In the “theses” for the convention, entitled The National and International Situation and the Tasks of the Party, we begin to get an inkling as to the why and wherefore of the purge. While the situation has been extremely favorable for growth, the “theses” say, it has not been taken advantage of “because of the sectarian-opportunist (sic) line of the leadership of the party which did not have sufficient vision to grasp the development of the revolutionary movement in our country and the possibilities of forming a mass party of the proletariat.”
What is involved, obviously, is the sacrificing of a number of scapegoats in the leadership for carrying out the pro-“democratic” line which the Kremlin has now thrown overboard. From another paragraph in the document we are given the impression that this number is going to be quite large:
“Right now ... there is proceeding a cleansing, from the top to the bottom, of our own ranks, eliminating from its midst all (underlined in the original) the wavering and alien elements from the party, who because of the false political line and the lack of revolutionary vigilance have infiltrated its ranks.”
Among the leaders to be purged, we are informed, are Vicente Guerra, Arturo Ramirez and Manuel Lobato, all members of the Central Committee. Guerra was a member of the all-powerful secretariat and Lobato an alternate to it. Ramirez is the leader of the Mexico City district organization which forms the core of the party. They are charged with any number of crimes in the usual Stalinist fashion – from “facilitating and protecting the work of Trotskyist spies” inside the organization to making pacts with the Right Wing presidential candidate General Almazan. Even a group of free masons was allegedly under their wing. But their gravest crime, it seems, is an opportunist capitulation to President Cardenas.
Of all the charges made, the last one mentioned seems to be most significant. The contradictory character of the charges is quite in line with Stalinist practices and it is always necessary to wade through all the verbiage of these allegations and to sift them carefully for an indication of the real purpose. In this case it is quite apparent that all else outside of “capitulation to Cardenas” is just the usual dressing. In a pending break with Cardenas lies the essence of the purge.
Apparently, a large number of functionaries of the Mexican C.P. has been resisting the change of line in consideration of the rather comfortable positions that the backing of Cardenas and his pro-democratic orientation has afforded them. So that in reality, the convention will be a sort of a showdown between the pro-Cardenas and the pro- Moscow functionaries.
It is not excluded, however, that in the rank and file of the party a movement to break with Stalinism in a revolutionary direction may develop as a result of this situation.
 

Fruits of the “People’s Front” in France
Among the lesser crimes of the “People’s Front” in France was the Stalinist rehabilitation of Leon Jouhaux, social patriotic leader of the General Confederation of Labor (C.G.T.) in the last war. Jouhaux was not only dressed up as a militant fighter but feasted as a staunch friend of Soviet Russia, in Moscow no less than in Paris.
But there is no gratitude in Jouhaux’ heart at all. No sooner had the war broken out than he took up his old post as French imperialism’s chief war-booster in the ranks of labor. Of course his C.G.T. denounced Soviet Russia and supports Daladier’s campaign against it. That in itself is what was to be expected from the first. But the U.P. – and all other press agencies as well – is able to announce now that “the French General Confederation of Labor which for years has had a pronounced left wing tendency bitterly denounced Russia as well as Germany today.”
The “pronounced left wing tendency” – that is the gilding of Jouhaux by Stalin’s popular front policy. His denunciation of the Soviet Union is only the fruit of that policy.
 

German “Socialists” in the Service of Imperial France
We have become quite used to the abominable patriotic antics of the social democratic politicians of England, France, etc. They act no differently than they did in the last war. Only the German social democracy does not repeat its performance of 1914. But that is not through any change of heart on its part. Hitler has simply refused to give it a chance to do its part.
Somewhat ludicrously, the German social democrats do manage, nevertheless, to be true to color. They have remained social patriots – but are now on the side of the Erbfeind, the “hereditary foe” they helped fight in the last war. From France issues their miserable propaganda for a “socialism” that is to be introduced into Germany on the bayonets of French imperialism. In turn, they print at the masthead of their official organ, the Neue Vorwaerts, an inscription in large type: Journal Anti-Hitlerien. Daladier’s anti-Hitlerism, it appears, is just as acceptable to them as their “socialism” is to Daladier. They have become, to use the phrase of one of our German comrades, “social patriots in reverse.”
* * *
But they are not alone in the ranks of “social patriots in reverse.” Among them are to be found also the heroes of the centrist S.A.P. (German Labor Party), the erstwhile pride of the so-called “London Bureau” and – Willie Munzenberg, for a long time a pillar of German Stalinism and its foremost Trotsky-baiter.
Until long after the Moscow trials, Willie continued to condone every atrocity committed by the Kremlin butchers. It was only after Moscow cut off financial support and invited him for one of those visits which cost scores of other German Stalinists their lives, that Munzenberg became a violent anti-Stalinist. But Willie apparently knows how to make anti-Stalinism pay just as well as he knew in the old days how to work the Moscow racket. Now he publishes a paper in Paris called Die Zukunft (The Future), as the “organ of the Franco-German Union.” It goes without saying that the paper’s line is such as to gain only plaudits from the French general staff. Collaborators on it include half a dozen other German ex-Stalinists, old wheelhorses in the Munzenberg publishing schemes.
Business as usual, seems to be his slogan.
 





Increased Attacks Against Our Belgian Comrades?
This week United Press carried the following dispatch from Brussels:
“The Cabinet, which met unexpectedly today, was reported to have discussed means of strengthening legislation against persons disturbing internal order. It was believed that the Cabinet was anxious to suppress the activities of communist agitators who, it was alleged, recently provoked strikes, especially among coal miners.”
The most recent strikes among Belgian miners were those of the Levant de Flenu company in the Borinage region, the traditional stronghold of our Belgian comrades, the Revolutionary Socialist Party (P.S.R.). Several weeks ago this column reported suppression of the party’s legal organ La Lutte Ouvrière and its reappearance under the title L’Action Socialiste. The paper had to change from the mining region to Brussels. It is consequently safe to assume that the Cabinet action is directed against our Belgian miner comrades.
Despite all previous attempts to drive them underground, our comrades have shown a remarkable ability to readjust themselves under fire. Their deep roots among the Borinage proletariat have assured the continuity of their work. If their past performance is any indication, they will be able with the aid of their devoted following in the pits to overcome even these latest moves of the government. Their heroic resistance to the war preparations of Belgian capitalism is an example of the vitality of the Fourth International under increasingly difficult conditions.
 

Only Fourth Internationalists Fight Against War in Canada
From Canada we have just received the latest issue of Socialist Action, the excellent little sheet put out illegally by our Canadian comrades.
Of all the working class organizations in that country, the section of the Fourth International is the only one that is actively engaged in the struggle against war. The reformist Canadian Commonwealth Federation (Second International) has gone completely patriotic under the leadership of its parliamentary whip, Coldwell. The pacifist wing under Woodsworth, which repeatedly wrote a rather strong anti-war plank into the party’s program at the Federation’s conventions in recent years, has completely capitulated to the war-mongering leadership of its parliamentary representatives, although it has been known to have a majority in the membership. The Stalinist party seems to have disappeared from the field of public action altogether after the switch in line that followed the conclusion of the Stalin-Hitler pact. At the outbreak of the war in September it was still for the support of the “democratic” powers. Only our comrades carry on the strong anti-war tradition of the Canadian workers.
In the elections to parliament which are now going on as a result of the dissolution of the lower house by Prime Minister McKenzie King, the C.C.F. is agitating along avowedly imperialist lines. At a recent meeting, Coldwell made the following declaration for his party, according to Socialist Action:
“The C.C.F. believes that our national unity, the allied cause and securing a just peace could be served best by limiting our military and naval participation to defense to our own large territory and lands belonging to the British and French adjacent to Canada. That would include Newfoundland, the Bahamas, Bermuda and such islands as Miquelon and St. Pierre.”
Allegedly opposing the Sending of Canadian troops overseas, the C.C.F. leader makes clear that this is not due to any real opposition to imperialist policy. On the contrary, he appears to be concerned only to obtain the most adequate defense of allied imperialist interests on the Western hemisphere. As against the openly war-mongering policy of the social reformists in the C.C.F. our comrades are participating in the election struggle under the slogans:
“For a Workers and Farmers Government! Expropriate the 50 big shots! For Workers’ Control of Production! Down with Imperialist War!”
 

How British Trade Union Bureaucrats Deal with Opposition to War
In Great Britain the movement of opposition to the war has become particularly pronounced among local trade union bodies known as the Trades Councils which are similar in structure to our own Central Labor Unions. The opposition springs from the growing realization of the rank and file militants that it is they who – by the decline of real wages and the rise in cost of living – have to bear the burden of a war which is not of their making. Apparently this movement is giving serious cause for worry to the trade union bureaucrats at the top who are, of course, thoroughly patriotic.
Recently they have been going over from worrying to action. What action? They simply instruct local affiliates of national unions under their control on pain of expulsion to withdraw from Trades Councils which have declared their opposition to the war. In other words, they put on the economic squeeze. Thus, for instance, Ernest Bevin, head of the Transport Workers Union, announces in the Daily Herald of December 29:
“Trades Councils that support the ‘peace at any price’ policy will find that part of the price of their decision is that they will not receive affiliation fees for 1940 from the Transport and General Workers Union. That ‘peace’ policy is in conflict with the decisions of the Trade Union Congress and the Labour party. The union has a standing resolution to pay money only to Trades Councils and local Labor parties that accept the national policy of the T.U.C. and the Labour party.”
Since then, the branches of the Bevin union have been instructed to withhold fees from the Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh Trades Councils. Such blackmail may deal a temporary blow to the workers’ opposition to war. But only a temporary one. For the plan of the Chamberlain government to squeeze a major share for the cost of the coming war year from the pockets of the workers will undoubtedly give it a new impulse. The next wave will only be more embittered because of the dastardly steps taken to stem it.
 





Will Stalinist Intrigues Lead Mexico to Bar Spanish Refugees?
A New York Times dispatch from Mexico City, dated May 6, carries the following news:
“Political agitation against the admission of further contingents of Spanish refugees has caused the Ministry of Government, in view of the approaching Presidential election, to issue an order that no more shall be admitted for the present.
“It is understood that 2,000 Spaniards, ready to sail from France for Mexico, have been obliged to return to concentration camps.”
It has been recognized for some time that in their shady maneuvers in Mexican national politics, the Stalinists are planning to concentrate Spanish Civil War veterans under their influence, for possible action in connection with the current election campaign. Apparently the above dispatch recounts the reaction in Mexico to such a move.
By their pernicious and underhanded intervention in Mexican politics, the Stalinists are thus endangering the very lives of thousands of distraught working class militants who had at last hoped to find refuge. Every friend of these militants must be aroused to expose and combat this reprehensible exploitation of their plight by the dastardly Kremlin clique.
Nevertheless, working class organizations and friends of the Spanish class war veterans cannot confine themselves merely to a condemnation of Stalinism in this affair. Letters, telegrams, resolutions, must be sent at once to the Mexican government urging that – while the need for protection against shady Kremlin intrigues is understandable – the crimes of Stalinism must not be visited upon the heads of the worthy Spanish refugees, innocent of any connection with this gang. In France, forced labor or enrollment in the Foreign Legion are the only alternatives for the heroic fighters against Franco. They must not be left at the mercy of French imperialism. The Mexican government must be urged to give every consideration to them and to distinguish between genuine anti-fascist militants and GPU agents in considering visas.
 

Labor’s Ranks in Motion as War Enters New Phase
Confirming the report given in these columns recently by our British comrade, the New York Times of May 6 carries a cable from London which gives the following precise information:

The city council of Cardiff in Wales took the lead in denying the use of parks and other open spaces to “Communists.” Laborite members voted against this ban as a denial of the right of free speech.
At the annual congress of the National Union of Distributive and Allied Workers at Blackpool, that union – while officially expressing concern against Stalinist propaganda – voted by a majority of 4,000 votes, to declare the “present war an imperialist war, waged in the interest of the capitalist class, and called on the whole trade union and labor movements to cease helping the government and use all their energy to end the hostilities.”
The same union, according to the Times dispatch, “mustered its fullest strength on a resolution ending the electoral truce with the Chamberlain government, which was carried against the will of the union leadership.”

It looks as if the British working class has already surpassed the first stage – that of mere apathy – and entered on its second lap of anti-war struggle, that of militant protest. From publications of the Fourth International in England which have recently arrived here it appears that the third stage – that of organized action against the treacherous social-patriotic labor leadership – is not too far off. Next week we intend to go into greater length in dealing with British developments.
 





British Trotskyist Reports on the Struggle in His Country
We had the pleasure this week of meeting face to face with a British comrade. His report uncovered a mass of information that has never yet seen public print. We submit herewith a few notes jotted down hastily by our comrade from Britain; further notes will be published next week:
“Amongst the Trade Unions, the desire for more militant leadership is making itself manifest. This can be best shown by the fact that in certain trades and industries the workers themselves have already set up their own job organizations. The Railway Vigilance Committee movement, the Shop Stewards movement in the engineering trades, and the tendency towards growing criticism of the reactionary Labour and T.U. leaders are all indications of the growing consciousness of the British workers.
“The Second Imperialist War finds the workers for the most part apathetic. There is a complete absence of jingoism and a genuine desire for peace, but as yet, this has not developed a political character. Thus, the petty-bourgeois P.P.U. (Peace Pledge Union) and the pacifist section of the I.L.P. are for the moment gaining strength. At a later stage the Fourth International groups will increase their strength, to replace the influence of the pacifists with a militant, revolutionary anti-war movement.
“Re: the official Labor Party: the Stalinist fraction working within the Labor Party have been withdrawn through the collapse of Popular Frontism, with the result that genuine revolutionists can now work better in the Labor Party for the overthrow of the National Government.
“The conscientious objector tribunals have already dealt with over 10,000 objectors. This shows that there is widespread opposition to the war amongst the youth. The grounds of objection stated are showing a growing political consciousness among the masses.
“The Labour League of Youth, who are, or, were, an auxiliary to the Labour Party, are mostly adherents of the Fourth International and are putting up a strong fight against Young Communist League fakers, especially in the large factories. The L.L.Y. has quite a few members on the Youth Advisory Councils of certain unions.
“The spokesmen of the National Government have already warned the workers that anything in the nature of a rise in wages corresponding with prices need not be expected. This has given rise to great resentment and even the Labour Party has been forced to register a protest for the sake of saving their faces.
“The No-Conscription League is a pacifist body with an I.L.P. tingle and has been active in the electoral campaigns. There have been two recent by-elections for Parliament held, in spite of the political ‘truce’ which the Labour Party decided upon so that the war could be carried on without ‘obstruction.’ In one election, the secretary of the British C.P., Harry Pollitt, was utterly defeated. This election was fought in Battersea, London, which was the first constituency in England to return a Communist in 1924.
“The other election was held at Manchester, the Conservatives winning the seat. The significant fact about this election was that a Stalinist who opposed the war was defeated along with an I.L.P.er. However, the I.L.P.er polled 5,000 votes and the C.P.er just over 1,000.
“I worked in military camps and spoke to young recruits and found that they are definitely not concerned with the war and ‘smashing Fascism.’ There are various complaints about food, equipment and restrictions placed upon the civilian population because of general rise in prices and no corresponding rise in wages.
“Scores of resolutions have been sent in by unions calling for an immediate international conference and also to call the war off – by the North Wales District Railroad Council, South Wales Miners Fed., the Dundee Jute Workers, Glasgow Dockers, etc., etc.”
 

Gorkin Greets – the Party which Endorsed Crushing of Barcelona
Our centrist friends seem to have a knack for supplying bitter irony in the spectacle they make of themselves.
We read in the Socialist Call of April 20:
“From the Spanish Socialists in exile came greetings (to the SP convention) in the person of Julian Gorkin, secretary of the POUM, whose members were decimated in the Loyalist struggle by both Franco Fascists and Stalinists.”
Is it not indeed odd to see the representative of the POUM (Workers Party of Marxist Unification), which participated on the side of the workers’ barricades in the 1937 May Day struggles at Barcelona, hailing the convention of the SP? At that time, the SP brazenly endorsed the Stalinist action of crushing these same barricades in blood. Their fellow member of the Second International, Largo Caballero, was then sharing his governmental portfolios with the henchmen of the Kremlin.
Nay, it is more than odd, it is more than ironical. It is simply a desecration of the memory of the heroic POUM militants who laid down their lives in that struggle. Their spirit was present at the convention of the Socialist Workers Party, of the Trotskyists, who unflinchingly sided with the Barcelona barricade fighters, not only against the Stalinists but – we were then in the SP – against Norman Thomas and Co. Their spirit was represented at our convention by Grandizo-Munis, the Fourth Internationalist militant who remains true to his fallen comrades in Spain and carries on their fight, not with their betrayers but with their comrades everywhere.
 

Death Penalty for French “Communists” Is Decreed by Government
A UP dispatch from Paris on April 28 carries the following report:
“To aid the police in their hard fight against an underground organization possessing innumerable clandestine printing shops, thousands of agents in the public services and factories, the government recently instituted the death penalty for Communists and other ‘wreckers’.”
But, in reality, the death penalty hits not so much at the Kremlin’s tools who head the French C.P., but at the devoted and self-sacrificing rank and file militants whom they have deceived and ten times betrayed. For the leaders can always escape to Moscow, but the masses of loyal Jimmy Higginses have no refuge anywhere. More than that, the new decree – the dispatch also talks of other “wreckers” (read: revolutionists) – is directed not merely at the Communist rank and file, but also against the valiant partisans of the Fourth International as well as against all other active anti-war fighters.
 





Anti-War Militants Answer British Labor Party Bureaucrats
Some time ago we méntioned that the left-wing organization in the British Labor Party adhering to the principles of revolutionary socialism which are also those of the Fourth International, had been banned by the Labor Party bureaucracy. Below we reprint an explanation of this step given by the official organ of the League, The Militant, in its April issue.
“The National Executive of the Labor Party has issued its ukase declaring that membership in the Militant Labor League is incompatible with membership of the party. In taking this decision, the party chiefs did not attempt to discuss the question with the people involved, in spite of the fact that all members of the Militant Labor League are active members of their local Labor parties, many of them holding important positions. The decision of the Executive was taken in a thoroughly bureaucratic manner and recorded in the ‘Labor Press Service’ without a word of explanation.
“In the light of this decision, it is worth while to examine briefly the history and aims of the M.L.L. ... In No. 1 of the Militant we stated:

“‘We therefore call for the immediate creation of a left-wing organization which will include all Labor Party workers who are willing to struggle for a revolutionary program and leadership, an organization which can offer to the workers a clear socialist alternative to the policies of treachery and despair of the existing leadership.’
“‘The M.L.L. stands for working class struggle against all imperialist wars and against all preparations for such wars. ... It calls for the waging of the class struggle both before and during the war for the overthrow of the imperialist government and the seizure of power by the working class.’ (Militant, Nov. 1937).

“This policy declaration has been the keynote of the struggle of the League since its formation ... When war finally broke out last September, the M.L.L. alone in the Labor Party issued a manifesto, which declared the conflict to be one between rival imperialisms, and called upon the workers to concentrate their fire on the enemy at home—the British boss class.
“Small wonder that the National Executive of the Labor Party has issued its ban! As the war progresses and wider sections of the working class see more clearly its reactionary nature, so the base of the Labor bureaucracy narrows. In order to protect their positions so that they may continue to carry out the behests of the capitalist class, they must attempt to smash all genuine socialist opposition in the party. It is not accidental that the M.L.L. is banned at the period when British imperialism plans to extend the war, and talk of further sacrifices in blood and money is in the air ...
“The Labor Party is not the property of the leadership. It was built up by the British working class. We have the same right as Attlee or Greenwood to publicize our point of view, to attempt to influence the party membership by propaganda and struggle. If the membership of the Labor Party supports the leadership in denying us this most elementary democratic right, then it is committing political suicide, and handing over the party, lock, stock and barrel to the bosses ...”
The M.L.L. also sent the following document to national newspapers and left-wing periodicals as a part of the campaign of protest against the Labor Party ban:
“Members of the M.L.L. have recently learned that the Executive Committee of the Labor Party has decided that our organization is not suitable for affiliation to the Party, and that therefore membership of the M.L.L. is incompatible with membership of the Labor Party.
“This news which amounts to a virtual banning of our organization was only obtained from the general press; we were never officially notified, no charges have been made against our conduct, and in fact no specific reasons were given for the ban.
“We emphatically protest against this ban as a denial of democracy and political freedom within the workers’ organization. While working entirely within the Labor Party for a number of years, the M.L.L. has always upheld the right of leftwing opinion to be heard, and we shall not accept lightly this Gestapo-like attempt by the official leadership to brush aside all forms of democratic freedom within the Labor Party in an effort to crush honest political criticism of their policy.”
 

Working Women Against the War
From another British labor paper, dated May 1940, we take the following item:
“The 201 delegates to the Conference on Women in Wartime held in London on April 20th, have given a fine militant lead to all the millions of toil-worn women of this country. The everyday struggle ‘to make ends meet’ expressed itself in the recognition of the fact that this war is in no way in the interest of the working class.
“In passing resolutions condemning the war, and at the same time urging that the struggle for the elementary interests of the working class should in no way be relinquished, the women delegate are clearly moving along the road to the only conclusive opposition to the war.”
 





Three Organizations Decide to Unite as 4th International Party
Fermin Olea, fraternal delegate of the Revolutionary Socialist Party of Chile to the Third National Convention of the Socialist Workers Party, provided us with the following summary on the Chilean situation and the formation of the R.S.P.:

The Socialist Party entered the Popular Front combination in 1937 with a fifty-point platform; but the real point of the Popular Front was to elect a presidential candidate opposed to Gustavo Ross. The Popular Front candidate was the bourgeois radical, Pedro Aguirre Cerda, and the Socialist Party sacrificed its own candidate, its leader Grove.
After the victory in the October 25, 1938, election, the Socialist Party convoked a General Congress in December to decide on its participation in the new government. At that congress were to be observed the first symptoms of open opposition to the reformist politics of the S.P.
This opposition grew in the course of the first year of the Popular Front government. The first serious incidents came in September 1939, when the Central Executive Committee of the Socialist Party attempted to effect a rapprochement with the Vanguardia Popular Socialista (a movement previously openly pro-Nazi but which, with the support of the Stalinists, had entered the Popular Front). With a combination with this organization, the S.P. leadership thought to counter-balance the Stalinist-Radical bourgeois alliance which was outweighing the S.P. in government decisions.

The Socialist Youth Federation (Federacion Juvenil Socialista) did not accept the S.P. policy and its general secretary, Krug, together with other leaders and active youth, were violently expelled from the S.P. These elements formed the Revolutionary Socialist Left (Izquierda Revolucionaria Socialista) in November, 1939.
New incidents came just before the VI General Congress of the S.P. which took place at the end of December 1939. Numerous militants were expelled and various sections reorganized by the S.P. Leadership.

Two tendencies constituted the opposition: one which was organized around Cesar Godoy, an S.P. deputy in parliament, and another, Trotskyist, which was organized under the name Ala Izquierda Socialista (Left Socialist). The two tendencies agreed in their condemnation of the dishonest practices of the government, of the S.P. leadership and of the leadership of the trade unions, whose principal body, the Confederacion de Trabajadores (Workers Confederation) is controlled by the S.P. and the Communist Party, with a slight majority in the hands of the S.P.

The Left Socialists and the Godoy group made an agreement on the following platform: (1) Democratic centralism and liberty of discussion; (2) reinstatement into the party of those expelled for political reasons; (3) the candidacy of Godoy for General Secretary of the party.
Grove was elected General Secretary over Godoy by an insignificant majority. The result was that many militants left the party. These, together with those expelled, constituted in January 1940 the Revolutionary Socialist Party (Partido Socialista Revolucionario) and immediately established contact with the previously-organized Revolutionary Socialist Left and with ex-members of the Communist Party who had become disgusted with the Stalinist regime and its international politics.
At the Congress of the Revolutionary Socialist Left in February, there were fraternal delegations from the Revolutionary Socialist Party and the Internationalist Workers Group (Grupo Internacionalista Obrero), (the latter has been affiliated to the Fourth International for some time). At this Congress it was agreed to form a Committee for Unification of the three organizations.
In March the Revolutionary Socialist Party published its first pamphlet, which consists of a Manifesto, a Declaration of Principles, a program of action, and the statutes of the party. A second publication, a new translation of Marx’s Criticism of the Gotha Program, in the press.

In its Declaration of Principles, the Revolutionary Socialist Party declares that the World Party of Socialist Revolution (the Fourth International), “represents with fidelity and purity the interests of the working class,” and in its statutes states that the party’s International is the Fourth International.
The new party that will result from the fusion of these organizations has great perspectives: (1) Because its militants and its theories are imbued with the Trotskyist ideas of proletarian internationalism. (2) Because those discontented with the Socialist Party do not find in any other group a firm ideological base. (3) Because those discontented with the Communist Party have not succeeded in creating any other independent group. (4) Because the new party has a genuine and effective proletarian base and many of its militants are those who developed the active trade union work of the C.P. and S.P.

   March 1940   Fermin Olea  

* * *
After attending the S.W.P. convention, comrade Olea added the following appendix to his report:
“Concerning the international question raised by the war, the German-Soviet pact and the war in Finland, the P.S.R. had not taken, at the time of my departure from Chile, any official position; but in the Central Committee there prevailed the position supported by the national convention of the American party. The same thing happened in the Revolutionary Socialist Left and the Internationalist Workers Group.
“I believe that in no case will a minority in the P.S.R. take a stand against the unity of the party, and this position will also be maintained in the course of the process of unification between the P.S.R. and the other groups.”
It is clear that our movement in Chile is leaving the stage of propaganda groups. A unified party of the forces at our disposal in Chile means, from its inception, a party of action in the mass movement.
 





Heavy Sentences for the Revolutionary Anti-War Fighters
We have just received the January number of L’Etincelle, the illegal organ of our Fourth Internationalist comrades in France. The regularity with which this little sheet is appearing, under the most harrowing conditions of government persecution, is truly amazing.
Thus, L’Etincelle reports, the entire press, from the paper of the pacifist Paul Faure to that of the fascist Colonel La Rocque, has been calling for a “clean-up” campaign. The radio blares its threats against our comrades daily. Recently, the renegade socialist L.O. Frossard – now a minister in the Reynaud cabinet – made a speech in parliament, calling for more drastic government action against the Fourth International.
Last week we reported the arrest of a new group of sixteen French Trotskyists. Now we learn from our French paper that two comrades previously arrested, the youth leaders Bourdois and Chuvin of Marseilles, have been sentenced to two years each. Comrade Lucien Weitz, the national secretary of the Workers and Peasants Socialist Youth League (JSOP) – who had been arrested before the outbreak of the war itself – has had an additional sentence of four years hung on him.
Recently the leaders of even the “moderate” Workers and Peasants Socialist Party (PSOP) – which had “purged” itself shortly before of the revolutionary Minority (including Lucien Weitz, Daniel Guerin and the Trotskyists – have been seized by the government.
 

Revolutionists Break with P.S.O.P.; Join Forces with 4th International
The arrest of the PSOP leaders is, in a sense, ironical. For the latter, a combination of freemasons and pacifists, refused to prepare for illegal work and insisted on carrying on as if the war had not broken out and as if no dictatorial regime had been installed. In fact, they had voted to expel the revolutionary Minority because the Minority, demanding that the party carry out in action its resolution for revolutionary struggle against war (revolutionary defeatism), adopted at the last convention of the PSOP, had pointed out that such action was possible only by illegal means and had proceeded in the localities where it was in control to act accordingly. Even the expulsion of the revolutionary defeatists and all the “legalism” of the free mason leaders of the PSOP could not save them from Daladier’s axe.
The revolutionary PSOP Minority, under the leadership of Daniel Guerin – best known in America for his brilliant work, Fascism and Big Business – and Lucien Weitz, as well as the Trotskyist comrades who entered that party a year ago, have now joined in a body with the Committees of the Fourth International for joint work and for the building of a united party on the program of the Fourth International.
Among the items carried by L’Etincelle is a brief article on the war in Finland, from which the following are pertinent excerpts:
“The situation is clear: once again the leaders of the USSR have shown their disregard for the people and for their liberation. For years they have practiced the politics suited to the imperialist democracies. Now they are following a policy which aids the Fascist countries. That shows that they are themselves becoming more and more a small minority cut off from the working masses.
“The country which they are thus leading towards defeat or towards increased enslavement neverthelesss remains the country where the proletariat has chased out its capitalist oppressors; as such it remains the butt of all the hate and greed of the imperialists. The Red Army, supported by an as yet too feeble industry, does not suffice for its defense. Only a powerful and free anti-capitalist movement in the other countries can save it. Once the people of the USSR are freed of the menace of imperialist attack, they will be able to chase out their treacherous leaders and install their own dictatorship and, upon a revitalized technical base, they will be able to introduce real socialism, the socialism of liberty.”
 

A Resolution of the Belgian Revolutionary Socialist Party
We have just received a resolution on the same subject from the Revolutionary Socialist Party (PSR), the Belgian section of the Fourth International. Excerpts follow:
“The aim of the campaign launched by international finance capital around Stalin’s aggression in Finland is clear: to realize an imperialist united front against the USSR and to attempt thus to save the capitalist regime undermined by its own contradictions ...
“The real crime of Stalin. We are not among those who approve Stalin’s action in Finland. From the first day we have said that this aggression is a crime. But wherein does Stalin’s crime lie ? Is it in the employment of military force, in the violation of frontiers? No. These are the criteria upon which the social democrats, the anarchists and the petty bourgeois base their condemnation of Stalin ... What gives the aggression of Stalin its reactionary and criminal character is the fact that it has been launched without the least regard for the sentiments of the Finnish workers and of the world proletariat ... By his high-handed manner, his cynicism, his contempt for the conscience of the workers, Stalin is weakening the USSR and the proletarian cause, throwing the masses of workers into confusion. In doing so, he plays into the hands of the bourgeoisie ...
“Precisely by the example of Belgium we see however, with what facility formal neutrality gives way to a system of imperialist pacts and how a war ‘for national defense’ is turned inevitably into a peace with annexations (the annexation of Eupen and Malmedy as well as of the former German colonies) ... That does not mean that we approve of the annexation of Finland by Stalin. On the contrary, we are opposed to it. We are for the independence of Finland, but of a Soviet Finland. To be for the independence of bourgeois Finland at the same time as one is for the revolution in Finland – that is a contradictory position. The victory of the bourgeois Finnish army would inevitably signify the strengthening of the capitalist regime in Finland and the dictatorship of Mannerheim.
“The ideal thing for the Finnish workers to do would be to get rid of the Finnish bourgeoisie and at the same time to escape Stalinist annexation and the bureaucratic oppression which will result from it. But since this aim is hardly realizable by virtue of the unfavorable relationship of forces, they must choose the lesser of two evils: the victory of the Red Army. It goes without saying that they must utilize this victory profitably by pushing forward the expropriation of the Finnish landlords and capitalists, by getting close contact with the Soviet workers in order to ally themselves with them against the Stalinist bureaucracy ...
“The future of humanity lies in the world organization of production on the basis of socialized property and planning. In spite of Stalin, this acquisition of the October revolution still exists in the USSR and it is the absolute duty of the Soviet workers as well as of the workers in the entire world to defend it ... The overthrow of Stalin and his clique undoubtedly remains an imperious necessity for the Russian revolutionists, more imperious still because of this war which places the USSR in an extremely dangerous position. But the Soviet revolutionists can carry out that task only by proving themselves the best defenders of the USSR. A defeatist or just an indifferent attitude on their part can only reinforce the political positions of the bureaucracy ...”
Almost without international contact and working under the tremendous handicap of illegality and censorship, our Belgian and French comrades have reacted to the complicated events of the unfolding war with the same clear revolutionary attitude as our sections overseas. The Marxist program, it is evident, is an indispensable guide in stormy times and a guarantee for coordinated revolutionary action.
 





A Controversy Regarding the Facts on France
We have received this week a letter from Marceau Pivert, leader of the French Socialist Workers and Peasants Party (P.S.O.P.), respecting some facts we have printed in this column recently about his party and its actions against the revolutionary minority within it. Since comrade Pivert, who is at present in this country, challenges our information, we feel it is our duty to air the controversy before the readers of the Socialist Appeal. We confine ourselves here to the bare essentials. Should further developments require it, we are quite prepared to go further lengths in proving that every bit of information printed here, on French matters as well as in general, is based on sources whose reliability is uncontestable.
The letter of Marceau Pivert and the reply by the author of this column follow below:
* * *

Pivert’s Letter
The Socialist Appeal
116 University Place
New York City
April 16, 1940
Comrades:
Once again, in your issue of April 6, you make such a fantastic presentation of events in regard to the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party of France (P.S.O.P.) that a simple comparison of this article with that of December 2nd suffices to characterize your method. Yesterday, you announced that your friends had captured the leadership of the P.S.O.P.; today, you are obliged to confess that this leadership was struck by the suppression. You use this occasion to slander the imprisoned militant revolutionists. You accuse them, in a word, of having capitulated at a time when they have remained faithful to their Party, to its program, and when they are brutally condemned for having courageously carried out its decisions in time of war. You find in that an occasion for irony. Nevertheless, you cannot be unaware of the terrible conditions in which they are placed, as, for instance, the tubercular Emile Rouaix, former general secretary of the Party. Enough said! We merely register our opinion that your incurable pretentions to the monopoly of revolutionary action leads you to the use of the same methods as Stalinism in relation to other sectors of the working class movement which are not subservient to your exigencies. But bluff and lies can last only a limited time. Before the French proletariat, all accounts will some day be reckoned.
       With socialist greetings,
Marceau Pivert  

P.S.: Because of a discretion (which you will no doubt be incapable of understanding) I will refrain from discussing your information in regard to Lucien Weitz and Daniel Guerin. One thing, however, is certain; that is, that they have not been expelled from the Party.
* * *

Our Reply
Marceau Pivert
April 18, 1940
Dear Comrade:
Your letter of April 1 is at hand and has been turned over to me for reply.
First of all, I am sorry that the first occasion for contact between us is one which involves a dispute on minor matters of fact. However, let us hope that we will be able to straighten out these lesser disagreements and establish a relationship that will permit of a fruitful political discussion between you and us.
As to the actual matter under dispute, allow me to state the facts as they are. You say that in my column in our December 2nd issue of the Appeal, we announced that our “friends had captured the leadership of the P.S.O.P..” A reading of that column will reveal that we announced nothing of the sort. We merely said that rumors had reached us to the effect that some of the leading Freemasons in the P.S.O.P., including yourself, had been expelled by the leadership of the organization with the participation of Jacquier, the secretary.
This information I received by word of mouth from a reliable Spanish militant passing through the States at that time. I have since checked the information with the comrade in question and he insists that that information was correct for that time. Furthermore, I have received direct word from France substantiating that same information. Should you persist in denying that the incident occurred, I shall furnish adequate evidence.
The expulsion of the Freemasons and yourself was later revoked. Just how that was done and how the Right Wing in your party resumed control is not as yet clear to me. Under the conditions under which our correspondence with France – which, let me assure you, is quite ample and quite regular in other respects – is being carried on, it is impossible to check on every detail at once. But we will get around to clearing that up, too, in good time.
Next, you say in your letter:
“Today you are obliged to confess that this leadership [the Right Wing of the P.S.O.P.] was struck by suppression. You use this occasion to slander the imprisoned militant revolutionists. You accuse them, in a word, of having capitulated at a time when they have remained faithful to their party and its program,” etc.
Let me remind you of the actual facts:

In the April 6 issue of the Appeal we called attention to the arrests of three of the leaders of the P.S.O.P. To my knowledge, that is the first publicity given to these arrests in the United States. We consider that kind of publicity a duty inspired by international working class solidarity.

In this respect, it seems to me that, instead of complaining, you should commend us for reacting more quickly and with greater efficiency than others.
Solidarity with our co-fighters against French imperialism in the P.S.O.P. leadership cannot and must not blind us, however, to mistakes made by them, some almost fatal. Such blindness, to our mind, could only nullify that solidarity.
We said about the imprisoned P.S.O.P. leaders in the April 6 Appeal that they “refused to prepare for illegal work and insisted on carrying on as if the war had not broken out.”

Is that slander, comrade Pivert? Do you deny this fact? If you do, I am quite ready to furnish undisputed evidence in this respect, which I am sure you have at hand also, by now.
You say of the leadership of the P.S.O.P. (referring, of course, to those who have the formal leadership and have expelled the militants of the “minority”) that they have remained faithful to the party program. Allow me to correct you. In the same issue of the Appeal that you refer to, my column says:

“In fact, they (the P.S.O.P. leaders) had voted to expel the revolutionary minority because the minority [demanded] that the party carry out in action its resolution for revolutionary struggle against war (revolutionary defeatism), adopted at the last convention of the P.S.O.P.”
Do you deny that the St. Ouen Congress of your party officially made revolutionary defeatism the party position?
Do you deny that, instead, the “leadership” of your party carried out a social-pacifist policy? Who was it, then, that remained “faithful to the program of the party”? Are you going to oblige me to republish the well-known documents in this matter also? I am quite ready to do so.
In any case, I regard it as the highest duty of a revolutionist, while maintaining complete solidarity with those struck down by imperialist suppression, to state the real facts. That is all I have done.
Finally, you object that we “find in that (the arrests) an occasion for irony.” Let me set you straight on this also. What we find ironical, as any objective reader will attest, is not the action of the bourgeois government. Not that – but the criminally stupid policies of kowtowing to the legality of that same government; policies pursued by your friends who, by refusing to prepare for illegal work, thereby not only endangered the lives of the revolutionary militants in the rank and file, but eventually fell as victims themselves.
One last point – with regard to my information on Lucien Weitz and Daniel Guerin. Nowhere in the column mentioned have I said that these two specific persons are among those actually named as expelled. I do not know whether they are, in fact.
It may be that your friends who are left in charge of the party are attempting a sorry maneuver to split these two excellent militants from the rest of the minority. But in vain – that shabby maneuver will not succeed. The fact is that the P.S.O.P. minority, including Guerin and Weitz have, as stated in that column “joined in a body with the Committees of the Fourth International (our French section) for joint work in the building of a united party on the program of the Fourth International.” Let me assure you that I have word from Guerin himself to this effect and I am ready, if you oblige me, to substantiate that also.
Your reference to the condition of comrade Rouaix and others of your comrades now under arrest is, of course, in spite of the fact that you manipulated this situation very crudely against us in place of an argument, of deepest concern to us. We are prepared, let me assure you, in spite of the deep-going differences existing between us, to join with you at once in a close collaboration to bring immediate aid to all of our French class war prisoners, as well as to the comrades now hit by the spasmodic spread of the war in other countries. We are prepared to discuss this with you, and others of the F.O.I. (International Workers Front Against War), either informally or formally, and await word from you at your earliest convenience.
Assuring you of my most cordial respect, I remain,
       Fraternally yours,
(signed) Paul G. Stevens  
  





Greetings to Illegal Organ of French Comrades
L’Etincelle – The Spark – organ of the French Fourth Internationalists is appearing regularly! From the November, and December issues of the paper, which have just reached these shores, we get a picture of close contact with the masses of workers, the poilus and the French colonials as well as of intensive activity on the part of our valiant comrades. L’Etincelle appears illegally and is bound up with tremendous sacrifices. That it appears at all is a tribute to the heroism of the comrades engaged in the work. That its pages are filled with a wealth of pertinent information and with pungent revolutionary directives is a token of the vitality of our movement.
Our warmest fraternal greetings to L’Etincelle, a great pioneer in the struggle for the Socialist United States of Europe, a powerful front-fighter against imperialist war!
 

News from the Front – Uncensored
From the organ of our French comrades we cull the following items which show what is really going on at the front:

The 31st Infantry Regiment, after a march of 120 kilometers in three days, threw their arms into the ditches along the fighting zone and refused to continue. No reprisals were possible.
 
Metropolitan troops from Tunis were surrounded by gendarmes on their arrival. They had thrown their knapsacks at their superior officers.
 
At Kairouan native troops rebelled and were quelled only by machine-gun fire.
 
A regiment composed in the main of former volunteers in Spain, part of the famous Bat’ d’Af shock troops, refused to march. It was subdued, disarmed, dissolved and interned at the Mailly Concentration Camp. The young workers, who two and three years ago left everything to defend labor’s rights in Spain, had apparently seen through the patriotic speeches and the useless slaughter.
 


In the Navy – the Same Rebellious Spirit

In Marseilles one of our comrades received a month in prison for demanding immediate furlough permits. Four thousand sailors followed up this punitive action with a demonstration against the maritime authorities. P.S.: Furlough permits were granted at once.
 
In Cherbourg the issuance of furlough permits is announced. Everybody rushes to get a permit. Soon word is passed around that those returning from furlough are to be shipped out. A mass refusal of permits follows.
Volunteers for Syria are called for constantly. At the same time communiqués are issued: “All’s quiet in Syria.”

* * *

The 126th Line Regiment is punished for singing the International by being sent to the Warndt Forest for action. A large number of casualties results.
 
The 103rd Regiment has refused to march. The 105th has had to replace it.
 


Dissolution of the Federation of Technicians by the C.G.T.
The Federation of Technicians had taken a clear revolutionary position right from the start of the war. It had opposed the Stalin-Hitler as well as the Paris-London-Warsaw pacts. Unable to discipline the Federation as part of its police-controlled anti-Stalinist drive in the unions because of the Technicians’ well-known opposition to Stalinism, the C.G.T. (General Federation of’ Labor) officialdom has finally decided to expel the Technicians for “delay in payment of its per capita.”
 

Arrests of Workers in the Factories
Militants are being arrested right at their place of work in the Paris district. In the “Lorraine” factory (whose protest actions were reported in a previous column) the cops have been picking militants off one by one, taking them away in their work clothes. At the Mureaux factory the whole shop committee (non-Communists included) has been sent to the front after a period of imprisonment. At the Gnome et Rhone factory the militants are sent to the barracks under guard – and often directly to the front – long before their ninety days’ period (of assigned work) is up.
Our comrades are carrying on a vigorous campaign against the arrests in the factories, against the persecution of the Communist Party militants by the police and the trade union fakers and for the maintenance of trade union unity – the right of the local unions and shop councils to retain their regularly elected officers even if these are Stalinists. The campaign is bearing fruit with a steady influx of former C.P. militants into the ranks of the Fourth International.
 

Class Struggle Continues in Germany – Despite Hitler Terror
In the great Siemens automobile works near Berlin the workers are demanding the return of the eight-hour day and increases in wages. Illegal leaflets are circulating in all departments under the heading: We Don’t Want to Work for the War! Soldiers, Refuse to Shoot!
In several munitions plants in the same area the following slogan is found inscribed on walls: “To Fight for Higher Wages Is to Fight Against War!”
 

Demonstrations by Workers and Women in Vienna
At a munitions plant in the proletarian quarter of Brigittenau in Vienna, a protest resolution of the entire personnel against the non-payment of overtime was adopted at a shop meeting and transmitted to the “Labor Front.” The former shop committee men were subsequently all arrested.
At an “educational meeting” of the Nazi party in the Ottakring section, women interrupted the speaker, Nazi-leader Krebs, with continual complaints about the difficulty they encounter in buying food staples. Several women were arrested.
At the Karmeliter Market there was a demonstration of housewives who formed lines displaying empty baskets and shouting: “We thank our Fuehrer.”
 





News Briefs from France
By a decree issued November 15, working hours are increased to 72 per week, with a maximum of 14 hours set per day. For women and children, the limit is set at 60 hours per week and 10 hours per day!
It must be remembered, in addition, that the lengthening of the work week and day doesn’t at all make for a larger pay envelope. Through a complicated system of overtime-pay-taxes and wage-taxes, the essential features of which we described in a previous column, the French worker now gets the same pay for 60 hours of work that he received for 40 hours before the outbreak of the war.
Strikes are, of course, outlawed. But, more than that, revisions in wage rates can be made only by government decree.
The shop steward system has been abolished. The men can no longer elect their representatives. They may be represented only by officials of the “loyal” trade unions – that is, unions that have been purged, with police aid, of all “nonconformist” elements.
The difference in working conditions under the French “democracy” and the Nazi dictatorship is practically at the vanishing point.
* * *
We mentioned here last week that the agitation of the bourgeois “pacifists” like Flandin, de Monzie and Bonnet is tolerated by the government. The same situation holds true, we learn, also for the Paul Faure wing of the French Socialist Party (S.F.I.O.). It must be remembered that Paul Faure hailed the “Munich” peace. On the other hand, the Leon Blum wing of the party, although completely patriotic, is being harassed by the authorities. Some of its most prominent members are being sent to the front. Blum was, of course, militantly “anti-Munich”. All of which would seem to indicate that the Daladier regime, on the fence most of the time, is at the least leaving the door open towards the conclusion of a truce with Germany, in order to direct its guns elsewhere.
 

Troubles of the British Empire
Latest to stir rebelliously against the Union Jack are the lowly Lascars, those native East Indian seamen who are the backbone of British shipping in the Far East.
The Lascars are simply walking off the ships when they reach ports which seem to them to be approaching the war zone. They are intent not to shed one drop of blood for the Empire.
Thus, in Sydney, Australia, Lascar crews who had quit refused 100 per cent increases in pay and preferred to remain on the beach. The government had to import, by airplane from Calcutta, a certain Khan Bahadur Fazlul Karim – a native “strong” man – to break their resistance. However, he has met only with partial success. Despite his presence, a Lascar crew held a public demonstration in Sydney at the end of November, declaring its firm intention to stay out of the war and demanding relief pending repatriation to India.
“There is no doubt in my mind,” Mr. Fazlul explained to the Australian press, “that powerful influences have been at work somewhere to prevent the Lascars from going about their duties in the ordinary way ... We must not forget that it was they, largely, who kept the sea routes open by serving loyally in the Great War.”
Can it be that the experience resulting from “serving loyally” – the continued enslavement of India – has something to do with the “powerful influences” at work?
* * *
Under pressure from the labor ranks, who have en masse defeated the government’s voluntary recruiting drive, the Australian Labor Party has officially gone on record against conscription and “against the despatch of forces overseas.” The leaders of the party are having difficulties, steering a course of social patriotism in which they cannot go the whole hog.
* * *
“Wheatgrowers in Victoria and Western Australia say they are determined not to deliver their wheat unless the Commonwealth government agrees to increase the guaranteed price.” – item in the Sydney Herald.
The farmers are falling in line with what appears to be a pretty definite movement to give the British rulers a pack of headaches.
 





West African Negro Leader Interned by British
Wallace Johnson, the Organizing Secretary of the West African Youth League and President of the Sierra Leone Trade Union Congress has been interned by the authorities of British West Africa. Johnson was arrested under a “Defence Regulation” which provides that persons shall be detained “when the Governor is satisfied that it is necessary to prevent the individual concerned acting in a way prejudicial to public safety or defence.”
The detention took place several days after war was declared. It is interesting to note that the judge who ordered Johnson’s arrest is the man whom Johnson, as the candidate of the trade unions of Sierra Leone, was to oppose in the coming elections for the Legislative Council.
Wallace Johnson is also one of the leaders of the International African Service Bureau, whose rousing anti-war manifesto the Appeal carried several weeks after the, outbreak of the war. That manifesto concluded with the following paragraphs:
“The issue is more fundamental than Hitlerism. It is a question of imperialism. Empire and Peace are incompatible.
“It is for this reason we say that, if lasting peace is to be achieved in Europe and throughout the world, then Capitalist imperialism must give way to a world Socialist Federation of Equal Nations and Peoples – regardless of race, color and creed.”
No wonder the imperialist masters of West Africa are afraid of Johnson. His program kindles the light of world revolution in darkest Africa.
 

How the French Government Fights for “Democracy”
Some news about the struggle for “democracy” as it works out in France:
No less than 30,000 German and Austrian refugees from Hitlerism are interned in concentration camps. To safeguard the rights of the refugees an advisory body of well-known exiles under the chairmanship of the German Social Democrat Breitscheid was appointed. The committee has never been consulted, but half of its members have been arrested.
At the end of October the government turned over to the Franco regime in Spain 400 members of the International Brigade on the ground that they were Spanish citizens because they had been given travelling passports by the Spanish republican authorities.
Even mild pacifists are rigorously prosecuted. Among them are some thirty-one writers of international reputation, who have been placed under arrest.
Arrests of revolutionary workers are legion.
At the same time, of course, the bourgeois defeatists around Flandin, Bonnet and DeMonzie are left entirely unhampered in their agitation for peace ... with Hitler and ... war against Soviet Russia. It is known that these circles still manage to keep in touch with their Hitlerite friends through interested neutrals, mainly through Brussels.
According to the social democrats, the war is being conducted over the issue of Hitlerism. That is, according to the New Leader in New York, the Herald in London and Populaire in Paris.
One would expect therefore, that social democrats all over the world would take such a war just as seriously in one country as in another and be ready everywhere to die in the struggle against Hitlerism.
But Camille Huysmans, erstwhile General Secretary of the Second International and banner-bearer for years of the Belgian Labor Party (P.O.B.) has been contributing under his own signature for weeks to the Nazi Koelnische Zeitung!
How do you account for that? Very simple. It seems, that Belgian capitalism requires, for the maintenance of its interests, a continuation at present of a policy of neutrality. Therefore, in Belgium, social democrats, far from being deadly enemies of Hitlerism, must help retain the friendship of Hitler. Huysmans is simply taking the assignment to get on the good, side of the German imperialists. Another of his social democratic friends courts the British imperialists, and so on.
At any rate, for the social democracy the menace of Hitlerism obviously stops at the borders of Belgium.
We leave to the New Leader to elaborate in greater detail the logic of this odd fact. We suggest Mr. Charles Yale Harrison for the job.
 





A Political Strike in War-Time London
Tucked away in obscure corners of inside pages in the daily press we find a little item that is nevertheless of considerable significance. We refer to the strike of 3,000 “black-coated” (the British equivalent of our “white collar”) civil service employees in London. They are striking against their “evacuation” to Blackpool. Their action is directed against the government. Their complaint: the wages they receive in the metropolis are inadequate to meet the living standard in the rural community.
Only the other day Chamberlain called for sacrifices from the nation to meet the emergency created by the war situation. As is usually the case, although sacrifices are demanded of all classes “alike”, the brunt has to be borne by those in the lower income brackets. That the latter realize this and are by no means reconciled to their fate – that is what the strike of the “black-coated” workers shows.
The dislocation in economy brought about by the inter-imperialist struggle is bound to create a wave of struggle on the part of the workers. The fact that it is among the most backward section of the working class – the usually timid, submissive and patriotic clerks who most readily accept the “national” and “democratic” ideology of the bourgeoisie – that the one of the very first symptoms of this wave are in evidence, shows the elementary force of the class struggle will break through the sham of this “war for democracy” with extraordinary speed and violence. It is an indication of the degree of decay and disintegration, incomparably greater than during the last war, that capitalism has actually reached.
 

An American Legion for Finnish “Independence”
Another modestly displayed item in the press (N.Y. Times, January 15) announces that “American volunteers who have been arriving in Finland by the hundreds since the war with Soviet Russia began, are being organized into a separate legion.” Apparently the Hoover Committee is getting down to brass tacks.
In line with their policy of giving “independent” support to the “Finnish people”, shall we soon see a Lovestone Brigade and a Norman Thomas brigade helping Mannerheim “independently” against the Soviet Union? And will the Lovestone Brigade stop at the borders of the Soviet Union or will it go right on with the American Legion and the doughty baron towards the liberation of the “Russian people” too? And if Mannerheim and Hoover afterwards declare for the restoration of “Western civilization” in Russia, Lovestone and Thomas can always reserve their right to an “independent” interpretation of this boon.
 

Another “Solution” for the Indian “Controversy”
Trouble in India seems to have no end for the harassed British imperialists. Even an artificial enthusiasm for the war is difficult to stage-manage. On the other hand, we have such outbursts as that of the strikes of the Lascars, reported here last week. Reliable sources also report that about a month ago a one-day strike against the war was successfully carried out in Bombay, involving in the main some 60,000 textile workers of the Garni Kamgar unions.
To allay these disturbances, the Colonial Office is working overtime. Rumor has it that Sir Stafford Cripps, noted millionaire Labour lawyer and outstanding advocate of the “People’s Front” in England, is currently engaged in putting over a “radical”-seeming settlement in close conjunction with the government. Meanwhile, the papers announce that the Marquess of Linlithgow, Viceroy of India “saw many political leaders and the feeling is growing that these meetings will assist toward a settlement of the current disagreement over Indian support for the British Government in the war.”
The political leaders here referred to are obviously none other than the usual colonial toadies of the imperialist masters who have always put their rubber stamp on whatever the Viceroy expresses as “India’s goal.” According to a recent speech by the latter, that goal is now “dominion status at the earliest practicable moment.” That is, the same vague, paternal promises that have always characterized British policy.
Not even the extreme Right wing of the Indian nationalists – the All-India Congress – can now be expected to be in the slightest satisfied with such promises. Thus, Gandhi, the foremost spokesman of this conservative wing, recently declared in a statement to the British press:
“The proposed Constituent Assembly is the only body that can evolve a proper and lasting solution. Any other can only be a makeshift carrying no popular sanction ... No wonder Hitler has challenged the British Government to prove her sincerity by recognizing India as a free nation. Whatever may be his intention in issuing the challenge, it cannot be denied that it is pertinent.”
The reference to popular sanction is the key to an understanding of the problem. The masses are on the move and anxious to take advantage of British difficulties in order to settle accounts with their oppressors. Not even a Gandhi has any hope of strangling their will to struggle, without first yielding to it. No matter what the instigation, no matter what the intentions of a Hitler in this matter may be or what the purpose of the Stalinists who are active in direct support of Indian rebellion may be, a storm is brewing in India whose explosiveness is bound to sweep aside not only British imperialism, but its German opponent as well – and with them the Gandhist leaders of the bourgeoisie and the Stalinist leaders of the unions.
 





Militants Break with Australian C.P.; Hail Fourth International
Our Australian comrades’ vigorous anti-war activity, reported in these columns on previous occasions, is bearing fruit. A considerable number of rank and file members of the Communist Party of Australia are drawing closer to the Communist League, the Australian section of the Fourth International, and some have already joined officially. The latest number of the Militant, official organ of the League, reports that J.N. Rawlings, editor of World Peace, has broken with Stalinism and endorsed the Fourth International.
Rawlings was a member of the Australian C.P. for fifteen years. From reserved criticism of the People's Front line he developed to the point where, at the outbreak of the war, he openly took issue with the local satrap of the Kremlin, one J.B. Miles, who went so far as to urge “fit and available members” of his party to join up with the army and “to participate in the struggle to defeat the aggressor armies.” After several months of increasing conflict with the party leadership, Rawlings was summarily expelled, on December 17.
Rawlings had been editor of World Peace, the weekly paper of the League for Peace and Democracy, from its inception. He was immediately removed from that post upon his expulsion from the C.P. A squad of Stalinist worthies raided his editorial office, ordered him to leave with a threat of force and even refused to allow him to take his personal belongings with him. Guido Baracchi, another old time C.P. leader, has solidarized himself with Rawlings in his conflict with the party leadership.
Aside from his journalistic work, which made his name familiar to radical circles throughout the British Empire, Rawlings is the author of the authoritative History of the Australian People and of numerous pamphlets on economic and historical questions.
 

Excerpts from the Statement Issued by J.N. Rawlings
Here are some interesting excerpts from a statement issued to the press by comrade Rawlings after his expulsion:
“What of the thousands of workers who, remembering the last war, were ready to oppose this, but who, seeing the Communist Party support it, were either bewildered or led to believe that they should fight ‘for the independence of nations now enslaved by Nazism?’
“But the decision to support the war was no ‘mistake’. It was a perfectly logical step ... Capitalists and capitalist politicians were divided into two classes, good and bad, according as they were ‘non-appeasers’ and ‘appeasers’. Capitalism was no longer the breeder of wars; wars now resulted from ‘Fascist aggression’ ...
“First it was ‘democratic’ France and Britain —and Communists in these countries voted war credits, supported conscription, sang the Marseillaise and God Save the King, and hobnobbed with duchesses, deans and scions of noble houses. Then it was Nazi Germany, which Pravda led us to infer was invariably based on striving to defend and preserve peace! ...
“Today, Finland is being invaded, just as Austria, Czechoslovakia and Poland were invaded. But this time the invasion is made in the name of Leninism! To such a level has the Communist Party of Australia, together with the rest of them, descended, that it can idealize that invasion and present it as the extension of Communism.
“With the Comintern attitude, switching now left, now right, towards the war, and with policies, spread over years, that led to that attitude, no true Marxian can have anything to do.
"Events have shown that the Third International has followed the path of the Second. But the path of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky is the only path that the workers can follow to their emancipation, and a new, Fourth, International must be built to lead them along it.”
 

Labour Party Students Join Against Social Patriotism
From time to time we have reported here the growing anti-war movement in the lower ranks of the British Trades Unions as well as in the Labour Party. Only recently, as this column pointed out, this movement showed such strength in the local Trades Councils that the top bureaucracy became obliged to enforce its rule by means of extraordinary measures intended to squeeze the local bodies into line by financial pressure.
Now we get word that the bureaucracy is also in conflict on this score with the University Labour Federation, the students’ organization affiliated with the Labour Party. Arthur Greenwood, deputy leader of the party in parliament, found the conflict so sharp that he had to resign as president of the Federation. On January 4 the Labour students held their national conference at Liverpool. The first step taken by the conference was the adoption of a resolution “condemning the war as, an imperialist war for profit and for world domination”, and point out that the same anti-war policy has been “expressed by sections of the Labour Party and by trades unions in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Sheffield.”
The resolution carried by a vote of 49 against 9 and 2 abstentions. Mentioning this fact, a statement of the Federation chides Greenwood for attributing their attitude to “Communist instigation.” It continues:
“The Conference of the U.L.F. regards the struggle against war on the part of the labor movement as a foremost task and as a step necessary for the realization of socialism. Only by such means can the L.P. and the U.L.F. fulfill their role as ‘light-house of socialism’. The conference regards your (Greenwood’s) action and that of the other leaders of the Labour Party who support the war and the political truce as treachery to socialism and to the interests of the working class. The Conference has decided to continue the struggle against war and for socialism in agreement with the numerous groups in the labor and progressive movement who are opposed today and who will continue to oppose this war.”
 





Victor Alter Executed by Stalinists in Eastern Poland
According to the New York Jewish Daily Forward of March 6, Victor Alter, a leader of the “Bund” (Jewish Socialist Federation), has been executed by the Stalinists at Kovel, Soviet Poland, after a flight from Nazi-occupied territory.
What lends this report particular weight are repeated dispatches in the press for several months giving eye-witness accounts, by socialist refugees who managed to escape abroad, of round-ups of radicals in Soviet-occupied Poland. The Appeal recently carried such an account in a letter from Polish Fourth Internationalists who escaped. In the New York Times of February 7, we read in a wire from Paris:
“After a short initial period of tolerance, Soviet authorities ordered a clean-up of Socialist Labor Federation leaders in the occupied area and members of the Jewish Socialist Party ‘Bund’ were treated even worse, he (a leader who escaped from Eastern Galicia) said.
“Hundreds of the rank and file were deported to Russia, the leaders having been arrested immediately when the Russians occupied East Polish provinces, it was said. Bund members were compelled to repudiate the organization or be deported or imprisoned.
“The Bund in Poland was known for its Leftist tendencies. The Bolsheviks (read: Stalinists) accuse its members of Trotskyist sympathies, regarded as the worst crime in Stalinist Russia.”
Here we have perhaps the clearest explanation of the ferocity with which the persecution of labor radicals in Soviet Poland is being carried on. In spite of all the previous blood-purges, in spite of repeated “liquidation,” the hydra-headed threat of “Trotskyism” – so often declared exterminated – continues to plague the Stalinist bureaucracy like a nightmare. Even such outspoken opponents of the Fourth International as Victor Alter and Heinrich Ehrlich become victims of the Kremlin for no other reason than that at one time or another they tolerated the expression of Trotskyist views within the Bund.
But all the heinous crimes of the Kremlin oligarchy will not protect it from its impending doom. The defense of the Soviet Union from imperialist attack, which is now on the order of the day, requires revolutionary initiative on the part of the masses of workers for its success. In fighting to preserve the conquests of October against the imperialist foe, the workers and peasants of the USSR will learn not only the necessity but the possibility of blowing to smithereens the shackles of bureaucracy. When that hour comes, the labor victims of Stalin’s bloody terror will be adequately avenged.
 

Purgers Purged in Mexican “Communist Party”
Several weeks ago, this column commented on the coming extraordinary convention of the Mexican Communist Party and its Theses. We said then that it was evident that a number of scapegoats in the leadership were to be sacrificed for the “People’s Front” line which that party was in the process of abandoning. Our estimate, we now find, was much too modest. Not only have the few scapegoats mentioned then – Vicenta Guerra, Arturo Ramirez, and Manuel Lobato – been disposed of. The priests who were to make the sacrifice have themselves been added to the list of goats.
Thus the New York Times of February 27 reports from Mexico City:
“Purgers were purged in the Mexican Communist party today when Hernan Laborde and Valentin Campa, respectively president and secretary of that party, were expelled by a committee that they themselves had appointed some weeks ago to purge their organization of all members whose allegiance to Moscow was considered in any way doubtful.”
Just as Guerra, Ramirez and Lobato were previously liquidated for “harboring Trotskyists and free masons” so now Laborde and Campa are being liquidated for harboring the harborers. Apparently not even the most flexible spine can save a Stalinist functionary from destruction once Moscow is bent on wholesale purges. Herman Laborde was the completely hand-picked satrap for Mexico for the past ten years. He occupied his position thanks to the same readiness to respond to a wink from the Kremlin which Earl Browder has shown in this country. How long before Browder will meet a similar fate? One thing is sure: that depends as little upon what Browder does or thinks as it did in the case of Laborde.
 

A Concentration of G.P.U. Agents Directs Operations
According to reliable information that has arrived here the purge of the Mexican Stalinists is being conducted by an international concentration of G.P.U. agents. Among them are the following notorious characters:

D. Manuilski, Russian, prominent Comintern figure, having held at one time or another in the past the posts both of president and secretary in that organization. Reported executed in the course of the purges, Manuilski arrived in Mexico on the steamer Mayakovski in January.
 
Dombal, Russian, former head of the “Krestintern” (international Stalinist peasants’ organization), who arrived there with Manuilski.
 
These two were accompanied by a third G.P.U. agent, whose identity has not as yet been established, but is said to be either Haikis, former Soviet ambassador to Spain or Pestkovsky, former Soviet minister to Mexico.
 
James W. Ford, prominent Negro leader of the American Communist Party, who arrived in Mexico about six weeks ago.
 
George Mink, American Stalinist, notorious for his G.P.U. activity during the civil war in Spain, who now operates under another name.
 
Tina Modotti, Italian Stalinist, suspected of implication in the murder of Ignace Reiss. She was held in this connection by Swiss police for some time, but later released. She was secretary of the Stalinist “International Red Aid” during the Spanish civil war and came to Mexico from Paris as a Spanish refugee.
 
Sormenti, internationally known G.P.U. agent, once prominent in the Italian federation of the American Communist Party, who now operates under the name Carlos Contreras. Sormenti arrived in Mexico three months ago and is said to have been involved in previous Mexican political killings.

This imposing line-up of G.P.U. agents is indicative not only of the serious trouble that the Stalinists are faced with in connection with the purge, but of plans for shady work that extend far beyond the confines of inner-party politics in Mexico. Their activities will bear watching on the part of working class militants all over the Western Hemisphere.
 





New Recruits for Australian Section of Fourth International
Our comrades of the Communist League of Australia (Section of the Fourth International) are steadily evincing signs of rapid growth. Their bold revolutionary work, carried on under wartime pressure, is attracting widespread support from a working class which has a tradition of anti-war struggle. The anti-war resolution which, the newspapers here report, was adopted last week by the New South Wales Federation of the Australian Labor Party, despite the rabid opposition of the party’s leadership, may be regarded as another indication of the trend.
The League’s official organ, the Militant, in its February issue, reports that the Boot Trades Union has endorsed our comrades’ call “for steps to be taken to develop organization to provide working class resistance to any future attacks on the workers’ already limited rights.” The Trades and Labor Council of Sydney is to act on the union’s recommendation shortly.
Two organizers of the League have been sent to Melbourne which, the Militant reminds us, “was the center of the anti-war movement” in 1914–1918.
Recruitment to our ranks from the disillusioned ranks of the Stalinist party is continuing apace in Australia. Aside from numerous worker-militants, prominent C.P. intellectuals and leaders are rallying to the banner of the Fourth International. Among the latter, aside from J.N. Rawlings and Guido Barachi, whose break with Stalinism was reported here some time ago, Jack Kavanagh and Betty Roland have now publicly declared their stand. Kavanagh is a former leader of the Communist Party of Australia and Betty Roland is that country’s leading playwright. In a statement issued by her and published by the Communist League, Betty Roland says:
“Naturally, my disillusion has not been confined to the leadership of the C.P. of Australia, as I realize that events here, as in all sections of the Communist International, have their origin in Moscow. And, while I recognize that the U.S.S.R. is still a workers’ state and still retains the principle achievement of the October revolution, i.e., the socialized means of production, nevertheless the present leadership under Joseph Stalin is the enemy of that workers’ state, and, unless speedily deposed, will certainly bring about the destruction of the gains of October and betray the Soviet Union into the hands of the capitalist class, as they have betrayed the revolutionary cause in so many other parts of the world since they came to power.”
The February Militant also publishes a statement of the Communist League on Stalin’s Assault on Finland identical with the resolution on the Soviet-Finnish war adopted by the Political Committee of the Socialist Workers Party.
 

New Publications of the International in Other Countries
In spite of the censorship, publications of our sections in other parts of the world manage occasionally to reach the office of the Appeal.
Especially gratifying in this respect, is the fact that comrade Leon Trotsky’s great work The U.S.S.R. in War is enjoying widespread attention. The pamphlet has now been issued in England, in Belgium, in Switzerland, in Denmark and in South America. The French edition, published by our comrades of the Belgian Revolutionary Socialist Party, contains a preface applying its political conclusions to the recent Soviet- Finnish War. In Denmark, it has appeared as a special issue of Klasse Kamp, the official publication of our section there. The German edition is published along with Trotsky’s later work, Again and Again on the Character of the U.S.S.R. in Der Einzige Weg, theoretical organ of our comrades in Switzerland. In South America, the pamphlet was published by Clave, monthly theoretical review of our Latin American comrades.
Among other publications received are the following:

La Nueva Internacional, official organ of the Revolutionary Workers Group of Argentina (Fourth International), which contains among others a translation of the resolution on the Soviet-Finnish conflict adopted by the American party.
 
Contra la Corriente, organ of the International Workers Group of Uruguay (Fourth International), a new publication in that country.
 
Workers Fight, organ of the Revolutionary Workers League of England. The latter writes in its mid-February issue:

“Whilst vicious attacks are being made on the rights of trade unionists, whilst wage cuts are proposed by the City of London, our most responsible trade union official, Sir Walter Citrine, goes to Finland to solidarize himself with the bloody butcher Mannerheim. This mission is obviously one inspired by the National Government. The visit resembles that of J.H. Thomas and Henderson in 1917, when these labor fakers were sent by Churchill to Russia in order to induce the Russian toilers to continue the struggle on the side of the allies ... We have chosen our place in this struggle. It is on the side of the Soviet Union and against Chamberlain, Daladier and Roosevelt ... We realize that the treacherous policy of the Comintern is now bearing fruit. The Soviet Union is now in danger, and she has very few friends left in the working class movement of the world. But it is the duty of revolutionists to explain patiently that Stalin has not yet succeeded in destroying all the economic and political conquests of the October revolution ... Move in your trade union branches resolutions against Citrine’s visit to Finland ... No Intervention Against Russia! For the Defense of the U.S.S.R.!”
That this sentiment is gaining ground in England is indicated by the report, carried in the press this week, of the strong anti-war resolution adopted by the national convention of the National Union of Shop Assistants, Warehousemen and Clerks. The action of the Scottish Division of the Independent Labor Party, on which we commented last week, is another indication.
The revolutionary anti-war stand of the Fourth International is making itself felt despite the war-mongering of the social patriots and the confusion spread by the centrists of the I.L.P. and its similars.
 




Among the centrists today united in the so-called “International Front Against War” (British Independent Labor Party, Lovestoneites, French P.S.O.P., Dutch Revolutionary Socialist Labor Party, etc.), the Soviet-Finnish conflict has brought to the fore the deep contradictions which have been latent among them for years.
Thus we read in the German edition of the “Front’s” information bulletin (January 1940): “Among adherents of the I.F.A.W. who have had an opportunity to discuss the question there are divergent views with regard to the character of the present regime in the Soviet Union.” Some consider it, we are told, as still retaining the character of a “progressive workers state.” Others, that it is no longer a workers state, that the bureaucracy is a new exploiting class and that therefore the workers should be for its defeat.
Some regard as motives for the war: the desire to strengthen the defense of Leningrad and to find other military-strategic guarantees for defense against Germany as well as the Allies – without excusing in the least Stalin’s procedure in realizing these motives. Others think that the invasion of Finland is part of a great plan of conquest agreed upon by “Berlin-Moscow imperialism.”
Some recall the counter-revolutionary character of the Finnish bourgeoisie under Mannerheim. Others regard the “resistance of the Finnish people against the Russian attack as a progressive national war”. They believe that “the Finnish proletariat must participate actively in the defense of Finnish independence, maintaining their class independence in doing this, and desire the defeat of the Red Army.”
After setting forth the existence of the divergent views in its ranks, the I.F.A.W. presents a resolution which contains the following main point: “Regardless of our opinions about the character of the present Russian state (!) and the motives for its invasion of Finland, that the methods employed by Stalin against the Finnish people must be condemned and attacked as counter-revolutionary ... the Russian workers can not therefore be for the victory of the Russian (!) Army in Finland, but must desire the immediate cessation of the war. For a peace without, annexations! For the immediate Withdrawal of Russian troops from occupied territories!” etc., etc.
 
How Do They Do It?
How anyone who still regards Soviet Russia as a workers state and considers Mannerheim’s Finland as an outpost of world imperialism can consistently be “against the victory of the Red Army” in a struggle between the two is not explained. Nor can it be explained. For the centrists are here trying to reconcile two opposing class points of view.
How untenable this position is has been revealed by subsequent events. While the January resolution strained itself to avoid characterizing the Soviet Union in the terminology of Marxism, and in order to avoid commitments, speaks of the “Russian” state and the “Russian” army a resolution published by the same people in February throws all caution to the winds in this respect.
In Independent News, the English language bulletin of the I.F.A.W. for February, we read something entirely different:
“By appealing to the argument of ‘strategic advantage’ as a justification for a wanton attack against a small neighbor, Stalinist Russia puts itself in the category of imperialistic powers ...”
 
Logical Result of Their Theory
Whoever says “A” must say “B”. Having discovered that Soviet Russia is an imperialist state, the I.F.A.W. now finds:
“Because we sincerely believe in the principles of national self-determination, because we recognize the disastrous effects of Stalin’s invasion from the standpoint not only of the Finnish people but also of the Russian people and of the international working class generally we sympathize with the Finnish struggle against the Russian invader. Of that there can be no doubt.”
The new line permits their American section (the Lovestoneites) and the Dutch (Sneevliet) to howl in chorus with the bourgeois press against “Soviet imperialism” and to identify the Communist Party with the German-American Bund, and to call for funds to be sent to Finnish “labor organizations”, that is, to the social democracy which is in one bloc with Mannerheim. However, it does not yet prevent the Scottish Independent Labor Party from adopting a resolution which goes against the grain of this whole line: the latter, adopted at a conference on January 20–21 says:
“This conference, reviewing the events which led up to the present situation in Finland, condemns the foreign policy of the Russian government.
“We warn the workers, however, to be on guard against the intensive propaganda in which world capitalism seeks to canalize opinion against Russia ...
“We therefore resolve to oppose the formation of a capitalist block against Russia and consider that we can best assist the workers and peasants of Russia by concentrating our energies against the capitalist, imperialist enemy at home.”
The Finnish-Soviet war is concluded. But the imperialist war goes on. In this war, the class lines come boldly to the forefront. Within the workers’ camp, in this war, is the Soviet Union which, despite Stalin and his degenerated bureaucracy, still retains the main economic conquests of the October revolution. Any attempt to slur over this fact, any attempt to find compromise formulas that reconcile two opposing class attitudes, are bound to shatter on the rocks of living reality. That is why centrism is doomed to disintegration. That is why one wing of the I.F.A.W. must of necessity go over to the camp of the treacherous social democracy. That is why another wing must approach ever closer the positions of the Fourth International. The actions of the Lovestoneites, Sneevliet and company, on the one hand, and of the Scottish I.L.P. on the other, are merely portents of this trend.
 



Twenty years since that great day in 1915, and the SPARTACUS YOUTH LEAGUE again celebrates! International Youth Day.
But I.Y.D. is not last another holiday to us. In some respects, it is THE holiday of our organization and the toiling youth because it is the concentrated expression of a big part of what we stand for and fight for.
I.Y.D. began as a resurgent movement. It woke to life wide strata of young people demoralized by the crime and tragedy of 1914. It became a powerful insurgent movement The force it stirred up did not rest until, with other help and bands, they built the Young Communist International.
 
Treachery Everywhere
We wait today from moment to moment knowing that war is crowding close to us. Back in 1915 it was already raging on a world scale. Betrayed by the leaders in whom they had placed trust, young factory hands, students and field workers stumbled and were driven into the trenches. Typical of the general disaster to the youth movement, Robert Banneburg of Austria, secretary of the International Bureau of Young Socialists, turned social-patriot and howled in the hyena chorus with the rest. The revolutionary movement ran to low ebb.
“Already influenced by the activity of the International Left, preparations were made for the holding of an international conference of the youth. This conference was held in Berne, Switzerland on April 4, 1915. It established the International Union of Socialist Youth. There were present 13 delegates from nine countries. It marked a turning point in the development of the youth movement.
“The Berne Conference, which was the forerunner of the Young Communist International, decided on the convening of a day of demonstration against militarism on an International scale. There was born International Youth Day, which has been celebrated now for twenty years by the Communist youth of the world. The conference decided on Oct. 3, 1915 as the first International Youth Day. The call was sent out to all countries and to all youth organizations calling upon them to demonstrate against the war and against militarism. During those years these anti-war demonstrations assumed tremendous proportions. In many countries they represented the only voice against the war, drawing in thousands upon thousands of adult workers. Since 1915, every year witnessed a world-wide demonstration against war and militarism. These demonstrations grew larger and larger as the years passed. The slogans of Berne became watchwords of the revolutionary youth.” (Young Spartacus, September, 1933)
 
The Answer of October
The program of the conference gave a partial answer to the question: what should we young revolutionists do? The program was not complete; the necessary sections were to be supplied later, and the words were to be written in the fire and steel of the October revolution.
But the fact is, the conference did call for international demonstrations against the war-makers. How the hearts of the revolutionary youth, bitter from a year of betrayal and from the waste and horror of organized mass murder, must have swelled passionately at the call! IYD revitalized the depressed youth fighters, and for once, it even set in motion whole masses of adult workers who had needed just this spark.
Our national Spartacan organization finds similar task today. As they in the midst of the war raised a clarion call for mass action, so we in the midst of reaction issue a call for revolutionary struggle against war.
 
Spartacus Alone Shows the Way
Just as the Berne conference found itself the vanguard youth group of the day, alone on the international field in its opposition to the war, today the SYL in America is the only voice among young people telling the truth about a system rotten with greed and privilege, and alone among youth groups stands for the Leninist slogan:
“Turn imperialist war into civil war!”
The young Socialist hears his leader tell him: there are several ways of stopping war, and if necessary we will go the limit (perhaps). But pledge ourselves to the revolutionary, the Bolshevik way out? – never. The young Socialist will yet see a good section of his party leadership consorting with the war-makers (as some of them are already doing abroad) and urging him, as Dannenberg did before them, to join up with the colors.
The young Stalinist, militant and eager to follow in the steps of Lenin, is already learning that Stalin supports the war plans of the French bourgeoisie; that the Seventh Congress of the C.I. favors coalition (unity with capitalists) governments; that the 5 point program of the C.P. on war is completely reactionary and pacifist; that the Stalinist leadership has gone back to Kautsky, social-patriot and renegade, for its reasons to support the wars of “peaceful” capitalist governments (!!) against warlike ones.
And so we find ourselves in close alliance with the anti-war pioneers of Berne. Across the years we extend a comradely hand. We say: what yon dared and tried to do, we also can dare and try. We too know how it feels to see the world saturated with the poison of imperialist brewed hatred, to see the world rush careening toward another tide of blood, to hear the voices of betrayers in workers’ ranks cover with high sounding phrases the poisoned bait: “Join the next war to save ‘democracy’.”
We will pound away all obstacles. We will build. We will fight. We will conquer.
 





Congress of French Workers and Peasants’ Socialist Party (P.S.O.P.)
Two weeks ago, on May 28–29, the French Workers and Peasants Socialist Party held its first regular congress in the proletarian center of Saint-Ouen, a suburb of Paris. Some 160 delegates, representing close to 5,000 members, gathered there to sum up the party’s experiences since the split with Leon Blum’s S.F.I.O. and to outline a course of action for the future. Representative of the drift leftward of various strata who have broken with the parties corrupted by social reformism and Stalinism, this gathering has its importance for the development of the revolutionary movement toward the building of the new, Fourth International.
As was to be expected, the Saint-Ouen congress was not at all a homogeneous body of thought. Most of the participants had only recently left the ranks of the old parties. The centrist current of Marceau Pivert still proved to be predominant. But the revolutionary Marxist tendency made considerable headway in the course of the sessions.
On the all-important war question, the revolutionary defeatist position put forward in the motion drawn up jointly by Jean Rous (formerly of the French Fourth Internationalist party, the P.O.I.), Daniel Guerin, the author of Fascism and Big Business, and Lucien Weitz, the leader of the P.S.O.P. youth, received 59 votes, the same number as the motion of the Pivert tendency drawn up by Michel Collinet. An outright pacifist motion received 26 votes and a motion by Lucien Herard attempting to strike a middle course between the Bous-Ouerin-Weitz and Collinet motions received 45 votes.
A practical motion on anti-war activity, however, proposing to exclude in the future collaboration with such alliances in France as the Keep America Out of War Committee in this country, received 53 votes as against 120 for the Pivert motion endorsing such alliances.
Highly significant for the revolutionary current was the result of the discussion as to whether membership in the Freemasonry organization was compatible with membership in the P.S.O.P. After a heated debate, the Guerin motion for incompatibility received the highest vote, 76, while two separate motions opposing Guerin’s each polled 62 and 50 votes respectively. This problem which touches upon the very essence of the proletarian character of the party is bound to continue to agitate the P.S.O.P. in the future if one is to be guided by the great concern and dissatisfaction shown by many unattached rank and file worker delegates at the fact that the leader of the party is still a Freemason.
On the trade union question, a motion proposing the organization of party fractions received 62 votes, while one opposing organized party work in the unions received 122 votes.
Finally, on the international question, the congress voted to affiliate with “International Marxist Center” (formerly the “London Bureau”) by a vote of 120, against a motion by Weitz proposing non-affiliation for the time being which received 42 votes. An amendment by the latter recommending that an invitation to the coming conference of the “International Marxist Center” in September be extended to the Fourth International was accepted by agreement after considerable discussion.
A good deal of time was taken in a discussion of the “Trotskyist infiltration” of the party, attacks against the Trotskyists being made mainly by the defenders of the Freemasons in the course of the dispute over whether the membership in the latter organization was compatible with membership in the P.S.O.P. The attacks fell flat when the speakers of the revolutionary tendency refused to be hornswoggled into an anti-Trotskyist campaign and insisted on the discussion of the political content of the motions and resolutions proposed. The attackers did manage, however, by sheer weight of numbers to push through an organizational statute requiring eighteen months’ continuous membership in the P.S.O.P. of former members of other proletarian parties before they are accorded equal rights with the other party members. The statute received 96 votes and was opposed with 88 votes and 16 abstentions.
All in all, the congress, as recorded in the votes quoted, showed that the leftward development of the P.S.O.P. has not by any means been concluded, that consistent revolutionary sentiment within its ranks is sufficiently strong to augur well for the future. By the way, on the matter of practical party work in the period ahead, the Marxist minority declared that just as in the previous period, when it proved itself in action, it would have no difficulty in collaborating with the party leadership.
 

Willie Gallacher, M.P., and British Imperialism
Recently the Appeal reported the formation in England of the “Friends of the Irish Republic,” an organization which has set as its task the organization of a revolutionary socialist party in Ireland and which has already held demonstrations in London of a mass character. That such a move was in the cards goes without saying ever since the degeneration of the Communist party which has left the field in the Irish fight against British imperialism to the heroic but muddled and utopian terrorists of the I.R.A. What finally gave the impetus to the move may be gathered from such an item as the following which we reprint from the Militant of London:
“During the Great War to End War, 1914–18, the workers of the Clyde and other industrial centers insisted on fighting for better conditions and workers’ rights. They caused a great deal of annoyance to the government which denounced them as unpatriotic and disloyal. Among these disloyal and unpatriotic workers was one William Gallacher.
“Now Mr. Gallacher is Communist M.P. for West Fife – and is he loyal? When Mr. Chamberlain made a statement to the effect that Northern Ireland was to be exempted from conscription in order to give scope to its loyalism, Mr. (late comrade) Gallacher rose in his wrath. No longer was he the Clydeside militant who defied Lloyd George and the engineering bosses, but one of the boys of the bulldog breed, stirred to his innermost depths because his patriotism had been called into question. He demanded to know ‘whether the Prime Minister in making such a declaration about North Ireland is not casting a slight on Scotland, Wales and Northern England.’ Truly, as the party of which Gallacher is a member so frequently remarks, times have changed.”
 





Fourth Internationalists Organize Anti-Nazi Fight in Denmark
It is fast becoming a fact that wherever there is organized, militant struggle against fascism, there the Fourth Internationalists will be found at the forefront; wherever a section of the Fourth International exists, there the fascists cannot take to the streets without facing battle.
The Socialist Workers Party brought the masses into the streets to meet the provocations of the Nazi Bund and the various home-baked varieties of fascism in New York, Philadelphia, Los Angeles and San Francisco in the course of the past year. The Revolutionary Socialist Party of Belgium stopped Degrelle’s Rexists in their tracks in one mining town after another, when the fascists attempted to penetrate the proletarian strongholds of the Borinage region. And now, word comes that the newly organized section of the Fourth International in Denmark, the Internationalist Communist Party whose formation we greeted in these columns but a short few months ago, led a successful counter-demonstration against the Danish Nazis in Copenhagen on May 1.
Close to the German border and thus more arrogant than elsewhere, the Danish Nazis provocatively announced a mass meeting in one of the city’s public squares on the workers’ holiday. The social democrats and the Stalinists responded to this challenge in their usual cowardly fashion – they demonstrated under the national flag in a park miles away from the Nazis. Only our Danish comrades took up the challenge. Thousands of leaflets calling for a counter-demonstration were distributed by the I.C.P. throughout Copenhagen on the day before the demonstration and, on May Day, at the rallies of the Stalinists and the social democrats.
Everywhere the appeal was greeted enthusiastically. Fifteen hundred workers joined the I.C.P. in active combat at the Nazi meeting. Although the police protected the latter, they could not make themselves heard. Every speaker was pelted with a multitude of projectiles from the crowd, which was well-equipped with rotten eggs and ripe tomatoes.
In this action, the I.C.P. for the first time brought into the public streets of Denmark the transitional slogans of the Fourth International. Inscribed on placards, they were greeted enthusiastically by the assembled workers. Altogether, it was an auspicious baptism in action for this fighting infant in the ranks of our international.
More power to the Danish Bolshevik-Leninists!
 

Ranks of French “Labor” Leaders Split by Munich Crisis
Some time ago, this column indicated the rift created in the ranks of the major Frencn labor organizations after the September crisis. In the General Federation of Labor (C.G.T.) the formerly militant syndicalist minority – the “Amis de Syndicats” – countered the Jouhaux-Stalinist war-mongering with nothing but a pro-Munich type of “pacifism”. In the official Socialist Party (S.F.I.O.), where Leon Blum joined the Stalinists in their pro-war line, the crisis brought forward the pro-Munich tendency of Paul Faure. Now the rift has widened considerably.
The syndicalists, with their blind apathy toward politics and their superficial anti-Stalinism, were bound to flounder into dangerous waters. At first, their agreement with the Flandin-Bonnet group of capitalist “Munich-ois” appeared to be a mere coincidence. When their pamphlets were reprinted in the press of this imperialist gang, that should have been cause for them to pause. It was, but instead of re-evaluating their phoney kind of pacifism, they began to “reconsider” ... their syndicalism.
They have finally arrived at a conclusion which makes their class collaboration no better, and in a sense even more dangerous, than that of Jouhaux and the Stalinists whom they have been fighting for years. Joint meetings with the bosses’ association representatives “in the general interest of the country” have been organized by such prominent syndicalists as Georges Dumoulin and Delaisi in the North, where they are in control of the unions. Dumoulin writes in their paper, Syndicats, with a cynicism characteristic of those whom he has fought in the past:
“There are, of course, some risks ... We haven’t abandoned a particle of our class feelings; we merely think that, like everything else, the class struggle has changed. It has taken on new forms. In every case, constructive work requires collaboration and no durable construction is possible without loyal collaboration ...”
The syndicalists are thus well on their way into the camp of the Munich group of French capitalists, just as their Stalinist opponents have already lined up with the pro-war group.
 

Paul Faure Lines Up the S.P. against Blum
In the S.F.I.O., the same tendency is reflected in the struggle between the Paul Faure and Leon Blum factions. Under the cry that “the heavy obligations imposed by national defense are serving as a pretext for a policy of social reaction”, Faure demands, not a denunciation of national defense by coalitions with the capitalist parties ... but a break with the Stalinists on the part of Leon Blum and the Socialist Party. Having been the general secretary of that party Paul Faure lined up a large majority at the party convention last week-end in a test vote on whether to debate a resolution on this subject which he had presented and the National Committee had suppressed. Faure does not yet openly propose alignment with the Flandin-Bonnet group of French capitalists. But his stand in the Munich crisis leaves no doubt that he is headed in the same direction on the political field as the syndicalists are on the trade union field.
 





Southport Conference of B.L.P. Reverses Stand on Conscription
Despite the tremendous wave of opposition against conscription in its ranks, despite its repeated avowal of loyalty to the party’s anti-conscription stand, despite its rebuffs to Leon Blum who came from France to urge them fraternally to drop that stand in the name of social patriotic common sense, and despite the fact that only two weeks ago such prominent leaders as Ernest Bevin of the Transport Workers Union and John Marchbanks of the National Union of Railwaymen insisted that “even assuming that we are in a minority, and no one can judge yet,” they were “still satisfied it would be right to resist this effort (of conscription) to destroy our liberties””despite all this the Labour Party’s leadership last week foisted upon the annual conference at Southport a reversal of policy on this crucial issue.
To be sure, the resolution adopted on this question does not bluntly come out in favor of conscription. It merely states that the party will not resist conscriptive measures. The flunkies who run Transport House (the party headquarters) for British imperialism could not flaunt the rank and file sentiment too brashly. But in taking the stand they did, they finally squared their position on conscription with their general “collective security” position, thus reassuring Chamberlain, making Blum and the French capitalists very happy and removing from their own path a very embarrassing inconsistency.
To make up for this change, so to speak, the Southport conference confirmed the expulsion of Sir Stafford Cripps and rejected the Popular Front line he espoused. From the point of view of their fundamental social patriotic position, the action against Cripps makes about as much sense as their previous opposition to conscription. Small wonder then, that a N.Y. Times correspondent from London reports that “the country tends to look upon the Churchill-Eden Tory combination, rather than upon the Labour Party, as the real opposition to Chamberlain.”
More consistent is the reported decision of Transport House to make membership in the Militant Labor League incompatible with membership in the party. The M.L.L. has consistently opposed “collective security” and conscription and has recently been making considerable headway in local L.P. branches. It is attacked as “Trotskyist”. The Militant, official organ of the League, announces in its last issue a campaign, centered around an organizing tour, to resist expulsion and to rally support in the local sections for revolutionary socialism.
 

In France: New Blows against the Opponents of Imperialist War
While the Flandin-Bonnet gang of “Munich-ois” pacifists (sic) and the Beynaud-Mandel gang of “collective security” war mongers jockey for position, while Blum and Paul Faure temporarily compose their differences at the Socialist Party convention by agreeing finally to bury the Popular Front (breaking off all relations with the C.P.), their government strikes new blows against the real opponents of imperialist war. “Democracy” is reserved only for the social patriots and their capitalist masters ...
During the month of April a wave of resistance to the government’s order recalling for additional service reservists of the class of 1936 who had already served more than their two years, spread throughout a number of regiments along the Maginot Line. Reservists in Strassburg began a hunger strike and refused to drill. The strike soon extended to Metz, Morange, Arras, Bitche and other points along the line of frontier fortifications. The entire daily press”Fascist to Stalinist”greeted the revolt with a conspiracy of silence. The revolutionary soldiers who led the revolt were all summarily imprisoned and the movement thus beheaded ...
Issues of papers of the minorities who gave the movement prominence”our own comrades’ Lutte Ouvrière, Juin 36, the organ of the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party, the anarchist paper Libertaire, the syndicalist papers Révolution Prolétarienne and Combat Syndicaliste and several others were confiscated and their responsible editors subjected to prosecution ...
The headquarters of the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party (P.S.O.P.) were raided in Cherbourg and several other cities and the party threatened with dissolution ...
In the colonies, the anti-imperialist allies of the French revolutionists face similar persecution. In Tunis, three leaders of the dissolved Liberal Constitutional Party have been arrested for reconstituting cells of that party (the reconstituted organization of the LaRocque Fascists is, of course, allowed to proceed with impunity). In Algiers, Chabane All, the editor of El Ouma, the paper of the People’s Party of Algeria, whose recent election victory we reported in these columns, has been held in prison incommunicado under a despicable charge that is becoming usual in these persecutions: “Connivance with foreign powers” ...
 





Aftermath of Belgian Elections: An Attack against the Miners
Taking heart from the rightward trend in the recent elections, the Belgian bosses are launching a large-scale onslaught on the conditions obtained by the working class of that country during the great strikes of 1936. As a first step, the mine barons are proceeding against the coal diggers of the Borinage section, in an attempt to scale down present conditions in the new agreement. The Borinage section is known as a hot-bed of militancy. As such it has been chosen purposely, to test the ground for the great struggle ahead. If they succeed here, the bosses calculate, half their battle is won.
When the new terms were offered the miners of the Levant and Produits du Flenu pits, they were rejected out of hand. The bosses replied by locking out the workers of these pits, some 5,000 miners. The reformist leaders of the miners’ union have, up to the present, contented themselves with appeals for aid to King Leopold, calling on the workers to remain calm and accustom themselves to the unemployment relief to which they are entitled as a result of the lock-out. Since, as is self-evident, no family can very long subsist on the meagre dole, such a course cannot help leading to a break-down of the miners’ resistance if persisted in.
Our comrades of the Revolutionary Socialist Party of Belgium, concentrating their forces to this region, are holding successful meetings in all the mining towns urging the workers of the Borinage to bring pressure for the calling of a general strike in support of the Levant and Flenu miners. The movement in this direction is growing. A twenty-four hour sympathy strike has already been proposed in several unions. The success of such action alone, our comrades argue can forestall the wholesale onslaught on Belgian labor being cooked up by the bosses.
 

Another Sample of French Democracy in the Colonies
Recently we reported in these columns the great election victory of the Popular Party of Algiers, the Algerian party which is closely allied with the French revolutionary socialists. Douar Mohamed, of that party was elected as a general councillor.
Now the Council of the Prefecture, the agency of the French colonial office, has seen fit to annul his election on the petition of his pro-imperialist opponent, Zerrouk. The latter was declared elected although he polled less than 3,000 votes out of a total of 15,000 cast.
The grounds for the decision are so flimsy, that French friends of the P.P.A. expect to carry the fight against it with considerable support.
 

A Voice in the Wilderness: Anti-War Speaker at Southport
Most of the speeches at the recent Southport conference of the British Labour Party were, of course, in favor of the “war against the aggressors” and in “defense of democracy,” laying the ground for the acceptance of conscription. One of the most rabid war mongers was party leader Hugh Dalton. Apparently Dalton’s spiel was too much for one old-time militant who found his way to the conference by chance. Here is how one of the British papers reported his reaction:
“Mr. J. Wood (Moseley), a self-styled old soldier who waved the Guards necktie to the delegates said:

“‘My greatest enemy during the war was not the “Jerry” on the other side of No Man’s Land, but my own Sergeant-Major.
“‘Let Sergeant-Major Dalton do his own dirty work when the war comes. I’m not going to do it – not Pygmalion likely!’”

The Labour Party’s Daily Herald did not see fit to include this speech in its accounts of the conference sessions.
 

Strike Waves Gaining Momentum in India
Comrade Stanley submits the following item:
Official strike statistics for 1938 just published by the Government of India indicate the extent of the revival in the Indian revolutionary and nationalist movement.
Strikes in 1938 were the highest on record for the past 20 years. There were 399 of them as compared with 379 for 1937. The number of working days on strike (not hours, as in American statistics – S.S.) was 9,000,000 and the workers were successful in 46% of the strikes.
Textile workers (the “untouchables” of India) again proved themselves to be the vanguard of the Indian proletariat. They accounted for 39% of the strikes, 70.8% of the workers involved and 71.1% of the working days spent on strike.
Two major working class activities are now under way in India. Both, in all likelihood, will lead to All-India general strikes involving the textile and railway workers. The former, concentrated in Bombay, Allahabad, Cawnpur, Ahmedabad, etc., are already preparing a general strike to combat a proposed 12% wage cut. The railway workers, solidly organized in the All-India Railwaymens’ Federation, have presented demands with a 3-month ultimatum, half of which has already passed.
 





Are Our French Comrades Facing an “Espionage” Trial?
Last week we gave several instances of the wave of persecution unleashed against the anti-war forces in France and its colonies. As a result of the rebellion among the soldiers of the Maginot Line against the indefinite retention of the reservists, which we reported in this column, the persecutions have multiplied. In addition to numerous local headquarters, the central offices of the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party in Paris have since been raided twice. Similar raids have been made on anarchist and syndicalist centers throughout the country. But more startling than all these incidents is the case of our comrades Steve and Rigal, young militants of the French section of the Fourth International.
Steve and Rigal have been held incommunicado since their arrest several weeks ago. They were arrested for anti-militarist articles appearing in our press and all efforts to see them up to the present have been unsuccessful. In the name of the coming war for “democracy”, the most elementary democratic rights are thus being abrogated even before the outbreak of hostilities. Outrageous as this procedure is, the rumors being spread about the case are even more alarming. As in the case of the rebels in the colonies, according to certain sources, the government is going to try the revolutionary anti-militarists under charge of “conspiring with foreign powers.”
If the frenzied lynch-agitation of the Stalinist Humanité and its parliamentary expert on military affairs, Gitton, are any indication, a frame-up espionage trial against Rigal and Steve is being cooked up behind the scenes. Already the recruiting sergeants for imperialist war in the ranks of the French labor movement are every day hatching amalgams in their press between the P.S.F. (Colonel LaRocque’s Fascist French Social Party) and the “Pivertists-Trotskyists” in preparation for frame-ups.
Of course, our French comrades are not being intimidated by this campaign. They are carrying on their anti-militarist work with even greater vigor than before. But the whole revolutionary movement of the world must stand ready to aid them against the frame-ups and persecutions which French “democracy” and its Stalinist and reformist agents are hurling at them.
 

Revolutionary Socialists of Ceylon Mark Important Advances
Among the signs of revolt against British war preparations in the colonies, we recently cited the struggle of the Socialist Party of Ceylon. As we pointed out at the time, this party has consistently opposed “collective security” and at its recent national conference adopted a resolution on war which affirmed the revolutionary class struggle as the only means of fighting against war.
That the Ceylon masses have responded to this policy is attested to by the fact that the party has since elected two members to the State Council and combined its parliamentary activity with powerful street demonstrations in Columbo and other towns. The Ceylon Socialist Party celebrated May Day by converting its weekly paper into a daily. Our heartiest congratulations and warmest greetings of solidarity to the revolutionary socialists of Ceylon!
 

Unspeakable Stalinist Attacks Against Revolutionary
The Stalinists in France are leaving no stone unturned to make life as miserable as possible for the revolutionary Spanish refugees who have found a precarious and temporary asylum in that country. Because of the revelations of these refugees, which exposed the counter-revolutionary role of the Kremlin in Spain, the G.P.U. agents are redoubling their efforts to silence these opponents by even more despicable methods than they have employed hitherto.
These assassins of Erwin Wolf, Nin and Moulin now have the unmitigated nerve to accuse Spanish anti-Stalinists of plotting the assassination of a Stalinist deputy, André Marty Nor do they confine the accusation to their press. They have taken it directly to Albert Sarraut, Minister of the Interior, whom they not so long ago characterized as the arch-Fascist in France. Furnishing him with lists upon lists of their opponents among the refugees they have demanded that he round them up and hold them for trial.
The bloodhounds of the Kremlin hope by this means to cover up their crimes in Spain They will hardly succeed. As with their other crimes, here too truth is on the march.
* * *

An excellent account of the civil war in Spain, submitting its experiences to the searchlight of Marxist analysis, has just been published by our French comrades in a special issue of their theoretical review, Quatrième Internationale The pamphlet is entitled L’Espagne Livrée: Comment le Front Populaire a ouvert les portes à Franco (Spain surrendered: How the People’s Front Opened the Gates to Franco). The author is M. Casanova, one of the leaders of the Spanish section of the Fourth International, whose miraculous escape from Spain was related in the Appeal last March. Pioneer Publishers is planning to publish it in English soon. Its appearance is another important blow directed against Stalinism and will be invaluable in educating the cadres of the new revolutionary International.
 





Anti-War Actions in British India
Meeting at Bombay three weeks ago, the All-India Congress Committee, governing organ of the five-million strong Indian Nationalist Congress, adopted an anti-war resolution whose practical consequences are bound to embarrass British imperialism no end.
“Congress has repeatedly declared its policy of uncompromising opposition to Fascism and war,” the resolution declares, “and its determination to resist the exploitation of Indian man-power and resources in the interest of British imperialism.”
Citing the necessity for active war resistance, the Congress Committee directs affiliated organizations to begin active anti-war propaganda; to agitate among the people against recruitment into the British army; to organize railway and dock workers for preventing the transportation of war materials; to build up a national army of Congress volunteers for militant war resistance, etc.
The A.I.C.C. likewise stated that “they will refuse to help the Central government in war and recruitment, and that they will resist with all their powers the working of the new amendments to the Government of India Act.”
According to a dispatch from Peshawar, at a conference of various tribal chiefs it was decided to “accord no support to Britain in any war in which she might be involved. Badshahgul (a chief) who addressed the conference stressed the need of organization of tribesmen with a view to making united action possible in any crisis.”
From the looks of things, the war-mongers in Downing Street have far more to fear from national organizations in the colonies than from the Labour fakers at Transport House. In a crisis, however, it is not excluded that the working masses of the mother country will break through the social-patriotic barriers put up by their treacherous leaders and join hands with the oppressed colonials to put an end to the tottering rule of the Chamberlains and the Churchills.
 

Workers in the Lead of Independence Movement
The anti-war sentiment of the Indian masses is only one phase, however, of the struggle for independence from Great Britain. Equally significant is the spread of strikes around economic issues.
On that front, the workers of India are in the vanguard of the independence struggle. In Bombay alone, 50,000 night shift textile workers are on strike. Lockouts and the closing of night shifts are spreading. The textile strike is extending rapidly to Ahmedabad, Sholapur, Cawnpore, Jubbulpore, etc., and may soon assume nation-wide proportions involving hundreds of thousands of textile workers. These workers are engaged in conflict not only with the despotic British government, but also with the anti-labor actions of the Popular Front Congress ministries. In many cases the strikes are directed against native Indian capitalists and mill-owners.
 

Behind the Breakdown of Anglo-Russian Negotiations
Anglo-Russian negotiations for a “peace pact” have virtually broken down. Sorely pressed, the British seem to have been prepared to make all manner of concessions. Their lack of success has given rise to greater stress among British publicists on news items relating to negotiations between Berlin and Moscow.
After the revelations of Krivitsky and others, A.J. Cummings, political editor of the London News Chronicle, now reports that he has definite information on proposals made by Berlin. Writing in that paper on July 11, he says:
“Unofficially and indirectly Hitler has made the following proposals to Moscow:

“(1) Freedom of action for Germany in Eastern Europe, involving no threat against Russia or the Ukraine.
“(2) Partition of Poland.
“(3) Freedom of action for Russia, with full German support, in Asia and the Far East.
“(4) Germany’s withdrawal of cooperation with Japan – that is, dropping Japan from the Axis.
“(5) Political Russo-German alliance on these lines.”

No one can vouch for the veracity of these proposals. But, as Mr. Cummings points out, “for months past there has been practically no anti-Russian propaganda from Germany.” That speculation about relations between Hitler and Stalin has reached such a stage of precision and that an actual truce in the bitter propaganda carried on by both sides has been reached, is in itself significant of the real trend in Kremlin foreign policy.
 





New Anti-Conscription Slogan: “Cigarettes for Our Boys!”
Not so long ago we mentioned in these columns the odd fact that French Stalinists and British Stalinists were openly at variance with regard to the proposal to introduce conscription in Great Britain. The Paris Humanité (official organ of the C.P.F.), in line with the Daladier government, had urged support for the proposal. William Gallacher, lone C.P. representative in the House of Commons, had openly repudiated his French colleagues, when Government spokesmen cited them in parliament.
In this country, Mr. V.J. Jerome wrote a lengthy piece of Jesuitical tripe for the Daily Worker, “explaining” why the C.P.F. was for conscription in France and why the C.P.G.B. was opposed to it in England and why both were right.
Gallacher wrote in the British Stalinist sheet: “I am absolutely opposed to conscription and to those who are behind it ... It is the cruelist thing imaginable for fathers and mothers who sacrificed for years to give their boys education and apprentice training to find them being handed over to the ‘Brass Hats’!”
But all that was a month or two months ago. The professions of opposition are not worth the paper they were written on any more. The “dispute” between Gallacher and the Humanité has turned out to be nothing more than the type of highjinks that the lackeys of the Stalintern are required to engage in while each carries out, according to the particular local need, the “general line” of the Kremlin.
For the C.P.G.B.’s fight against conscription has ended, now that conscription is a fact, with the slogan: “Send the Boys Cigarettes,” in the very best tradition of the old ladies’ patriotic societies. Here Is how the British Daily Worker puts it on May 27, 1939:
“Next Saturday the Youth who are liable for military training will register at the Labor Exchanges. A few days later many of them will commence training ...
“‘Keep in touch with our lads’ must be the slogan of the working class. Why should not every trade union and youth organization have its committee which will keep in touch with the boys, send them cigarettes, books and papers, and give them all the news from the workshops, and from the organizations of which they are members ...”
That’s what the pseudo-fight against conscription has come to. It only remains for the “Brass Hats” to decree just what newspapers books, and how many cigarettes the boys are to be sent. The lickspittles are always ready to comply – subject to approval from the Kremlin. And Kremlin Joe should worry ...
 

“Democratic” Government Terror Rages in Syria
A large number of native Syrian militants have been languishing in government prisons for three months. They are charged with “conspiracy against the French army.”
What is their “crime?” On March 8, on the occasion of the anniversary of the declaration of Syrian independence, they made speeches reaffirming their faith in the treaty of 1936. According to this treaty, French imperialism was preparing to grant Syria its independence within two years. Of course, it has met with the fate of most treaties under imperialism. It has become a scrap of paper.
Like their fellow French colonials in Tunis these Syrian militants are kept in the prisons without the benefit of a trial. Most of them have contracted frightful diseases as a result of their long imprisonment. Some of them, like Munir Rayes, who suffers from facial paralysis, are in danger of their lives. The French anti-imperialist fighters are working for their liberation.
 

Carrying the “White Man’s Burden” in South Africa: 1939 Style
His brow wrinkled by the cares of the “white man’s burden,” the current Minister of Labor in the Union of South Africa, explains in the Johannesburg Star:
“Information at the disposal of the Department of Labor shows that the movement towards organization (of native workers) is growing and that a number of so-called ‘trade unions’ are in existence ... In the absence of State recognition, control or protection, the native worker is liable to fall into the hands of an undesirable type of organizer.”
And so the government kindly condescends to offer the native worker “some form” of recognition. But he is not, god forbid, to be recognized as an “employee” under the existing laws for “it would entitle the native to full trade union status and representation on industrial councils side by side with European employers and employees.” And that must never be. For, in that case, the black workers might make common cause with the white workers and thus absolve the minister and fellow-imperialists of his “white man’s burden” all too quickly.
 





Marceau Pivert Joins List of Persecuted Anti-Militarists
In addition to our comrades Rigal, Steve and Schmitt, a whole series of other militants in the labor movement, ranging from the anarchists to the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party (P.S.O.P.) are now facing full-barrelled persecution for anti-militarist work in France. Latest among the attacks against the anti-militarists is the prosecution initiated by the Daladier regime against Marceau Pivert, leader of the P.S.O.P. Pivert has been indicted for “provoking the military to disobedience.”
The charge is based on a leaflet issued by the party at Cherbourg, calling upon the reservists to act against their arbitrary detention in barracks beyond the twenty-one day period they were called out for. A local leader of the organization, comrade Mariette, had already been charged on the same grounds.
In a statement to the court, comrade Pivert takes full responsibility for the action of the Cherbourg branch of the P.S.O.P. Defending their action, he reaffirms its correctness and denounces the war-mongers in the following terms:
“I declare that the appeal to the reservists seems to us especially justified since, as we have proved in the columns of our paper Juin 36, the big capitalist powers which are the origin of the war threat continue to exchange among themselves the materials necessary for war – minerals, gas masks, airplane motors, etc.”
The first hearing of the case was held on June 21. The actual trial is due to be held later this month.
 

Strikes Against Lower Living Standard Spreading in Indo-China
Numerous important strikes are spreading throughout French Indo-China, linked with mass demonstrations against the new pro-war taxes. Both the strikes and the demonstrations are directed at the declining living standards.
On May 8, more than 3,000 workers went out on strike at Haiphong with the following demands: 1. Increase of 30 per cent in wages; 2. Regular payment; 3. Sick benefits; 4. Recognition of shop delegates; 5. Suppression of unjust fines. The strike started with the weavers of the “Cotonniere” factory, and soon spread to the whole textile field. After sixteen days of struggle the basic demands of the strikers were accepted and the strike settled.
On May 31, more than 2,000 workers at the navy yard in Saigon went out on strike against an attempt to cut down the rate for overtime work. The strikers are demanding time and a quarter for overtime during the day and time and a half for night work. At the present writing the strike is still spreading.
A strike of 3,000 unskilled coolies in the Saigon-Cholon region has broken out recently with a demand for a twenty per cent increase in wages.
Anti-tax demonstrations have been held in Saigon, Hanoi and Haiphong.
At the same time, the colonial lackeys of French imperialism have cracked down on the native working class press. No less than three editors of working class journals have been arrested in recent weeks, among them our comrade Nguyen Van Qua of La Lutte, organ of the Indo-Chinese section of the Fourth International.
 

Canadian Comrades Organize Farmers Branches in West
Within the last month, our Canadian comrades, the Socialist Workers League, have organized two new branches in the Western part of the Dominion. The branches are located in the towns of Wiseton and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, and are composed almost exclusively of farmers. So popular has the party become in these towns that for the first time in its history the local authorities granted the use of the schoolhouse for a meeting of a political party. A meeting held there on June 14 attracted farmers from the whole countryside who came to listen to Carl Hichin, Western organizer of the League. Most of the participants braved heavy rainstorms and almost impassable roads in order to attend.
Congratulations to the Canadian section of the Fourth International! In breaking the ground among the farmers they have accomplished a real pioneering job for our movement in North America. It is an example worthy of emulation by our comrades in the farming regions right here in the States.
 





Bevin’s Too Radical for Mr. Harry Pollitt
Somewhat scared by the speed with which his confrères were rushing through pro-conscription and pro-war resolutions at the recent Southport Labour Conference, one of the more staid British trade union leaders, Mr. Ernest Bevin, delivered himself of the following quite correct but more or less vague and not too binding opposition speech:
“I do not want this Movement to be fighting for the salvation of the Paris Bourse, the London Stock Exchange, the Amsterdam Exchange and Wall Street. I want this Movement in its peace policy to be fighting for the salvation of the common people of the world.”
That Mr. Bevin was not taking himself too seriously may be gathered from the fact that up to date he has not made a single move to actually fight conscription. Like the rest of the Labour leaders, he is taking British war preparations in his stride. His speech was purely verbal radicalism. But even that is too much for Mr. Harry Pollitt, Stalin’s chief stooge at the head of the Communist Party of Great Britain. Writing in the current issue of the Stalinist Labour Monthly, Mr. Pollitt characterizes Bevin’s speech in these words:
“Mr. Bevin’s line is a direct continuation of the Munich policy. It was a try-out at Southport of the policy of the Cliveden set and the pro-Fascist Chamberlain government.”
Nobody was probably more surprised at these darts than poor Mr. Bevin himself. A colleague in the Glasgow Forward comes to Bevin’s support with a rather apt quip:
“How long will it be,” he asks, “before Harry Pollit will be demanding that the Internationale cease to be sung at Socialist meetings and that what we want is a good old anti-Fascist song like Rule Britannia?”
 

Ambassador Maisky Explains Current Kremlin Policy
That the Kremlin masters of Mr. Harry Pollitt have long ago displaced internationalism with the Russian version of the Rule Britannia spirit may be gathered from a recent interview between their Ambassador to England and a British member of Parliament.
In the London Evening News of June 16, Mr. Beverly Baxter, M.P., makes public his interview with Ambassador Maisky. Some of the passages attributed to the Ambassador sound like a less hypocritical reply that Pollitt might have given Bevin. For instance, asked by Mr. Baxter as to his attitude regarding the present alignment of the powers, Maisky said:
“We have no love for you, but less love for the German. We do not wish to die to preserve the power of France and Britain in the West. That is not hostility on our part – it is just pure reason. First: we do not want war at all. We do not mind war, but it doesn’t suit us. We have 50 years’ work ahead of us and we must have peace to carry it out. Therefore we ask only one question – ‘Does this non-aggression front help Russia to remain at peace?’ We are not sentimental like you. We are thinking only of Russia, not of humanity.”
As if to emphasize this last point, to make sure that it is understood properly, the venerable Ambassador answers as follows to the question: Is it not true that the Soviet government is still planning and working for world revolution?
“Absolutely no,” says Mr. Maisky. “All that belongs to the past, when under Lenin there was a lot of emotion mixed up with politics. Once the Comintern had that magnificent building near the Kremlin and exerted a dominating influence. Now they have moved over to a small house in the suburbs and the trade unions have taken their great place by the Kremlin. No, we do not work for World Revolution.”
There. That ought to reassure any Tory diehard. For Mr. Maisky speaks with authority. He had nothing to do with the Kremlin “when under Lenin there was a lot of emotion mixed up with politics.” On the contrary he was interested on which side his bread was buttered in the camp of the White Guards fighting Lenin. He is still interested on which side his bread is buttered. And so are all the other bureaucratic colleagues of Mr. Maisky, both in the Kremlin and on mission for it. No, these boys don’t work for world revolution.
 





Australian Labor Bucks Conscription
for War in Europe
Resistance to the dragooning of youth for imperialist slaughter
goes on in one form or another in all the belligerent countries. It
is only rarely, however, that censorship allows a glimmer of the true
situation to break through to see the light of day.
In Australia, for instance, our comrades of the Communist League
(Fourth International) carried on a vanguard struggle against the
so-called National Register, long before the war started. They
explained patiently that the registration of all man-power by the
government was merely a prelude to conscription. All the opposition
parties, including the Labor Party and the Stalinists, supported the
government then, and ridiculed the idea that Australia was preparing
to conscript youth for war overseas.
When the war broke out, the Menzies Government finally proclaimed
its intention to put conscription into force. However, the Sydney
Sun, pro-Government organ, explained on October 23:
“They (the conscripts) will not bleed for Imperial
ambitions or capitalistic advantage. They will simply learn how, if
an enemy attacks their own country, Australia, to put up a good fight
against him, instead of being pitched, untrained, into massacre.”
Now we learn that this last shred of deception has been dispensed
with and that an Australian Imperial Force is to be raised and “would
proceed overseas early in 1940.” This was the announcement made
by Prime Minister Robert G. Menzies in the Australian House on
November 29.
After going along for months in support of the government measures
on the ground of their purely defensive character, the Labor leaders
find themselves hard put to go the whole hog when the naked
imperialist content of the war preparations is revealed.
The New York Times of November 30 reports:
“A motion by the leader of the Labor Party, John
Curtin, that Parliament go on record as opposing the dispatch of an
Australian Imperial Force to fight in Europe was defeated today in
the House of Representatives. The government defeated the Curtin
motion by only 33 to 28.”
The strong vote for the Curtin motion is indicative of the
tremendous unrest which serves as pressure from the ranks upon the
Labor leaders. The laboring masses have boycotted the National
Register from the first. The voluntary recruitment system initiated
by the government at the outset of the war was a flop.
Whether the Labor skates in Parliament and in official control of
the unions will be able to stem the tide, whether the government will
be able to make use of the pro-Hitlerite treachery of the Stalinists
to derail the workers, is still a matter of conjecture. In their
bi-weekly paper, the Militant, our Australian comrades wind up
their exposure of conscription in the following words:
“Menzies’ conscription can be defeated. The
workers are willing to follow a militant lead, as was shown by the
National Register boycott. It is necessary that their opposition be
mobilized and expressed by the medium of mass meetings,
demonstrations and above all, by the enunciation of a clear-cut
anti-capitalist policy.” (The Militant, November 11,
1939).
That the Australian Fourth Internationalists are doing their bit
toward mobilizing the workers in this direction is evidenced clearly
by their paper and by the successful mass meetings in Sydney and
Melbourne, which they carry on incessantly despite the war regime.
 

Comrade Franz Meyer Imprisoned in Antwerp
At the beginning of September, our comrade Franz Meyer, member of
the International Communists of Germany (I.K.D.) was arrested in
Antwerp, Belgium.
Comrade Meyer was charged with furnishing anti-war cartoons to the
weekly paper of our Belgian Revolutionary Socialist Party, La
Lutte Ouvrière, under the name of Holz.
Here is an example of the “justice” meted out by the
so-called “Socialist” Minister of Foreign Affairs, Paul
Spaak, to a man whose alleged crime is that he puts his art in the
service of the struggle against war. Is Belgian “democracy”
really in such a poor state of health that it has to resort to the
use of police measures against cartoonists and caricaturists? Is
Spaak’s conception of the “democratic right of asylum”
one in which a refugee artist from Hitler’s Germany is to be
subjected to the same type of persecution as in Nazi Germany?
Meyer has been imprisoned since September. What is the accusation
filed against him? Why is he being held incommunicado? What
intentions does the Spaak government have with respect to this
refugee revolutionist? Is this rebel artist to be deported and turned
over to Hitler’s hangmen?
Every class conscious worker, every upright writer and artist has
the right to demand an answer from the Belgian “democracy”
on the case of Franz Meyer.
 

Swedish Section of “International Front Against War”
at Head of Reaction
Stalin’s invasion of Finland has called forth a tremendous
reaction in Scandinavia. Sympathy with the attacked Finns reaches
deep into the workers circles. The reactionaries are utilizing the
situation for an attack on civil liberties. In Sweden the Communist
paper Ny Dag has been banned and the government has ordered
the press distribution bureau, which has a monopoly over the sale of
papers on the streets and at the kiosks, to stop the distribution of
the paper. Instead of protesting against this unheard-of coup of the
government, the representative in parliament of the Swedish Socialist
Party, Flyg, has become the advocate of even stronger measures. In a
speech at the Riksdag session of December 2, he declared that it was
“absurd” to grant Swedish democratic rights to the
“agents of a foreign power” and demanded more appropriate
measures on the part of the government. This adaptation of Flyg to
the moods of reaction is not only cowardly but stupid. For, it is clear that the attacks of
Swedish reaction against freedom of the press will not be halted at
the doors of the Stalinists. Already, the weekly of Ture Nemann,
Tross allt (In Spite of Everything), has been
confiscated because its criticism of the Hitler regime is “too
sharp.” Nermann has been hauled into court for that. Flyg is
simply digging his own grave.
Flyg’s party is a member of the “International Front against
War,” the successor of the London bureau. What attitude do
Lovestone, Brockway and Pivert take towards the actions of their
Swedish confrère?
 





Fourth International’s Activity in Germany Confirmed
Some time ago, the Appeal carried a dispatch quoting a
Paris Temps report on Trotskyist action in Berlin. This is
corroborated by a news report in the Copenhagen Politiken of
October 26.
“According to information gathered from divers
sources,” writes Politiken, “the German police is
engaged in a widespread raid action against numerous cases of
assassination and acts of sabotage. It has organized in Berlin and in
other large cities patrols composed of S.S. troops and volunteers to
quell disorders resulting from blackouts.
“On a recent night raid, a patrol discovered in the
former Communist strongholds of Berlin batches of leaflets bearing
the insignia of the Red Front and the words: Down with Hitler and
Stalin! Long Live TROTSKY!”
 

Belgian P.S.R. Calls for Fight Against National Unity Gov’t.
In Belgium, the government of “National Unity” under
Pieriot and the “socialist” Spaak is preparing for its
part in the Second World War by instituting a tax program which is to
bring a revenue of some 1,443 million francs. It is by far the most
extensive tax program ever proposed.
Of the 1,443 million, less than 120 million or 8 per cent is to be
levied on the trusts and the inheritances of the wealthy. The balance
of more than 90 per cent, constitutes taxes on matches, tobacco,
coffee, beer, fruit, etc. – in other words, taxes which place
the burden of the war preparations squarely upon the shoulders of the
working class population of the country.
The reformist Belgian Labor Party, in its official organ, the
Peuple, fully approves this plundering program of the
bourgeoisie. In its issue of November 11, it gives the usual social
patriotic grounds for that support:
“In the grave hours which we are now witnessing, it
is necessary to act rapidly. At a moment when public opinion
reproaches the government, although sometimes wrongly, with being too
hesitant, it is desirable that parliament give it at once the means
of facing its responsibilities which are urgently necessary.”
The only party in the country which is mobilizing public opinion
against the anti-working class “National Unity”
government and its tax program is the Revolutionary Socialist Party
(P.S.R.), the Belgian section of the Fourth International.
In its paper, La Lutte Ouvrière it concludes an
attack on the tax program with the following words:
“At no time has the slogan of the sliding scale of
wages, which is inscribed in the transitional program of the Fourth
International taken on such importance as at present.
“The working masses must give themselves a clear
account that they can no longer depend for their self-defense, upon
the reformist leaders whose whole devotion belongs to big banking and
industrial capital.
“They can rely only on their own action. They must
create their own organs of defense and struggle: Committees of
workers, of the unemployed, of the soldiers. Long live the united
front of all the oppressed for immediate demands which will put an
end to the starvation plans of the capitalist reaction supported by
the leaders of the P.O.B. (Labor Party). Make the rich pay!”
 

Moscow Confessions in England: Pollitt and Campbell Recant
The Kremlin’s old wheel-horses in the “democracies”
were caught short completely by the Stalin-Hitler pact. Thus, Harry
Pollitt, General Secretary of the Communist Party of Great Britain,
wrote in a pamphlet issued early in September:
“The Communist Party is convinced that the people
of Great Britain are united as never before in their determination to
win this war against Fascism and the friends of Fascism in Britain,
and to end the horror and anxiety that have overshadowed Europe since
Hitler came to power ...”
Another Stalinist stalwart of People’s Front days, J.R.
Campbell, whipped himself up into such a frenzy over the “defense
of Danzig” for Polish imperialism, that he saw a “Fifth
Column” lurking behind the opposition of pacifists to the
government’s declaration of war. Thus he attacked the Glasgow
Forward, mouthpiece of the centrist Scottish Socialist Party
in the following words:
“No demonstration of the Fifth Column would be
complete without a pacifist contingent and so we find the Forward
demanding ‘Should we fight over Danzig’ (horror of
horrors).”
The final upshot was that Moscow ordered these two to act as
scapegoats when the line was changed. Pollitt was “removed”
from his post and Campbell was denounced in the C.P. press. Now they
have both confessed in the best style of the Moscow trials. In their
statements (London Daily Worker, November 11) the former says
that he “played into the hands of the class enemy, and
especially the reactionary Labour leaders, who saw in my attitude the
justification of their own policy of supporting the Chamberlain
Government” and the latter, that he “slipped into a
position of national defense in an imperialist war, involving
objectively support for our own imperialism.”
A better characterization of the treachery of their People’s
Front politics could not be given even by us. But two questions
remain: (1) Since Stalin was the sponsor of that policy in the first
place, why is there no confession forthcoming from him? (2) Since
both Campbell and Pollitt are now for accepting the “peace”
offer of Hitler, how long will we have to wait until we get their
confession of “playing into the hands” of Hitler as well?
 





How the French Workers Are Mulcted for the War
Last week this column gave some general indications of the fact
that the French workers are bearing the brunt of the war economy on
their shoulders and that they are in a state of incipient rebellion
as a result. This week we are in a position to give our readers more
concrete information on this score, as gleaned from illegal organs
that have reached us since then.
The 60-hour week has been established as a minimum, although in
the more important war industries a work week of as much as 72 hours
is in force. Of the minimum 60 hours, 45 hours work is required for
the pay of 40 hours established by an old decree. Taking 10 francs as
an average hourly rate, a worker receives 400 francs for 45 hours
work. The 15 hours supplementary which now make up the 60 hour week
are supposed to be paid at the regular rate, that is, 10 francs for
the average worker. Thus, a worker should get 550 francs for his 60
hours of work.
In actuality, however, here is what happens. One decree,
established since the beginning of the war, levies a 25 per cent tax
on “overtime” or supplementary hours beyond the 45
originally set. Thus, the average worker gets only 112½ francs
“overtime” pay instead of 150. Then 4 per cent of the
remaining total salary goes to “social insurance,” and 2
per cent goes to the government under the Reynaud emergency decree
established before the war, leaving him a total of 482 francs out of
the 550 francs he is supposed to get for 60 hours of work.
But even these 482 francs was deemed too much to give a worker for
the 60 hours he is now required to work. So the war government of
Daladier decided to slap another 15 percent war tax on his wage,
reducing the average worker’s pay to some 409 francs. Thus he
is really required to work 60 hours for the same pay as he previously
received for 40 hours work, at the same time that the cost of living
keeps constantly mounting.
This last tax, however, may prove to be the straw that breaks the
camel’s back. For, although the 15 per cent has already been
officially decreed, resentment is so widespread that the government
has up to the present refrained from enforcing it.
 

... And How the Prolos Answer in Action
At the Lorraine-Dietrich works in Argenteuil, the whole personnel
carried on a strike for several hours, shouting revolutionary slogans
and singing the International. They went back to work only
when the management assured them that the 15 per cent tax would not
be applied there.
At the “Compteurs de Montrouge” department store, 300
women workers demonstrated for 20 minutes with the same object in
view. Their demonstration met with a similar success.
In the C.A.P.R.A. factory at Courneuve, the bosses announced the
government decree would be effective with the next pay envelope. The
night-shift went on strike. As a result the 15 per cent was not
deducted from their wages. At the “Petites Voitures”
factory in Aubervilliers, the workers quit one hour earlier, carrying
out a strike action along identical lines. Same result here too.
From the looks of things, the French prolos are not going to take
the war deal there lying down.
 

Need of the Hour: A Revolutionary Party
Conditions at the front are not any better for the French
bourgeoisie then they are at the rear. Every bit of information
coming from France is testimony to the fact that a tremendous ferment
is making itself felt in the population as a whole.
When you keep in mind the recent revolts in Czechoslovakia and the
reported disturbances in the Reich you have here a more than ample
explanation as to why “all’s quiet on the Western Front.”
The situation just isn’t set for an enthusiastic war. It is
much more ripe for revolutionary action. What is lacking most is the
existence of a firmly-knit revolutionary party.
Here too, however, the trend is becoming more favorable. We learn
from reliable sources that the groups adhering to the Fourth
International in France, which were hitherto divided over tactics
with regard to work inside the Workers’ and Peasants’
Socialist Party (P.S.O.P.), have recently reunited and are carrying
on common activity.
The P.S.O.P. itself has undergone a considerable change. At the
outbreak of the war, the party seemed to have disappeared. Late in
October, however, it began to show signs of life again. Its paper,
Jilin 36, has reappeared as a legal organ. An illegal edition,
mimeographed, is also making the rounds of the Parisian working class
quarters. The leadership of the party has passed over to elements
designated as “left-centrists”. The freemasons have been
expelled from the organization. It is rumored that included among
those expelled, is Marceau Pivert, former leader of the party.
The Stalinists, who regained a measure of the workers’
confidence by their new fake “turn”, are still paralyzed,
and in spite of their tremendous apparatus and the aid of the G.P.U.,
display hardly more activity than the small revolutionary groups. Of
late, there has been a steady trend of more advanced militants from
their ranks going over to the P.S.O.P.
 

A Note on the Work of Our Belgian Comrades
The circumstances surrounding the government’s persecution
of our leading Belgian comrades are only now coming to light. It
seems that, at the outbreak of war, a certain Vereecken, the leader
of an ultra-left group which split from our Revolutionary Socialist
Party (PSR) about a year ago, took it upon himself to “prepare”
the revolutionary vanguard for illegality ... This was done by means
of a mimeographed circular containing detailed instructions which was
mailed, among others, to a list of our comrades which he had
purloined from the PSR when he split.
Naturally, the government, which was looking for just such a
pretext, was greatly relieved of its trouble by this piece of
stupidity. The result was that every leading militant in the country
was instantly picked up. Confronted with the evidence, some of the
comrades arrested found it hard to deny the identity of the
perpetrator before the investigation judges. After being held for
weeks, all the militants arrested, including Vereecken, were finally
released.
Upon his release, Vereecken attempted to provoke a split in the
ranks of the PSR because of the repudiation of his “document”
by some of the comrades arrested. This attempt fortunately has
failed. At a recent congress held by our Belgian party under the most
difficult conditions, this matter among others was settled
definitively. The “illegal circular” of Vereecken was
condemned unanimously. The action of those comrades who identified
the circular as hailing from Vereecken was censured. The party swung
into action after the congress, resuming publication of its weekly
organ, the Lutte Ouvrière, and beginning a vigorous
anti-war campaign in the mining fields and in the industrial cities.
In spite of the initial crisis, brought about by the government
action which has resulted from the stupidity of the ultra-lefts, the
party has remained intact. As a matter of fact, the reports to the
congress even showed a substantial gain in membership, coming mainly
from the ranks of the Stalinists in such centers as Brussels and
Liege.
 





The Revolt Against the “National Register” in Great Britain
At the time of the “Munich” war crisis last September there was no lack of speculation as to the causes for the so-called Chamberlain capitulation. All commentators agreed, however, that the desire for peace on part of the general population was strongly in evidence – even if it was expressed only passively: by the missing enthusiasm that usually precedes the opening of hostilities.
A far more positive confirmation of this fact is being driven home dramatically by the revolt against the “National Register” that is now taking place in British working-class ranks.
The “National Register” is a measure adopted by the Chamberlain government recently, calling for the “voluntary” registration of workers in all industries preparatory to the unfolding of a general conscription plan. The vast majority of the Labour Party members voted for it, or “abstained,” in the House of Commons. The Labour Executive and the Trade Union Council have agreed to “cooperate with the government in its execution.” But ...
The rank and file of Labour has risen up in arms against this war-mongering scheme. No less than seven Trade Councils in the major industrial cities – Sheffield, Leeds, Norwich, Huddersfield, Barking, Perth and Lowestoft – have rejected all responsibility for it. The powerful National Union of Railwaymen and the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen, as well as the Scottish Miners Union and the South Wales Miners Federation, have turned down cooperation.
As was to be expected, the revolt against the war plans of the British capitalists takes on the form of a revolt against their agents at the head of he Labour Party and the General Council of the Trades Unions. Obviously, these bureaucrats were not responsible for the widespread anti-war sentiment last September. But even more significant is the fact that the Stalinists, who enjoy a certain prestige as radicals in the United Kingdom because the trade union and Labour bureaucrats still are opposed to having any truck with them, have had no better luck in pitting themselves against the sentiment of the masses.
One of the leading British Stalinists, Arthur Horner, President of the South Wales Miners Federation, has been touring the coal fields with the pro-war Labour parliamentarians in his area in support of the “National Register.” The usual result is indicated in a resolution adopted by the miners lodge at Troedyshir, in the presence of the speakers, denouncing support of the “Register” because it “places the Labour Party in a position where they can be charged with lining up with the National Government for the preservation of British Imperialism and Capitalism” and calling “upon the rank and file members of the Labour Movement to demand an immediate revision of the anti-working class policy adopted by the Parliamentary Labour Party.” The resolution was carried 200 to 3 in spite of persistent appeals by Horner that it be withdrawn.
* * *

Belgian 4th Internationalists Take Office in Municipality as Revolutionists
As readers of the Appeal are aware, our comrades of the Belgian Revolutionary Socialist Party (P.S.R.) won an absolute majority on the Municipal Council at Flenu, in the Borinage mining section, in the course of the elections last fall. This month they have been inducted into office. Forced to take the royal oath, they did so with a public statement that is an example of the revolutionary behavior of Fourth Internationalists on the parliamentary arena. Here are some excerpts from this highly interesting document:
“If we yield to the restrictions imposed by the capitalist state, it is only in order to be seated in this deliberative assembly, in which we intend to defend vigorously the interests of the laboring masses who have elected us. For us, the oath is a mere formality. It cannot commit us politically in any way ... In fact, we are for the abolition of the monarchy as a symbol of the exploitation of the working class by the possessing class: the capitalists. We are fighting and we shall fight for the installation of a workers and peasants republic, a socialist Soviet republic like the one formed by the workers of Russia in October 1917 in the course of the greatest revolution in history ...”
According to the Belgian constitution, our comrades in Flenu, having an absolute majority on the Municipal Council, are entitled to select the Mayor. The latter, however, must have the formal approval also of the Departmental Commissioner who represents the central government. Comrade Walter Dauge, the leader of the Revolutionary Socialist Party, was proposed for the post. Before giving his approval, the Departmental Commissioner posed two questions before Comrade Dauge, requesting a written answer. The questions were: “1. What will you do in case of a strike? 2. What will you do in case of factory occupation [sit-ins]?”
Dauge replied by reaffirming, as to the first question, the election platform of the party, which says:
“In case of a strike (like those of July 1932 or June 1936) the representatives of the P.S.R. will be entirely on the side of the workers. Even under the threat of being removed by the central authorities, they will systematically refuse to carry out the orders of the governor or of the Minister of the Interior regarding prohibition of meetings, demonstrations and picketing. On the contrary, they will remain with the latter to the very end, defending them in their demands.”
As to the second question, our comrade expresses doubt about its realism, since most of the factories in the region have been shut down. But, in case of their reopening, and in the event of a sit-in, he says:
“I will be heart and soul with the sit-iners. I will support them with all my strength. I will organize the food supply for them. I will appeal to the entire laboring population to back them up effectively so as to help them win out against the bosses and the government.”
The actual outcome is still in doubt. The Belgian “democracy” is in a pickle: Shall it flout the “democratic” constitution and refuse to seat Dauge or shall it allow an avowed revolutionist, who sticks to his principles under fire, to take charge of the municipality? In any case, the workers know where the Fourth Internationalists stand.
 





How Daladier Was Really Welcomed in North Africa
Truth travels slowly indeed.
When Premier Daladier recently toured French North Africa in a national demonstration against Fascist Italy’s colonial designs, the press was full of accounts of the enthusiasm of the natives. Everywhere, every day of the tour, thousands of indigenous Tunisians and Algerians, it seems, manifested their loyalty to French “democracy.” To the initiated, this was very strange news. Why should the colonial slaves pay such vibrant homage to their imperialist overseers?
Only now, a month after the event, the real state of affairs is brought to light, on the basis of reports carried in the local Tunisian press. Everywhere, in Tunis, in Bizerte, in Bardo, in Bab El Khadra, the natives demonstrated under the banner of their nationalist organization, the “Destour.” Daladier was greeted everywhere with cries of “Long live the Destour,” “Down with the privileges,” “We demand a Tunisian Parliament.” In other words, the demonstrations were really for national independence ... and not for French “democracy.”
The balance sheet: Two “Destourians” arrested at Tunis and sentenced to five years of exile. Mass arrests at Bab El Khadra with blanket sentences of one month and fifteen days for women and two months for men. Nine arrested at Bardo with similar penalties. And so on down the line ... Demonstrations for French “democracy”? Pure mockery.
Naturally the Stalinists go along the whole hog “for the safety of the empire.” An indication of the success of their agitation for French imperialism may be gleaned from a recent election result in Algeria. In the vote for Municipal Councillor of Algiers, the candidate of the revolutionary Party of the Algerian People, Boumandjel, received 2,074 votes against 659 for the secretary of the Algerian Communist Party, Boukhort, who was running against him.
* * *

Sir Stafford Cripps Out on a Limb with his Popular Front
Sir Stafford Cripps, member of Parliament and of the Labour Party Executive, has been expelled from the British Labour Party for issuing a memorandum to local branches, over the head of the leadership, calling for a Popular Front policy “in order to oust the National [Chamberlain] Government.”
Always considered a left-winger, the previous attacks of the reactionary Executive had raised a large following for him among the rank and file. His adoption of the Stalinist People’s Front propaganda as part of his policy has reversed this relationship entirely in favor of the Labour party leadership. They now quote Cripps against Cripps and with especial effectiveness. What can this latest convert to the People’s Front reply to a quotation of his, which is constantly held up to him, such as this, in 1934:
“There must be no compromise over socialism, no coalition or arrangement with others who were not socialists. That way lay suicide.”
Or this, in 1935:
“The National Government had done quite well for a capitalist government ... There is really very little case at all for an alternative government within the capitalist system.
“I don’t think we should fix our eyes on the ex-Liberals and the middle class people, but that we should fix our eyes on the working class.”
His present position can only gain him the allegiance of the British Communist party, which has never amounted to anything and is now in even greater decline. Before the broad rank and file of the Labour party he appears, in view of his previous stand, as a ridiculous mountebank. Sir Stafford is out on a limb and so is his Popular Front.
However, as the reaction of British labor to the National Register (see the Socialist Appeal, Feb. 10) shows, the Labour Party Executive is not at all rid of healthy opposition to its reactionary policies, despite its advantage in combating Sir Stafford’s somersaults. Quite the contrary.
In addition to the Trades Councils listed last week as opposing the conscription plan of the Chamberlain government and its Labour agents, the following, in more important cities, have joined forces with them: The Trades Councils of Bristol, Derby, Brighton, Chichester, Kent, Dartford, Slough and Dundee, aside from numerous local unions and the National Amalgamated Union of Shop Assistants. A revolutionary group in the Labour Party can do tremendous work now as a leaven in the ferment.
* * *

Glad Tidings: New Party of Fourth International Formed in Denmark
At the September Conference of the Fourth International, held in Geneva, Switzerland, there appeared among other representatives, those of the “Leninistisk Arbejdsgruppe,” a group of Danish revolutionists who had recently broken with Stalinism.
Equipped with the program of action adopted there, the Danish comrades returned to their homes to expand their activities in Copenhagen and in the provinces. The result of this expansion of activity has culminated in the formation of the Internationalt Kommunistik Parti (Internationalist Communist Party), Danish Section of the Fourth International. Our heartiest greetings and pledges of the warmest solidarity to the new Danish section of the World Party of Socialist Revolution!
 





How Leon Blum Saved the Present Fascist Mayor of Barcelona
A certain Matteu was named mayor of Barcelona immediately upon Butcher Franco’s entry into Barcelona at the beginning of the month. Senor Matteu is the head of the trust that has for years controlled the electrical industry, not only of Spain, but of Central France as well.
At the time of the heroic uprising of the Barcelona workers on July 19, 1936 against the Franco insurrection, Senor Matteu, among other reactionary capitalists and their lackies, was fast in the grip of the revolutionary workers committees.
What happened? How was Matteu released? Who is responsible for his escape and for his transformation from prisoner to jailer of the Barcelona workers?
An amazing revelation of the facts in the case is made in the February 3 number of the French journal Juin 36. An article signed Rous reveals the following facts:
Senor Matteu was linked to international and particularly French finance through Forgeot, director of the famous Hispano-Suiza concern and a former French cabinet minister in the days of the Andre Tardieu premiership. Hispano-Suiza has been defended in French courts by none other than Leon Blum.
On July 30, 1936, the socialist and communist workers in the region of the Eastern Pyrennees learned with astonishment that Matteu had been released and thus saved from the course of revolutionary justice. At the Catalan border, where the news was tracked down finally, it became known that this arch-capitalist was released on demand of Leon Blum, then heading: the first French People’s Front government!
In fact, he had crossed the French-Catalonian border that day in the company of the “Socialist” Montel, confidential secretary of Leon Blum, who came to call for him in his automobile!
Thus, while Blum and his French Socialist Party were participating in the farce of the “Non-Intervention Committee” and denying aid to the hard-pressed Spanish workers under the pretext that it would involve Europe in a world war, he was actually giving aid to the forces that were out to crush them.
For Matteu, once released, continued to aid the Franco rebellion with his financial resources, being rewarded with the appointment as mayor of Barcelona upon the Fascists’ occupation of the city.
These facts speak volumes about the inner corruption of the People’s Front. They are a demonstration of the baseness of its proponents in the so-called socialist and communist parties.
* * *

Rumanian Fourth Internationalists Under the Blows of Reaction
The recent attacks upon the Fascist “Iron Guard,” culminating in the murder of its leader, Codreanu, were followed up by the enrollment of some 70,000 Fascists in King Carol’s Rumanian Guard. With the “Iron Guard” out of his way, the King-Dictator of Rumania has concentrated his fire on the left.
Among the latest victims of Carol’s drive are comrades Stegan-Stefanov, Ion Donitrescu, Lucia Niculescu and Oscar Fraenkel, of the Rumanian Section of the Fourth International.
All honor to the Rumanian Bolshevik-Leninists who have fallen victims to the royal-fascist terror by their valiant struggle in the front ranks of Rumanian labor! Aid them by supporting the American Fund for Political Prisoners, which acts in the cause of such heroes as these.
 

French 4th Internationalists join the P.S.O.P.
On January 28, the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party (P.S.O.P.) carried through a mass demonstration in the heart of the Paris boulevards, calling for the opening of the French-Spanish border (that was just before the fall of Barcelona) and for the right of asylum to the Spanish refugees. No less than 1,500 arrests were made in the course of the demonstration.
In light of the P.S.O.P.’s development, the minority of the French Fourth Internationalist party has recently joined the P.S.O.P., following the convention of their party. The statement of these Fourth Internationalists is printed in the official organ of the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party, prefaced by a note from the leadership greeting it. It declares that the leadership of the P.S.O.P. did not accept such a proposition. Pressure of time and the fact that important numbers of advanced workers who have broken with the People’s Front have rallied to the P.S.O.P., the statement continues, have convinced the signers that they must at once join these forces in the closest daily activity in order to develop the resistance of the working class as a whole against the assaults of capitalism, war and Fascism.
“To be sure,” the statement concludes, “it is known that we have not at all abandoned our ideas and that, particularly, we retain our complete loyalty to the Marxist transition program adopted by the Congress of the Fourth International in September 1938. We believe that this program would constitute an incomparable weapon in the struggle for the P.S.O.P. While we have given up our affiliation to the Fourth International we must, however, declare that we do not at all renounce the right reserved to us within the framework of P.S.O.P. discipline, to work for the unification of our party with the World Party of the Fourth International ...”
* * *

Mr. Arthur Horner in Footsteps of Ramsay MacDonald
Among those who are beating the drums for British war preparations is Mr. Arthur Horner, a Stalinist leader who after many years has reached eminence as President of the South Wales Miners Federation. While miners are engaged in a hard strike struggle to unionize the Cory Pits in South Wales, Mr. Horner is feted as a dinner guest by ... Mr. Iestyn Williams, Secretary of the Coal Owners Association (South Wales Echo, January 23, 1939).
Another guest at the same dinner, the Echo informs us, was Sir David Morgan, intimate friend of the late Ramsay MacDonald.
Arthur Horner is well on the road of Ramsay MacDonald and only picking up speed. “Stalinism is Twentieth Century MacDonaldism.”
 





Around the War Preparations: A Curious Spectacle of High Jinks
Popular unrest over the war preparations has become particularly marked in the British and French empires. Concrete indications of it have been cited in this column and elsewhere in the Appeal in recent issues. In Great Britain, the trades unions have had to come out officially against conscription, a London conference reaffirming this position only last Friday. In the French empire, the victory of Ta-Thu-Thau in the Saigon elections and of the Algerian People’s Party in the Algiers elections – both reported in the last issue of the Appeal – show that, despite the tremendous social-patriotic pressure, the masses are far from being in tow.
The disparity between the mood of the masses and the needs of the ruling class – which is still groping for the final war line-up and therefore cannot yet afford to show its stark totalitarian face – leaves the reformists in a most uncomfortable spot. They want with all their souls to support the war-mongering foreign policy of their respective bourgeoisies, but they can’t support specific internal measures that such a policy requires because their rank and file won’t let them.
Under the slogan of “Collective Security” the Labourites have been able to put over the government’s A.R.P. (Air Raid Preparation program) and even (the so-called National Register, although with some difficulty. But conscription is too much for their following to swallow – especially since they still have fresh in their memories the manner in which Daladier used the conscript army against the French general strike last November. Hence, the Labour Party makes a peculiar spectacle of itself in parliament.
 

Chamberlain Quotes Leon Blum Against the Labour Party
In the House of Commons, Chamberlain makes his just complaint against his Labour opponents.
You urged me to give up “appeasement” for your policy of “collective security,” he says – well, I did. “Collective Security,” our French partners tell us, he continues, requires that Britain raise a conscript army. Why, all French politicians – including Leon Blum’s socialists and even the Communists – demand British conscription. Where is your socialist consistency?
The Labour benches remain quietly embarrassed. At party meetings, a Scotch labor paper informs us, “organizers, watching the perplexed faces of the audience that used to be told: Workers of the World, Unite, tell the speaker at the conclusion of his oration: ‘For God’s sake don’t deal any more with foreign affairs, stick to Old Age Pensions’.”
 

“Internationalism” in Action: Reformist and Stalinist Variety
It is interesting to note the difference in the reactions of the reformists and the Stalinists when Chamberlain challenged them to international solidarity, so to speak with their French counterparts.
Old and experienced, the reformists are used to the type of internationalism in which the labor bureaucracy plays its role according to national needs. When Chamberlain quotes Blum against them, they may be embarrassed but they merely shrug their shoulders, calm and well-behaved.
Not so the Stalinists. For instance, when Chamberlain cites the French L’Humanité (central organ of the C.P.F.) as approving conscription, William Gallacher, M.P., jumps up excitedly and shouts: “I repudiate that completely.” Gallacher is the only C.P. representative in parliament. As a new-blown opportunist, he naturally lacks the good manners of his reformist fellow-opportunists. He has to show demonstratively that his “internationalism” doesn’t mean a thing.
 

No Gratitude for Blum From the French Bosses
One would think that Leon Blum would at least get some recognition from his ruling class for his attempt to get the British Labourites behind conscription. But there is no gratitude in politics. Le Temps, the semi-official French government paper addresses itself to the former People’s Front premier about as follows:
You say that “(British) conscription is one of the capital acts upon which the peace of the world hangs.” True. You point out the “inexplicable contradiction” between Labour’s policy of firmness against the “aggressors” and its present attitude. Quite correct. But isn’t there an “inexplicable contradiction” between the foreign policy which your party advocates and its opposition to Daladier’s decree-laws? Aren’t they too “capital acts” upon which the struggle against the dictators depends? Don’t you suffer from the same contradiction as the Labourites?
And Blum finds it very difficult to answer these embarrassing questions. The trouble is that like the British fakers, he would gladly go the whole hog and probably will, at the critical moment; only there are the working class followers to reckon with – they are not ready for everything as yet. What he and his like can’t understand is why the bosses embarrass them so, why they don’t sympathize with them in their plight – why they are so ungrateful. That is because reformists and labor opportunists never learn from history. They don’t want to realize that the bosses act like class conscious bourgeois rulers and never – no matter what the “national danger” – forget to pursue their fight against the working class; never miss an opportunity to split its ranks and to demoralize it.
Yet, hope for the future of humanity depends upon just this realization and upon the logical conclusions drawn from it. Before the British and French workers can really plunge into the final struggle against the bosses and their wars, they will have to cast aside their reformist and Stalinist leaderships. Such leaderships only lead ... to fascism. Victory depends upon a consistent class struggle policy, a policy which is today upheld only by the Fourth International.
 





French Teachers Uphold Militant Anti-War Tradition
These days bear witness to the fact that history does repeat itself. Sadly enough, little seems to have been learned by humanity as a whole to take advantage of the repetitions quickly. It is all the more gratifying to find that certain sections of it have at least not unlearned their correct reaction to events such as are recurring now in new form. Among the teachers of France a strong tendency is today repeating the valiant anti-war stand of the unionized teachers during the last war. It is still a minority today, but substantial enough to carry important local unions like that of the Ardeche region by big majorities.
The Teachers Union of the Ardeche has recently adopted resolutions which not only denounce the war preparations of the French bourgeoisie in the abstract, but also call for concrete resistance to the campaign of the government which is enrolling the educational personnel of the country in the war machine under the sign of “passive defense.”
“The (Ardeche) section,” says one of the resolutions, “true to its past of intransigent struggle against war, affirms that ‘passive defense’ is a sinister deceit and that it is meant to lead to nothing else but passive acceptance of war. The section calls upon the national union to denounce most energetically the criminal lie of ‘passive defense’; it protests against the scandalous attitude of the C.G.T. (the General Federation of Labor) and the Federation of Functionaries who are not only, not doing anything in this sense, but on the contrary, are complacently doing the dirty work for the General Staff ...
“Its attention having been drawn to the Ministerial Circular of February 4 relative to the teaching of ‘passive defense’, the section contests the right of the minister to introduce new teaching material by means of a simple circular announcement into the schedule; remarks that no legal compunction exists obliging the teaching personnel to participate in the teaching of ‘passive defense’; observes that the application of the Ministerial Circular leads to a militarization of academic life similar to that practiced in the totalitarian states ... etc.”
At the National Council meeting of the union early in April, the organized minority called for similar action, proposing in addition, a public propaganda campaign to be conducted by the union in its traditional anti-war spirit.
The resolution of the minority recalls the past actions of the union against capitalist war and continues:
“The particular task of the teachers is to revive the hatred of the popular classes against the war which become impossible the day on which the proletariat refuses its consent or simply its resignation to it ...
“(The union) denounces energetically the imperialist character of the present international tension which is laying the ground for a conflict between various capitalist group interests camouflaged as ideological blocs ... Reaffirms its complete hostility to the threatening war and refuses to follow the lead of the governments engaged in a policy of intense preparation for the massacre.”
Of course, the bureaucratic machine succeeded in defeating the resolution and the practical motions flowing from it, but the agitation along the lines described is widespread among the teachers and through them, reaches vast layers of the working population.
* * *

Two New Revolutionary Organs: In France and in Argentina
In recent weeks two new publications have seen the light of day which are in every sense powerful contributions to the international arsenal of revolutionary Marxism. They are the magazine La Voie de Lenine in France and the newspaper La Internacional in the Argentine.

La Voie de Lenine (Lenin’s Road) is edited by comrade Jean Rous in collaboration with Fourth Internationalists and other comrades belonging to the P.S.O.P. (the French Socialist Workers and Peasants. Party). Devoting a good deal of its space to theoretical articles by Trotsky and to polemics by Rous and Craipeau, its literary section is conducted by the noted proletarian poet Henri Poulaille.
 
La Internacional is published in Cordoba, Argentina by one of the groups working for the constitution of an Argentine Section of the Fourth International. The first number features the interview between Trotsky and the well-known Latin American trade unionist Matteo Fossa and includes excellent material on Latin American as well as on international affairs.

Both publications are well balanced and full of the punch that revolutionary papers should have. We greet them heartily into our midst and wish them the success that their efforts surely deserve.
 





Two Examples Portend Coming Divisions in the Stalinist Camp
Particularly in view of such recent developments as the removal of the champion of “collective security,” Maxim Litvinov, and the trend towards some kind of a deal with Hitler, Stalinism is due for large-scale splits and desertions. On the one hand, a turn to Hitler is bound to open the eyes of many deceived workers in the so-called communist parties. On the other hand, many of the petty-bourgeois patriots whom the “democracy” line attracted in the past will no doubt take the first opportunity of cleansing themselves from every last tarnishing vestige of “radicalism” in order to get themselves accepted as bona-fide nationalist warriors by the ruling class.
What will be left of the apparatus of the Comintern parties will probably be determined in each country by the exigencies of the moment confronting the local bureaucracies. But the two-fold trend indicated above is already coming into evidence, although slowly.
We have before us two cases. In the one case, the defection of a group of rank and file workers from the Communist Party of Great Britain. In the other, the resignation of a certain Dr. Bourguignon, who as recently as April 2 was a candidate for parliament on its list, from the Communist Party of Belgium. Each case is symptomatic of the trend described.
 

Resignation of Dr. Bourguignon from the Belgian Stalinist Party
Dr. Bourguignon recently had his letter of resignation from the Stalinist party of Belgium published in the Belgian press. In this letter he describes his disgust with the party, the intrigues, injustices, etc., going on inside of it as well as what he calls the “enormous bluff” organized by the party around the “supposed betterment brought about by the Soviet regime for the peoples of the U.S.S.R.”
It seems that in the year 1939, the honorable doctor has finally discovered that “civic and material equality is only a memory there, that castes and classes with all their inequalities are taking shape again, that the standard of living is lower than in our countries, that the regime is as bestially dictatorial as in the totalitarian countries and hardly democratic even in appearance ...”
No doubt, pointed remarks. But, as our Belgian comrades comment, why was Dr. Bourguignon so strangely silent until after the elections of April 2? (He was not re-elected as a deputy at that time.)
In the same vein, the ex-deputy depicts the structure of the so-called communist party, ruled as a satrapy by a Kremlin proconsul. But it is just in this description that the real political nature of Dr. Bourguignon’s divergence from Stalinism begins to become clear. Here is what he says about his attitude toward the straw-boss:
“I do not want to bear any longer having this Slav Jew, ignorant as he is about our national mentality, impose upon us our manner of voting and dictate to us our attitudes.”
From here, it is only one step to the ultra-nationalistic conclusion with which Dr. Bourguignon ends his letter:
“I am merely submitting to the dictates of my conscience in rejoining as a simple soldier (sic), the great labor (?) family and in having no other aim than that of applying whatever strength and dynamic (!) force there is left in me to the service of the people, of the country; in being above all, a good Belgian.”
That’s a foretaste of the way many bureaucrats abroad are going to part company with the Kremlin …
 

C.P.G.B. Members in Islington Split and Join the Fourth Int’l
An entirely different road away from Stalinism has been taken by a group of workers in the Islington Branch of the British Communist Party. A section of this branch raised the question of the betrayal in Spain, particularly with reference to the membership in the Spanish C.P. of General Miaja. During the discussions the members developed an anti-People’s Front position and began to read and quote Marx and Lenin.
The party machinery was put into action to crush this revolt. Compulsory branch meetings were called under the direction of such C.P.G.B. big shots as Campbell and Springhall. All to no avail. What these workers got out of the branch meeting’s was merely a strong conviction that, if it were in their power, Campbell and Co. would repeat the Spanish experience in England. These workers decided to split away in a body. After prolonged discussion with our English comrades, we now hear, these Islington Communists have joined the Revolutionary Socialist League, British Section of the Fourth International.
No doubt, the course of the Islington comrades, like that of the Belgian ex-Stalinist, but foreshadow bigger developments in the future. The class lines, so to speak, are being drawn inside the ranks of Stalinism. We of the Fourth International have clearly the task before us of preparing to join forces with the proletarians who inevitably are breaking with the rotten-ripe bureaucratic apparatus of the Comintern.
 





British Conscription Stirs Resentment Throughout Empire
The Chamberlain government’s decision to institute conscription has stirred up a tremendous wave of anti-war sentiment throughout the British empire.
An indication of the scope that this rank and file anger has taken on may be surmised from the fact that the government itself has been obliged to include a “conscience clause” (making provisions for the enrollment of conscientious objectors in non-military work) in its conscription bill.
 

No Conscription for Any Part of Ireland
At first the Chamberlain government had intended to institute conscription also in Northern Ireland, in the so-called “Six Counties.” Lord Craigavon, Ulster’s pro-British premier, to facilitate this step, even called for a formal request from his government for conscription. A storm of protests broke loose throughout the Emerald Isle – both North and South. The de Valera government of Eire (Southern Ireland) declared that any such move would be regarded as an “act of aggression.” Big demonstrations of the Irish masses took place. The Irish Press called for these demonstrations in the following terms:
“The British government has no constitutional right to conscript any man of Irish nationality.
“Craigavon has neither right, nor mandate from the people – Protestant nor Catholic – to call for conscription to be applied to the Six Counties of Northern Ireland.
“England’s Wars are her own making. Let English do her fighting.
“Ireland has no quarrel with any nation with which England may be at war.
“Come in your thousands to this National Demonstration and prove by your numbers to the British government and Craigavon that we are prepared to fight to the death to protect our God-given right of freedom.
“Conscription begets murder.”
As a result, Chamberlain has desisted from including Northern Ireland in his conscription plans. Apparently, British “democracy” is going to have its hands full before it can make any headway whatsoever in getting any Irish backing for its war preparations.
 

Oppressed Jamaican Labor Raises Its Voice Against War
Another sign of how the people in the British empire are reacting to the war preparations comes from the Island of Jamaica in the West Indies. Discussions on the coming war are widespread on the island, which last year went through some tremendous strike struggles, brutally crushed by the British soldiery. The Jamaica Labour Weekly, a workers’ paper appearing in Kingston, summarizes the attitude of the population in the following words:
“Thus at any moment England and France might be involved in a war against Germany and Italy. When that war started, it would be proclaimed to the beating of drums that Jamaicans must join up and fight to DEPEND DEMOCRACY.”
But, the speakers (at the discussions) pointed out, HOW COULD JAMAICANS FIGHT TO DEFEND DEMOCRACY WHEN WE HAVE NOT GOT ANY? ...
“Although we Jamaicans are bitterly opposed to fascism and are ready to defend democracy when we get it here, WE ARE NOT GOING TO FIGHT FOR IMPERIALISM AND THE PERPETUAL ENRICHMENT OF THE POCKETS OF THE BRITISH CAPITALISTS.”
It is interesting to note that the same paper, in speaking of the fight put up by colonial leaders resident in London against British imperialism, holds up as an example to his fellow Negroes the work of C.L.R. James.
 

Rank and File Revolt in Canadian Labor Too
Still another example of what British imperialism will have to put up with in the coming war comes from Canada, right at our border. There the Canadian Commonwealth Federation (C.C.F.), the Dominion’s counterpart of the Labour party; recently held a regional convention in Ontario.
A resolution was introduced by Professor Grube, of the University of Toronto, denouncing Premier King’s war budget as “a waste of public funds in the interests of British imperialism” and demanding transference of the funds to a public works program for the unemployed. It was unanimously endorsed by the convention, which was otherwise run like a well-oiled machine by the social-patriots in command. They could not stem the tide of anti-war sentiment.
Professor Grube was subjected to a barrage of attacks from all reactionary quarters designed to get him fired from the university. National attention was drawn to the case. So strong was the wave of local labor support on his behalf, that the C.C.F. bureaucrats were forced to take up their cudgels for Grube. He still retains his post.
The original Grube resolution, by the way when first introduced in the Garland, Ontario branch, was denounced as “Trotskyite”. When it came up on the convention floor, it was cheered so enthusiastically that both ths officialdom as well as the Stalinists considered it the better part of wisdom not to oppose it then and there.
 





Voices Against the War on the Increase in England
It is cheering to learn that right in the midst of the war, the revolutionary internationalists of the British Militant Labour League have decided to transform their excellent little paper, the Militant, from a monthly to a fortnightly. Our comrades from the M.L.L. remain as before the clearest voices in the consistent socialist struggle against war there. The fact that they have combined political clarity with a practical knowledge of how to function from day to day in the official Labour movement augurs well for the future progress of revolutionary internationalism in England.
In the current issue of the Militant they define their stand in an article entitled Working Class Attitude to War as follows:
“This present war is a thoroughly reactionary war. The British capitalist class have embarked upon it in order to preserve their own colonial possessions, their own foreign investments against the growing menace of German imperialism. The working class have no possessions in the colonies, no investments. They have nothing to defend except their living standards and their democratic rights which are threatened by the war, and these must be defended against the capitalists who are already attacking them. The enemy is in our own country, it is our own ruling class. The only victory which can bring any benefit to the working class is the victory over the exploiters. Only the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of socialism can end wars, exploitation and poverty for all time.”
Contrast this unequivocal presentation of the internationalist working class stand against war with that of the centrists in the Independent Labour Party as expressed in the latest issue of its paper, the New Leader, to reach here. That paper carries as its main head: Will Revolution in Germany End the War. The headline itself could just as easily be the lead in the Conservative Times. As a matter of fact, the entire capitalist press of Great Britain features revolution ... in Germany.
The article in the I.L.P. paper takes up most of its space with a description of the possibilities of an overthrow of the Hitler regime. Only towards the end does it remind itself that “we must strive to secure than when this war ends (is it presumably to end only in one way, by revolution in Germany? – P.G.S.) the system of capitalism which causes poverty and war ends with it, and that here, too (well, well – Ed.) we begin to build a Socialist Britain and a Socialist World.”
The I.L.P.’s “internationalism” has always been strangely coupled with a peculiarly nationalist behavior of its chief parliamentary spokesman, James Maxton. Here is an example of Maxton presenting the I.L.P. position, so to speak, at a time when anti-Munich sentiment ran high in the Commons:
“I am not a fighting man. I am not bellicose. I am reasonable and rational. Great Britain (!) never disarmed, never without great resources of men, money and materials, could surely face up and say something definite (!) to the powerful dictatorial nations of Europe.”
His speech greeting Chamberlain’s efforts at Munich itself created a scandal which is still remembered. The social patriots used it to great advantage in Great Britain today. Thus, the Lord Provost of Glasgow, whom we mentioned in a recent column, in the course of an article in Forward: “Even James Maxton, the chief spokesman of the pacifists in Parliament, has admitted that the Prime Minister did everything possible to avert the catastrophe.”
The difference between the I.L.P. stand and that of the Militant Labour League is the difference between opportunists to whom program is a matter of indifference and revolutionists who approach every problem precisely from the point of view of their fundamental program.
* * *
John McGovern, another I.L.P. parliamentarian, whose politics are not much better than Maxton’s, nevertheless occasionally rises to a far higher level of moral courage. The British press tells this story:
On September 2, when the declaration of war was being debated in the House of Commons. Arthur Greenwood, the leader of the Labour Party got up to make an impassioned speech pledging the support of the social patriots to the Chamberlain government. His ringing jingoistic phrases were greeted by “members of all parties” with cheers and cries: “Speak for England!” Greenwood reached the peak of his oratory with this sentence:

“If we march I hope we shall march in complete unity, and march with France.”

Suddenly, the papers report, “there was a dramatic intervention by Mr. John McGovern.”
“Turning round and facing the crowded Socialist benches, Mr. McGovern shouted: ‘You people don’t intend to march, not a damn one of you!’”
The press attacked McGovern’s remarks as “in bad taste.” He was not polite enough to refrain from reminding the war-mongering Labour generals behind the front that their generous pledges to “sacrifice all” were to be taken out exclusively from the hides of the millions of their trade union followers. Greenwood and Co., as is well known, are amply provided with soft berths in the administration at the rear.
* * *
McGovern’s commendable “rowdyism” in the House of Commons is about the high point of the I.L.P.’s contribution to the struggle against war. While we admire McGovern’s sense of the dramatic we cannot refrain from pointing out that even such completely middle class politicians as the elder LaFollette in the United States Senate have in their time shown a similar disregard for the amenities on occasion with similar personal courage – without thereby furthering the ultimate struggle against war appreciably.
 





French Labor Under the Heel of the War Dictatorship —
Only the scantiest scraps of information regarding the labor movement have managed to come out of France. Labor news from that war-torn country is almost as rare as from Germany.
The labor press has been reduced to a shadow of its former self. All the Stalinist dailies have completely disappeared. Nor has there been any noticeable Stalinist effort to issue an illegal press. Only La Vie Ouvrière, the Stalinist trade union weekly still appears with a semblance of regularity. The last issue of that paper whose contents have come to our attention shows that the Stalinists had not yet made their turn from social patriotism to the new, camouflaged, “anti-war” position by the end of September. Thus, G. Monmousseau, the editor, writes in a leading article:
“The struggle for liberty against Hitlerite barbarism does not signify for those who fight in the ranks of the countries subjected to this aggression merely defense at any price of the nation itself against foreign oppression; it also means, at the same time, defense of public liberties, of democracy and of all that which comprises the possibilities of social progress and human liberation.”
 

In the Middle of the Crossing
This was written weeks after the C.P. had already been dissolved by the Daladier government, and only testifies in part to the great confusion in the ranks of the Stalinist functionaries, who for months now have been juggling phrases which try to reconcile “democratic” patriotism with approval of the Stalin-Hitler Pact and the line flowing from it.
The great trade union daily, Le Peuple, has been transformed into a weekly. The social democratic press has likewise suspended most of its daily publications, with only Le Populaire still appearing regularly.
Naturally, as was to be expected, the entire social democratic leadership, both the “collective security” faction under Leon Blum and the “pacifist” faction under Paul Faure, is completely hacking the Daladier government in its conduct of the war.
 

Syndicalism – Its Fruits
But even the pacifist syndicalists under Belin and Dumoulin have given up every pretense of an anti-war struggle. Thus, their weekly, Syndicats, declares that “we will take care not to give any council (sic) in the conduct of military operations” and further, that “in order to make all the arrangements corresponding to the necessities of such production as is indispensable to armament and to the human possibilities (sic), it is necessary that our syndicalism be freed from outside control.”
In other words, their slogan “for the independence of syndicalism” turned out in practice to be a cover under which control of the trade unions was transferred from the Stalinists ... to Daladier.
This inauspicious realization of “independence” has borne some pretty rotten fruit for the mass of the workers in the unions. Thus, their press is muzzled, hundreds of their militants arrested for “seditious” language, correspondence spied, communications suppressed, agreements violated, social legislation abolished and, above all – their 40-hour week transformed into a 72-hour week, their paid vacations abrogated, their wages reduced anywhere from 30 to 40 per cent, not to speak of the wholesale slaughter of the trade unionists sent to the front.
Belin explains all these fruits of “independent trade unionism” away as follows:
“In a period of war it is hard to see what remains of democracy and liberty ... In times of war, liberty and democracy, like the monuments in the public squares, are sort of hidden from sight by sand-bag embankments. Later on, the sandbags will be removed ...”
Thousands of workers have replied to this state of affairs with a mass exodus from the unions.
 

The First Rumblings of Revolt
But the revolutionary voices are not silenced altogether in the trade unions. Thus, the Federation of Technicians, with which militants of the Fourth International have long been identified, has publicly proclaimed its revolutionary internationalist position. Its stand has been endorsed by several local unions and trade union councils. At present they are engaged in a struggle to prevent their expulsion from the CGT.
Here and there in a factory, the International is sung spontaneously by the workers. In the Paris munition works a mass movement against reduction of wages has begun to make itself felt. In one factory a social patriot calling for support to Daladier was recently sent to the hospital by a group of enraged workers. Even at the front, the soldiers are beginning to grumble against the “war of the bosses.” Our comrades report that on a recent visit to the front, Daladier was booed in the trenches.
These are but the first rumblings of a native “bolshevism,” says one of our correspondents, which the French bourgeoisie fears far more than the so-called imported variety which it has been able quite easily to suppress.
 

For International Solidarity – S.O.S. from China
Recently a comrade representing the Chinese section of the Fourth International passed through here. The comrade gave an account of the work of that section which is testimony of an unquenchable heroism in the face of untold dangers. More than 500 comrades, concentrated in the main industrial centers and in the guerilla armies fighting Japanese imperialism, are waging a daily battle for the ideas of revolutionary internationalism. Two monthly illegal papers and a legal weekly make their way regularly to the factories in Shanghai and the other industrial cities.
We have just received urgent word from our comrades in China, however, that without immediate financial aid their organization faces almost certain extinction: In the past comrades here have responded promptly and generously to the appeals of our Chinese organization. Will we now, at this critical moment, fail to respond again?
We must not let down our valiant Chinese section in this hour of need! Rush donations, no matter how small, to the Socialist Appeal, 116 University Place, New York City! Hold social affairs! Take up collections among your friends!
Our Chinese organization needs your help at once. Do your bit!
 





Brazilian Communists Move Towards 4th Internationalist Position
Some months ago, the Appeal reported on a split which had taken place between the San Paolo state organization and the Communist Party of Brazil. Arising over differences on national policy, the San Paolo opposition, contacted by Fourth Internationalists, extended the split to the Communist International on the international questions. Meantime, the Regional Committee of the organization, in its bulletin, posed the question of affiliation to the Fourth International. A lively discussion has been taking place on this subject.
One of the former leaders of the C.P., whose authority was particularly great several years ago, has written a letter to the San Paolo Committee, declaring himself in favor of affiliation to the 4th. This fact is especially significant because the comrade in question had no previous relations with the dissident movement.
In another state, Parana, in the Southern section of the country, the dissident movement in the C.P. which had, due to the imprisonment of almost all its leaders, lost all contact with the San Paolo opposition, has now spontaneously developed to the Trotskyist position. Early this year, one of the leaders of the group was released from jail. This comrade, an old communist militant, reorganized the group which unanimously decided to join the Fourth International. Their resolution was adopted without their knowing that the San Paolo organization had publicly broken with the Communist International. There had never been a Trotskyist movement in the State of Parana before. Their first contact with the Fourth International was made by a delegate whom they sent to Rio de Janeiro for that purpose.
A preliminary conference, in which the dissident groups of San Paolo and Parana, as well as the Leninist Workers Party (Brazilian Section of the 4th International) participated, was recently held. The resolutions and decisions of the conference have not yet reached us. But, from the information we have at hand, it is clear that a strong Brazilian section of the Fourth International is in the making.
* * *

Ta-Tu-Thau Barred from Elections to Colonial Council
No sooner freed from prison, where he contracted a serious illness, our comrade Ta-Tu-Thau immediately joined the campaign of the Indo-Chinese section for elections to the Colonial Council. Together with comrade Tran-Van-Tach, he headed the electoral list decided upon by the party. Although the Colonial Council is in itself a meaningless institution in so far as the rights of the native population are concerned, the electoral platform and the ballot can be utilized to gauge the sentiment of the masses.
But it seems that the French governor of Indo-China and his bosses in Paris are afraid of even such a limited utilization of the suffrage. So the governor has simply disqualified them from standing as candidates. Of course, there is no legal ground, since both Ta-Tu-Thau and Tran-Van-Tach have been elected twice before as municipal councillors of Saigon and have successfully fought previous attempts to disbar them. But, apparently, the fear of a mounting vote of protest around these two famous rebel names is enough to cause the French colonial administration to make light of its own laws.
Both in Indo-China and in France, the move is being fought by our comrades and allied organizations. In Paris, a protest movement is developing, headed by the Bureau for Defense of Colonial Peoples.
* * *

Belgian Elections Mark Swing to “Moderate” Right
The general elections held in Belgium on April 2 marked a distinct turn to the so-called “moderate” right. The home-baked Fascists, the “Rex” movement of M. Degrelle, were practically wiped out as a factor in parliament. The Belgian Labor Party lost 54,000 votes and 6 seats; the Stalinists held on to their 9 seats, but lost 18,000 votes as compared with 1936. The Catholics and Liberals, who constitute the “moderate” right, gained together some 200,000 votes and 20 seats and now form the government coalition.
Our comrades of the Revolutionary Socialist Party also suffered a setback in comparison with their achievements in the municipal elections, even though they did manage to hold 5,000 votes in the Borinage and 2,000 in the Charleroi sections, the two proletarian strongholds of the party.
Generally, the elections appeared to reflect the all-pervading fear of war among the electorate. The defeat of Degrelle naturally indicates how completely unpopular Fascism has become. Fearing war, the masses apparently have not distinguished between the “national defense” policies of the reformists, the Stalinists and the old-line “liberals,” except to see some advantage in the traditional attachment of the latter to such a policy.
The general desire among the working class to get whatever they can of a “realizable” protection in parliament before the war breaks out no doubt caused a good many who voted for the P.S.R. in the communal elections to vote for the Labor Party in the national elections. The P.S.R., in a post-election statement recognizes the results as symptomatic of a reactionary period and directs the attention of the Borinage and Charleroi workers to the impending struggle of the miners against the governmental attack on their conditions.
 





I.F.T.U. Postpones Meeting in the Midst of Crisis
The increasingly sharpened character of political events appear to have paralyzed completely the bureaucrats of the International Federation of Trade Unions.
A regular meeting of the Executive of the I.F.T.U. was due in March. Hitler was taking Czechoslovakia and Memel, Franco was entering Madrid and Valencia. With such heat on, the Citrines and Schevenels decided ... to postpone their meeting!
It was not by accident that the only international working class organization meeting in the midst of the crisis last September and issuing its call to action was the Fourth International. While the social reformists and Stalinists become petrified by the impact of the crisis, the revolutionists of the Fourth International loom as the only hope of action for the world’s workers.
 

How They Worked to “Save Spain”
A pamphlet written by Jean Rous, French Fourth Internationalist who spent many months in Spain between July 1936 and the conclusion of the civil war, has just been published in France under the title Spain 1936–Spain 1939: The Revolution Assassinated. It covers the whole period with an amazing mass of detail.
The Rous pamphlet should be of particular value in making clear the criminally mistaken line of the P.O.U.M. The impotence of its centrist policies is clarified throughout by the mere recital of events and the P.O.U.M.’s reaction to them. The victimization of this party by the Stalinists and their People’s Front allies should not, despite our sympathy and solidarity with the victims, close anyone’s eyes to its false politics.
Rous cites a letter of May 25, 1937 written by the socialist War Minister of the Loyalist government, Prieto, to his party comrade, the Loyalist ambassador to the United States, Fernando de los Rios. This letter shows with what zeal these “socialists” went about saving Spain ... by crushing the Spanish working class organizations.
“Finally,” says Prieto in one of the passages, “the most important part of our mop-ping-up process in the rear has been concluded. At Barcelona, as well as in the rest of the province, the wheels of the F.A.I. and the C.N.T. [the anarchist mass organizations – Ed.] have been completely stopped, their most dangerous elements are either dead or imprisoned. What’s even more important, is the fact that those who have come to their senses are today either convinced or at the very least more moderate ... We haven’t yet finished mopping up completely. We have decided, among other things, to transfer these elements to the most dangerous fronts. In this manner the disrupters will aid us in perfecting our mopping-up process, for which we should be very thankful to them ... In following this line of conduct, we shall, as you know, please the three countries who have aided us most and who, quite recently, have demanded such a course from us.”
We learn from the press that de los Rios has formally resigned his post as ambassador and that he is joining the teaching staff of the New School for Social Research, where he will no doubt lecture on how to fight fascism.
This is no more than fitting. For, as Bernard Shaw once remarked, “He who can, does; he who can’t, teaches.”
 

Labour Party Branches Flock to “Anti-Register” Opposition
Thirty-nine branches of the British Labour Party have officially flocked to the growing rank and file opposition against the National Register conscription scheme, the development of which has been recorded regularly in this column.
 





Fruits of the Popular Front in France
Readers of the Appeal are acquainted with some of the results of the People’s Front policy in France on the living conditions of the workers and the life of the labor movement. They already know that the institution, of the sixty-hour week in place of the forty-hour week achieved by the June 1936 strike wave is practically a fact; that the unemployed are to be regimented for forced labor in the best style of the Fascist countries; that the militants who took the general strike order of last November seriously are filling, the jails of Daladier’s “democracy”.
New fruits of this rotten and treacherous policy are coming to light every day, however. On March 1, 1939, the government issued a decree affecting the shop delegate system (the system of grievance committees established in June 1936). The decree sharply restricts the rights of the workers in the shops to elect delegates of their own choice, withdraws the right to recall an incompetent or renegade delegate and practically gives the bosses a free hand to dictate the election by ordering that “the chief of an establishment or his representative shall always have access to the voting place” – that is, the right to intimidate the voters. Not only have the Stalinists, socialists and trade union bureaucrats not taken any measures to fight the decree, but their press does not even see fit to denounce it.
For the first time in French labor history, we learn from Paris dispatches, the trade union movement is not to order the traditional May Day strike.
But, more indicative even than these political set-backs are the declining figures of trade union membership. In the Paris region alone, the “Union des Syndicats” or Central Labor Union, controlled completely by the Stalinists, reports that the membership there declined, in the period between September 1938 to December 1938, by more than 200,000. The workers are voting against the Popular Front with their feet.
Only a drastic push by the revolutionists organized in the minority movement in the trade unions known as the “Class Struggle Circles” (Cercles Lutte de Classe) can reorient the French workers and prevent the rout of the People’s Front from becoming a defeat for labor.
This movement is supported, and in many instances led, by Fourth Internationalist members of the P.O.I. (Internationalist Workers Party) and the P.S.O.P. (Socialist Workers and Peasants Party). Their immediate objective is the creation of a network of factory committees to take the initiative wherever it is impossible to get the regular trade union organization to act.
* * *

An Admission of Bankruptcy From the Anarchists Themselves
To Marxists, the role of the C.N.T. (anarchist trade union body) and the F.A.I, (anarchist political organization) in the course of the Spanish civil war has from the first confirmed the bankruptcy of anarchism. If a theoretical analysis of the petty-bourgeois character of this movement could only convince hundreds, the actions of the Spanish anarchist organisations clearly demonstrated to millions the uselessness of anarchist doctrine as a weapon of working class struggle.
To the very last, the C.N.T. and F.A.I, leaders pursued the old reformist policy of hanging on to the coat-tails of the capitalist politicians and to the People’s Front which supported them. Their continued collaboration justified every atrocity committed by the Stalinist G.P.U. gang in Spain. When the “Loyalist” bourgeoisie in order to finally make peace with Franco, used the Stalinists as scapegoats and shot down the rank and file Communist party members in cold blood in Madrid and Valencia, the anarchists condoned that action too. As is well-known, Val and Marin of the C.N.T. served as official members of the Miaja-Casado “Defense Council’’ which arranged for the final burial of the People’s Front and the capitulation to Franco.
Revolt, an anarchist organ published in England, prints the declarations of the “Defense Council” and concludes its editorial comment as follows:
“Having to choose between a Negrin (who, they claim, still worked with the Stalinists – P.G.S.) and a Besteiro (who worked with Miaja) the Spanish anarchists have chosen the latter in order to shorten a useless war. This is the lamentable situation, the result of having allowed the Stalinists for the past two years to crush the revolution and lose the war.”
If there has ever been a more patent declaration of political bankruptcy, it has still to come to our attention.
 





“Poor Little Poland” Carries on for Democracy
All eyes have been turned on Poland as the newest and most dangerous of the powder barrels from which the coming European arid World War is to get its first spark. The Chamberlain-Daladier crowd, in their campaign of encirclement against the Fascist Axis, have replaced the late republic of Czechoslovakia with Poland in their propaganda as the symbol of the “democracy” they are fighting for. Henceforth, we shall probably hear from them and from their American counterparts in the Roosevelt war machine, including the Stalinists and social democrats, of all kinds of outrages being committed against “poor little Poland.”
It is therefore highly interesting to read in a not so old copy of the British Manchester Guardian, which is part and parcel of this campaign, how “democracy” actually fares in Poland.
“The Polish terror in the Ukraine,” wrote a correspondent of that paper, “is now worse than anything that is happening anywhere in Europe. The Ukraine has become a land of despair and desolation that is all the more poignant because the rights of the Ukraine have been guaranteed by international treaty, because the League of Nations has been altogether deaf to appeals and arguments and because the outside world doesn’t care.” (10-18-30).
Conditions in the Polish Ukraine have, if anything, become worse since the rise of the Hitler threat. What treatment the Jewish minority receives in Poland has been a matter of public scandal for years. Yet this is the “poor little democracy” that we are going to be drummed up to defend in the coming conflagration.
 

Sixty Hours for the Workers – Jail Terms for IV Internationalists
Hand in hand with the Daladier decrees abrogating the forty-hour week and replacing it with the sixty hours, with the decrees abolishing nearly every economic gain achieved by the French workers in recent years, goes the ferocious attack against the French Fourth Internationalists.
We have already reported here the arrests of our comrades Suzanne Charpy, Loret and Steve. Word now comes that comrade Morel, who succeeded Charpy as editor of Revolution, the organ of the French Youth Section is under indictment on similar charges. Comrades Beaufrere, Philipp and Forges, three militants of the Revolutionary Socialist Youth, are likewise under indictment for “provoking the military to disobedience,” due to articles which appeared in the very latest issue of Revolution. Beaufrere has also been indicted for distributing a leaflet entitled: “Defend the Forty Hours! Down with the Daladier Government! Throw the Cagoulards in Prison!” (The Cagoulards are the hooded French Fascist organization.)
Naturally, the Stalinists and reformists in France are entirely unconcerned with their fate. They are still busy licking the boots of Daladier. Our French comrades depend upon international solidarity in their valiant struggle. All aid to the French Fourth Internationalists!
 

Why the Chamberlain Crowd Sees No Barrier in Stalin’s Ideology
It has long been known to Marxists that Chamberlain’s reluctance to deal with the Stalin government of the Soviet Union in his line-up of diplomatic alliances was due entirely to tactical considerations on the part of British capitalism. Only propagandists for the Cliveden set made a bogey out of Stalin. Only Stalinist dupes and paid scriveners have regarded Chamberlain as an opponent in principle of the Stalin regime.
Now, that Hitler’s refusal to be held in tow has forced Chamberlain to agree to a British-Soviet alliance, the real attitude of the Tory capitalists to Stalin comes to light.
The Marquess of Donegall, one of their spokesmen writes in Lord Rothermere’s Sunday Dispatch:
“I was glad to see Mr. Chamberlain state that we have no ideological barrier to co-operation with Russia. There are still a lot of people in this country before whom the Communist bogy looms large.
“They failed to realise that with the ousting of Trotsky and the execution of many of his followers, Communism – if by that you mean Marxism with its aims of world.revolution-went west years ago.
“What has been growing up in Russia for years is National Socialism – a bourgeois State.
“Furthermore, with Russia’s limitless resources, that National Socialism is not forced into the position of being aggressive, as is Germany’s.
“It has, of course, paid the Fascists to keep alive the Communist bogy with which to entice gullible moderates into their camp. And it is astounding how many intelligent Conservatives in this country have only just awakened to the fact that they have been facing the wrong enemy.”
No doubt, the good marquess over-reaches himself in this all too sanguine estimate. He is simply working hard to change public opinion in line with the change in tactics when he speaks of Russia as a bourgeois state. But the reference to Trotsky is sufficient to indicate where he really stands. That the workers of Soviet Russia and of the world have little to expect from a Chamberlain-Stalin alliance – that flows clearly from every word the marquess writes.
 





New Recruits for Social Patriotism in France
Hitler’s latest “surprise,” swallowing nearly all that there was left of what was once Czechoslovakia, appears to have finally shattered the tender hopes of an understanding with him in French and British ruling circles. In France, Daladier is pushing through the Chamber of Deputies decrees giving him full dictatorial powers for eight months in anticipation of the inevitable clash with the Rome-Berlin axis.
While the social democrats under Blum and the Stalinists under Thorez grumble against this step and call for the “union sacrée” or national coalition cabinet, there is very little likelihood that they will go beyond that. They have prepared their following for just such moves as Daladier is now making.
The latter, taking a leaf out of Hitler’s book, knows that if you can get your opponents to accept a partial defeat without serious resistance, you can get them used to accepting greater defeats without any resistance at all. Blum, Thorez and the trade union leader Jouhaux have played right into the hands of this hatchetman of French imperialism from the very firist days of the “Popular Front.” They will support him with or without the official “union sacrée.”
Social reformism, Stalinism and the trade union bureaucracy have long been lined up for national defense, and their support of French imperialism has been virtually guaranteed. Now new recruits have come over to the side of social-patriotism from unexpected quarters. They are the leaders of the purely syndicalist tendency in the French trade union movement who go under the name of “Amis de Syndicats” or Friends of the Unions. Their chief stock in trade throughout their existence has been: Lay off politics! Under this banner, they had attacked the social democrats and the Stalinists, as well as Jouhaux, from the “left.” During the crisis last September, they were naturally against the war-mongering of the Stalinists. Since then, their fight against working-class participation in politics has taken them on strange paths – and into the camp of Chamberlain-Daladier “appeasement.”
At a recent banquet one of the syndicalist leaders, the general secretary of the Teachers Union, Delmas went so far as to say:
“If, for once, capitalism serves to stop a war, it will make up in part for the evils it has caused.”
Then he added:
“Huge armaments may well be the price of peace.”
The speech caused a sensation in France. Shortly after a manifesto issued by the group incorporating the same line appeared in the Petit Provencal, an organ of the reactionary Fernand Bouisson who is allied with the pro-Fascist group of former Premier Flandin. The paper commented enthusiastically on the manifesto. Now, when the “appeasement” policy culminates in war preparations under a dictatorial Daladier regime, the anti-political syndicalists, headed by Delmas, Belin and Co., can be said to have done their shares for the “union sacrée” equally well with the social democrats and the Stalinists.
As always in the past, the only consistent and reliable opponents of the social-patriotic wave in present-day France are the political revolutionists, those whose policies are based on Marxism. Any hope of resisting the war plans in France rests with the P.O.I. (the French Fourth Internationalists) and with the leftward development of the centrist P.S.O.P. (Socialist Workers and Peasants Party) which contains many excellent Marxist militants.
* * *

Paul Faure and His New Newspaper
Just a step ahead of the anti-political pacifists in this treacherous game is the “pacifist” minority of the S.F.I.O. (French Section of the Second International), led by Paul Faure who recently broke with Blum after a life-long collaboration.
Mr. Paul Faure’s enthusiasm for “appeasement” à la Daladier has led him to launch the publication of a newspaper called Le Reveil du Peuple (The Awakening of the People) co-jointly with ... one René Brunet, an associate of the reactionary George Bonnet, present Foreign Minister.
Where is the money for the enterprise coining from? The cry is raised in the French revolutionary press. The answer is obvious.
* * *

Another Blow at Our French Comrades
In addition to the persecutions directed by Daladier against our comrades Suzanne Charpy and Loret, reported here last week, a new court sentence has hit one of the leaders of the Revolutionary Socialist Youth (Fourth International), comrade Steve. Steve has been sentenced to six months imprisonment for a placard which appeared on the walls of Paris entitled. “This War Is Not Our War.”
* * *

Heavy Prison Sentences for Algerian Fighters
Among the preparations of the French imperialists for their fight against the “Fascist powers” is a savage attack against the political organizations of the oppressed in the colonies. The latest to come under their blows are the militants of the Algerian Popular Party. Twenty-three leaders of the party recently faced a mass trial and were given sentences averaging one year’s imprisonment each. Prominent among them was Ben Dahmane Amar, who was arrested in Paris last September and deported to Algiers.
 





Ukrainian Social Democrats Leave 2nd International for ... Nationalist Intrigues
Last September’s crisis showed up the so-called Labor and Socialist International (Second International) as a pretty hollow shell. Shortly after Hitler’s reorganization of Czechoslovakia, the Czech social democracy quickly crumbled away from even this shell. It is now becoming moth-eaten in addition to hollow. The latest recruits to post-Munich nationalism within its ranks are the Ukrainian social democrats.
Meeting in conference at Prague (significantly enough) on Nov. 5 last, the Ukrainian Social Democratic Labor Party adopted a resolution withdrawing from the Second International. The L.S.I. Secretariat has just made this resolution public. Stating the view that the Ukraine has undergone “profound modifications” in the last twenty (!!) years which make the reorganization of a new party necessary, it declares that, in order to build such a party, they “must begin by avoiding all ideological obstacles” and therefore withdraw from the L.S.I.
Obviously, the “modifications” of the last twenty years boil down concretely to the revival of Ukrainian nationalism under the aegis of Hitler’s Ostorientation (drive to the East). The Prague resolution is, therefore, merely an announcement of the unhampered participation of the Ukrainian social democrats in the newly-hatched national intrigues. The Second International pours grist to the mill of the Fascists in even more than an ideological sense.
* * *

French Party of Fourth International Forges Ahead
As reported here last week, a minority of the comrades in the French section of the Fourth International joined the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party (P.S.O.P.) in their desire to bring about a fusion of forces between this sizeable split from the French social democracy (which is recruiting adherents from other groups who have become disillusioned with the Popular Front) and the Fourth Internationalists. This minority took the drastic step it did because of its anxiety over the time element, regretting that the leadership of the P.S.O.P. had not reacted favorably to proposals for a formal unification put forward by the Internationalist Workers Party (P.O.I.), the official Fourth International party in France. The latter is proceeding with its campaign for such a formal joining of forces with even greater vigor than before.
Joint meetings between P.O.I. and P.S.O.P. groups for the purpose of carrying on united front actions are being held regularly in many parts of Paris, in the Citroen and Renault factories, and in many cities in the provinces. Among the latter, the activity of the P.O.I, comrades in Strasbourg is particularly noteworthy.
In Strasbourg, chief city of Alsace, our comrades have had a particularly hard task in combatting the Daladier policy of rapprochement with Hitler Germany, In Alsace, the German nationalists have been bringing tremendous pressure to bear in favor of the Daladier regime.
Our comrades have carried on a highly successful campaign against it and for the revolutionary position of the Fourth International. A printed paper, Die Rote Fahne has appeared as the official organ of the group. 12,000 leaflets were issued by the group calling for the November general strike and same amount of leaflets were issued drawing the lessons of the strike’s betrayal by Jouhaux, Blum and the Stalinists. Both the Rote Fahne and the leaflets got an excellent reception from the German-speaking working class of Alsace. As a result the group has grown rapidly, drawing behind its leadership the militants of the P.S.O.P. Needless to mention, the German nationalists and clericals are pouring out their daily wrath on our comrades and their valiant paper, calling for its suppression by the Daladier government.
* * *

Behind the “Appeasement Policy” of the Chamberlain Government
Some weeks ago we pointed to the opposition of British labor against the “National Register” as one important factor in explanation of what appears to be capitulation before Hitler on the part of British imperialism. Another phase of the background behind Chamberlain’s “appeasement policy” is the situation in the British colonies, above all, in the largest of the colonies – India. Seething rebellion, cropping to the surface in powerful spasms, marks the scene there. Here is a brief review of only a select list of incidents:

Burma, separated from India against the will of the people in 1930: In the past three months a mass movement has swept the province against the new, oppressive constitution. It has just forced the resignation of the pro-British Ba Maw ministry. But not before 200 Burmese workers and peasants had lost their lives in street fighting with British troops.
 
Bengal, seat of the completely British-owned jute industry, the largest in the country: In 1937, jute workers around Calcutta and other cities along the Ganges river spent 10 million working days on strike! For three months they have conducted a general strike against the reactionary Huq ministry and its Jute Ordinance, fixing prices in the interests of mill-owners and native landlords and reducing wages beyond the endurance level. Now word comes that they have forced the withdrawal of this hated law. Strikes have been renewed wherever workers were locked out from company-owned homes.
 
Reora: Demonstrations of 20,000 peasants (Kisans) are an ordinary occurrence in this district of Bihar province. Recently such a demonstration brought about the release of an arrested leader, Sharma.
 
Banpur State: A demonstration against the Rajah resulted in the shooting down of 2 demonstrators by a British officer. He was killed instantly. 5 months of the year are spent in forced labor in Ranpur!
 
Bajkot: Militant demonstrations have forced a signed agreement between the Takhore (local ruler) and his feudally oppressed workers. His British adviser has been driven out.

These are only a few samples of the Indian ferment. Is it any wonder Chamberlain is for “appeasement”?
 





The Case of Peter Forster: G.P.U. and Refugees
In June 1938, two courageous anti-Fascists, Emil Bargatski and Peter Forster, fled the concentration camp at Buchenwald near Weimar, An armed storm trooper tried to prevent their escape. He was laid low with a shovel. It was the only chance these anti-Fascists had of getting out of the Hitlerite hell, where thousands of socialists and communists, Jews as well as Catholics are forced to submit daily to the sadistic outrages of the Nazi degenerates.
Bargatski was caught and beheaded shortly thereafter. Forster managed to cross the border into Czechoslovakia. Immediately after the Sudenten crisis broke out, Forster appealed to the Soviet consulate for an entry permit to the U.S.S.R. Time and again he was given the run-around. In the meantime, the Communist Party and the Stalinist “Red Aid” made ample use of him in public meetings, where he was drummed up for collection purposes, instead of being guarded against the ever-watchful Gestapo.
Early in September, he was given to understand by the Czech government that it would be best for him to get out of the country. Again he made frantic efforts to get the necessary papers from the Soviet consulate. Again he was told to wait. Even a temporary visa was refused him. An attempt to flee in a plane headed for Russia was stopped by the Czech foreign office at the airport.
“Munich” came and the Czech government, which had previously refused to turn him over to the Gestapo, finally agreed to deliver him to the German authorities “on condition that his life be spared.” Meaningless condition! A few days later, Porster was beheaded in a Weimar prison.
The fate of this valiant anti-Nazi fighter has recently been made public by Erich Wollenberg, German revolutionist and author of a recent work on the Red Army, in which he served as an officer for many years. Wollenberg also gives us an insight into the behind-the-scenes machinations that are back of the Forster case.
It seems that High Commissioner Malcolm, who is in charge of evacuating the German emigrants in Czechoslovakia, has as his secretary a certain German emigrant by the name of R. Katz. This Katz has been in the employ of the Stalinist G.P.U. since 1931, working for it in the “Red Aid” organizations, and finally landing, after being catapulted through various People’s Front committees, as Secretary of the “Emigrants’ Recognition Committee” in Paris.
This gentleman goes over the lists of emigrants to be evacuated. Naturally he had charge of the Forster case. Quite naturally, no refugee who has ever had any kind of a clash with the Stalinists stand a chance of getting a square deal from this corrupt and conscienceless tool of the Kremlin. Dissident communists, revolutionary socialists are practically doomed in advance, if their case has to be handled by Mr. Katz. How many Trotskyists and other anti-Stalinist refugees have already suffered rank betrayal by this G.P.U. agent into the hands of Hitler’s Gestapo is not known.
Forster is dead. But thousands of non-conformist anti-Fascist Germans are still at large in Czechoslovakia. They must not be allowed to share his fate.
You can do your part to prevent this, by giving every ounce of moral and material aid to the American Fund for Political Prisoners and Refugees.
 

New Repressions Against the 4th Internationalists in Indo-China
Readers of the Appeal are aware of the terrible treatment accorded our comrade Ta Tu Thau, municipal councillor of Saigon, by the French colonial authorities In Indo-China. Half-paralyzed, Ta Tu Thau carries on the struggle from prison.
Now word comes from Tonkin, that another leader of the Indo-Chinese Fourth Internationalists has been jailed in the hell-holes of French imperialism in the Far East. Comrade Thai van Tam has been arrested in that city and sentenced to a long term in prison for a series of anti-imperialist articles he published in Thoi Dam, the organ of the Fourth International in Tonkin. The articles were written at the time of the September crisis, when mobilization was decreed in Indo-China because of French fears of Japanese attacks in case of war, Japan being allied with Hitler.
Comrade Tam was one of the founders of the Communist Party in Indo-China and the first editor of its paper. He broke with the Stalinists after the suppression of the Indo-Chinese Congress and organized the first Fourth Internationalist group in Tonkin.
Neither the arrest of Ta Tu Thau nor that of Tam has succeeded in stemming the growth of the Bolshevik-Leninists in Indo-China. The banner of the Fourth International seems to be firmly implanted among the oppressed in the colonies. An active movement for the liberation of the two great Indo-Chinese class war prisoners has been organized by our comrades in Indo-China as well as in France.
 

Universal Suffrage as Practiced in Eastern Europe
On November 6 last, elections to the Polish Sejm (parliament) took place. The character of elections in this Bonapartist state, hope of the Stalinists and the “democrats” against Hitler’s threat to Eastern Europe, may best be illumined by a little court incident reported from Warsaw.
The day after the elections, the worker Baranowski was hauled up before a magistrate. The charge: He stood in front of a polling place all day, constantly taking something out of one pocket and putting it into the other. Finally, some enterprising dick decided to arrest him. At the police station, he was frisked. But, instead of infernal machines, it was found that his pockets were full of ... raw peas. In court, Baranowski maintained that he simply liked to chew raw peas. But witnesses were introduced who testified that Baranowski passed the peas from one pocket to the other, in order to determine the exact number of voters entering the polling place. Naturally, the court believed the witnesses, and not Baranowski.
But even so, the magistrate was perplexed when he came to the verdict. Not for long, however. Since no law exists punishing unbelief in official figures, Baranowski was sentenced for “an attempt to obstruct normal traffic.”
 





The Electoral Campaign in Belgium
As a result of the appointment of the Flemish nationalist Martens to the Academy, the cabinet of Premier Spaak fell and unleashed a national crisis, in which King Leopold III intervened with a letter to Spaak’s successor, Pierlot, that had all the earmarks of a threat to install a Bonapartist regime in Belgium. Martens had been pacifist and anti-government during the late war.
The crisis had, of course, been brewing for. some time around economic and foreign policy issues and was only set off by the Martens affair. It culminated in the dissolution of parliament and the calling of general elections for April 2. The Martens issue is being made the most of by the Fascists (the “Rex” movement led by Degrelle). The Labor Party (P.O.B.) is concentrating on the slogan “Against Deflation.” In reality, the Martens affair merely conceals the struggle for national independence of the Flemish section of Belgium, which is discriminated against by the Walloons; while the deflation policy of the Belgian capitalists is inseparable from their wholesale attack against the social legislation wrested by the workers for many years as well as from their armaments program.
The Revolutionary Socialist Party (P.S.R.), Belgian section of the Fourth International, is entering the general elections fresh from a big success in the communal elections last fall, when they gained an absolute majority in the Municipal Council of Flenu. The P.S.R., in its election manifesto, poses the issues before the workers as they really are.
They point out that “the institution of a union of Socialist Soviet Republics of Flanders and Wallony” is the only permanent answer to the acute national problem revealed by the Martens crisis, at the same time stressing their adherence to the right of self-determination of peoples in any case.
They warn against the royalist Bonapartist danger and call for the preparation of the General Stirke and the armed insurrection against any attempt to install a dictatorship.
They call for the application of the transition program of the Fourth International against the deflation and anti-labor plans of the Belgian bosses.
If the results of the municipal elections were any indication, our Belgian comrades should make considerable progress this coming April 2.
* * *

Cooperatives Join British Unions in Revolt Against “Register”
This column has previously reported the revolt of local trade union councils and Labour party branches against the “National Register” conscription scheme of the Chamberlain government, despite its endorsement by the Labour party executive and the T.U.C. Naturally, the Cooperative Union leadership, like the other labor bureaucrats, also favored the plan. Now word comes that local cooperative societies all over England have joined in the revolt of the rank and file and are preparing to fight out the issue at the annual Conference of the Cooperative Party at Easter.
Among those who have joined in this anti-war movement are the local societies in such important cities as Watford, Bristol, Macclesfield, St. George, Glasgow, Birkenhead, Manchester and Salford.
Particularly outspoken was the action of the Cooperative Society at Southampton, which is proposing the following amendment for adoption by the annual conference:
“This Annual Conference of the Cooperative Party registers the strongest protest against any form of National Register of man-power, believing it to be the first step towards conscription and an instrument which may be used by the Government against the working class. It calls on every section of the Cooperative Movement to refuse any invitation which may be received to cooperate in the operation of the National Register.”
Obviously, the crusade for the holy war of the “democracies” against the fascisms – looming more ominously since the latest Hitlerite conquests – is going to hit upon considerable snags before it is fully launched, not only in the United States, where the Gallup Poll has recently again confirmed the overwhelmingly anti-war sentiment of the masses, but in Great Britain as well. The fact that the sentiment is purely rank and file in character and pitted against the powerful propaganda of the unanimous accepted leadership appears to be indicative of revolutionary developments breaking sooner in the coming war crisis than was the, case in the last World War.
* * *

A Correction on the New Danish Party
In reporting the formation of the new Danish party of the Fourth International recently, this column mistakenly said that a Danish representative was present at the International Conference last September in Geneva. The Danes first applied for admission to the Fourth International upon constituting the Internationalt Kommunistik Parti after the Conference and could not, therefore, have been represented at that time.
 





A Wave of Persecutions Hits the Polish Trotzkyists
On February 14, the French news agency “Havas” carried the following dispatch over its wires from Warsaw:
“A wide-spread police action has been undertaken against illegal political groups. More than a hundred persons have been arrested and forty-seven are still being held. The police action appears to be directed against Trotskyist elements in the main. In the course of the raids, leaflets and proclamations of the Fourth International were seized in large quantities.”
This reign of persecution unleashed against our Polish comrades is of particular significance in view of preceding events. As reported in these columns, Moscow dissolved the Polish Communist Party last July. The formal dissolution of this Comintern section followed the physical extermination of scores of Polish leading militants during the Stalinist purges in Russia since 1936.
Immediately after the dissolution of the C.P.P. was announced, the Polish Trotskyists issued an appeal for the reconstitution of the Polish Communist Party on the basis of the platform of the Fourth International. They undertook this step under the most dangerous circumstances. The fascist police of Poland was constantly at their heels, aided by the Stalinist agents who openly denounced our comrades to them in the press.
Nevertheless, the Polish Trotskyists carried on widespread activity with excellent results. Several weeks ago they were able to hold a successful conference at which a whole series of important documents were adopted. It was shortly after this conference that the police, encouraged by reports from Stalinist stool-pigeons, launched the drive reported by “Havas.” How hard the organization has been hit cannot be said as yet. Reports are too scant. But, although a large number of leading comrades have been jailed, the Polish section of the Fourth International has already established a name for itself as the only revolutionary organization in the country. Its growth can be impeded by police persecutions, but it cannot be stopped. Our most heartfelt feelings of solidarity to the brave illegal Bolshevik fighters in Poland! The victorious revolution of the Eastern and Central European working class will avenge the dastardly murders of their leaders and the stool-pigeoning betrayal of their militants by the Stalinist agents!
 

Revolutionary Socialists of Ceylon Show Way to Fight Fascism
Particularly gratifying these days is the fact that the oppressed of the colonial countries refuse to be fooled by either Stalinists or social democrats in the so-called Mother countries regarding the line-up of the democracies against the totalitarian states for the coming war.
Among those most clearly outspoken against the fraud of the “democratic front” are the militants of the Ceylon Socialist Party. This party has been carrying on a persistent struggle against the British ban of trade unions on the island, against the pussyfooting of the Ceylon National Congress in its dealings with the British colonial office and for democratic rights. Recently the party held its annual conference, at which 500 delegates were present. Among other resolutions adopted was one on the Munich “peace.” It is in this resolution especially, that the Ceylon revolutionary socialists speak out in a voice which cannot but arouse the attention of the workers misled by Stalinism and social reformism in the imperialist countries. The resolution concludes by “proclaiming to all colonial peoples and to the international working class, that in successful colonial struggle against imperialism lies not only freedom to colonial peoples, but also the main attack against fascism; for finance capital draws its greatest strength from the exploitation of colonial peoples.”
 

Daladier Hits at French Revolutionists While Chamber Talks of “Amnesty”
While the French Chamber of Deputies is preoccupied with debates regarding the granting of amnesty to all those arrested during the general strike last November, the Daladier government, helped into power by the disastrous Popular Front, becomes particularly vicious in its attack against the revolutionary press.
On February 7, comrade Suzanne Charply, former editor of Revolution, the organ of the Fourth Internationalist youth in France, was condemned to ten months imprisonment and a 2,000 franc fine. The charge was that an article in the paper incited the military to disobedience.
On Feb. 13, comrade Loret, editor of La Lutte Ouvrière, the weekly paper of the Internationalist Workers Party (P.O.I.), French Section of the Fourth International, was hailed into court for an article giving the revolutionary defeatist position of the P.O.I, in the course of the frenzied, social-patriotic days of the September crisis. His case is yet to be tried.
Daladier, the hero of the Popular Front and the conqueror of the general strike, knows whom French capitalism has to fear. All aid to the French Fourth Internationalists, under attack from the capitalist government, in the front ranks of the working class struggle!
 

Winston Churchill as Guest of Soviet Ambassador Maisky
On Tuesday, February 21, that arch-jingo of British imperialism and earliest of enemies of the October revolution, Mr. Winston Churchill, was an official guest at a dinner given at the Soviet Embassy in London by Ivan Maisky, former White Guard and present incumbent in the ambassadorial position.
Apparently there was some confusion as to whether Mr. Churchill had turned left or whether Mr. Maisky was merely renewing acquaintances.
A commentator in a rather conservative British labor paper reassures his readers with the following contribution on the subject:
“Churchill’s visit to the Russian Embassy must not be taken as confirmation that he has joined the Communist party. He is regarded as being too far to the Left for that yet.”
 





West Indians Will Fight – At Home, Against Own Oppressors
If Great Britain finds herself involved in a war as a result of the present European crisis, she can expect little assistance from her colonial subjects in the West Indies.
This opinion was expressed here by E.V. Allen, one of the twelve Negro legislators in the Jamaica legislative council, in an interview with the Pittsburgh Courier of Aug. 19.
“If England is drawn into another war in Europe, it is my opinion that the people of the West Indies will refuse to fight,” he said.
“The government has shown no interest in the people’s problems and the people would have no interest in theirs. The average Englishman who is sent out from Great Britain has no interest in the islands except to draw his salary.”
Lest some New Deal enthusiast interpret such a stand as even in the slightest indicating preference for the benevolent imperialism closer to their shores, the Jamaica legislator specified:
“In spite of anti-British feeling, however, the average West Indian would not welcome the annexation of the islands by the United States. They would even prefer an independent status to this.”
We assume that the “even” in the last sentence was merely giving point to the immediacy with which the people of the islands would like to get rid of British rule. Their official representatives, at present still moderate and not quite revolutionary in their perspectives, regard independence in this day of rapacious imperialist appetites as quite a risk.
While the West Indians are quite firm in their opposition to war for the salvation of the British Empire, they are nevertheless not at all inclined to be pacifists. They carried on militant, fighting strikes hi Jamaica last year. Mr. Allen reports that as a result of these struggles, some improvement in economic conditions has taken place.
“Prior to this (the 1938 ‘riots’),” the interview quotes Allen as saying, “the average laborer earned only about 35 cents a day. Since the ‘riots,’ the average wage has risen to 50 and 60 cents a day, but this is still too far low for decent existence ... What we really want is an improvement of economic conditions in our present status.”
And, if last year’s strikes are an indication, the West Indians know that they can achieve that by fighting. The interview may be summed up simply: If the Negro people of the islands are going to fight, it will not be in an imperialist war for Great Britain but in a struggle against the British oppressors.
No wonder the great “democrats” in Downing Street are so hot for peace and appeasement! They know that the last word will be with the colonial masses at present under their thumbs.
 

Hathaway Is Not the Only Stalinist Convicted as a Slanderer
Recently the Stalinist press kicked up quite a fuss about the trouble Clarence Hathaway, editor of its New York rag was having as a result of a libel action brought against him by the widow of a Minneapolis publisher. It seems that Hathaway was beset with more such libel suits and that they were all just one grand “Trotskyist” plot. But the real truth of the matter is that these boys are crawling with an old Stalinist affliction called slander, which even the courts of the “democratic” governments they support cannot fail to recognize as such.
A case in point is that of Anton Ciliga, former Yugoslav member of the Executive Committee of the Comintern, who recently brought a libel suit against the Stalinist International Press Correspondence (Inprekor) in Paris. Ciliga, who broke with Stalinism after a plucky escape from G.P.U. jails to Russia, wrote a book about his experiences under the Stalin regime. A reviewer in the Inprekor denounced him as a Fascist spy – the usual “answer” that these people have for any critic whose arguments are based on fact and hard to refute.
In court, the Inprekor editors were required to present proof for their charge. And what was their proof? Ciliga was guilty of living to exile on an Italian passport!
Of course, Ciliga was able to prove that he had lived on an Italian passport not only in Russia from 1926 to 1936, but that he possessed such a passport while actively directing the Yugoslav Communist movement from the day he joined it. He was a Yugoslav by descent and upbringing, but had been born on Italian territory and consequently required an Italian passport during his sojourn in all other countries.
Numerous socialist and liberal emigrants from the Fascist terror testified in his behalf. The Stalinists were clearly exposed as the slanderers and defamers they actually are. As a result of the verdict they have had to publish a retraction in their own press and pay for the cost of publishing the verdict to two other papers. It takes a long time to catch up with Stalinist lies. But even the Hathaways and their ilk should not be surprised by now when they are finally caught red-handed.
 





Leon Blum Reveals His Role in Installing Daladier
In a recent polemic with a bourgeois opponent, Leon Blum speaks with startling candor about the part he has played in installing the current Daladier reaction as the political regime in Prance. Writing in Le Populaire on July 8, he boasts of “having done everything possible to insure a peaceful transfer of power (into the hands of Chautemps, Daladier’s friend) on June 20, 1937.”
“I left no stone unturned,” he writes, “to see that things were done just that way.
“If I had bucked the Senate, if I had decided upon resistance, if I had called upon the masses of the people for support of such resistance, indeed if I had only allowed the masses free play for their instinctive movement, very likely M. Wladimir d’Ormesson [the gentleman against whom the polemic is directed – P.G.S.] and his friends would have felt shivers creeping down their spines of the same kind as in May and June 1936 ...”
Nor is this said in a spirit of penitence.
“I have nothing to regret in my conduct of that time,” Blum adds. The former Premier winds up his article by reproaching “bourgeois of the type of M. d’Ormesson” that they simply dub as impotence “that which they should praise, they more than anyone else, as an act of wisdom.”
“Fortunately,” he concludes, “we are wiser than they.”
Fortunately, for the capitalist class, naturally. Not for the workers, certainly.
 

Daladier Plans Frame-Ups Against French Anti-Militarists
To the list of French anti-militarists arraigned before Daladier’s courts has been added the name of Lucien Weitz, youth leader of the Socialist Workers and Peasants Party (P.S.O.P.). Together with Marceau Pivert, Jaquier, Goldschild and Lafeuvre, other leading militants of this party, Weitz is charged with inciting the military to disobedience.
But, aside from that charge, the youth leader is also being prosecuted for “divulging information relating to an espionage case.” This latter charge is based on the publication of the following item in Jeune Garde, the paper which Weitz edited:
“Comrade Steve of the J.S.R. (Revolutionary Socialist Youth, French youth section of the Fourth International which recently merged with the P.S.O.P. youth) has been under arrest for more than a week; he is held in solitary confinement without the possibility of any contact with the outside world.”
From the charge, it is evident that Comrade Steve, as well as our comrades Rigal and Schmitt, whose case has been reported in this column repeatedly, are actually being framed-up as spies.
That some such kind of an amalgam is being planned is further confirmed by reports in last Friday’s paper of the arrest of a stenographer employed by the Senate military appropriations committee who is alleged to be a member of the “pacifist wing of the Socialist party which recently split away from the main body,” namely the P.S.O.P. The Senate stenographer is also held on an espionage charge. His name is linked in the newspaper dispatches with that of Otto Abetz, avowed Gestapo agent, who was expelled from France several weeks ago. The Daladier government has learned a good deal from Gestapo and G.P.U. frame-up methods.
 

Belgian Militants Appeal for Help in Miners’ Struggle
Some time ago we reported that the Belgian boss class locked out some 4,500 workers who stood their ground against downward revisions in the wage and hour scales when renewal of contracts came up in the Levant du Flenu mines.
The lockout is still in full force. Some 20,000 persons are on the brink of starvation. The reformist leaders of the miners union have remained absolutely passive. Only our comrades of the Belgian Revolutionary Socialist Party are carrying on a campaign for militant action. As the first need of the hour, they have launched the slogan of equal division of work among all the miners in the region in those mines which the lockout has not yet affected. It is a demand which has found a ready response among the active militants in the mines who know what demoralization of their locked-out comrades can mean for their whole movement.
Meanwhile our comrades, whose main base is in the mine regions, have encountered the greatest difficulty in raising the material means for their campaign. The miners who make up the bulk of the members of the party are penniless.
In a deeply moving letter, Comrade Walter Dauge, the leader of the P.S.R. has appealed to us here in America to come to the aid of the Belgian party.
The S.O.S. of our Belgian miner comrades must not be left unanswered. Collect and send in contributions for them to this column. They will be remitted at once.
Send all monies to Socialist Appeal, Att. Belgian Fund, 116 University Place.
 

Stalinists Attack Thomas Mann: End of Another People’s Front?
In line with the alleged negotiations between the Kremlin and Wilhelmstrasse, it is interesting to note the attack launched by the German Communist Party press against Thomas Mann, the well-known novelist. Up until very recently Mann has been played up by the Stalinists as the true prophet of the German People’s Front. No matter what inane, anti-socialist and anti-communist literary twaddle Herr Mann saw fit to bandy about, on the public platform or in print, the paid German agents of Stalin have always leaped to his defense.
Recently Herr Mann referred to certain similarities between the political regime in Russia and that in Germany, at a lecture in New York. For that speech, he has now been attacked by the Stalinist Runa-Korrespondenz of Zurich as a “lackey of American big business.” If this attack is at all indicative, it is as an adumbration of a change in line on the part of the bowdlerized Comintern. Apparently, the German “People’s Front,” always more of a caricature of those in France and Spain than anything else, is also about to be officially buried.
 





South American Situation Fraught with Revolutionary Possibilities
(This week’s column by Diego Montanez)
Unrest and turmoil continue in Latin America. Chile and Ecuador have just had a little trouble. Mexico had a minor outbreak last week in the rich mining state of Guanajuato and United States diplomatic sources hint that they expect further developments. Information from Brazil indicates that the constant jockeying for control of the government is fast approaching the point of eruption into open civil war. In Argentina the reactionary, pro-British President Ortia, with the aid of the Stalinists, whips up an anti-German spy hunt. Throughout the Latin part of the continent one finds the same ferment that preceded the sweep of revolts that took place in 1930.
With so many capitalist governments tottering, a splendid opportunity for revolutionary action should exist. But, with the exception of the numerically small sections of the Fourth International, and to a certain extent the Nacionalista Party in Puerto Rico, the clever smile of Roosevelt and the pro-imperialist turn of the Stalinists have wrought havoc among the labor and progressive movements of the continent.
The situation of the capitalists is complicated by several factors. There are the struggles between the “democratic” and “dictatorial” powers for control of the industries and markets and military bases, the struggles between the U.S. and British capitalists, the struggles of the native capitalists for a larger share of the booty, the fusses occasionally raised by sections of the native capitalists who prefer “liberal” means of ruling, the continual battles between sets of job-hungry officials, the maneuvers of the labor bureaucrats and Stalinists, and under them all the restless stirring of the hundred million workers and peasants.
The fresher bureaucratic government cliques that took power in the wave of revolts nine or ten years ago have become worn out. New and still fresher strata are being pushed forward. In Brazil a large section of the ruling class, including many of the army leaders, has grown tired of the inept and unsteady Vargas dictatorship. They are preparing for an attempt to replace it with one more to their own liking. This attempt will be bitterly resisted by the Vargas group, probably to the point of bloody civil war.
In the course of such a war both sides will ferociously turn upon any section of the working class that raises its head. The advanced workers, who supported the large and influential Communist Party in the past, have by now lost all faith in the Stalinist relic that preaches support of the very government that murdered and jailed thousands of its old militants and keeps it illegal even today. Whole masses have voted against the “new line” with their feet. Others, to a surprising and significant extent, have drawn the lessons of the Stalinist degeneration and have come over to the Fourth International.
Though the Stalinist lackeys of the imperialist police “reached the depth of announcing over the Moscow short-wave radio the real names of party members who they knew were opposed to the support of Yankee imperialism” (quoted from the unanimous decision of the Sao Paulo Regional Committee of the C.P.), the Communist organizations in Parana and Sao Paulo (the latter the Brazilian equivalent of New York State), as well as many individual militants, have broken with Stalinism and joined the Leninist Workers Party (Fourth International section to Brazil). Even to the prisons and dungeons of Rio and Fernando Naranho Island where Vargas keeps five to six thousand anti-imperialist fighters, the same process is going on, as new arrivals bring news of Stalinism and the new Fourth International. The Stalinist henchmen now find themselves forced, by the appearance of so many manifestos of disaffiliation by militant C.P. groups, to sign their leaflets: “Communist Party (section of the Third International)”!
The revolutionary, Bolshevik movement to Brazil, inspired by its new gains, has held a congress to consolidate its forces to prepare to move forward to winning the masses of downtrodden, underfed workers and landless peasants for the decisive struggle against the corrupt native and foreign capitalists.
 





A Sharp Split in the Communist Party of India
The Bengal Labor Party, led by the young militant, Butt Mazumdar, is the foremost working class political organization in the important British province of Bengal, with great influence in the peasant and trade union movements. In 1936 it merged with the Communist Party of India and appeared to be lost in the swamp of Stalinism.
Differences with the Peoples Front policy developed, however, and culminated recently at the Tripuri session of the Indian Nationalist Congress, where the Stalinists fell prone before Mahatma Gandhi, sacrificing everything for the sake of unity with the Indian capitalists and landlords whom Gandhi represents.
Dutt Mazumdar openly dissociated himself from this Stalinist line, delivering a scorching attack on the Gandhi wing of the Congress. He compared the Gandhists with the counter-revolutionary generals who rebelled against the Spanish republic. So effective was his attack that the Stalinist delegates were confused and didn’t know who represented the official Stalinist line at the Congress.
After that the Stalinist machine went to work on Mazumdar and publicly attacked him in its press as a “disrupter of unity”, “agent of reaction”, etc. Mazumdar stuck to his guns, and he and the Bengal Labor Party were expelled from the Stalinist organization.
While Dutt Mazumdar has by no means arrived at the revolutionary position of the Fourth International, he has nevertheless taken decided steps towards a correct class analysis of the Indian revolutionary scene.
He correctly understands the dilemma facing the impotent Indian capitalist class, which is rapidly driving it to capitulate to British imperialism.
“One step to the left and the capitalists might ignite the powder heap of agrarian revolution, in the wake of which might come other revolutions.”
Mazumdar understands that one cannot fight British imperialism without fighting its ally, the native capitalists and landlords.
“... it is apparent that the struggle is between the outspoken aim of the millions of Indian people and the secret aim of the Indian bourgeoisie, between the fighting, genuine democracy of the masses and the dictatorship of the diplomatic bourgeoisie.”
As to what must be done – “to consolidate our power we must throw all our forces on the mass front and defend each mass struggle, however small or local in character, with our initiative. Our efforts to bring Congress into the struggle must be exercised to the utmost. But we (the workers) must jealously guard the initiative.”
 

Rumblings in the C.P. of the Mother Country Also
Nor is the Communist Party in Great Britain immune to the internal disintegration resulting from the People’s Front policies of the leadership.
Recently we reported in these columns on the tragi-comical dispute between the French and the British Stalinists on the subject of British Conscription. The following item from the London New Leader puts the finishing touches to the running story of this “dispute.”
“All is not well either politically or organizationally with the Communist Party of Great Britain,” says the New Leader.
“Some weeks ago Harry Pollitt published a pamphlet against Conscription.
“The French Communist Party protested. It urged that British Communists should support Conscription to strengthen the ‘Peace Front’ against Hitler.
“An international consultation of Communist Party leaders took place to settle the question. It decided in favor of the French Communist Party view and Pollitt’s pamphlet was withdrawn.”
Pollitt, like all the paid Stalinist scribblers the world over, can withdraw a pamphlet from publication just as easily as he can write one – and that holds true for any subject under the sun.
How the ranks are reacting to the miserable juggling of these “leaders” with the lives of the workers may be gathered from the concluding paragraphs of the New Leader’s report:
“Nor is the British Communist Party happy organizationally. It has suffered such severe losses recently that it has now decided to ‘recall’ members whom it sent into the Labour Party. We have heard this week of daily resignations from the Labour Party. These represent not conversion to the Communist Party – because they were always its instruments – but obedience to the instructions of the Communist Party and its latest change of line.”
 





Truth Is Beginning to Clear a Path for Itself
With the beginning of the war and the clamping down of a rigid censorship by the belligerents, only the lies of national unity made their way into the press. What had become of the revolutionary working class movements in Germany and in Great Britain, in France and in the rest of Europe – to all these questions the blackout of the various propaganda machines barred an answer.
Only slowly the real truth is beginning to trickle through. In the past few issues of the Socialist Appeal we published the first dispatches from the countries at war indicating that the forces of the Fourth International are carrying on in Germany, in France, in England and everywhere where the imperialist conflict has unfolded, as the international army for peace, under the slogans of the Socialist United States of Europe and the World Federation of Socialist Republics. Small in number, but compact and disciplined, bound together solidly by a system of ideas wrought and perfected in sixteen years of common struggle for the world revolution and against the most hideous betrayals of Stalinism and social democracy, the sections of the Fourth International already constitute, as these dispatches reveal, the clear-sighted and courageous Marxist vanguard of a working class for which the opportunity to take power is rapidly advancing amidst capitalist crisis and catastrophe. If there is any distinct difference in the situation today from that of 1914, it surely lies in the fact that the alternative to the disastrous war – the socialist world revolution – already has at its disposal an instrument that is standing up under duress.
 

Tendencies Toward a Breakdown of National Unity in Great Britain
The struggle of the Fourth International against social patriotism and for the revolutionary solution to war is naturally aided by events themselves. National unity is far more of a farce now than in the last war – even as a fiction for the moment it is becoming more and more untenable.
Take the example of Great Britain. To be sure the official Labour leaders are the same war-mongering scoundrels that they have always been. A Hugh Dalton still disports himself of a jingoistic gem like the following:
“The war would end when above the war zones of Europe, with her allies Britannia ruled the waves.”
But even a conservative social patriot like the Lord Provost of Glasgow, P.J. Dollan, finds this too much to stomach. In the same issue of the Forward, published there, which carries Dalton’s great thought he publishes an article characteristically entitled No Jingoism for Socialists. Being in closer contact with the working class, he knows that the wilder variety of social patriotism just will not go over in the ranks. But far more significant is a growing breach between the parliamentary social patriots and the second rank functionaries of the trade unions.
For example, in a special edition of the bulletin of the No Conscription League – an organization sponsored by the Independent Labor Party and various pacifist groups – Rowland Hill, Chairman of the Bradford Trades Council, writes:
“The official Labour leadership is the medium through which the capitalist class is today attempting to allay that suspicion (that this is a war of imperialist conquest). It exploits Labour’s hatred and fear of Fascism for its own imperialist ends.”
And he proposes:
“The Trades Councils, as in the war years, in, 1920 and 1926, take on a greater importance. They must accept the leadership that has been abdicated by the Labour statesmen.”
The importance of this view, which in itself is not new, can be realized only when one remembers that this is an official of a trade union speaking, in just that capacity.
The stir in the Labour ranks is not confined to this stratum alone, however. Even the political people, particularly the usually timid centrists in the party are beginning to raise their voices. Thus, the Scottish Socialist Party, an official affiliate and quite a power in the Labour Party, has taken the following action in a resolution passed early last month:
“The National Council of the Scottish Socialist Party condemns the action of the Parliamentary Labour Party in failing to oppose the passing of the Emergency Powers Bill and declares that this failure has allowed the ruling class of this country to impose a Fascist dictatorship on the people. The lack of opposition by the Labour Party to the rearmament program of the National Government, their participation in National Service schemes, their failure to adequately oppose conscription and the final tragedy of the Labour Party appealing to the workers to unite with British imperialism to fight Fascism on the continent convinces the National Council of the Scottish Socialist Party that the Labour Party Executive is utterly incompetent to lead the workers in this crisis which threatens to embroil the peoples of the world in a war of capitalist domination and we, therefore, demand the immediate resignation of the Labour Party Executive en bloc; the summoning of a special conference to deal with the emergency situation and the redrafting of the policy of the Labour Party insofar as international affairs are concerned.”
Inconsistent and muddled as the conclusions themselves are, the tenor of the attacks on the social patriots is in itself impressive, because it reflects the growing grumble among the rank and file.
 

