

The fall of Primo de Rivera surprised almost no one. It surprised only Primo de Rivera himself ... and the leading Spanish Communists. The former stated, two weeks before his collapse, that he would relinquish power of his own accord in six months; the latter, like an echo, were writing that Primo would be with us for a long time.
Primo did not yield up power of his own accord. Neither was he driven out by a revolutionary movement. His downfall was due to one of those secret revolts which threaten to break out not only against a government, but also against the class which maintains it. The class – the bourgeoisie, the monarchy the army – wish to ward off the immediate danger, the discontent and the growing revolution, by driving Primo out of power and promising a return to the constitutional form of government. In fact, a large-scale conspiracy was organized, which, in breaking forth could have overthrown not only the dictatorship, but even the monarchy, and which, under the existing circumstances, could have exceeded the desires and intention of the organizers themselves.
It can be said with certainty that the discontent against Primo was widespread. The proletariat showed their discontent through the powerful strikes of 1927–28–29 in Asturia, Catalogne, Seville, etc., strikes of an almost spontaneous character, let loose through economic causes, and which rapidly assumed a political character, not through the almost non-existent efforts of the official communist movement, but through the intervention of the dictatorship, on the side of the bosses, against the proletariat and through the rapid development of the latter.
(The leading Spanish Communists have deceived the International in pretending that these strikes were instigated and directed by themselves. Unfortunately this was not so.)
 
Bourgeoisie Desert Primo
The discontent of the petty-bourgeoisie, of the intellectuals, and of a section of the army manifested itself in the form of conspiracies, (six, up to the one which was being recently prepared) and in the student movements. Primo was already left with the support of only a section of the big financial and industrial bourgeoisie whom he had succeeded in reassuring through the establishment of national monopolies at the expense of foreign finance capital, and through extreme political protection. But he ended up by losing the support of the big bourgeoisie as well because of the fall in the value of the Peseta. The pressure of international finance was in fact one of the chief causes, a fact which can easily be explained, it having given rise to the ultra-nationalist political economy of Primo. This, however, was not the sole cause. Instead of correcting this entire political economy, financial and social, and of achieving parity, the dictator, ship believed that it could sustain the Peseta by means of simple manipulations in the world market. It obtained a credit of 18 million pounds from a group of British and American financiers, which made possible only a temporary halt in the decline of the Spanish standard. The decline proceeded in a fatalistic manner, resulting first in a defection of the Minister of Finance and finally in the collapse of the entire government.
 
Financial Crisis in Spain
The economic and political situation which Primo is leaving as a heritage to his successors, is extremely dangerous. If the best-known former political leaders – Cambo, the younger Maura, Sanchez Guerra, etc. – definitely refuse to aid Berenguer, it is because of the seriousness of the situation. Above all stands the financial question. In 1923, the year of Primo’s Coup-d’État, the Spanish public debt, according to the official figures themselves, was 8,531 million Pesetas, the total indebtedness of the treasury approaching 5,000 million. At the end of 1929 these figures had risen to 19,633 million pesetats (an increase of 11 [thousand] million in six years and four months of the dictatorship!)
Naturally, the political situation is also extremely serious. In 1923, Primo destroyed all the government parties. Those could no longer offer the least resistance, being discredited in the eyes of the people.
But Primo set up nothing in their place. The Patriotic Union was an artificially created party, an empty shell in the eyes of the public owing its existence solely to official support. This group, together with the Advisory Assembly and everything created by the dictatorship of Primo, were doomed to perish. The proof of this lies in the fact that the king appealed and continued to appeal to the former leaders of the traditional parties, through Berenguer, that they reorganize their parties and prepare for distorted elections, following the vicious methods of former years. All this as though nothing had happened!
Of course the Spanish proletariat did not look at things in the same light. For them the former parties were permanently discredited. They did not await, they did not desire their return – a return to the status of 1923. Not a praetorian guard, but neither the former regime, and above all not a monarchy. Primo had engineered his coup-d’état in 1923 in order to save the monarchy.
 
The Growing Republican Movement
It is also in order to save it that his rule has just been liquidated and that the former politicians are preparing to govern anew. Will they succeed in saving the crown? We think not. A wider and wider republican movement is taking form in Spain. The very first acts of Berenguer have been to arrest several of the republican leaders in Valencia, Barcelona, etc. The demonstrations of the students and workers against the dictatorship revolved not only around the slogan of “Down with Primo”, but “Down with the Monarchy”. The republican movement cannot but grow. The important problems left over by Primo and which cannot be solved by his successors will serve to aggravate the crisis of the monarchist regime. We are at the threshold of political struggles of the greatest interest.
But we Communists, in this situation, which, by the action of material forces assume an increasingly revolutionary character, must act with energy and facility. The anti-monarchist movement will be led in its first stages by the petty-bourgeoisie, by the republican party and by the socialists.
The Spanish proletariat, whose living conditions are extremely wretched, and whose hatred of the entire system has matured during the last few years of dictatorial oppression, are getting ready for participation in the struggle.
 
The Need of a Communist Party
But in face of the socialists who are preparing to maneuvre, and of the anarcho-syndicalists who will attempt to reassume the leadership of the revolutionary trade unions, what is needed now is a strong Communist Party, disciplined, supple, knowing how to lead the proletariat in the coming struggles towards its emancipation. Will the actual Communist Party attain its historic mission? This is the serious problem for the entire International. Today, once again, the leaders of the Spanish Communists, with the support of the Stalin clique which steers the Comintern, readily devote themselves to the miserable task of systematically hounding the best militant Communists. Under any circumstances this attitude would be incorrect; at present it is an anti-Communist crime. We Opposition Communists will know our duty. But if the Stalinist bureaucrats attempt to hinder us, they will be responsible before the international proletariat.



Paris, February 7, 1930


 
Gorkin



 







On March 1st, we published an article by comrade Gorkin on The Fall of Primo de Rivera and Its Consequences. In connection with this article comrade Trotsky made certain comments, bearing particularly on the agitation of the petty bourgeoisie for a republic and the attitude of the workers towards this agitation. Comrade Gorkin replies below.



* * *
Dear Comrade Trotsky:
I shall attempt to clarify you on the points raised in your letter of February 12. In my article, I stated that “in the beginning the struggle would be led by the petty bourgeoisie, the republicans, and the socialists” Already the different conspirators against the dictatorship have been led by the petty bourgeoisie in concurrence with a large part of the army which feels itself to be “republican”. The proletariat has hardly ever interfered for two principal reasons: because the organizers do not inspire them with confidence – besides, the organizers fear the intervention of the proletariat – and because there is no Communist party or revolutionary class organization capable of launching the struggle. And the set-backs of these conspiracies have been “due to just that: the lack of intervention of a genuine revolutionary element. It is a fact, too, that the struggle against the monarchy – in a weak and legalistic manner, it is true – is now being led by the petty bourgeoisie. They hold the monarchy responsible – contrary to us, who, of course, hold imperialism as a whole responsible – for the Moroccan “adventure”, the loss of millions in money and huge loss in life, crowned by the catastrophe at Annual, even as at the time of the coup d’état. The dictatorship was the monarchy’s last card. Almost everyone in Spain realized this. Sanchez Guerra, former leader of the Conservative Party, a thoroughly dynastic party, prepares for presiding over a sort of heterogeneous Left bloc, embracing those who demanded a revision of the constitution, the various shades of republicans, up to the socialists – we shall return to him in due time. Ossorio y Gallardo, one of Maura’s former lieutenants, a Christian socialist, known for his demagogy which very often forces him to use language more radical than that of the socialist “lackeys”, threatens to call for an accounting of the King’s liabilities; and Romanones himself – whom you know well for having caused your expulsion from Spain in 1916 – has begun to extol a form of republic, presided over by the king – a form of “republican monarchy”. He has saved the monarchy twice already and at present wishes to save it again, but under the cloak of – a president of the Republic. Those former politicians who dare to speak of their monarchism, do so in a very weak voice. So unpopular is ttte monarchy at the present time that even those most monarchistically inclined, believe it prudent to disguise themselves as republicans; an example is one of Maura’s sons, the assassin of Ferrer. Plainly, this disguise can fool only imbeciles. Why the Petty Bourgeoisie Are Republican But let us return to our petty bourgeoisie. Their republicanism is, as you have so well put it, the expression of despair. This despair is the result of deep-seated political and economic causes. Thus – the heaviest taxes bear down upon them. From 1922 to 1928 levies increased by 1,292 million pesetas. [1] Provincial and municipal taxes increased proportionally (the sums realized by municipal and provincial councils increased to 963 millions between 1923 and 1929). Spain maintains a corps of officers of much higher rank proportionally than those of other countries. This explains why In the last budget, so large a budgetary item was added to the ordinary budget of the dictatorship; 800 million pesetas were assigned to the army and navy, whereas only a 172 million was assigned for public education. This does not take into account the 700 millions expended by the dictatorship for war material and the 877 millions spent for the navy, this being reckoned into the extraordinary budget, as well as the loan of 500 millions recently raised.
The deficit of the expositions of Seville and Barcelona, about 500 million pesetas, must be added. In a word, the ordinary budget has risen from 2,879 millions in 1923 to 4,185 millions and the public debt which was 14,700 millions in 1923 is today – these are the official figures – more than 21,000 million and to this must be added the debt of about 350 million pesetas destined for manipulation of the international money market. It can be said that at the liquidation of the dictatorial period the debt exceeded 23,000 million. Since Spain has a population of about 22 million this represents a debt of about 1,050 pesetas for each inhabitant.
To this must be added that during the dictatorial period the petty bourgeoisie suffered on two fronts: the constant intervention of the economic organs of the state which hindered its development, and the concentration of the national economy into the hands of the big financiers and industrialists which threatened its existence as a class. The republicanism of the petty bourgeoisie is completely explained: it holds the monarchy responsible for the experiences of the dictatorship and demands a new constitution which would make impossible a renewal of such experiences.
 
Fear of the Proletariat
Will the petty bourgeoisie be able to set into motion the masses of workers and peasants in a struggle for the bourgeois republic? No. Today as yesterday, during the conspiracies, it fears the proletariat. Recently the demonstrating unemployed in-Madrid – we shall speak of the unemployment situation presently – sought the aid of the students. The latter, although clamorous the day before, refused. And the Republicans and Socialists said to the unemployed: “Remain quiet, you will spoil everything”. The petty bourgeoisie who desire a small tranquil republic, attained by legalistic means are afraid that the proletariat will interfere with their plans. As between the reactionary bourgeoisie and the revolutionary proletariat, their choice will be made quickly. Besides, Sanchez Guerra is preparing to place himself at the head of the petty bourgeoisie and this is very significant. One word about this man: in 1903 while governor of Madrid he compromised himself in the assassination of a news dealer who took part in a workers’ demonstration. In 1909 while minister together with Maura and La Cierva, he was one of those responsible for the “bloody week” of Barcelona, and for the assassination of Ferrer. In 1917 while at the head of the conservative government, he played a sinister role in violently suppressing the great revolutionary strike and mutilating the dead bodies of the strikers. These are three small exploits of the “saviour” who is preparing to attempt the “operation”.
 
The Condition of the Workers and Peasants
Before taking up what our position toward the republican petty bourgeoisie should be, let us say a few words on the situation of the workers and peasants. If the conditions of the petty bourgeoisie are bad, those of the workers are naturally much worse. This is especially evident in the form of chronic unemployment. For the past two years the number of unemployed has been: thirty percent of the mining basin of Asturia, sixty percent in the Biscay, from thirty to forty percent of the building industry of Madrid (in the latter industry in Madrid there are at present 35,000 unemployed).
The ultra-protectionist policies of the dictatorship during the last few years has lowered these figures somewhat, but these policies have at the same time caused living expenses to rise higher and higher. The unemployment situation will become intensified still more by the fact that the new government is stopping tho major part of the public works undertaken by the dictatorship. The unemployed do not receive any aid from the state or from the municipalities. Those who do work receive niggardly wages.
The conditions of the agricultural workers are still worse. The Spanish peasantry, especially in Andalusia and in Castile, have always been subjected to the most miserable conditions possible. (Spain is a country with an agricultural economy; 71 percent of the population of Spain are peasants.) Side by side with the large estates there are thousands of agricultural farm workers without land and without work. In Andalusia side by side with acres and acres of non-productive land used for hunting, there are thousands of farm hands who work no more than 50 to 80 days during the year and that for starvation wages. It is there that the class differences are sharpest. Also, the class hatreds are easily aroused there. In 1918–1920, while struggles of large magnitude were unfolding in the principal centers under the influence of the October revolution, the Andalusian province was in a ferment of revolt. The workers burned the harvests of the large estates, ran through the streets crying “Long live Lenin!” “Long live Trotsky!”, disarmed the police and freed their arrested comrades. The peasant nurses abandoned the children of the rich ...
 
The Workers’ Awakening
It is evident that the masses of workers and peasants will awake to struggle soon enough. If this awakening is not yet an accomplished fact, it is due to the absence of a strong and disciplined Communist Party and revolutionary unions. We should expect powerful strikes which must be coordinated by connecting the economic demands with revolutionary political aims. It will be necessary to know how to link up the strike movements with unemployed movements. This plainly calls for special organizing of unemployed. And if the movement becomes really serious, and if conditions warrant the belief that it can develop with sufficient rapidity, activity should he directed, as you say quite correctly, towards militant propaganda for the election of Soviets and for the permanent slogan, For a Workers’ and Peasants’ government. (The slogan has just bean launched by the Spanish Communist Party.)
A few lines now on class organizations. The only Party that had a legal existence during the dictatorship, outside of the Patriotic Union, is the Socialist Party; and the only workers organization, aside from the so-called “free” unions (organized by Martinez Amido during the period of harsh oppression) – is the Confederation of Labor. The collaboration of the Socialists with all the economic and political organizations of the dictatorship was the price of this legality. The Socialist Party numbers between 7 and 8 thousand members; the Confederation of Labor, some 200 thousand members. The latter are recruited mainly in Madrid and the backward rural districts. The well known anarcho-syndicalist National Confederation of Labor succeeded with difficulty in retaining 25 thousand members. The worker and peasant masses will swiftly create powerful revolutionary organizations. It is highly improbable that the reformist organization will succeed in augmenting its effective forces (as a contrast the National Confederation of Labor can see once again the splendor of former times). It remains for us Communists to gain influence in its midst and to try to obtain the leadership.
After what I have said above, it is unnecessary to lay much stress on the subject of our relations with social-bourgeois republicanism. For the petty bourgeoisie the republic! is a goal; for us it can be a stage toward the dictatorship of the proletariat. Our tactics are clear; struggle against the Monarchy, and, at the same time unmask the republicans and socialists, while organizing the proletariat for the social revolution. Our permanent slogan must be: A government of the workers and peasants. When the moment arrives, we must agitate for the elections of Soviets. It would be ridiculous to forward this slogan now. The street fights against the police and their machine guns, the revolutionary strikes and the demonstrations with red flags in the forefront, exist unfortunately, only in the minds of the scribblers of Humanité. Having seen a manifesto of the Communist Party of Spain, calling on this for the future and not knowing a word of Spanish, nor, for that matter, a word of Leninism, they believe that this had actually happened.
 
The Opposition and the Party
A final very important point: our Op-positional relations with the Communist Party of Spain. The position of the Party could not be any weaker. Since its founding, it has suffered from a series of crises which have reduced it to almost nothing. The Communist International shares a large part of the responsibility for this situation. It has favored a leadership of bureaucrats without the following of the Party to a fighting, capable and devoted leadership.
The Party is beginning to reorganise. Possibilities exist for the formation of a strong proletarian Party (a Party with four, six or eight thousand well-disciplined members could be a revolutionary force of the first magnitude in Spain). Its organization is not difficult at this moment; on the contrary, it is very easy. The betrayals of the Socialists and the relative state of decomposition of anarcho-syndicalism, make the situation favorable for this organization. We must primarily work toward the capture of the Federations (of the seven regional federations; the three most important are in fact with us: the Asturian, the Catalonian and the Valencian).
This is a very good starting point.

Footnote
1. The peseta is worth about 12 cents on the exchange.
 







What is the real identity of “Jacques Mornard” or “Jackson,” the agent of the Stalinist GPU who murdered Leon Trotsky and who is now serving a prison sentence for the crime in Mexico?
Up to now, investigation has failed to establish the truth behind this sinister assassin. The article we print herewith gives the story of his true identity. It is written by Julian Gorkin, the well-known Spanish socialist, who lived in Mexico throughout the war and afterward and is now in Paris. The article is the sensational climax of a book written recently in Mexico by Gorkin in collaboration with the chief of police of Mexico City. The book is the result of an extensive independent investigation, based largely upon the files of the police authorities.
While the propriety of a literary collaboration with a police chief by a socialist has been brought into question, and some of the conclusions reached in the book have also been questioned by comrades and friends of Loon Trotsky who are intimately familiar with all phases of the crime, the present article is of such a highly important nature and filled with details of such worldwide interest, that we reprint if in full. It was transmitted to Labor Action for publication by the widow of Leon Trotsky, Natalia Sedov Trotsky. – Ed.



* * *
This book, the product of a scrupulous investigation, and based on the only official and complete documentation that exists, would nevertheless be inconclusive were the true identity of Leon Trotsky’s assassin to remain in doubt. Obviously, I refer to the material assassin, the simple instrument of execution, since no one can throw a shadow of a doubt on the identity of the other. This identity has been clearly and definitely established.
As is noted elsewhere in this book, various Catalonian refugees who held positions of trust in the Communist organization during the Spanish Civil War, and who later found themselves on its fringes – some in opposition to it – recognized the assassin without a shadow of a doubt. As proof of their assertions, they assured me that the former had a scar on the right forearm caused by a wound received at the front. A fact, which I had verified without arousing any suspicions on the part of the assassin. Scrupulous in the extreme, I nevertheless wished to await for other complementary proofs.
At last they have arrived. Some, the main proofs, from Moscow itself. The iron curtain created by Stalinist totalitarianism to isolate the martyrized Russian people from the rest of the universe has its flaws and leaks. In any case, I find myself in the position of making a series of affirmations and of answering fully for them. Let me also say, that if it is necessary I can at any moment cite my proofs in support of what I am about to say.
 
Mother Worked in GPU Service
The mother of the assassin is living and is named Caridad Mercader. She is a Catalonian, energetic and fanatical. She is a woman who has irremediably played the game of Stalinism. She lived in France and Belgium for many years. She educated her children, four boys and one girl, in these countries, and this explains the correct French which they all speak. And this is why Trotsky’s assassin, the third child, could pass himself off as a Belgian.
I believed that Caridad Mercader had entered the service of the GPU in Spain, and had begun during the Civil War. This is not so. Her relations with this sinister police and espionage organization go back much further. In 1928 she was already in its service in Paris. She formed part of a “special cell” controlled by the secret service which acted – and still acts – under the cover of diplomatic immunity. She, as well as other GPU agents, entered the political organizations that were independent of the Communists. This is an old tactic of the GPU, which it used and abused in my poor Spain before applying it in the countries today under the Stalinist yoke. With her daughter, Montserrat, Caridad Mercader belonged for a few years in Paris to Section 15 of the Socialist Party. The old militants of this section know them and remember them perfectly.
During the Spanish Civil War, Caridad Mercader participated actively in the Catalonian party of Socialist Unification (PSUC), which adhered to the Communist International. She gave proof of a blind fanaticism, and of an absolute lack of scruples in the army of terror. She gained merit in the eyes of the important agents of the GPU, and principally with the most important of all, “Peter,” ex-agent in Paris, in Brussels, and in Barcelona, and one of those who organized the political and police coup which has placed Hungary under Stalinist totalitarianism. Caridad Mercader became one of the trusted GPU agents in Catalonia, and drew her children toward that terrible organization.
The surname of the children is del Rio Mercader. One of them died in Spain. The oldest resides in Paris. The second in age is the daughter, inseparable from Caridad. The third is the sadly celebrated Jacson-Mornard, the material assassin of Leon Trotsky. [1] The youngest of the children, Luis, lives in Moscow and is finishing his course in engineering.
 
Petty Adventurer to Assassin
The so-called Mornard belonged to the Communist militias of Catalonia. It was at the front, then, that he received the wound in the right forearm to which I referred above. His existence had been aimless. He had been accustomed to living without working, to frequenting houses of prostitution to satisfy all his vices. He was a petty adventurer without a future. Following the example of his mother, he became one of the docile instruments of the GPU. Once in their hands, he was designated to assassinate Trotsky, should the attempt of the painter Siqueiros fail, in accordance with the plot outlined in this book.
Caridad Mercader lived in Moscow from 1940 until August 1944. She was treated there as an important personage. She maintained direct relations with Beria, all powerful chief of the NKVD. She was strictly forbidden to speak to anyone about her third child. Notwithstanding this, she revealed most of the story, above all to trusted militant Communists who were refugees in Moscow. There is one thing which the NKVD has not succeeded and will never succeed in altogether suppressing: individual conscience, trust between comrades and intimate friends, family ties, and the maternal sentiment ... Besides direct contact with the Russian reality must be a tremendous blow to the critical judgment of some of the foreign militants. So tremendous and dramatic must it be, that it drove Jose Diaz, ex-secretary-general of the Spanish Communist Party to jump from the third floor of the Hotel Intourist in Moscow. Caridad felt herself the prisoner of remorse. She began to hate in the depths of her heart the Russian tyranny and the chiefs of the organization of which she and hers were slave perhaps forever.
After long and persistent pressure, Caridad Mercader succeeded in leaving the USSR at the time indicated above. Her youngest son remained there as a hostage to guarantee the silence of his mother and his brothers. The NKVD did not dare to suppress Caridad for fear that the son, the assassin of Trotsky, would speak out one day. And it did not care to suppress the latter, for fear of his mother. Such is the infernal circle.
Caridad Mercader stayed in Mexico under a false identity from the October of 1944 until November of 1945. She maintained a permanent connection with her son. She saw to it that he lacked nothing, and moved the strings through a skilful lawyer and judge in order to allow the argument of “legitimate defense” and obtain an important reduction in the sentence of 20 years and one day.
She has been in Paris with her oldest son and daughter, Montserrat, for almost three years now. But she maintains contact with a commission of direct NKVD agents in the Mexican capital. These agents are paid high salaries. Their only mission consists of attending to – and watching over – Trotsky’s assassin. I must add that the organization of the assassination of the ex-chief of the Red Army, the aid given his assassin, and the maintenance of the apparatus of the NKVD in Mexico have cost Moscow the handsome sum of $600,000.00 to date. Stalin must surely value these hirelings. For him, for his totalitarian tyranny, the death of Leon Trotsky was worth this and much more.
* * *
Footnote
1. The complete name of Trotsky’s assassin is: Ramon del Rio Mercader. He never used the father’s surname, but that of the mother: Mercader. His older brother, who lives in Paris with his mother and sister, Montserrat, is named George. And as has been said, he who lives in Moscow, the youngest of the Mercaders, is named Luis
 

