


Lessons of My Life
by Lord Vansittart
Published by Alfred A. Knopf, New York 1943
There seems to be some confusion whether Vansittart is a Baron or merely a Right Honorable Lord. What is clear is that he is a one-time British diplomat, a dabbler in poetry and drama and the proprietor of a string of initialed titles: PC, GCB, GCMG, etc., in short, a member of the neither right nor honorable British ruling class.
As is now well known, Vansittart is demoniacally concerned with the problem of Germany. Lessons of My Life is not autobiographical and has only one lesson: that the war and misery prevalent in Europe for the last twenty-five years are to be blamed on Germany, for which, of course, Germany is to suffer retribution and punishment. His idiosyncrasies would not concern us if they were merely personal. On the contrary, he is merely a crude, vociferous spokesman for the prevailing opinions and attitudes of the ruling classes of the victorious-to-be Allies.
Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin maintain the silence of sphinxes on the future of Germany. Then: plans are so fraudulent and bankrupt that they can best be maintained only in darkness and silence. Meanwhile Vansittart and all his offspring do the necessary “spadework,” poisoning the atmosphere with hatred of Germany, and Germans per se, so that the actions of the victorious imperialists in regard to Germany will be justified in the eyes of the masses.
Unfortunately he has already had some success. Half a million copies of his pamphlet have already been sold. The British Trade Union Congress of 1943 adopted by a small majority the thesis that the whole German people is responsible for Nazism and the war. Unless revoked, this self-inflicted blow by the British labor movement can have an untold harmful effect.
Imperialism can be defended only by the strengthening of national prejudice. And this is all Vansittart’s “theory,” exhorted loudly by the conservatives and taken so seriously by the liberals, amounts to.
By studiously recording the crimes of German imperialism, by pedantically quoting every quotable Junker, general, Crown Prince and reactionary professor, Vansittart is able to agitate the reader very strongly against German imperialism; and here we are confronted by a bit of stupid magic out of the bourgeois hat. By exemplifying the manifestations of Germany only, we are to come to the inevitable conclusion that imperialism and its brutalities and crimes are attributable to Germany alone – or to the German people, all classes alike.
Any sidelong glance into the history of Europe of the last seventy-five years is enough to shove this “theory” to its proper place at the bottom of the waste basket.
“Between 1870–1900, Great Britain acquired 4,754,000 square miles of territory ... Between 1884 and 1900 France acquired 3,583,580 square miles ... Germany had last acquired 1,026,220 square miles.” (War and Western Civilization, by Major General J.C.H. Fuller)
It is interesting to note that Vansittart treats in some detail the betrayals perpetrated by the German social-democracy, their support of war credits and massacre of Spartacus. This is unquestionably a sop to British working class opinion. But if Vansittart was at all interested in the independence of the labor movement from the imperialist state, he could mention, at least in passing, the role of the British Labor Party leaders, who are very cheap to hire as the bourgeoisie’s watchdog, among the workers. Admittedly, choosing between the betrayals of Scheidemann and Bevin, Ebert and Cripps would be pretty much of a toss-up.
It is obvious then that to analyze imperialism as a socio-historical phenomenon would be entirely too revealing. An obscure and analysis-defying proposition that wars are caused by German national psychology serves Vansittart’s purposes much better.
Vansittart’s plans and advice for the future of Germany have some importance, not that they are in any way profound, but because they reveal the explosive contradictions of the entire Allied-German relationship since 1919. When the plans of German imperialism failed at the end of the First
World War, the Allies had good reason to gloat at then- triumph. Lloyd George said: “One of our chief trade competitors has been crippled and our Allies are about to become her biggest creditors. That is no small “achievement.”
But no sooner was this triumph announced than the victorious imperialists had to prop up the German ruling class against a rebellious proletariat. This ruling class had to be propped precisely because the severe economic punishment imposed upon Germany and the consequent occupation of the Ruhr intensified the political and social crisis. Dreading the union of a Soviet Russia and a possible Soviet Germany, the Allied bourgeoisie winked at the arming of an anti-working class Reichswehr of sixty thousand men, although this was a clear violation of the disarmament clause of the Versailles Treaty. The German masses, on the other hand, were clearly told what they could not do.
In 1920, Lansing, the American Ambassador, promised food for Germany only on the condition that “Germany will prove that it can uphold law and order.” The British Ambassador, Lord Kilmarnock, followed in the same vein, promised even raw materials for German industry “only if the capitalist regime remained.”
By 1933 these gentlemen could breathe easier. Aided by the opportunism of the Social-Democrats and the surrender of the Communists, Hitler came into power and proceeded to torture, murder and imprison the cream of the German proletariat. The British bourgeoisie chortled with joy and made certain that nothing should jar the equilibrium of the new Nazi regime. Lloyd George rose in Parliament in 1933 to say:
“In a very short time ... the conservative elements in this country will be looking to Germany as the bulwark against communism in Europe. Do not let us be in a hurry to condemn Germany. We shall be welcoming Germany as our friend.”
The British bourgeoisie did more than cheer Hitler on. Having smashed the largest and most threatening working class on the continent, Nazi Germany was now provided with arms and capital in preparation for a war with Russia.
William Dodd, the American Ambassador to Germany in 1935, wrote of a letter he received from the British diplomat, Lord Lothian, that:
“The problem of the democracies as he (Lord Lothian) sees it, is to find for Germany a stronger place in world affairs, to which in his opinion they are entitled because of their power and tradition. He hopes that this can be accomplished without any sacrifice to the British Empire and with as little destruction of human liberty as possible.”
(Students of history will some day stand amazed at this bit of bloody hypocrisy. The liberals today, of course, can do no better than explain this as “appeasement mentality.” It is only the other side of the counterfeit theoretical coin of Vansittartism.)
By 1938, Hitler had made it clear that he was going to carry out his imperialist ventures in disregard of the role intended for him by the British-French bloc. German exports followed by political propaganda flooded the Middle East, North Africa and South America. The bourgeoisie of France and England were divided in their attitude toward the evergrowing danger of this new imperialism. But their enthusiasm for Hitler’s crushing blows against the German working class was unabated. As late as March 1939, with an Allied-German war clearly on the horizon, Lord Kensley, publisher of the Sunday Times, could write: “We ... have had no quarrel with either Germany or Italy because her system differs from our own.” This view was clearly enunciated even during the war by Anthony Eden, aspirant for the job of Prime Minister and taskmaster of the British Empire.
Occupation, dismemberment and de-industrialization of Germany (either one or all of these) is the only course left to the Allied imperialists. Their last triumph over their German rivals almost resulted in a proletarian revolution. Their support of the German bourgeoisie against the German workers resulted in a new war in which France was overrun and the British Empire nearly wrecked.
The overthrow of Hitler tomorrow will reveal a revengeful proletariat, with a capacity for struggle that will electrify Europe and the world. The Allies must therefore occupy Germany, impose severe punishment for war “responsibility” and maintain its occupation in order to carry out its punishment. This is the program of Vansittart and all the little Vansittarts who have sprung up on both sides of the Atlantic.
A new AMG, perhaps more streamlined and less clumsy than the one in Italy, will smash any revolutionary movement in Germany. This is what Vansittart means by “... the last delusion: German socialists are good fellows.”
Central Europe, which cannot exist economically without Germany, will be directed to live at the expense of Germany, carting away German industry and using the Germans as a source of cheap slave labor in lieu of reparations. This is what the London Daily Express means by “Whether you like it or not, vengeance on Germany is becoming the prime war aim of all Europe.”
That is why the threat of a German revolution is handled by Vansittart with all the skill of a complete political idiot. First he tosses off his belief that “the only hope for German betterment is the left.” He then says that a German revolution is improbable because it will be caught in the crossfire of the more extreme alternatives, nationalism or communism. The latter is unlikely because – now hold your breath – “it is not among our war aims.” This does not prevent him from attacking bitterly “the members of the extreme German left who have been exercising too great an influence on our politics and propaganda.” (It is unnecessary to add that this “influence” is a product of Vansittart’s imagination.) Paradoxically, Vansittart must vehemently deny the possibility of a German revolution because the possibility is so terribly great!
As another generation goes to the slaughter, the ruling classes of both camps can have as “war aims” only a more intense jingoism, chauvinism and national hate. Against this we must clearly indicate the international solidarity of the working class as being not only moral and rational but as the only road to peace. Every time a Vansittart opens his mouth he makes the choice crystal clear.
 




The assassination of Lord Moyne brought to a climax the series of terroristic acts by Jews in Palestine. In a larger sense it was a climax of twenty-six years of British rule of the much-too-promised land. The assassination has once again put the spotlight on the explosive nature of the “Palestine problem.”
 
Reasons for the Terror
It is impossible to shed a tear for Lord Moyne. He was Under Secretary of Colonial Affairs during the violent suppression of the Indian masses and during the drowning and deportation of Jewish refugees. As a member of that cynical and callous tribe of slave-drivers, who make up the British Colonial Office, he was involved in acts of terrorism that imperialism always carries out on a large scale.
The terroristic activities of the “Stern Group” are the inevitable result of twenty years of British provocation, sabotage and strangulation of the Jewish community in Palestine. The individual terror is also a by-product of the complete frustration of Zionist politics. The more disappointments they suffer, the more conciliatory the Jewish political leaders become.
While the British hound the Jews of Palestine, the Jewish Agency recruits thirty thousand Jews, to shed their blood for the British Empire. The embittered Jewish terrorists are either Yemenites, members of the most depressed and backward sections of the Jewish community, or, in some cases, revengeful relatives of those Jews who were victimized by the British authorities.
 
Some Recent History
All the Jewish organizations and newspapers have denounced the terror. But for the British Colonial Office this wasn’t enough. They wanted the Jews of Palestine to act as stool-pigeons and spies, to be police-hounds for the British Colonial Police. Since such a role was repugnant to the Jewish community, they had to be bullied and threatened.
The whole Jewish community was held “responsible” in the terror. An entire village was punished for “lack of cooperation.” The British police, playing the role of kidnappers, swooped down on 251 Jews and deported; them from Palestine.
There was no trial, no proof and no telling in what foul dungeon the 251 Jews were rotting. A week later, the Jewish Agency capitulated and proclaimed that the Jews are to turn over every suspected terrorist to the police. Taking advantage of the Jewish political weakness the British imperialists have succeeded in tightening their murderous grip on Palestine.
 
What of the Future?
What will come next? Forced evacuations of Jewish villages, more deportations or some abominable imperialist crimes which are as yet difficult to guess? The British Colonial Office is already using the assassination to cloud over the truth of what is going on in Palestine. The Jews are being presented as vicious criminals, the British as innocent bystanders. And behind this thick fog they will be preparing a more staggering blow at Jewish aspirations in Palestine.
Churchill, who in 1938 came out for a Jewish Homeland, kept his mouth tightly shut all during the last four years of anti-Jewish intrigue and violence. Now he comes out bewailing the death of Lord Moyne, “who was a friend of the Jewish people” and “was busy finding a solution to the Zionist problem.” This “solution” is already known.
Palestine is to be partitioned among the Jews, Arabs and British. Imagine the state of New Jersey being cut up into three parts, each one a national state! The Arab peasant masses, ground into the dust by their feudal exploiters, will be forcibly separated from any contamination by the class-conscious, socialistically-minded Jewish working class. The safety of Arab feudalism will be guaranteed by the British Colonial Office. And the Jews slaughtered by the millions in Europe, will be given a walled-in ghetto called a Jewish state – with just about enough room to choke in.
At the last elections in Palestine, one-third of the Jewish voters voted against an exclusively Jewish state, thus expressing indirectly their desire for Jewish-Arab and a bi-national state in Palestine. This is an effective move in the right direction. Neither capitulation to imperialism nor assassination of British officials can break the present political impasse. Only a mass revolutionary struggle led by the workers and peasants of both peoples will finally deport British imperialism out of Palestine.
 




We know pretty well what has been going on in Italy. Whole towns and cities are leveled to the ground by German shells and American cannon as both armies slowly and tortuously battle up the Italian boot. Economic life is almost at a standstill. Hunger and disease pervade every corner of Italy. Working class women are forced to walk the streets. Amgot has become AMG, then Allied Control Commission, then simply Allied Commission. All the masquerading cannot help its unpopularity, since the change of names does not mean any change of conditions for the better. Land hungry peasants seize the large estates. The Bonomi government, tottering in Rome, gathers enough strength to drive the peasants off at the point of a gun. Italian Partisans are thrown into jail if they keep their guns. If they give them away, they receive, in exchange a summary “thank you” or a certificate. Police shoot into crowds in Sicily, where the British are trying to get in with both feet. The Vatican, which blessed Franco’s rebellion in Spain, pleads, begs and warns against social revolution. The Minister of Transport can’t get gasoline for his own car but Italy declares war on Japan. Such are the mad and maddening results of Allied “liberation” – peace with reaction, war against the masses.
 
Pink Negligee, White-Coated Servant
But we were absolutely enlightened by a story in the New York Times, November 5, conclusively entitled Italian Countess Ignores the War. When the American soldiers arrived, Countess Lavinia Filo Delia Torre, “unperturbed as usual,” was “in her boudoir clad in a pink negligee.” Five thousand miles away, here in this country, old clothes are being collected for the almost, naked masses of Italy. Isn’t it a comforting thought that the Countess isn’t even short of – a pink negligee?
“A white-jacketed retainer brought us fine Italian red wine.” The Countess said: “I’ve simply ignored the war – despite some difficulties.” Such modesty! But she was no doubt a very experienced hostess. Indeed, “... in February there came two hundred troops of the Herman Goering Division. They brought three German dancing girls ...” This “elite” German division robbed and destroyed at every town. They shot many Italians, deported others. This is strenuous work, so for relaxation they went to the villa of the Countess who “ignored the war”!
 
Countess Has Her Privations, Too
But the Countess has her troubles. No water in the swimming pool, pieces of shrapnel in her tennis court. Most bothersome were the fifty peasants who had come to her estate for refuge during the terrific shelling of the countryside. “Grimy-faced children were dabbling their feet in her goldfish fountain.” (Whom are we supposed to feel sorry for, the goldfish or the Countess?) The Countess complained of the peasants: “I don’t think they want to move. They like it here.” The peasants are a little jealous of the Countess’ good luck. They’re obviously hungry and homeless, not having succeeded in “ignoring the war.”
“The Countess smiled and ordered more wine. She turned to Lieut-Col. Phelan: ‘Would you please tell all those people living in my cellars and barns that they!’ can go home now.’” And if you don’t catch on as yet – Lieut.-Col. Phelan had dropped in to help put her estate “in order.”
What a marvelous occupation for the American Army in Italy! The bloody battles at Cassino, Anzio, the Gothic Line! And now doing their best for secluded estates, guarding goldfish pools, pink negligees, white-jacketed servants, red vintage wine and the rare and precious Counts and Countesses!
 
Conclusion
The Italian workers and peasants will be free from economic misery, criminal injustice, the agonies of war only when they throw from their backs that pack of assorted idles and exploiters – the aristocracy, the capitalists, the old monarch Victor Emmanuel, the young one, Crown Prince Umberto, and those useless windbags who make up the theatrical Bonomi government.
 




The most noteworthy fact about the recent anti-Semitic violence in New York City is the attitude of the police. William Herlands, commissioner of investigation, in a report, sampling fifty cases, said that the police were negligent in twenty-five per cent of the cases. But even this does not tell the whole story.
Ever since the rise of an arrogant Christian Front movement in New York the police force has built up a shameful record of indifference to anti-Jewish attacks, while carefully protecting the life and health of Father Coughlin’s followers.
This pattern is familiarly tragic, to the Jewish people of Europe. In Czarist Russia, Poland and Germany the police always arrived late when Jews were attacked, let the assailants get away, and hurried to arrest the Jews who defended themselves.
The police of New York have not yet arrived at such perfect cooperation with the anti-Semites, but the alarming tendencies in that direction are already apparent.
 
Before the War
In 1939, tens of Coughlinites were peddling their hate-sheets on New York street corners. The New York police made every effort to see that their anti-Jewish propagandizing would go on unmolested.
In May, 1939, a girl carrying an anti-Coughlinite sign in Times Square was arrested for “disturbing the peace.” At least ten Coughlinites were selling Social Justice in Times Square that very day.
At a Coughlinite meeting in that same month, Professor Gill of Union Theological Seminary made an unsympathetic remark. He was immediately attacked and beaten. The police intervened – and arrested Professor Gill. Two salesmen of an anti-Coughlinite magazine were arrested that same evening.
A Nazi Bund demonstration in Madison Square Garden was protected by a cordon of police. The demonstration outside, led by the revolutionary socialists, was attacked by the police, who were determined to preserve law and order for the Nazis. Inside the Garden, a member of the Jewish War Veterans challenged one of the vicious lies that Fritz Kuhn was orating in best Hitlerian style. He was immediately assaulted by uniformed storm troopers. The police ran up – only to carry his bloody body outside.
Thus no one was surprised when various inquiries conducted among the New York police showed that the number of sympathizers of the Christian Front ran into the hundreds. But Mayor LaGuardia, very brave in his speeches against Hitler, who was thousands of miles away, did not care to come to grips with the anti-Semites in his own police force.
 
Six Months – 150 Assaults
There were at least 150 assaults on Jewish lives and property in New York City in the last six months. In approximately ONE OUT OF EVERY FOUR CASES the police failed to make any serious effort to arrest the anti-Semitic attackers.
One particular story in the Herlands report shows what kind of “protection” the Jews of New York can expect from anti-Semitic policemen. A Jewish watchman at the Inwood Center was abused and attacked by anti-Semitic hoodlums almost every night between the 26th of March to the 3rd of May in 1942.
He called the police frequently, but finally gave up since the police would either arrive too late or not at all. After a while his phone calls were accompanied by the chanted advice of the hoodlums: “You’re wasting your time. The police won’t come.” The pogromists were obviously well acquainted with the “defenders of law and order.”
 
The Drew Case
We bring the story up to date with some details on LaGuardia’s miserable, squirming defense of a well known Christian Fronter in the Police Department, Patrolman Drew. Drew admitted contributing money to the Christian Front and keeping anti-Semitic literature in his home but was later cleared by Police Commissioner Valentine. The Jewish labor and liberal organizations, stirred by the recent anti-Semitic wave, protested strongly.
Mayor LaGuardia promised another investigation of Patrolman Drew. For this task he appointed three old political wheelhorses, who, without publishing a report, simply echoed Valentine’s decision. But their clumsy, transparent whitewash was no great help to LaGuardia.
Acting to defend his own political prestige, the Mayor defends the anti-Semitic members of the police force. Drew was invited to speak on the radio and beg for sympathy. So this friend of Christian Front Chief Joe McWilliams made a short speech saying he was a father of five children, that he didn’t hate Jews and ended by apologizing for any trouble he might have caused.
Anyone acquainted with Drew’s record could have asked some very pertinent questions. What did he do with the anti-Semitic literature in his home – use it to light the furnace? And the contribution to the Christian Front, did he perhaps mistake that organization for the Anti-Nazi League?
But it was all LaGuardia’s show, and he made sure to ask no questions which would embarrass Drew or the anti-Semitic elements in the police department. In this manner, LaGuardia is crudely trying to pull the curtain down on this tragic farce.
 
Workers Defense Guards
The unreliability of the New York police only further encourages the anti-Semitic hooligans. But there are at least 100,000 Jewish members in the trade union movement in New York united with all the other union workers of every creed and nationality. These workers could organize groups of defense which would stop the Christian Front dead in its tracks.
The situation in police departments and the professional politicians’ preoccupations with their “positions,” call for the use of Workers Defense Guards without delay. This will prove to be the only effective way of protecting all persecuted minorities from fascist attacks.
The anti-Semitic hooligans are really cowards. They roam in gangs, beating up individual Jewish victims. At the sight of flying squadrons of Workers Defense Guards, these anti-Semitic rats would put their tails between their legs and run back to the holes where they belong.
 




In the New Republic of March 6 there is an article so exceptionally smelly it deserves some comment. It is entitled The Hang-Back Boys and was written by one of the editors, Bruce Bliven.
Written as a leading article, it lets out a blast at “ex-communists, socialists, Trotskyists, an ex-liberal editor, a Yale man, a labor publicist” and others. Bliven then makes general accusations, an old, easy and dirty trick. If he tried kicking any dog in particular, the dog might bite back.
Some samples:
“... A number of men who are refusing to take any real part in the struggle between fascism and democracy.”

“They no longer have any sort of program of their own, or if they have one it is indistinguishable from that of the tories.”

“While other men fight fascism in this country ... the hang-back boys are silent.”

“Some of these critics are surprisingly friendly to the State Department and speak very mildly of Badoglioism and Darlanism.”
 
We Answer for Ourselves
This writer won’t try answering for others, but we can say of the Trotskyists that, while the editors of the New Republic sit quietly in their offices the Trotskyites in Europe have suffered death and torture in the anti-fascist struggle. Also, unlike Bliven’s hero, President Roosevelt, we were never “close to the State Department” and we do plenty of justifiable yelling against “Darlanism and Badoglioism.” Last but not least we have a program, and not only is it distinguishable from that of the Tories, but it’s clearly different from the vagaries of the New Republic.
Bliven complains about the “I-hate-Russia boy’s.” We, on our part, don’t hate Russia as we don’t hate America. We simply hate the terrorizing, exploiting ruling class headed by Stalin. In the last war, Russia’s Czar also joined on the side of the Allies, but the Czar didn’t become a democrat as a result.
Then there’s some whining by Bliven that the “hang-back boys” are not taking a real part in this war between fascism and democracy. We think that the ruling classes of England, the United States and Russia have given the liberals plenty of proof how little democracy is involved in this war. That’s what leaves the liberals so frustrated. But why does BliVen let it out on us? Is it because we correctly labeled the war as imperialist from the very day it broke out?
Bliven says that we “talk darkly of secret commitments which were made at Teheran.” Does he know of any public commitments that were made at Teheran? Obviously since the whole show wasn’t held just to feed Churchill and Roosevelt some caviar, secret discussions, promises and commitments must have been made. Even some congressmen, who – God forbid – aren’t in our category have suspected the same thing.
As his best blast, Bliven accuses us of being a help to the Germans. Whom does Bliven think he’s helping in his support of the mass murder of German workers by bombings? He forgets too easily the facts of the First World War. For believing in proletarian internationalism during the First World War, Lenin was constantly slandered as a German agent. This did not deter him in the least from leading the Russian masses in their successful working class revolution which not only ended Czarism but which brought the war to an end and caused the Kaiser to abdicate.
 
Roosevelt’s Coattails
What bothers Bliven most is criticism of Roosevelt from the left. Thus he says that the left critics “... are opposed to the plan for compulsory national service, overlooking the fact that the President also opposes it, unless it is accompanied by measures to guarantee just treatment of labor.” The way Bliven swallows Roosevelt’s tall promises makes us gulp. Victor Riesel, a pro-Roosevelt writer on the New York Post, reported that Roosevelt told Murray and Green that he would NOT veto a slave labor act? And the President’s cabinet members, Stimson and Knox, spoke up for the slave labor act without even breathing a word about labor conditions. And General Marshll’s vicious anti-labor attack gave a foretaste of what is meant by a “guarantee” of just treatment to labor. Doesn’t Bliven read the papers or is he concentrating so desperately on Roosevelt’s coat-tails that he forgets what he reads in the papers?
 




During this present month of August there will be an election in Palestine for representation in the Asepeth Hanivcharim. The Asepth Hanivcharim merely carried out Britain’s orders, sometimes protestingly, among the Jews of Palestine. Its most successful activity, for instance, has been recruitment of Jewish youth for the British army and the war.
Yet the elections have importance because they will allow a show of strength for the various classes of the Jewish population. Particularly important will be the relationship of forces within the organized Jewish working class, which now, numbers 136,000, or more than one-fifth of all the Jews of Palestine.
The Mapai is the largest political tendency among the Jewish workers. It is a reformist party and controls most of the bureaucratic jobs within the General Confederation of Labor, or the Histadrut.
The revolt against the Mapai leadership is coming from Group B, a more leftist group which claims one-third of the party membership. Group B accuses the leadership, of betraying the cause of socialism. Yet Group B is not a revolutionary tendency. It is more like the left wing of the British Labor Party.
The largest opposition force is the Kibbutz Artzi. It suffers from Stalinist illusions and supports the war. Yet it is closer to a revolutionary program than any other party in Palestine. Close to the Kibbutz Artzi is the Left Poalei Zion. This group once applied for admission into the Stalinist Comintern but was rejected.
The Mapai is threatening to expel Group B for running its own ticket in the election. Group B, however, refuses to join the amalgamated Left Poalei Zion-Kibbutz Artzi ticket in opposition to Mapai.
This is the political lineup in Palestine at the present time.
 
Swing to the Left
The first real break in the working class political scene occurred in 1940. The Jewish population of Palestine was startled and pained by Britain’s brutal actions toward the Jewish refugees. At the same time the uncontrolled cost of living and burdensome taxes weighed most heavily on the Jewish working class. The Mapai, whose leaders were actively supporting the capitalist-imperialist status quo, was attacked and deserted by thousands of Jewish workers.
At the elections for the general council of the Histadrut in 1940 the combined left opposition collected one-third of all the workers’ votes. Within Mapai, a left wing franction, reflecting the more radical tendencies of the masses, began a political civil war which is as yet unfinished.
In the last five years the Jewish position in Palestine has deteriorated. Jewish refugees have been manhandled, drowned and exported from Palestine. Hitler’s war against the Jews of Europe has been complemented by Britain’s war against the Jews of Palestine.
In 1941, Dr. Chaim Weitzman, meek and mild leader of the World Zionist Organization, was shuffled from one British office to another. At the end of the year he let out an exasperated howl at the way he was treated. David Ben-Gurion, head of the Jewish Agency, shuttled to England, America and back without result. Moshe Shertok, social-reformist and would-be diplomat, then took up the Jewish pleas. Dr. Israel Goldstein, head of the Zionist Organization of America, flew to England, came back and promised great news, but has kept quiet since.
Six months ago, Ben-Gurion resigned as head of the Jewish Agency, the first resignation in the history of that institution. Even he couldn’t swallow the complete servility of the Jewish leadership to British imperialism. Ben-Gurion is now back but the real crisis is just beginning. These lessons of the impotency of official Zionism will not be lost upon the Jewish masses of Palestine.
The Jewish masses fight in their own way. In the face of a British anti-strike law there were 132 strikes during 1943. For years the British colonial bureaucrats have used every legal and illegal trick to keep the Jewish and Arab workers apart. Yet today almost 11,000 Arab workers are organized into unions, where five years ago there were less than 1,000 Arab unionists. Two thousand five hundred of the 11,000 belong to the Jewish Histadrut. In the five Jewish-Arab strikes last year as many man-hours were lost as in EIGHTY-SEVEN strikes led by the Histadrut. This is an excellent gauge of class solidarity.
Also, there have been countless demonstrations, a general strike, at least one street battle and the burning of the British press. Caching of arms has been persistently reported. The imperialist terror has recently been confronted with a Jewish terror. Although carried out by a small illegal organization, it is a symptom and expression of Jewish chafing in the imperialist chains.
 
After the Elections
The British are attempting to make the Jewish existence in Palestine impossible. In self-defense, the Jewish masses must put an end to British rule. The success of imperialist repression or anti-imperialist struggle depends upon the role of the Arabs. If the British impress the Arab masses that their anti-Jewish actions are really pro-Arab favors, if the Jews are isolated from their natural allies, then the Jewish struggle, no matter how desperately fought, is doomed to failure. The liberation of Palestine demands the unity of the Jewish and Arab peoples, of the advanced Jewish working class and the backward, enslaved Arab peasantry.
If the Jewish workers vote for the left Poalei-Zion-Kibbutz Artzi coalition, it will be because Mapai is so obviously bankrupt while the opposition at least uses revolutionary phraseology. It will be because Mapai has a patronizing attitude toward the Arab question while Kibbutz Artzi has always made verbal declarations for Jewish-Arab unity and for a bi-national state. The British overlords, the Jewish bourgeoisie and Arab feudal taskmasters have each in their own way contributed to the partition, provocation and antagonism between the two peoples. That is all the more reason why unity represents the most natural and instructive answer to the problem of both the Jewish and Arab toiling masses.
Against the background of inevitable struggles, the elections grow in importance. Their results will indicate the mind of the Jewish masses and hint of events to come.
 




The dizziest political character of the year is Max Lerner, the “reformer” from The Nation and the New Republic and now editorial writer for the New York newspaper, PM. Usually when somebody suffers from a split personality he visits a psychoanalist. But Lerner spreads his confusion over a million words and to some hundred thousand readers.
In this case Lerner is saying yes, no and maybe on the question of Germany. Lerner notes that the German cartels are dangerous to peace and are a cause of fascism. We agree. Therefore we say the German workers should take over the cartels and confiscate the property of the monopolists, Nazis and war-makers. We say the German workers should take over the cartels because from 1918 to 1933 they fought one long, bloody battle against the monopolists, their Kaiser, monarchist generals, deceiving politicians and fascist bands, the red flag flew in Kiel, Soviets were formed throughout Germany, a Commune was founded in Bavaria, armed workers went into battle in Hamburg, one general strike after another paralyzed the Junkers and militarists.
 
Lerner Prepares His “Position”
To all of this, Lerner, the “socialist,” is blind. He has hitched his wagon to the imperialist war and unavoidably – to their post-war plans for Germany. As is known, the Hull plan is to subjugate German industry, and the Morgenthau plan is to destroy it. Lerner thinks that the control over German industry will be ineffective, so he chooses the second plan, whining all the time that “you cannot change an industrial into an agricultural country without lowering the living standards of the people” (PM, September 27). Lerner sheds tears for his own political crimes. What hypocrisy!
In his final editorial on the subject (PM, October 4) he is for a German “democratic” resolution but he thinks it very unlikely. “There will be only a very small minority of the German people who will be capable of helping rebuild a decent Germany.” After more than twenty-two years, the Italian masses burst the oppressive chains of fascism. The fascist rats were sent running for their lives. This was an extraordinary lesson for the “socialist” skeptics. Not Lerner. He just about writes the German working class out of existence.
Lerner blunders on. “If the generals, and State Department officials display the same fears of social change that they have displayed in Italy, then the game is up – as far as getting a German democracy is concerned.” First it is worth noticing that Lerner blames the State Department and the generals. Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin simply don’t exist. The small fry are villains. The big ones are angels. Secondly, why the “if”? Lerner knows very well “the fears of social change” that “the State Department displays.” Thus he’s dooming the German revolution for a second time. The conclusion? “If ... all hope of a democratic German revolution has been lost, I shall unhesitatingly favor ... the Treasury plan to destroy the big industrial potential of Germany.” You see, the German revolution is unlikely, in fact it is well-nigh impossible because American imperialism is going to bury it. After that is accomplished, it will be correct to destroy German industry and bring ruin and starvation upon the masses of people. Have you got that dizzy feeling? Indeed, what a fantastic mind a man must have to hatch such nonsense!
 
Justifying German Dismemberment
We remember very well Lerner’s cautious and pious praise for the great German revolutionist, Rosa Luxembourg. She represented the “other Germany.” She wrote such beautiful letters from prison. It’s a shame she was murdered. How remarkable, how befitting: that Lerner can praise Rosa Luxembourg only in her martyrdom! For when alive and free she brilliantly castigated the Lerners of her day as cowards, deceivers, betrayers and confusionists!
Even as we pull down the curtain on Lerner’s sickening performance we must not underrate his importance. Though he says little, he writes a good deal. He now has a large public. To the already existing confusion, he adds his own. He has “style.” He can be lyrical and well-intentioned. He can slur over class differences and conflicts. He is always ready to sing a different tune.
But double-talk and doubt are luxuries only Lerner can afford. The American working: class must be very clear on this subject. Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin are preparing a gigantic hangman’s noose for the German working class. They will cut the country into pieces. They will rob it of machines and human labor. Though plundered and pillaged, the German working class will not be silent. We here must demand: Hands off the German working class! The German ruling class has committed some of the most atrocious crimes in all history. That is “exactly the reason why we will stand solidly with the German workers in their heroic efforts to open a new, proud and shining page in the struggle against fascsm, imperialist robbery and oppression.
 




A sad and familiar phrase cropped up again last week at a conference on problems of youth at New York’s City Hall. Dr. C. Lynd, a professor of sociology, predicted that the young people after this war would be a “lost generation.”
The first “lost generation” grew up in the great depression of 1929. Accustomed to the temporary prosperity of the twenties, the American youth suddenly found himself confronted with closed factories, widespread breadlines, unemployment and all the misery of being on government relief. The period of youthful discovery and excitement – the finest time in human life – was wasted in the frantic search for jobs and in the total frustration and despair of capitalist society.
 
A Helluva World for Youth
That generation has now marched off to war and – lo and behold – while they are dying in Europe, a new “lost generation” is arising at home. What fine fruits of victory!
Professor Lynd put it very plainly:
“This is one hell of a world for kids to be trying to grow up in, with the situation deteriorating, not improving, as power politics on a world scale, and fear and cynicism here at home increase.”
Professor Lynd added:
“In the angry times here in the United States after the war, when men fight for jobs, there will be a tightening of anti-Semitic, anti-Negro and anti-foreigner treatment.”
The post-war world of shiny automobiles, flying helicopters and a new League of Nations is only a mirage, purposefully invented by capitalist propagandists well experienced in exaggeration and lying.
Instead of a national fight for a higher standard of living, we will have an individual fight for jobs. Negroes, Jews, Gentiles, Catholics will be pitted violently against each other in the mad struggle for the right to sweat in the bosses’ factories. Bitterness, hatred and race riots will be the only result. Brave new world indeed!
 
Youth No Concern of Business
You don’t hear anybody from the Chamber of Commerce or the National Association of Manufacturers bewail the “lost generation.” The welfare of America’s youth is hardly their concern. They secretly expect that the cynical and disillusioned, youth after the war, joined by the young people whose normal lives have been upset during the war, will make excellent material for the fascist legions necessary to smash organized labor. Capitalism offers no future for American youth because capitalism is a social order without a future. That’s why it nurtures violence and exists by violence.
President Roosevelt’s proposal for post-war military training only proves the point. Originally it was for the purpose of training young people “to brush their teeth,” according to our very humorous President. But in his “grim” message to Congress, Roosevelt made it clear that he means a continuation of drafting young people into army camps after the “peace.”
Professor Lynd mentioned another truism worth quoting: “Conferences on child welfare can’t do much more than put a new coat of paint on an old tenement.” Most of the time they can’t even do that. This particular conference, besides listening to Professor Lynd, heard Grover Whalen, whose police “Cossacks” clubbed demonstrating workers in the early thirties; the very, very talkative Mayor LaGuardia of New York City, who cuts the budget on education and social welfare on every possible occasion; and Mrs. Winthrop W. Aldrich, wife of the president of Chase National Bank. The effectiveness of such a gabfest on youth problems can very easily be imagined.
Conditioned to living in the richest country in the world, American youth must devote its energies to the defense of the standard of living of American labor.
For American youth will learn by choice or through the most bitter experiences that only socialism makes possible an ever richer, more expansive life for all.
 




This has been an eventful month in the Middle East. Roosevelt conferred with King Ibn Saud of Arabia. After reading a declaration of war against Germany and Japan, the new Egyptian Premier was assassinated. Finally, delegates of seven Arab countries meeting in Cairo agreed to organize an “Arab Federation.” These three events are closely inter-related.
 
Britain’s Lifeline Threatened
From Egypt to India, almost all the Middle Eastern countries are under British domination. To maintain her sea and land lanes to India, Britain has brutally repressed successive Arab revolts. In addition, the backward physical existence and feudal economy in these areas are direct or indirect results of British imperialist policy. The political specialty of the British Colonial Office is to prop up and be supported in turn by all those who enslave the Arab masses and keep them in ignorance – the capitalists, landlords, kings and priests.
Today the dangers to Britain’s control of the Middle East are growing ever greater. In Iran (Persia) the supposedly joint British-Russian occupation of that country is turning into a Russian side-show. The Stalinist bureaucracy has made no pretensions about restraining its appetite for Persian oil.
In Arabia, American oil companies have an initial investment of a hundred million dollars in the potentially richest oil fields in the world. Obligingly, the American government is now coining Arabian money and training Ibn Saud’s army. American “intervention” in Arabia would be facilitated by the fact that Arabia has been relatively free from British control since Ibn Saud badly routed the army of pro-British King Feisal after the last war. Thus Roosevelt’s conference with Ibn Saud. and with no other Arab ruler. America is siphoning off Arabian oil and Ibn Saud is fattening the royal family on American revenue.
Confronted with two larger powers, America and Russia, both trying to get a toehold in traditionally British colonial territory, the British are frantically trying to strengthen their political position. Thus a conference of British Quislings was called together in Cairo to mouth in Arabic what Churchill and Eden are somewhat reluctant to say in English. After some tom-foolery about an Arab Federation, the conference demanded an end to French rule in Syria and prevention of the growth of the Jewish community in Palestine. There was no reference to British imperialism since Britain sponsored the conference. No critical comment about America and Russia, since these two large powers would not take kindly to criticism from thinly-veiled British sources.
 
“Federations” and Federations
All this was done under the guise of organizing a federation of Arab countries. There can be no doubt that a real economic, and political federation of the peoples in the Middle East would be desirable. But this is not the British intention. The British imperialists, for their own reasons, maintain the most artificial barriers and boundaries between Arab countries. Transjordania was forcibly torn off from Palestine after the last war and Britain has bitterly fought any unity of Anglo-Egyptian Sudan with Egypt.
It becomes clear that the Pan-Arab hoax was arranged for the British to stack their political chips in preparation for the sharp bargaining at the coming peace conference! The United States has the same purpose in organizing the Latin American conference in Mexico.
This brings us to the recent assassination of Premier Ahmed Maher Pasha of Egypt. The Egyptian people have some bloody memories of British rule and showed no enthusiasm for joining the war even when it was being fought on Egyptian soil. King Farouk, a parasitic, feudal reactionary was always in conflict with the anti-British Wafd Party and the former Premier, Mustapha Nahas Pasha.
Writing in The Nation of March 12, Henry Eulau says: “Nahas Pasha was fired because he opposed British control of the Pan-Arab League.” Farouk, himself a Charlie McCarthy for the British, picked a new Premier more willing to be a pliable tool for the British rulers of Egypt. The new Premier was promptly shot by a nationalist once imprisoned in a British concentration camp in the malarial Sudan.
The Arab masses are simply tired of imperialist plunder, repression and deceit. It is probably true that they don’t recognize fully the danger of Russian and American imperialism. The present jockeying for position in the Middle East is only preparatory motion toward a future war. But before the imperialist powers come to blows in the Middle East, they may all be toppled by the powerful wave of mass insurrections which are surely coming.
 




The first World Zionist Congress in seven years concluded recently. Lasting for seventeen days, the Congress was a dramatic proof of the bankruptcy and growing disintegration of the Zionist movement. Search as one might, it is impossible to find another world political gathering that evidenced such pandemonium, bitterness and futility. A. Alpern, correspondent for the Jewish Day, described it as a “disastrous Congress.” In the same paper, Dr. S. Margoshes wrote that “the two last days of the Congress were filled with sound and fury signifying nothing.”
It is necessary to recall that the Congress met after seven of the most momentous years of world history and Jewish life. The European continent has become a huge coffin for millions of Jews. The few hundred thousand still remaining are doomed to a slow death. The doors to immigration have been shut everywhere, particularly in Palestine. To speak of that country as “a Jewish National Home” is to make a tragic joke. For Palestine, hardly larger than New Jersey, is besieged by more than a hundred thousand British troops.
In desperation large sections of Jewish youth are turning to acts of individual revenge against the British. Palestine, pictured by the Zionist propagandists as a land of orchids, grain fields and prosperous villages, is in reality an armed camp at the brink of a gigantic bloodletting.
 
The Three Major Problems
Against this background the Zionist Congress convened. It faced three major problems: whether or not to accept a British invitation to another Palestine conference; whether or not to accept the plan for partitioning Palestine into three states – British, Jewish and Arab; and the election of a new leadership.
The Congress was filled with fiery speechmaking. After nearly thirty years’ experience with British oppression in Palestine, this speechifying is the extreme limit of Zionist militancy. Moshe Sneh, head of the Haganah, the biggest underground army in Palestine, stunned the delegates with the remarks, “Our slogan is surrender or capitulation. Britain has nothing more to offer Zionism.”
The reply to this view was made by Weitzman, the most famous figure in world Zionism, who is particularly noted for his abject subservience to British rule. Weitzman claimed that salvation still depended upon British imperialist benevolence. He condemned violence as “immoral” and said that while violent actions were the means of liberation used by other peoples, the Jewish struggles were different. Against the immorality of British violence, Weitzman offered a sermon. Weitzman’s pleas for piety and passivity only provoked anger among the delegates.
On this central question of attitude toward British rule, the Congress split into two camps, cutting across party lines. The leaders of the Religious Zionists, General Zionists, and Labor Zionists desperately attempted to unite their parties, but without success.
The large and vociferous opposition declared itself against participation in the London conference, against partition of Palestine and against the leadership of Weitzman. This opposition veers dangerously close to the line pursued by the Revisionists, the extreme right-wing, anti-labor, anti-Arab and anti-socialist group in the Zionist movement. They are the sponsors of the terrorists, whose activity has proven completely ineffectual in overthrowing British tyranny in Palestine.
 
A Political Program Needed
What is obviously required first is a political program, which could mobilize both Jews and Arabs in Palestine, which could gain the support of the neighboring colonial countries and the sympathy of the workers of the world. But the semifascist, chauvinistic Revisionists are completely incapable of providing such a program. They offer mere sabre-rattling.
The largest group of organized Jewish workers, the Labor Zionists, was hopelessly split in half, some dragging behind Weitzman and some behind the Revisionists.
Special mention must be made of Hashomer Hatzair which boasts of its “left-wing Socialism” point of view. The main role played by this group was to boost the Stalinist party line at the Congress. Most Zionists recognize the “Big Three” control over Palestine in the form of a trusteeship, would only triple the burden of oppression which Palestine now suffers from Britain alone. Not so Hashomer Hatzair. If proposed in effect, the intervention of Stalinist totalitarianism in the Palestine situation. After this pernicious proposal failed to gain support, Hashomer did little but drag behind Weitzman.
Much closer to the solution was the speech of Zrubavel, representing the small working class party “Left Poale-Zion.” He stated “The best chance for the realization of Zionism lies in the hands of the workers of the world, British and Arab included, who do not agree with their rulers.” Zrubavel and his followers fail to realize, however, that it is utterly impossible to expect the Jewish bourgeoisie which controls the Zionist movement to join hands with the workers of Britain and the Arab countries. Only the Jewish workers themselves can do this. But they must first break decisively with the Zionist organization, its bourgeoisie leadership and its chauvinistic ideology.
 
Results of the Congress
The Basle Congress was merely one more development in the speedy decline of the Zionist movement. The actual decisions taken by the Congress are of no great importance. No sooner had the Congress voted against participation in the London Conference, then a desperate search began for a formula which would make such participation possible. As for partition, if Britain offers a plan, such true and tried servants of the British Empire as Goldman, Weiss and Lipsky will accept it immediately. The other leading Zionists would complain bitterly, but finally accept partition since they have no realistic alternative.
Finally, Weitzman failed to gain control of the World Zionist presidency for the first time in nearly twenty-five years. He was succeeded by a co-executive of David Ben-Gurion and Rabbi Silver, who make more vigorous speeches but whose program is not much different from their predecessor.
Meanwhile zero hour approaches in Palestine. Recently young Jewish boys were flogged by British police. The Jewish terrorists who retaliated by flogging British soldiers may believe they have saved national pride but they have in no way saved Palestine’s Jews from further repressions. Thousands of British troops are arriving weekly.
The Jewish masses in Palestine must be profoundly disappointed in this Zionist Congress which consisted of splits, expulsions and endless speeches. They must begin to look elsewhere – to the peoples of Egypt, India, Indo-China, Burma, Malay, the Philippines, Indonesia – all of whom are struggling valiantly to free themselves from imperialist exploitation and terror. When the Jewish people join in this decisive struggle, it will sound the final death knell of’ political Zionism, and the beginning of national and social liberation.
 




Last week a congressional committee was considering a bill to set up a special commission “to effectuate the rescue of the Jewish people of Europe,” The State Department came out against this move, as it obviously meant that the jurisdiction of the State Department over the refugee problem was going to be challenged by the contemplated new commission.
Assistant Secretary of State Breckenridge Long appeared before the House Foreign Affairs Committee to give the opinions of his department. The New York Times reported that his testimony on the bill “... indicated Mr. Long’s feeling that such legislation would ... constitute a criticism of what the State Department has done quietly toward this end.”
In answer to any such criticism, Long insisted that the record of his department was good and that it had done everything possible for the victimized Jews of Europe. But as usual with the State Department, what Long didn’t say is more important than what he said. One thing is clear: the State Department insists that its handling of the refugee question remain a secret buried in its dusty files in Washington.
 
The Record of Ten Years
It is worth while here to review the record. Not for the sake of Long; he knows it too well. That is precisely why he doesn’t discuss it in public.
In 1933, Secretary of State Hull assured the American Jewish Congress that the anti-Semitic wave in Germany would be stopped by the Nazi government. Anyway, that is what the Nazis said.
By 1938 it had become clear that the Nazis were the instigators and not the preventers of pogromism. An international conference was called at Evian, Switzerland, to discuss ways and means of saving the lives off German Jews. But just as in the disarmament conferences everybody urged everybody else to disarm, so here too, every country urged every other country to open their doors wide. In fact, it was at that time that dead bodies were washed up on the shores of Palestine; the bodies of Jewish refugees who tried to swim from their ships anchored out on the sea, because they had no visas!
It was the same year in which the two great “democrats,” Chamberlain and Daladier, flew to Hitler and Mussolini in Munich. They all posed smilingly for pictures. But not one word was said, not one move was made to save or even to alleviate the desperate plight of German Jewry.
 
And More Recently
The death agony of European Jewry has aroused great protest in this country and England. The diplomats tried to save their shamed faces with another conference, this time in Bermuda. No delegates from organized Jewry were allowed; detailed reports of the rescue of European Jewry, reports which would have inspired hope and, courage in Europe’s most cruelly oppressed people, were never issued. Representative Sol Bloom, who attended the Bermuda Conference, openly stated that the conference did not lift a finger to halt the slaughter of the Jews of Nazified Europe.
Well known liberals such as Leon Henderson, Dean Alfange and Congressman Will Rogers, Jr., all have severely criticized the Allied governments for their inaction.
Dr. Israel Goldstein declared before the Jewish Conference earlier this year that feasible programs for the rescue of European Jewry were presented to the governments but “the will for great salvation is weak.”
Eliahu Doblain, a deputy member of the Jewish Agency of Palestine, said in a report: “Many opportunities for saving Jewish refugees were lost because there weren’t enough immigration certificates and they weren’t given out in time.”
A few days after Long’s defense of the State Department, Representative Emanuel Celler challenged Long to give the figures of how many Jews entered this country in the last few years compared with the number who requested admission.
A week ago the Intergovernmental Refugee Commission, which was set up in Bermuda and is now in London, declared that Jews would no longer be permitted to present proposals in person before the commission. The reasons are very simple: the Jews are bitterly critical of Allied complacency about the extermination of European Jewry. So the commission slams the door in their face. A befitting climax to ten years of “saving” the Jews of Europe.
 
Friends of the Jews?
When the State Department starts describing how virtuous it is, it only probes the worst depths of cynical hypocrisy. For years the main activity of this organized expression of American reaction has been to defend and befriend Europe’s fascists: Salazar, Franco, the men of Vichy, Prince Otto, the Hungarian pretender, and all the tottering crowns of Europe. The Jews did not get a tenth of the sympathy and active friendship that these henchmen of reaction received from the State Department.
There was always a suspicious smell about the State Department’s attitude and action for “the suffering Jews of Europe. Long’s defense, given in secret testimony, was supposed to clear the air. But it only made the stench more distinctly putrid.
 




Dear Editor:
Some ten years ago Hoover promised “a chicken in every pot” but the breadlines kept, growing longer. Today we have the Atlantic Charter, which is supposed, among other things, to promise “freedom from want.” But despite all the ballyhoo, some recent little known statements prove that the promises of Roosevelt and Churchill are of the same order as Hoover’s.
Two months ago it was Pearl Buck, the famous writer, who exploded the myth that the capitalist democracies stand for freedom from want. She pointed out that while the Allied politicians are damning Hitler for starving Europe, they have said nothing and done nothing about “80 per cent of the people of India who have never had a square meal in their lives!”
A few weeks ago, Luis Quintanilla, Mexican Ambassador, said in a radio speech that 85,000,000 of the 125,000.000 people of Latin America are starving. He added that Latin America is characterised by “absentee land ownership, lack of industries, disease, illiteracy and a cleavage between wealthy minorities who do not work and millions of underdogs who do all the work,”
A few days ago Sigrid Undset, the Norwegian novelist, said about the South; “There is no famine here. Yet they live worse than the poorest Chinese peasant. What is going to happen to the children?”
This is the fate of the masses living under the British lash and under the tyrant generals in South America (who are propped up by American imperialism).
Why the Atlantic Charter? It is very simple. The less the capitalist politicians can do for the masses, the more they make promises and scatter lies.
Will Gorman
 




Dear Editor:
The Anglo-American Conference on Refugees, which met at Hamilton, Bermuda, ended on April 30. Its accomplishments were negligible because the most important problem, that of the Jews, was hardly mentioned. It was considered improper at this conference to even mention the word Jew, though half the European population of Jews has already been destroyed in the course of the war.
The explanation of this was given as follows: “The refugee conference should not be considered as confined to persons of any particular race or faith.” This statement was an attempt to hide the fact that the British would not lower their immigration quota for Palestine. According to the British White Paper, only 75,000 entry permits will be issued until April 1944.
The conference stated that no negotiations with the German government would occur because Hitler’s word could not be trusted. One member, however, got nearer to the state of mind of the conferees by asking that if Hitler did let some of the Jews out of Europe, what would we do with them? To the conference, the sending of a large number of Jews to the United States or Latin America is impractical and not worth discussing. By their lack of action on the Jewish problem, they evidently share Hitler’s plan to colonize Jews in disease-ridden Madagascar.
The work of the conference was further limited by the fact that only British and American delegates were present. Inasmuch as one of the purposes of the conference was to set up an international committee, you can see that from beginning to end it was a hoax. An intergovernmental committee implies the presence of delegates from many countries and not only from the United States, and Great Britain.
The conference did not envisage any broad movement of refugees, but instead discussed the removal of refugees from one military zone to another. It wants the setting up of temporary havens in North Africa and in some British possessions. This could, at the very most, solve the problem of only 100,000 of the refugees of Spain, Cyprus, Iran and other countries of the Middle East.
In summing up the work of the conference, you can use the mild statement of a member of the American advisory group. He said: “The conference showed no imagination. Its scope was extremely too limited.”
Will Gorman
 




The latest wave of anti-Semitism has occurred in the suburbs of Boston. Name-calling, Jew-baiting and finally brutal physical attacks have been experienced by many Jews and, in some cases, helpless women and children.
The local police have been indifferent to the pleas of the Jewish victims for action against the attackers. Indeed, to one case the Boston police beat up Jewish boys for trying to defend themselves against the attacking hoodlums! These same boys were arrested and then convicted by a prejudiced judge.
The pattern is the same everywhere: In Detroit and Harlem the police acted provocatively against the Negro minority. Whenever any trouble occurred, the Negroes not only failed to receive protection against attacks but were themselves mercilessly beaten and manhandled by the Jim Crow-minded police force.
An investigation into the New York police force before the war disclosed that a large number of them were members and sympathizers of the anti-Semitic Christian Front. There is no question that the same situation exists in Boston, that the police force is a stronghold of anti-Semitic prejudice!
When Governor Saltonstall of Massachusetts was asked at a press conference about the anti-Semitic attacks, he threw the reporter out of the State House! With an amazing: glibness he denied everything! But less than twenty-four hours later, the extent of anti-Semitic pogromism in Boston was confirmed by the Jewish press, Jewish leaders, the CIO Council of Boston and the CIO Ladies Auxiliary!
Once the truth came out, the Governor became absent-minded about his vehement denial and “took action.” He ordered an investigation and organized a committee of Jewish, Protestant and Catholic clergy.
This will in no way frighten the pogrom makers. The Christian Front is a power in Boston, and the Jews have always been a political football in all elections. This explains the Governors strong denial of any anti-Semitism existing at all.
Jewish members of the City Council correctly charged that no investigation would have any effect unless it fully unearthed the power of organized anti-Semitism in the political parties.
And to top it off, a dinner was given in Boston last week-end to “honor” the arch anti-Semite, Father Coughlin. The anti-Semitic elements are arrogantly showing off their strength!
 
The Affairs in Montreal
Across the border to the North there lives a large Jewish community in the city of Montreal. The social and political atmosphere is dominated by the Jew-hating French clergy. During the plebiscite on conscription a year and a half ago, organized gangs terrorized Jewish neighborhoods to keep the Jews from voting.
In the summer, an anti-Semitic riot broke out in a dance hall in the resort city of Plage Laval, near Montreal. If there is any question about what the police were doing at the time, we need only mention that the leader of the anti-Semitic outbreak was the son of the police chief!
The police chief thereafter refused to arrest his own son, saying he could not be found. When the anti-Semitic hoodlum was found, he was promptly acquitted. A Jewish victim of the attack (boxing champion of the Canadian Air Corps) has lost the sight of one eye. The attacker is going around scot-free!
 
Anti-Semitism in Congress
It is equally important to note that anti-Semitism of an “official” character is increasing steadily. That doesn’t mean that all capitalist politicians have thrown caution to the winds to engage in anti-Jewish phraseology. But members of the State Department and the Southern poll-taxers who do not have to rely on public elections have of late let their anti-Jewish prejudices be heard.
Secretary of State Hull parried a question of a reporter by pointing out that the reporter’s real name was once “Feinstone.”
When an Army commission was given to a former deputy OPA administrator, congressional halls rang with the anti-Semitic cry, “I don’t want my son to serve under any Goldberg.”
Congressmen Rankin, Schaeffer and Hoffman, enemies of the Negro and enemies of the labor movement, keep up an endless ranting about “Jewish Communists.”
Poll-tax Senator Eugene Cox has had anti-Semitic testimony in his investigation of a government agency. (How it must have worried the heart of all bigoted reactionaries to hear the city of Washington described as a “ghetto” and “without being a Jew, you could hardly get a job there.”)
And now we have the latest addition to this anti-Semitic crew, Representative Elmer, a “Democrat” from Missouri, who explained that “if all the European countries drove out the Jews ... there must have been a good reason.” While the heart-breaking murder of Jews goes on in Europe, Hitler’s unhired apologists open up their mouths here!
The stubborn refusal of the State Department and Congress to do anything substantial for the refugees merely reveals their EXTERNAL anti-Semitism. All the promises about “freedom from want” made by the capitalist politicians on one day are forgotten the next, when they have “start explaining” why homeless Jews shouldn’t be allowed into this country. It will bring depression and unemployment, they say.
The decrepit private enterprise system which these gentlemen so adore will not be able to provide mass employment after this war. So the “Jewish foreigners” are already being set up as a scapegoat!
 




The American Jewish Conference that met in New York City at the end of August was a significant and impressive landmark in the history of the Jews of this country. It was the first time in twenty-five years that a gathering of such a size had taken place.
The more than five hundred delegates represented higher than ninety per cent of Jewish organizations, encompassing an estimated two and a quarter million people. Nor was publicity lacking. The New York Times, well known for its indifference to the struggles of minority races (Jews and Negroes alike) front-paged the conference twice.
Even the New York capitalist politicians, keeping their ear to the ground and realizing that elections are not far away, came out a week after the conference to request the government to help the Jewish victims of Nazi brutality.
Yet in spite of these superficial signs of momentary success, the conference was a marked failure. More than ever, the Jews today are victims of total reaction and unparalleled anti-Semitism. In contrast with this all-decisive moment, the conference was only an exhibition of futile words, gestures for “unity,” dramatic scenes and endless, speeches.
In short, the conference did not bring the wracked Jews of Europe one inch nearer to their salvation.
 
In a Quarter of a Century
It is obvious that the position of the Jews has changed drastically and tragically since the First World War. At that time, the Jews, although numerically not large, had a disproportionate influence in Europe and America.
In Eastern Europe, in the Balkans, Poland and Russia they made up almost the entire middle class, a vital part of the rising capitalist states. In Western Europe and America the
Jews made up a not unimportant section of the capitalist class and of the middle class intelligentsia, journalists, propagandists, civil servants, writers and teachers.
What has happened in the interim of twenty-five years?
Very simply, the Jewish economic and social position in Europe has so deteriorated that the Jews have ceased to play any economic or political role whatever. Instead, a rotting European capitalism has made Jewry into a permanent scapegoat, held responsible for the hunger, war and misery that it produces. Just as in Czarist Russia, every time the corrupt and degenerate monarchy faced the anger of the masses, it would rouse the “Black Hundreds,” who would channelize, this anger into pogroms on the Jew, so too the Southern Bourbons and the Detroit auto magnates, fearing the consequences of unity of the black and white worker, incessantly fan the flames of race hatred.
The impoverished merchant and professional classes of the semi-feudal Balkans and imperialist Germany were now exhorted to rob, plunder and murder their Jewish competitors. The “foreign” Jewish capitalists were squeezed out by the native ruling class. With their wealth confiscated, their merchants boycotted, their intelligentsia ghettoed, their workers chronically unemployed, the Jews lost all influence in Eastern Europe.
 
The Terror Against the Jews
In Nazi Germany, the process was swifter, and the terror better organized by the totalitarian capitalist government.
In France, the same process was to culminate in Petain’s anti-Jewish laws.
In England and America, anti-Semitism is undoubtedly rising, and the economic dislocation of Jewry has been hastened by the war. If we do not have government-sponsored pogroms, economic pauperization of the Jewish masses, it is only because we are not yet in the throes of a social upheaval. The Allied economy, compared to that of pre-war Germany and Poland, is relatively healthy. But the American and British ruling classes are holding their Coughlins and Mosleys on leash for the ever-threatening tomorrow, when they will have to defend their wealth in the same manner as did the Polish, German and French capitalists, by pogroms, hooliganism, the murder and expropriation of Jewry.
The liberal New Republic, writing on the Jewish problem, stated:
“It is an astonishing and disquieting fact that during the long series of negotiations and conferences ... in Munich, which were marked by a constant stream of major concessions to the Nazis, no serious attempt was made by the democratic governments to obtain at least a modification of anti-Jewish barbarism ... There were at times, on the contrary, a marked impatience in official circles with the agitation against the Nazi policy of persecution ...”
 
Evian and Bermuda
Is it any wonder that the Evian conference for refugees, which met in 1938, is hardly remembered by anybody, least of all by the wracked Jewry of Europe! The dignified representatives of the leading capitalist countries got together to convince each other why their respective countries could NOT take in any refugees! And not very must later, Earl Browder, pressed against the wall by a Jewish newspaper columnist, had to admit that Soviet Russia did not allow admission to any sizable number of refugees!
The Jews, fleeing from fascist terror, were left to drown in the seven seas – on the typhus-ridden ghost-ship St. Louis, on cattle boats in the Danube, on the Struma only seventy miles from shore, on the Patria in the very harbors of Palestine!
Even the Nazi paper, Völkischer Beobachter, gloats over the anti-Semitism of the so-called democratic countries. On June 20, 1943, it wrote:
“For years the democratic world has had time to demonstrate in action its alleged love for Jewry by opening its frontiers to them.”
And when the victims of Nazi brutality landed “illegally” in Palestine they promptly became victims of British imperialist brutality. The immigrants were clubbed, herded into concentration camps and even transported to Mauritius Island in the Indian Ocean, where they were left to die of malaria!
Only two successive general strikes by the Jews of Palestine have obtained a more tolerable treatment for the impoverished, tortured Jewish immigrants.
And now we have the latest mockery – the Bermuda Conference. Originally planned to be held in Montreal, it was packed off to the island of Bermuda so that nobody could witness the empty gestures of its organizers. Five years have elapsed between the cynical Evian Conference to the fraudulent Bermuda Conference. In that time, approximately three million Jews were murdered. In that time the Allies have neutralized entire countries, bribed politicians, invaded a continent, but have not carried out one concrete action to save the Jews from being slaughtered.
This, then, is the terrible reality facing Jewry today. Did the American Jewish Conference realize it? Did they formulate a consistent program and methods of struggle to defend the very physical existence of the Jewish people and for the ultimate end of anti-Semitism and persecution? Hardly!
These problems we will consider in another article.
 




The Jewish taxi driver and the leader of the Seamen’s Union in Tel Aviv were not the only ones convicted at the end of the “Arms Trial” in Palestine.
The whole affair was publicly staged as a crude attack on the political existence and hopes of the six hundred thousand Jews of Palestine. It was a well planned blow at the only expression of Jewish self-government in the country – the Jewish Agency. In short, it was one more step in Britain’s imperialist machinations in the Middle East, aimed at consolidating a bloc of Arab countries under reactionary feudal princes, who would only be the richly paid puppets of the British.
Gun-running has been going on in Palestine for many years, but the British colonial rulers never cared to publicize it. However, in this trial a hundred and twenty newspaper men were literally rounded up from all parts of the Middle East, and the usually tight censorship, which never allows political news to leak out, relaxed so that anti-Jewish dispatches could go out daily all over the world.
The British Colonial Office did not miss a trick in its all-out effort to label the Jews of Palestine as “armed trouble-makers.” Once the “crime” is established today, brutal imperialist punishment could be justified tomorrow.
 
A Policy of Provocation
There is still a more important reason for the gun-running trial. It was aimed as a provocation for the Arab people, who are now supposed to become so alarmed at the “arming of the Jews” that they would appeal to the British for “protection” and “action.” This would fit in excellently with the British plans.
After the last war, the Jews were used as an imperialist pawn against the nationalist aspirations of, the Arabs. Today the process is reversed. The Arabs are being used to frustrate the nationalist aspirations of the Jewish people. Thus, one people is being played against the other, Jewish and Arab blood flows, which enables the British to maintain with ease their hold on the rich and strategic Middle East.
 
Arab-Jewish Unity
The British imperialists have many reasons to fear what is now happening in Palestine. Jewish and Arab working class unity, which the imperialist bureaucrats have fought against for decades, is advancing slowly and steadily, thanks to the industrialization of the country.
The Arab fellah (peasant) is no longer illiterate and down-trodden or a landless agricultural worker. He can now go to work in the cities, where he fights as a conscious member of the working class to maintain his living conditions. Coming in contact with the Jewish worker, he finds no racial animosity, but only the same militant struggle in defense of labor’s existence in a country where the cost of food alone has gone up four hundred per cent!
The effect is contagious. Arab unions of all shades are springing up and, for the first time, a section of the city intelligentsia is turning its face toward the working class and socialism. In spite of the stringent anti-strike law, strikes are increasing in number. And Jewish-Arab strike committees have ceased to be a novelty.
Coincidentally, the political radicalization of the Jewish working class is going on at an amazing speed. The servile Social-Democratic Party, “Mapai,” once the largest political party in Palestine, cannot command any sizable section of the workers for their policies of betrayal. There can be only one final conclusion of this movement leftward: Jewish and Arab working class unity and revolutionary action by the Palestinian masses!
 




OAKLAND, Dec. 14 – The general strike ended more than a week ago, but some reverberations of this great labor demonstration are still being heard. Only a few days ago, all AFL unions in this area were “alerted” for action, although the previous tension and talk of another immediate general walkout subsided.
The general strike has apparently achieved two immediate objectives. First, the use of 250 policemen to convoy strikebreakers will not soon be repeated. Secondly, Kahn and Hastings Stores have found themselves compelled to bargain with the AFL clerks’ union. The general walkout exposed their refusal to bargain with the union.
 
Bogged Down
Negotiations have hogged down on the question of a “union shop,” and the issue is now in the hands of government mediation. Meanwhile, the stores have taken a new provocative action to break the strike. A court injunction has been issued to weaken the effectiveness of the picket lines, by cutting down the number of pickets and keeping them away from the store entrances.
Meanwhile another AFL leader has sounded off his hostility to the effective mass demonstration which shut down the city. Charles Real, head of the Bay Area AFL, declared that if he had been on the scene he would have never allowed the general strike to happen. The newspapers originally charged Real with telephoning from Washington to “pull everything out” thus starting the strike. Since then he has been trying to get out from the responsibility.
The Stalinists have distributed a leaflet Where Do We Go From Here? The Stalinists ask the workers to throw out the reactionary Republican clique which runs Oakland. But they give not the slightest indication who should replace it. Judging from their behavior in the recent election, they would prefer a Democratic city administration.
The Workers Party leaflet distributed after the strike says that the general strike was a demonstration of workers’ power, a power which must finally replace the scabby City government. A Labor Action Forum on the lessons of the strike is being held December 15. Many interested workers are expected to attend.
 




OAKLAND, Dec. 7 – The general strike, the fifth in American history, ended just two days ago. Every worker should be aware of the facts and lessons of this event.
Five months ago, the Department Store Clerks, Local 1265, AFL, struck against the Kahn and Hastings department Stores. The employers refused to bargain with the union.
The six week clerks’ strike was largely uneventful. The strikers were spirited, though frequently roughed up by department store goons. Competing department stores paid for large ads asking that Kahn and Hastings be patronized because they were struck.
Sunday morning, December 1, the city government took over the job of strike-breaking for the stores. All pickets, bystanders and vehicles were cleared away within a four square block area of the stores. Fully half of Oakland’s police force came upon the strike scene armed with tear gas, billy clubs and sawed-off shotguns in order to escort a load of “hot cargo” brought up by a scab trucking outfit from Los Angeles.
It was later revealed that Chief of Police Robert Tracy had been the camouflage artist for the scabs. He had originally promised the Teamsters Union they would be informed in advance of the arrival of scab truckers. Not only did he renege on this promise, but the scab drivers had been in nearby Berkeley for over a week waiting for the chance to run through the “hot cargo” with police protection! Thus was this strike-breaking trick carried out by a prominent “public servant,” Chief of Police Tracy.
The scab truckers, who went under the name “Veterans Trucking, Inc.,” were sponsored by the Merchants and Manufacturers Association of Southern California, one of the most vicious union-busting groups in the country.
Hundreds of teamsters from Local 70 immediately came upon the strike scene. Motormen and street car operators walked off the job spontaneously. The Alameda Central Trades Council went into a huddle. Sympathy was expressed by the Alameda CIO Council. Five o’clock. Tuesday morning an area containing a million inhabitants was in the grip of the general strike.
 
The Bureaucrats Fumble
The AFL leaders, accustomed to doing little besides collecting dues and salaries, then fumbled the ball. The AFL members were not informed of the nature of the strike or its causes. The strike declaration was made only at the last moment. No plan for mobilizing or organizing the workers’ action was made public.
But from the very first moments the Oakland general strike was a magnificent tribute to the power of Oakland’s working class. Not a bus or street car moved. Except for the few CIO or unorganized shops, not a factory wheel turned. No ships sailed from Oakland harbor. More than ten thousand workers gathered for mass picketing in front of Hasting’ and Kahn’s on the first and second days of the strike. The police, in full force a few days previous, now were scarce and inconspicuous.
Especially singled out by the workers’ wrath were the two venomously anti-labor sheets: Hearst’s Post Enquirer and Knowland’s Tribune.
The press retaliated. The Tribune’s radio station monotonously described every stubbed toe at the mass picketing. Hearst’s Frisco Call-Bulletin featured a large scare headline, Fighting on Streets.
 
Packed Strike Meetings
The strike mass meeting held in the Civic Auditorium was packed by over 15,000 workers despite the absence of any public transportation and a strong rain. The AFL leaders were stunned when facing this huge, aroused rank and file. So conditioned to talking to each other or to the bosses, they could only express their amazement at the presence of so many workers. Only the representatives of the teamsters and sailors were exceptions. The workers roared their approval when Harry Lundberg described the police actions as “fascist tactics.” Those speakers who characterized the struggle as a showdown fight, which had to be fought through no matter what the cost, received the loudest ovations.
The Bay Area Branch of the Workers Party gave out a leaflet at the meeting which declared its full solidarity with the general strike. (The leaflet is reprinted in an adjacent column.) All available copies of LABOR ACTION were quickly sold.
The union representatives had been closeted with the city manager and the employers from the very first day of the strike. At the mass meeting, they announced the rejection of the employers’ plan that the issues be left in the hands of a nine-man committee while the general strike be immediately ended. The reason for the rejection was the employers’ insistent refusal to bargain with the clerks at Kahn’s and Hastings’. Thus the general strike was to go into its second day to win a real victory for the striking clerks.
The CIO mass meeting was planned for Thursday night, to announce its joining of the walkout, which would stop all public services still in operation – gas, electricity and telephone – and would pull out auto, longshore and rubber workers. Rumors were flying that the powerful San Francisco AFL would join the walkout and thus completely tie up both sides of the Bay. But some AFL leaders became nervous and jittery and on Wednesday afternoon, Dave Beck, vice-president of the Teamsters Union, ordered Teamsters Local 70 to return to work regardless of the outcome of labor’s negotiations.
Feeling against this strike-breaking statement ran high. The press gloated over it while the teamsters were forced to maintain a frustrated silence.
The Alameda Central Trades Council gave out a general back-to-work order when the new city manager, John Hassler, had given them assurances that the police would not be used as scab herders. The union leaders immediately hailed this as the attainment of the strike’s objectives and declared the general strike to be a success, though no promise was received by Kahn’s and Hastings’ to negotiate with the Clerks Union.
However, two days after the strike’s conclusion, it has become clear that the settlement is little besides an uneasy truce. Yesterday, the police provided a cordon for the scabs leaving the store. Hassler denied making any statement other than that he “would avoid violence and uphold the law.”
Whatever the final outcome, the strike has achieved certain limited objectives. The provocative scab actions by the city and government were ended. Those bosses who would consider such actions now know that they will face a united powerful labor movement. The response of the workers an this situation will help prevent its repetition. But most important, it has been an inspiring, unforgettable demonstration of the strength of the 130,000 workers.
The general strike, which lasted for less than three days, is filled with vital lessons for the workers of this area and of the entire country. To the degree that these lessons are learned, future struggles will be assured of success.
 
Extent of Workers’ Power
The workers, as a result of this experience, were confronted most obviously with the extent of their class strength and power. In contrast with strike actions against particular bosses, this was a united action by tens of thousands of Oakland’s workers against the handful of Oakland’s big business men. The workers, for so long divided and split up by the ossified craft unions, joined their union brothers in militant solidarity. With great expectancy they awaited the actions of their union brothers in the CIO and across the bay in San Francisco.
By failing to join the walkout at the very beginning, the CIO missed the greatest opportunity offered in this area for cementing a powerful rank-and-file unity, which could have had repercussions elsewhere. The full explanation of the behavior of the Stalinist CIO leaders is not yet clear, but they apparently wanted a general strike on their hands as little as did their AFL counterparts.
To many thousands of the strikers it has become clear that the Oakland cop with his billy and the federal judge in his flowing judicial robes are not neutral in the strike struggles. They are merely part of the whole army of stooges and hirelings of the American capitalist class, trained to beat down union men and protect scabbing employees.
The AFL rank and file had a good look at their high-paid labor careerists who occupy the executive positions in their unions. The bungling, the confusion, the lack of planning, the indecision of these leaders did not completely escape many of the rank and file.
 




SAN FRANCISCO – Senator Claude Pepper’s visit to the West Coast has added some spice to the local political stew. Upon his arrival, the press reported that the Florida senator was tossing his hat into the ring as the “liberal” candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1948. Wallace, who was the previous darling of the Stalinist-liberal combination, seems to be losing the favor of the Stalinists.
On the other hand, Pepper has only recently completed a long pilgrimage through Russia and was even privileged enough to meet Stalin. Pepper came here to preach that Stalin’s price for “peace’’ – the Dardanelles, the Balkans, Manchuria and Persian oil – was perfectly reasonable. He also added something that all workers should know and that Labor Action readers have known for a long time: that Stalinist Russia is not the socialist Russia of Lenin and Trotsky, and that Stalin has no desire to establish world socialism.
But while Pepper preoccupied himself with defending Russian imperialism, his courage or memory failed him on a most important local question in the coming California election – the State Fair Employment Practices Committee. This issue, which comes up in public referendum on Election Day, is of real importance to the hundreds of thousands of Mexicans, Negroes and workers of other minorities who live in this state. Little wonder! For Pepper, the proud New Dealer, was re-elected in Florida only on the basis of a Jim Crow program!
Senator Pepper’s reception points up the political situation in this state. Not one bigwig of the Democratic Party machine came out to greet him. His meetings were sponsored by the National Citizens Political Action Committee, which in this area is a Stalinist front organization. The Democratic Party here is torn apart by the fight between the old machine politicos and the Stalinist leadership of the CIO. Due mainly to the conflict between Russian and American imperialism on a world scale, these two groups are growing ever further apart in the state. The state Democratic chairman, James Roosevelt, was elected to his post only after a bitter fight because of his known connections with the Stalinists. On being elected, young Roosevelt severed all connections with the Stalinist front organizations. The Stalinists thus got slapped as a reward for their political efforts.
But if the Stalinists got slapped, it is the workers of California who are taking the real beating. All the double-dealing and deceitful machinations of the Stalinists and the Democratic Party hacks haven’t frozen prices or built houses or halted discrimination.
 
Victory for Warren
In the recent primary, Attorney General Kenny, a “liberal” with a national reputation, couldn’t even win the Gubernatorial Democratic nomination in the primaries. Governor Warren, with little except a genial smile to recommend him, swept the Democratic and Republican tickets. Warren then puts in an “unexpected” visit to the Labor Day parade of the AFL. This is a good enough indication that some of the AFL leaders can be expected to act as vote-catchers for the Republican Party while the Stalinists in the CIO will do the same for the Democratic Party. The net result will be that a crew of capitalist politicians will be entrenched in office and the workers will be farther away from the solution of their pressing problems than before.
The workers in this state who fought militant strike battles in the machine shops, canneries, maritime, and transit can avoid being sold down the river each election year. In 1934 the San Francisco general strike was a signal to the American workers that the only way to fight wage-slashing and union-busting was by militant, large-scale strike actions. In 1946 the workers of California can take the lead in demonstrating to all the workers that the only way to fight inflation and union-busting is by building an independent Labor Party NOW.
 




SAN FRANCISCO – The Wallace affair has increased political confusion in California. The Democratic Party in this state is a crazyquilt combination of the old Democratic machine and the Stalinist-controlled CIO. The latter is responsible for snaring the labor vote at a time when labor is extremely dissatisfied with the housing and price situation.
The Democratic Party-Communist Party deal was achieved only after extensive smoke-filled-room contriving. Once achieved, the Stalinists drove hard to evangelize the Democratic Party and herd the workers once more into providing fat government jobs for aspiring Democratic office holders. But the coalition, made up of advocates of American imperialism and advocates of Russian imperialism, was very tenuous when it began. Today, it is bursting at the seams. It would be well nigh impossible to find any one in the Democratic Party camp who could explain the criss-crossing splits and splinters that come flying from this “force of progress,” as the Stalinists so blatantly titled it.
 
Act I
Since Governor Warren won both the Democratic and Republican nominations in the primary election, James Roosevelt, the Democratic Party chairman, conceded that he would vote for Warren in the coming elections. The Stalinists, who are conducting a write-in campaign for their candidate, Arcie Brown, let out a pained howl. David Hedley, State CIO-PAC chief, said, “When Mr. Roosevelt says he will vote for Warren, he ... blurs the dividing line between reaction and the forces for progress.”
 
Act II
“The Democratic County Committee, largest county unit in this state, is out in support of Wallace.” (San Francisco Chronicle, September 24) However, Will Rogers, the Democratic Party candidate for Senator, declared that he is for a “get tough” policy with Russia, i.e., supporting Byrnes and Truman!
 
Act III
Rollin McNitt, head of the Democratic County Committee which is supporting Wallace, is embroiled with Ellis F. Patterson. Patterson, who lost out to Rogers for Democratic Party Senatorial nomination, has declared himself a candidate for Congress from the Sixtieth District, against the regular Democratic candidate Harold Harby. Patterson is receiving Political Action Committee support. PAC is supporting the Democratic Party. “McNnitt threatened disciplinary action against all Democratic Party committeemen who support Patterson.” (Chronicle, September 25.) McNitt then resigned from the PAC. “Patterson said he would pay no attention to McNitt.” (Chronicle, September 25.)
Act IV
Patterson said that he will not support Rogers. “Patterson charged that Wallace had double-crossed him after promising in Washington that he would not be a candidate.” (Chronicle, September 26.)
The PAC statement on Roosevelt’s support of Warren continued, “the situation created by Mr. Roosevelt’s remarks will undoubtedly call for a careful examination by the state meeting of the California CIO and its Political Action Committee.”
Meanwhile, a possible hint of the results of the “examination” have been the “third party” statements by Patterson and Bartley Crum. (Crum is a Republican attorney who once lived in Wendell Willkie’s shadow and has now become one of the most reliable Stalinist weathervanes on the West Coast.) Patterson declared that he hopes Wallace will lead a “Third Party.” This was the same day that Wallace announced that he would campaign for “worthy Democrats.”
 
Stalinist Misleaders
This sordid playing of political football with the political power and strength of the California working class is not yet over. The Stalinists have thrust the CIO into greater confusion and disoriented the millions the CIO could have rallied to a fighting labor program, for the traditional Democratic vote-catchers are not so much to blame as the Stalinist misleaders who proclaim that they speak in the name of the working people.
The workers of California, are being provided with a multitude of excellent reasons for the formation and building of an Independent Labor Party. The dividing line between “reaction and the forces of progress” is the dividing line between the small group of profiteers and their political agents and fakers on one side, and the millions of workers on the other.
For housing, price-freezing, economic security the workers need only use their power for their own behalf. The very first step is the building of an Independent Labor Party NOW!
 

