

Few crises have been so widely predicted as the international banking crisis which finally hit the headlines in August 1982. [1] But such predictions merely testified to the impotence of the actors in the saga to govern their own destiny. The actions of the bankers themselves nearly brought disaster down upon their own heads; yet they had merely been pursuing the quest for profits, a quest dictated not so much by their own greed (although they are certainly greedy men) as by the fundamental nature of capitalism as a competitive system.
When Mexico in August 1982 declared that it could not pay its debts, the only novelty was that those debts amounted to anything between 80 and 90 billion (thousand million) dollars. The world’s biggest debtor had gone bust and the prospect of the banks getting their money back was in the opinion of many experts, nil. Yet the Mexican crisis was only the culmination of a series of defaults (although nobody liked to call them that), of failures to pay what was owed to the various creditors, by nation-states, stretching back over the previous eight years.
In 1975 North Korea refused to pay its debts, which were mainly to other governments. In 1977 both Peru and Zaire had to be rescued by the International Monetary Fund after failing to meet their payments to the banks on several billion dollars worth of debt. In 1979 Turkey and Zaire once more, had to have their debts rescheduled (i.e. the date of re-payment was postponed, although they were expected to go on paying interest for the banks). [2] In 1981, Poland, with debts of 24 billion dollars, sent a shudder through Western banking circles as its economy collapsed, and the struggle between the regime and the working-class organised in Solidarity remained deadlocked. In each case, the banks emerged a trifle shaken but with their profit figures still looking rather healthy. Each crisis was more serious than the last, a sign that the crisis in the world economy as a whole was worsening.
Mexico, along with Brazil (debts of $80 billion) and Argentina (debts of $38 billion) which soon followed in demanding that their debts be rescheduled, was quite another matter. As the figures began to be totted up it was found not only that their debts were much larger than anyone had suspected, but that between them a failure to pay up would wipe out more than 100% of the capital and reserves of the nine largest banks in the USA. [3] Worse than that, these were countries potentially at least as unstable as Poland. Mexico’s ruling party had been in power for over fifty years and its hold looked unshakable – but unemployment was soaring, the working-class was stirring and this was a country right on the borders of the richest, most powerful capitalist state of them all. In Brazil and Argentina things were even worse – tired military regimes losing their grip in the face of economic debacle, or military defeat, and confronting militant rebellious industrial working-classes which showed no signs at all of being prepared to pay the cost of their rulers’ extravagance.
The figures for total third world debt were staggering – a colossal $610 billion worth, more than the total gross national product of Britain. Debts in Eastern Europe amounted to around another $80 billion. [4] Not all of that was owed to the private banks. Much of it was owed to other governments which had provided vast and expanding credits and subsidies to their own exporters to the debtor countries as the world slump deepened in the 1970s. Much especially by the poorer countries of the third world, India, Bangladesh, or much of Africa, which had never been much favoured by the banks, was owed to international, (government funded), agencies like the World Bank or the International Monetary Fund. But the banks it was estimated had put up some 60% of the money, and probably around three quarters of the cash which had gone to Mexico and Brazil.
One estimate, by a collection of international bankers and ‘experts’ called the Group of 30, was that as much as $200 billion of the money lent by the banks would be difficult to collect – was bad debt. On top of that the raging economic crisis in the major industrial countries had pushed thousands of companies into bankruptcy, and a number of major multinationals (Dome Petroleum with debts of $4 billion, or International Harvester with debts of $4.2 billion) were in serious trouble. [5] Both the degree of integration and the vulnerability of the financial system were attested to when a small bank in Oklahoma, USA, Penn Square, went bust in July, and the much larger Continental Illinois found itself with losses of $220 million on money it had lent on via Penn Square. [6] As if to symbolise the whole situation, the head of the bankrupt Banco Ambrosiano in Italy was found hanging under Blackfriars Bridge on June 18 in mysterious circumstances. 1982 was not a good year for bankers.
Not surprisingly, the prophets of armageddon had a field day. Many Marxists who perhaps should have known better got carried away predicting the imminent collapse of the world banking system, but it was understandable given that Denis Healey was doing the same thing. The IMF meeting in September 1982 was, he argued, ‘the last chance to save the world from a catastrophe even greater than the slump of the 1930’s’. He went on ‘Many countries in the third world face the prospect of economic collapse, political anarchy and mass starvation. The risk of a major default triggering a chain reaction is growing every day.’ [7]
Denis Healey was wrong about the impending collapse of the international banking system. He was much more on target when he talked about the prospects for the third world. The rescue operations which were launched with astonishing speed in the months after the Mexican crisis in August showed the IMF and the world’s major states still had the capacity to contain the crisis, and in particular to prevent the collapse of any major bank. But their actions, it will be argued in the course of this article, have not solved the crisis, and may only have postponed the day of reckoning to a later date.
Two developments are necessary if the debt crisis is to be resolved. Neither is very likely. One is a sustained recovery in the world economy. But the debt crisis itself is prolonging tne current slump, reducing the level of world trade, and will limit the scope of any recovery. This makes it impossible for the debtor economies to sell enough goods on world markets to enable them to cover their repayments. The other condition is that the working-class of the debtor economies is prepared to accept the reductions in its standard of living, the increase in exploitation, necessary to free the resources, the surplus-value, demanded by the banks.
In reality the debt crisis is undermining the stability of the regimes whose very authoritarianism was so attractive to the bankers in the 1970s when they were making the loans. The strikes in Brazil, and Venezuela, the demonstrations in Chile and Argentina, are the events that have really frightened the bankers in recent months. For revolutionaries this is the real significance of the debt crisis – although these events will not be examined in any detail here.
This article is devoted to explaining the real roots of the debt crisis, and an examination of the response to that crisis both in the West, and in the major debtor economies of Latin America in particular. Most analyses of the debt crisis have been superficial because they separate out that crisis from the deep-rooted crisis of the system as a whole. That is why this article begins by looking briefly at Marx’s analysis of banks and banking crises.
 
Money, capital, and the banks
Financial crises have a long history. Charles Kindelberger in his book, Manias, Panics and Crashes, traces them back to the South Sea Bubble of 1720. [8] He along with many others sees them as having a logic of their own. Thus he describes a repeated saga of speculative manias, waves of irrational ‘get rich quick’ optimism, followed by the inevitable crisis, panic and crash. It is a rich tale, of swindlers and fall-guys, foolish bankers and financial mismanagement by the state. It is also a misleading tale.
There have been examples of purely monetary crises, or of purely speculative bubbles, with little or no connection with the state of the productive base in the economy. But they are the exception, not the rule. The most serious crises since the emergence of industrial capitalism have always involved severe slumps, with chronic overproduction and mass unemployment in the productive heart of the system. On several occasions, as in 1847 which Marx studied closely, the collapse in 1890 of the London firm of Baring (which had over-lent to traders in Argentina), and the 1929 Wall Street Crash, the financial crisis has marked the turning-point from boom to slump.
Not surprisingly economists have often seen the root of the crisis in the operations of the financial system itself. Some suggest that if only bankers had not been so foolish or if the government had not mismanaged things the slump could have been avoided. Others advocate reforms of the system, government regulation, even nationalisation, of the banks, as the solution. Marx was scathing about such ideas and the theories that underpinned them:
The superficiality of political economy shows itself in the fact that it views the expansion and contraction of credit as the cause of the periodic alternations in the industrial cycle, whereas it is a mere symptom of them. [9]
Banks make their profit by lending out money. More accurately they make money out of the difference between the interest they charge on loans and the interest they have to pay to attract deposits. One reason why British banks have long been so exceptionally profitable is that they have not until recently paid interest at all on most of the deposits they receive – banks elsewhere have not been so fortunate. It is still the case today that the bulk of bank lending is to governments or, even more important, industrial companies, rather than to individuals. The interest they receive on those loans represents in either event a share of the surplus value produced by workers.
For the capitalists, however, money has the capacity simply to breed more money. The holder of a sum of money only has to place it in a bank, or buy shares, or a unit trust to receive a regular, apparently guaranteed, return. ‘It becomes as completely the property of money to create value, to yield interest, as it is the property of a pear tree to bear pears.’ [10]
Interest only represents a share of the total surplus value produced by workers, which is acquired by a particular section of the capitalist class, the bankers, and those who simply lend money without engaging in production. Yet why is it that those who control industrial capital are willing to tolerate such a group of parasites receiving a share of their profits?
The answer lies in the fact that there are advantages for capitalists from having institutions which specialise solely in the handling of money. Banks act to concentrate sums of money in large quantities and make them available to capitals when they need them. In particular, as capitalism develops so does the scale of investment. Capitals cannot simply invest their profits as they flow in, but have to wait until they have sufficient funds to build a new factory or purchase a new set of machines. At any one time some capitalists will be building up hoards of idle cash, whilst others will be seeking to invest. Those with spare cash can benefit by placing it in a bank. Those who want to invest can borrow even larger sums than those generated by the profits of their own business.
Banks do not simply lend out funds from one group of capitalists to another. They also act to speed up the whole process of the circulation of money in an economy, by minimising the idle reserves of cash which capitalists have to keep. Indeed, although this is not the place to discuss it in any detail, banks, by lending out money, by the creation of credit, can effectively increase the amount of money available within an economy. Banks enable the system to economise on its use of what Marx called ‘money proper’ – gold or state-issued paper money – through the generation of what he called ‘credit money’.
In the early days of banking this occurred when banks issued ‘bank-notes’ or promises to pay, as substitutes for the gold they held in their vaults. But this was a system vulnerable to abuse, and highly precarious if the banks issued too many notes. Since 1844 in England, the Bank of England has had a monopoly over the issue of banknotes, and the amount issued is controlled by the state. However, that has not stopped the generation of credit-money by the banks. In modern capitalism the vast bulk of what economists call money consists not of cash, coins or paper, but of bank deposits. Marx himself noted the emergence of this system, observing that in Scotland whereas ‘currency has never exceeded £3 million, the deposits in the banks are estimated at £27 million.’ The banks only kept cash reserves amounting to about a tenth of their deposits, relying on the fact that its customers would only withdraw all their deposits in cash if there was panic, ‘a run on the bank’. Thus, ‘It is possible therefore, that nine-tenths of all the deposits in the United Kingdom may have no existence beyond their record in the books of the bankers who are respectively accountable for them ...’ (Capital, Vol. 3, p. 603)
The expansion of the system of credit is simultaneously an expansion of debt. As long as capitalism is expanding, prices are rising and profits are flowing in, old debt can easily be paid off, and the temptation to acquire new debt is strong. But as soon as the system begins to falter the fragility of the whole ‘superstructure’ of credit and debt is exposed. The expansion of the credit-system occurs in response to the growth of production and trade. Correspondingly, in a time of slump the credit-system rapidly contract seriously aggravating the crisis.
A slump however also exposes the inner limit of the banking-system, the reserves which banks have to hold against a withdrawal of deposits. For banking rests in a sense upon a gigantic confidence trick – the pretence that deposits which have been lent out are really still there, capable of being withdrawn at any time. As long as deposits and withdrawals roughly balance out there is no problem. Banks will tend to push their reserves down to a minimum, as they expand their profits through lending out money as quickly as it comes in. But in a slump withdrawals will rise and deposits slow, as capitals find their profits falling. An individual bank may find that withdrawals are so great that it has to start calling in its loans, and bankrupt many of the capitals which have borrowed from it. Alternatively, fear that the bank has lent out money to debtors who cannot repay may provoke a run on the bank. Depositors lose confidence in being able to get their money out, all seek to withdraw their money at the same time, and the bank’s reserves cannot, of course, meet the demand. The bank will collapse, the panic spread, depositors will lose their money, the supply of new loans will dry up, and a wave of bankruptcies will throw the system into a severe crisis. Banks, therefore, in Marx’s account are distinctly vulnerable.
At the same time they are powerful due to their ability to concentrate all the idle money-capital of the economy in their hands. That capital they distribute amongst the various spheres of production according to where it can most profitably be used. They speed up the process whereby capital is withdrawn from declining or unprofitable industries and channelled into the profitable and expanding. They can facilitate growth and centralisation of capital in the hands of a few large corporations. They also determine the fortunes of those capitals that start losing money or running up excessive debts. It is the banks that act to ‘bankrupt’ the weak, and promote the strong.
Yet some Marxists in stressing the power of the banks, or in focusing on the rise of what Lenin in 1916 was to call ‘finance capital’ (a virtual fusion of the banks and industry with the banks in command), have ignored the dependence and vulnerability of the banks outlined above. [11] It is true that banks can increase their share of the total surplus-value produced under capitalism at the expense of other sections of capital. It is also true that, when interest rates rise, money-lenders can prosper whilst the profits of industrial capital are falling. But the banks still depend upon the ability of productive capital to generate that surplus-value in the first place. The health of the banking-system depends upon the health of capitalism as a whole.
This issue demands that the whole boom-slump cycle of capitalism be looked at more deeply. But before doing that its worth considering another question.
One of the more remarkable features of Marx’s work is the way in which he anticipated some of these changes that were to take place within the credit system. [12] In discussing the 1847 crisis he argued that the Bank of England’s refusal to supply extra notes to the banking system when the banks were in trouble served only to intensify the crisis. But, he argued:
As long as the social character of labour appears as the monetary existence of the commodity and hence as a thing outside actual production, monetary crises, independent of real crises or as an intensification of them are unavoidable. It is evident on the other hand that, as long as a bank’s credit is not undermined, it can alleviate the panic in such cases by increasing its credit money, whereas it increases this panic by contracting credit. The entire history of modern industry shows that metal [i.e. gold] would be required only to settle international trade and its temporary imbalances, if production at home were organised. The suspension of cash payments by the so-called national banks [i.e. the refusal of the Bank of England or other central banks to provide gold for pound-notes] which is resorted to as the sole expedient in all extreme cases, shows that even now no metal money is needed at home. (Capital, Vol. 3, p. 649)
Two points are worth making about this passage. One is that Marx clearly distinguishes between the use of money within a national economy, where state guaranteed paper notes can indeed completely replace gold – and the use of money for international payments. A state can print as much paper-money as it likes – but there is no guarantee that this will be acceptable as a means of payment to sellers in other countries, especially if, as with the Argentinian peso recently, it is a currency liable to lose its value rather rapidly. To pay off their debts to traders or banks in other countries national groups of capital and the states which represent them, need money which is internationally acceptable – gold, or national currencies which are considered to be as ‘good as gold’ and are therefore held as reserves of foreign exchange. The pound sterling in the years up to 1931, and the dollar up to 1971, were therefore tied to gold as a guarantee of their value on the world market. Since 1971 when the Americans abandoned their commitment to exchanging their reserves of gold for dollars held abroad, gold has had no official role to play in the system. But that, as the exchange rate chaos of recent years has shown, did not settle the issue. Only a world state could issue paper money which would be automatically acceptable everywhere. As it is the world economy remains in a situation where, despite growing internationalisation, the key world reserve currency, the dollar, is issued by one particular, if powerful nation-state. [13]
To return to the passage quoted from Capital Marx is also arguing that whilst state intervention can help to alleviate a crisis (or intensify it), monetary crises will remain an inevitable result of the cyclical movement of capitalism itself.
 
Booms, slumps and the banking system
Accumulation is the process whereby capital throws back part of the surplus-value it has extracted into the production process as new investment. It is the rate of accumulation, driven by competition for ever greater profits, which drives the system forward, generating the booms, and, when it falters, the slumps. It is accumulation which in expanding the forces of production, and increasing the productivity of labour, also exposes the limits set to capital by capital itself, by the way the system is organised. Accumulation tends to undermine itself, because it cuts into the rate of profit, the flame which lures it forward. The law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall lies at the root of Marx’s explanation of why the system should sink into deeper and more prolonged crises as it grew older.
The arguments concerning this have been extensively discussed in other issues of this journal. [14] What I want to emphasise here is that Marx’s formulation of the law is at a very high level of abstraction and by itself does not provide a sufficient explanation of how the system moves from boom to slump. Most obviously it is an analysis applied to capital in general, ignoring the unevenness which arises from the competition among different capitals. Some capitals (especially the most efficient with lower costs of production) will be able to gain at the expense of others, even in a crisis.
The unevenness of the system relates to a second point. The rise in the organic composition of capital, and thus the pressure on the rate of profit from this source, is something which occurs only gradually, over a lengthy period of time, and subject, as Marx showed, to a whole number of countervailing tendencies. Yet the system has not slid gradually into a state of stagnation as its driving spark faded away. On the contrary, the underlying tendency has expressed itself only through a cycle of booms, or periods of expansion, in which the rate of profit rises, at least at first, only to fall even more sharply in the ensuing slump. This short-term cycle, which when Marx was writing lasted almost exactly ten years from peak to peak or trough to trough, also has to be explained.
Marx argued that the length of the ten-year cycle had its roots in the lifetime of fixed capital. The recovery of the system after a crisis will also form the ‘starting-point of a large volume of new investment’. [15] Whilst this investment is being made, new machinery introduced, new factories built, demand for means of production is high, encouraging the rapid expansion of industries such as building, steel and engineering. Money is being thrown into circulation, new workers are being taken on, and the level of demand rising ahead of the increase in production which this new investment will generate. Sales are easy, prices are rising, and profits tend to rise as well, encouraging a further expansion of production.
But eventually as this new investment comes on stream, the extra factories and machinery start to function, more and more commodities are thrown onto the market, and a situation of overproduction begins to develop. With full employment and a high level of demand the wages of workers and the price of raw materials will probably have risen. Capitalists find their profits being squeezed both by rising costs and the need to cut prices in order to ensure sales as the market becomes overstocked. They start to cut back on investment, which leads to sharp fall in demand for those industries producing investment goods – building, steel, engineering etc. Those industries, having expanded to meet the extra demand at the beginning of the cycle, are now faced with chronic overcapacity, and start to lay off workers and close down plant. The whole system begins to move in a vicious spiral downwards, as the fall in investment leads to a fall in demand throughout the economy.
If the rate of profit begins to fall as the boom nears its peak, it falls much more rapidly as a result of the slump itself. The fall in investment, the contraction of the economy, the rise in unemployment, all mean that capitals have great difficulty in selling their commodities – in ‘realising’ the surplus-value that is produced. Yet the slump also generates ‘counteracting’ forces which ease the pressure on profitability. The price of raw materials, capital goods and labour may all fall sharply. Some capitals will go bankrupt leaving a larger share of the market, and assets which can be purchased cheaply, by those which remain in the arena.
A revival of the system, a return to boom, however, depends on a revival of investment, and the low level of demand itself acts to discourage any such thing. But this is where the ‘lifetime’ of fixed capital enters the picture. Those capitals which survive the slump will eventually have to replace the machinery which they acquired at the beginning of the cycle. The very act of replacement, especially when it is bunched together by a number of capitals, serves to stimulate the industries producing means of production. They take on more workers, and reopen plant that’s been mothballed, demand in the economy as a whole begins to revive, and the cycle resumes again.
Marx argued that the short ten-year cycle which characterised the nineteenth century was thus rooted in an average ten-year lifetime of machinery. But he also argued that the length of the cycle, and especially the timing of the move from boom to slump, could be affected by other factors, including the operations of the financial system.
Here again we have to develop, make more concrete, Marx’s analysis of the rate of profit. That took no account of the division of the total surplus value between the interest received by the banks, and profit in the strict sense of the return received by productive capital. Obviously, movements of the rate of interest can affect the amount of profit available to the rest of the capitalist class, independently of what happens to the rate of profit in general. Shifts in the rate of interest also go hand in hand with the cycle of capital which we have just discussed.
It is difficult to summarise the most relevant content of Marx’s work in this area. As Engels lamented, Marx left only a mass of incomplete and disorderly notes on the subject. [16] Much of this was concerned with the details of contemporary crises and debates. For example, Marx placed a great deal of emphasis on commercial credit, debts contracted between commercial and industrial capital themselves, which is much less significant today. But the general picture which Marx provides of the expansion and contraction of the credit system in the course of the cycle, which we outlined in the last section, remains extremely relevant. Moreover Marx himself provides a concise account of the way in which the rate of interest changes:
If we consider the turnover cycles in which modern industry moves – inactivity, growing animation, prosperity, overproduction, crash, stagnation, inactivity, etc. ... we find that a low level of interest generally corresponds to periods of prosperity or especially high profit, a rise in interest comes between prosperity and collapse, while maximum interest up to extreme usury corresponds to a period of crisis ... yet low interest can also accompanied by stagnation, and a moderate rise in interest by growing animation. The rate of interest reaches its highest level during crises, when people have to borrow in order to pay, no matter what the cost. (Capital, Vol. 3, pp. 482–3)
The rate of interest is governed by the supply and demand for what Marx called loanable capital’. In the aftermath of a crisis, the period of stagnation and inactivity, interest rates will fall and remain low, because capitals with money to spare will be willing to lend it out again, or redeposit it in the banks, but the demand for loans for productive investment will be weak. As the system begins to expand again, and investment rise, the demand for loans will increase but so will the supply. Sales will be easy, prices rising, and profits high. In this period of prosperity, the credit system expands and more money flows into circulation, in response, as we saw earlier, to the expansion of the productive system itself: ‘The ease and regularity of returns, combined with an expanded commercial credit, ensures the supply of loan capital despite the increased demand and prevents the interest rate from rising.’ (Capital, Vol. 3, p. 619)
However, the expansion of credit, and the relatively low level of interest in relation to the rate of profit, themselves encourage an acceleration of investment and borrowing. The rise in prices, fuelled by the growth of credit, encourages speculation on a further rise in prices. Capitals borrow both to expand production even further, and, increasingly, simply to gamble on purchasing commodities, shares or property, hoping to make a quick profit from a rise in prices which will also enable them to pay off their debts.
The system then comes under pressure from two sources. On the one hand, profits actually generated by productive capital fail to rise to match the vast expectations generated by the speculation, and may even begin to fall, as costs rise and markets become glutted. On the other hand the rapid expansion of lending stretches the reserves of the banks to the limit. Interest rates rise rapidly as the demand for funds far exceeds the supply provided by the return of money as deposits to the banking system. But this rise in interest rates in turn cuts into the rate of profit of those capitals that have borrowed heavily.
The spiralling of credit and speculation means that the crash may come abruptly.
... the appearance of very solid business with brisk returns can merrily persists even when returns in actual fact have long since been made only at the cost of swindled money-lenders and swindled producers. This is why business always seems almost exaggeratedly healthy immediately before a collapse. (Capital, Vol. 3, pp. 615–6)
The banking system does not determine the course of the cycle, but it does accelerate and extend the booms, only to make the entire system dependent upon debt, vulnerable to a rise in interest rates and liable to crash. As the crisis begins, the interest level soars to ‘usurious rates’. Capitals faced with falling demand and prices cannot pay off their debts and are desperate to borrow more. The capitals with money in the bank withdraw it to keep themselves afloat. The rise in the rate of interest benefits the money-lenders, and forces large numbers of companies into bankruptcy.
But if the crisis becomes serious it may spread to the banks themselves. In that event there is a rush to turn bank deposits into cash, banks have to close, borrowing becomes impossible, and the whole system of credit and debt collapses. The crisis in the financial system in turn feeds back into the industrial crisis, aggravating it, and prolonging the stagnation which follows. As Marx summarised the whole process:
If the credit system appears as the principal lever of oveproduction and excessive speculation in commerce, this is simply because the reproduction process which is elastic by nature is now forced to its most extreme limit ... The credit system hence accelerates the material development of the productive forces and the creation of the world market, which it is the historical task of the capitalist mode of production to bring to a certain level of development, as material foundations for the new form of production. At the same time credit accelerates the violent outbreaks of this contradiction, crises, and with these the elements of dissolution of the old mode of production.
We have, therefore, three elements to Marx’s account of crises.
There is his explanation of the basic tendency of the rate of profit to fall, the rise in the ratio of dead to living labour, or of the amount of capital invested in means of production relative to the source of surplus-value. This means that over time, as the system ages, it should become prone to deeper and more prolonged slumps, whilst the booms become shorter and weaker. We have his account of the boom-slump cycle itself, which explains why even in a lengthy period of crisis and stagnation, the system continues to rise and fall, with periods of acute slump followed by limited recoveries. Finally we have his explanation of how the system of credit and banking is drawn into the cycle, in turn influencing the movement of production – helping to sustain and accelerate the booms, only to intensify the slumps which follow.
The relevance of all three of these strands to understanding the world crisis of the 1970s and 1980s should become apparent in the account which follows. But this is by no means obvious, not least when it concerns Marx’s analysis of the banking system and the course of the cycle. The capitalism which Marx examined was far less developed, much less international, much less concentrated in large corporations, and above all less subject to the growth and activity of nation states than it is today.
One consequence of those changes is a shift in the character of the boom-slump cycle. In the nineteenth century, the slump and the contraction of the system of credit went hand in hand with a wave of bankruptcies, a fall in prices (compensating for their rise in the boom), and a wiping-out of debt as it was either paid off, or the debtors were bankrupted and their assets sold. But nineteenth century capitalism consisted of a large number of small firms. The banking system itself was much less integrated and centralised than it was to become by the beginning of the twentieth century. A wave of bankruptcies, even the collapse of a bank or two, did not halt, indeed only briefly interrupted, the upward rise of capitalism. Indeed crises, in rationalising the system helped to restore the rate of profit of those capitals which survived.
Crises therefore were the mechanism by which capitalism resolved its own internal contradictions, ‘violent eruptions which for a time restore the disturbed equilibrium’ as Marx put it. They also served to accelerate the centralisation of capital in the hands of a much smaller group of large capitals – a process facilitated by the banks themselves, with their ability to concentrate large sums of money-capital. Hilferding, observing this growth of vast monopolies interconnected with the banks, suggested in his classic work Finance Capital that the crisis could be at least alleviated, and perhaps even resolved altogether, by this new type of ‘organised capital’.
But the crisis of the 1930s was to show that the concentration of capital in the hands of a few large corporations only intensified the difficulties of the system, once it entered into slump. A crisis now meant the bankruptcy not of a number of small firms but of several large corporations with a devastating impact on the whole national economy. A collapse of one bank now threatened an entire integrated banking system. Not least the internationalisation of the system meant that the crisis was transmitted from one country to another at rapid speed.
However, the crisis of the 1930s would also thrust upon the states, for the first time apart from war, the task of managing their national economies. The 1930s marked the advent of an era in which the concentration of capital was matched by the intervention of the state – increasing spending on arms and welfare, nationalising key sectors of the economy, propping up weaker capitals and bailing out banks in trouble and proclaiming its ability to prevent slumps and sustain growth for ever.
The crisis of the 1970s would, however, expose the myth of the Keynesian managed economy. Yet the protracted, stagflationary crisis of the last decade has been different from both the short sharp shocks of the nineteenth century, and the chronic depression of the 1930s. The persistence of inflation through both boom and slump has been the most obvious difference, but the new phenomenon of ‘stagflation’ (stagnation and inflation combined) is but a symptom of the much deeper transformation in the character of the system. At root it is a product both of the enormous concentration of capital, the resistance to price-cutting of the few giant corporations which dominated most industries – and the intervention of the state to prop up the system as the crisis deepened. That intervention involved, not least, supporting the vast and international system of credit and debt which had grown at accelerating pace in the post-war era. The major states and their central banks have had some success. There has, so far, been no major banking collapse, no sharp contraction of the credit system of the sort we discussed earlier.
But these features of the crisis also mean that the system is trapped in stagnation – there has been no thorough clearing-out, no rationalisation of the system through bankrupting the weak. the inefficient, and all those who cannot pay their debts. Instead the contradictions persist, the system staggers from slump to weak recovery, back into slump – and the debts have just grown and grown – until some of the suppressed tensions finally burst out in the course of 1982. It is this story – of banks and the states, debt and stagflation, and why it is the international banking system, the lending to countries like Poland and Mexico, which has finally broken down – that will be told in the rest of this article.
 
The origins of the debt crisis – a summary history
The history of international banking is a long one. As far back as the sixteenth century the banking houses of the Medicis and Fuggers were making and losing fortunes out financing the wars of the Holy Roman Emperors or the Kings of Spain and France. The Rothschilds, based in Frankfurt, London and Paris, had become the first ‘multinational’ banking firm in the early 1800s. [17] Marx, however, whilst noting the international repercussions of banking crises does not discuss them in any detail. This was partly a matter of levels of abstraction – Marx never wrote the volume on the world market where such developments would have been discussed. It was also because the significant period of capital export from the heartlands of developed capitalism in Western Europe to the rest of the world only began in the 1880s as he was dying.
The bulk of bank loans and other overseas investment in the 19th century came from Britain and went to finance railways and governments in the rest of Europe and America. But as rates of profit declined and the system entered into stagnation in the 1880s the search for profitable investment opportunities led those with spare capital further afield, and the competition became more intense. The rise of the new industrial powers of the United States and Germany threatened the dominance of France and Britain. The export of capital became intertwined with imperialist rivalries and the scramble to partition the globe between the major powers. It was this development which Lenin summed up by establishing the connection between the growth of ‘finance capital’, the concentration of capital in the hands of large monopolies intertwined with the banks, the export of capital and the epoch of Imperialism.
Although that thesis can be criticised in detail it did capture some of the decisive tendencies of the capitalism of that era. [18] Bank lending to foreign governments in particular was highly profitable but very risky. The American state of Mississippi is still listed in London as a bad debtor from its default in the 1850s. The prestigious London house of Barings, as we noted, collapsed in 1890 after guaranteeing dodgy loans to Argentina. Elsewhere however the accumulation of debt by sovereign borrowers was the cause or the excuse for intervention by the imperialist powers – in Egypt where the British took control in the 1880s, in Turkey where a consortium of German, British and French became the manager of the finances of the crumbling Ottoman empire, and in the Dominican Republic in the Caribbean where in 1907 in exchange for a loan, an American appointee was put in charge of the customs revenues, and troops were dispatched in 1911 and 1916 to guarantee that the money was collected. [19] After the Russian revolution in 1917, however, French holders of Tsarist bonds lost the lot, proving that international lending remained qualitatively different from lending to companies whose assets could always be flogged off after they had been taken to the bankruptcy court.
Capital export, and the markets and higher profits that it generated helped to sustain the rapid expansion of the system in the early years of the twentieth century. Capital export, including both bank lending and loans by individual ‘bond-purchasers’ tended to increase in times of slump in Britain, acting in counter-cyclical fashion to offset the severity of the crisis within the domestic economy. In the 1920s however, the rapid growth of international lending from the United States in particular served both to accelerate the boom and deepen the subsequent crash.
The events of 1929–32 vividly confirmed Marx’s account of the character of banking crises. In the United States nearly half the banks collapsed. In 1931 the Rothschild-controlled Kreditanstalt, Austria’s largest bank closed provoking a chain reaction of deposit withdrawals and bank failures throughout Europe. Germany, which had received large inflows of short-term money in the 1920s, was faced with a demand that the money be repaid instantly and was forced to default on its debts. In both Germany and the United States the collapse of the banking systems added to the severity of the crisis and as new loans dried up thousands of companies had to close. In both countries unemployment was as much as a third of the working population in the depths of the slump. In Latin America the fall in the price of raw materials meant that Bolivia defaulted in 1930, to be followed by names familiar in the current crisis – Peru, Chile, Brazil, Mexico. [20]
International defaults were in some ways less serious for the banks in the 1930s than the crises in the domestic economy. Instead of lending their own money, banks had in most cases simply sold bonds to wealthy individuals on behalf of the government which issued them. Nevertheless in the wake of the crisis the flow of capital from the world’s main financial centres dried up. The issue of foreign securities by United States financial institutions declined from an annual average of $1151 million in 1924–28 to $229 million in 1931 and nothing at all in 1934. [21]
Crudely summarised it can be said that the 1930s marked an end to the era of finance capital and the beginning the era of state capital not just in Russia but throughout the capitalist world. In the aftermath of the crisis states moved to prop up their domestic States. The Roosevelt government stepped in to provide insurance for depositors and extend the powers of the Federal Reserve central bank over the banking system. In Germany the banks were first nationalised by the Nazis and then allowed to operate only under the strict direction of the state. In France four of the largest banks and thirty-four insurance companies were nationalised at the end of the Second World War. [22] In Britain in the 1930s and 1940s both Tory and Labour governments pursued ‘cheap money’ policies, keeping the basic interest rate (the Bank Rate) as low as 2%, to encourage industrial investment.
The postwar order established in the West under American hegemony put an end to the period of national isolation and autarchic policies which had marked the 1930s and led to the second world war. The interests of American capital demanded that the markets of Western Europe be opened up in the name of free trade. But individual states retained the controls they had established over their domestic banks, and the network of exchange controls which limited the mobility of private capital. International bank lending to cover balance of payments deficits was to be in the hands of government-funded international agencies which were dominated by the United States. Capital export in the 1950s and 1960s consisted mainly of either government loans and aid, or direct investment by American and other multinationals, mainly in other industrial countries.
In the 1950s as the long boom gathered momentum the banks in America and Europe were still both tightly regulated and rather minor actors on the international scene. This situation would change for two main reasons.
One was that as the boom accelerated so the demand for bank loans increased as in the booms discussed by Marx. This occurred slowly. Most large corporations were making ample profits to finance their investments internally. But in the 1960s the competitive pressures began to increase, the scale of investment grew, and loans were cheap and readily available. Creeping inflation was rooted in the concentration of capital and the implicit agreement among the giant monopolies to raise prices in line with each other and never to engage in price competition. But inflation also both encouraged and was fuelled by the expansion of credit. Inflation encouraged companies to go into debt because it lowered the value of past debt in real terms, whilst at the same time raising the cost of new investment. The speeding up of the circulation of money by bank lending (which was increasingly efficient and centralised) in turn helped to sustain the overall level of monetary demand which meant that prices could be raised in the expectation that sales would not fall as a result.
By the late 1960s bank lending was accelerating hand in hand with inflation in most of the major western economies. Levels of debt owed by governments, companies and individuals were rising correspondingly. In the past this would have placed increasing pressure on the monetary reserves of the banking system, forcing up interest rates and cutting off the boom. This did not happen only because governments intervened to increase the money supply, in effect printing more money and expanding the reserves of the banks thereby providing as one Marxist has termed it a ‘pseudo-validation’ of the increase in the prices of commodities and sustaining the whole inflationary process. [23] States were finding that they had made a ‘one-sided bargain’, whereby they were committed to propping up the banking system as a whole but had lost all control of the process of bank lending. [24]
The second development that undermined state regulation of the banks was the re-emergence of international lending but in a form quite different from that of the 1920s. The postwar expansion of the system saw an even more rapid growth in the level of world trade, the size and number of multinational companies, and the mutual interdependence of national economies. The revival of international banking was a response to these developments. American banks set up branches overseas to service American multinationals. British banks in London began to receive deposits in dollars which they could then profitably lend out again. American moves in the 1960s to control interest rates and the flow of funds abroad only served to encourage American banks to transfer their base for lending to American and other multinationals to Europe, and especially to London where Harold Wilson’s 1964 Labour government allowed them great scope to operate. [25]
The emergence of the Eurodollar market, as it came to be known, marked a new phase in the international integration of the system. The Euromarkets (which came to include lending in other Euro currencies – sterling, marks and yen as well) were truly international markets in that they involved the borrowing and lending of currencies outside of their country of origin. Lending through the Euromarkets was more profitable because banks were not subject there to government controls, which usually demanded, for example, that they keep a fixed proportion of their deposits as reserves. In the Euromarkets reserves were minimised as banks maximised their lending. The use, via the markets, of offshore tax-havens such as the Cayman Islands, Luxembourg and Panama also enabled banks to escape taxation. On one estimate the average worldwide effective tax rate for American banks on their profits was only 19% in the 1970s. [26]
The growth of the Euromarkets was fuelled by the American balance of payments deficit which widened in the 1960s with the costs of the Vietnam war and increased overseas investment. As dollars piled up in the hands of holders outside the United States, they were redeposited in the Euromarkets for further lending. Even central banks in Europe began to deposit their foreign exchange reserves with banks in London, undermining their own attempts to keep the markets under control. Between 1965 and 1973 the size of the market (excluding interbank transactions or deposits by one bank with another) grew from $15 billion to $132 billion. The internationalisation of the money markets began to undermine the ability of individual states to manage their own national currencies, and provided ample opportunity for speculative movements from one currency to another. This in turn helped to undermine the whole postwar order of stable exchange rates which finally collapsed in 1973.
In the period leading up to the return of the world system to slump in 1974 however, the role of domestic lending was still more significant. Some observers have argued that the length and scale of the long postwar boom is attributable to the inflationary generation of credit, that the ‘western economy sailed to prosperity on a sea of debt’. [27] This is extremely dubious. The expansion of credit did not take off until the late 1960s, after 20 years of boom, and was far too unstable to do more than extend the Boom for a few years; What is true is that in the early seventies the pressure on profit margins on the one hand, and attempts by governments to follow Keynesian reflationary policies as the boom faltered on the other, meant an inflationary explosion of both private company and public debt. The rate of growth of bank loans in the United States accelerated from 9.0% a year between 1965 and 1969 to 15.2% a year in 1970–73. [28] The boom was also becoming more speculative. Inflation now meant that higher and quicker profits could be made from speculating on property development or the stock exchange, or commodities such as wheat and copper, than from productive investment in factories and machinery.
The 1974 slump, precipitated by the oil price rise, but with far deeper roots in the declining profitability of industrial capital, put an end to the speculative boom of the early 1970s. In Britain the collapse of the property market threatened the network of secondary banks which had sprouted in the previous decade. The financial crisis had all the hallmarks of those analysed by Marx with one important difference. To prevent a panic and the crisis spreading to the banking system as a whole the central banks intervened. In Britain the Bank of England put up $2 billion in a lifeboat operation to rescue 26 financial institutions. [29]
But whilst the states (which intervened to bail out or nationalise the most important debt-ridden companies such as British Leyland, Lockheed and Chrysler) and the central banks (which pumped money into the banking system and held down interest rates) could prevent a collapse – they could not restore the system to health. The recovery which followed in the late 1970s was weak and fragile. Investment levels remained low, and despite low interest rates (negative for a while in real terms after inflation was taken into account) borrowing was slow to recover. This was one reason why the banks turned to new, more eager, borrowers in the third world.
The Euromarkets were also hit by the 1974 crisis. The Herstatt bank of Cologne and the Franklin bank of New York had to close after huge losses from foreign exchange speculation. For a brief period this led to a rapid shrinking of the international banking system. The number of banks involved fell almost overnight from over 200 to under 40, as deposits in the interbank market were withdrawn from any bank which lacked the most impeccable credentials. [30] The crisis exposed the degree of integration of the international financial system, created by the way in which banks deposit funds and borrow from each other – so that a failure by one bank ripples through into losses throughout the system. But the crisis also forced the central banks to announce in the Basle Concordat of 1975 that they would take responsibility for guaranteeing deposits with their respective national banks. Confidence was restored, but for the states it was a matter of responsibility without control. When international lending began to grow rapidly again they had no means of regulating it. The banks were landed between 1974 and 1976 alone with an estimated $46 billion worth of deposits from the OPEC countries such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the Gulf States (although the contribution of OPEC deposits to the growth of the Euromarkets has been exaggerated and on one estimate has been only 10% of the total). The slump meant that profitable opportunities for lending in the main industrial countries were limited. Flush with cash, on which they were having to put out interest, the banks were desperate to lend. Third world borrowers, facing large deficits on their balance of payments and often with ambitious industrialisation programmes were anxious to borrow. Between 1976 and 1981 lending to such borrowers, mainly through the Euromarkets, rose at an average yearly rate of 23%. [31]
The whole process of channelling funds from surplus to deficit countries is now often referred to as the great recycling folly. [32] At the time it was acclaimed as a great achievement by all but the most far-sighted, as a means by which the banks could continue to lend to those who wanted to spend, and thus maintain the overall level of demand in the world economy. Certainly the advocates of financial rigour, who now criticise the imprudence of the banks, fail to consider that the stagnation of the system would have been even deeper in the late 1970s if the lending to countries in Latin America and Eastern Europe had not occurred. But the suggestion that this was an act of folly on the part of reckless bankers also needs to be rejected.
Anthony Sampson in his book The Money Lenders tells of how bankers at the annual meetings of the IMF in the late 1970s would literally pursue the finance ministers of countries like Brazil and Argentina in the hope of signing deals for new loans ahead of their competitors. [33] His account of the optimism of some bankers over the mineral resources of Zaire or the stability of the dictatorship of the Shah of Iran makes them look naive and blundering rather than calculating financial sharks. It is a good story, and provides a useful corrective for those inclined to overestimate the sagacity of the ruling class or the expertise of economists. The problem with it is that it ignores just how profitable that lending proved to be. Banking is a very competitive business and as more banks, including the Japanese and tiny banks from the Midwest of the United States, entered the market, margins of profit on loans to the biggest borrowers were forced down. In 1979 Argentina was being charged an interest rate only slightly higher than that for the British electricity board.



TABLE I
American Bank Profits and Assets in Foreign Countries 1980




8 Largest US Banks
 


Total
Revenue
($ Billion)


Foreign
Revenue
($ Billion)


For. Rev.
as % of
Assets


Total
Foreign
Assets
($ Billion)




Citicorp


  14.2


    9.1


64.1


    68.0




Bank of America


  12.1


    6.3


52.5


    44.3




Chase Manhattan


    8.0


    5.1


63.5


    40.1




J.P. Morgan


    5.2


    3.2


62.0


    27.3




Mfrs Hanover


    5.2


    2.8


54.5


    28.2




Chemical New York


    4.3


    2.1


49.4


    17.5




Bankers Trust


    3.7


    2.0


55.3


    16.4




First Interstate


    2.3


    1.3


57.2


      7.2




TOTALS


$55.0


$31.9


(av. 58.0%)


$249.0




[Source: see note 34]



Nevertheless, by 1977 most of the major United States banks were making over 50% of their profits on overseas lending (in the case of Chase Manhattan and Citicorp over 70%). [34] Much of the debt was at floating interest rates, which rose after 1979 in line with the rise in interest rates in the United States and the Euromarkets. The scale of the profits American banks were making in 1980 is indicated by the table. If the banks ignored warnings about the rapid accumulation of debt, and the danger of defaults, it was partly because of the profits they were making, which could be made nowhere else, and partly also because the largest banks at least were relying on the IMF and US government to bail them out if they got into trouble. As an official of the Chase Manhattan bank told the magazine Euromoney in 1976:
On the one hand a purely technical analysis of the current financial conditions would suggest that defaults are inevitable; yet on the other hand, many experts feel that this is not likely to happen. The World Bank, the IMF, and the governments of major industrialised nations, they argue, would step in rather than watch any default seriously disrupt the entire Euromarket apparatus with possible secondary damage to their own banking systems which in many cases are already straining under their own credit problems. [35]
The lending was also highly selective. Countries which ran into trouble with their repayments such as Zaire and Peru were promptly cut off from all further loans. In the ten years after 1971 three quarters of all Eurocurrency lending to the third world went to just six countries – Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, South Korea, Peru and the Philippines. Mexico and Brazil alone accounted for a quarter of the debt from all sources. [36]
It has been argued that much of this selectivity was political, that bank loans were directed particularly to client regimes of the United States, or those particularly favourable to the operations of private, multinational capital. The manner in in which bank lending to Chile after 1973, and to Argentina after 1976 increased in the wake of American sponsored military coups is commonly used to support this claim. [37] But the argument misses the point that the real significance of these coups was that they led to a crushing of the working-class movement, and an enormous increase in the rate of exploitation. It ignores the rapid growth of lending to Eastern Europe, even though American banks played only a small role in this. But in Peru in the early 1970s US banks were willing to lend to the nationalist military regime of Velasco even whilst it was cut off from money from American sponsored international agencies after nationalising a number of American owned mining interests. [38]
What mattered to the banks were two features which characterised almost all the major borrowers. One was that they possessed either substantial mineral resources capable at least in theory of generating export revenues on the world market, or that they had already acquired a social and industrial infrastructure which made further rapid industrial development possible (some such as Mexico and Brazil had both). The other was that they were strong repressive states, capable of maintaining high levels of exploitation. As one banker revealed about one of the important state capitalist borrowers in the mid-1970s:
We like Algeria because it’s totalitarian and if the government says people will have to cut back consumption, they will. [39]
Similar considerations applied to Poland, Brazil, South Korea, and Chile after 1973.
By and large the banks preferred lending to states rather than private companies. States after all could at least in theory mobilise the resources of a whole country to pay them back. In Mexico 86% of all funds went to the government or state-owned enterprises. In Brazil the banks financed the military regime’s programme of massive state investment. A remarkable alliance was formed between the Brazilian state which accounted for 51% of industrial assets, multinationals (another 11%) and the international banks (which provided the capital necessary for rapid expansion). [40]
Neither vast resources and industrial capacity, nor vicious repression, could, however, guarantee that the banks would get their money back. The ability of the major debtor economies to service their debt depended also upon the health of the world economy. In the years after 1975 continuing inflation and a moderate recovery in the West lightened the burden of debt service (the proportion of exports devoted to the payment of interest plus the repayment of the sum originally borrowed, in any one year). Inflation of export prices meant that the burden of the debt diminished in real terms, but encouraged the debtors to borrow even more. The weak recovery of the late 1970s went hand in hand with a rapid growth of IT the volume of world trade especially between North and South. All that changed after 1979.
The turning point came with the appointment of Paul Volcker as Chairman of the Federal Reserve (the US central bank) in 1979. His task was to reverse the fall in the value of the dollar on world markets by restraining the growth of the US money supply. He succeeded but only at the cost of sending American interest rates soaring through the roof. With other major economies turning to tighter monetary policies as well, interest rates rose generally, threatening an already precarious financial structure inside the western economies. There is no space here to discuss adequately the repercussions of this shift for the corporate borrowers inside Western Europe and North America. Many had remained heavily indebted through the 1970s, and the failure of the 1974–75 slump to produce a clearing out of the weak and inefficient had merely postponed the problem. As interest rates rose whilst profits were squeezed the banks benefited but the burden for many companies of this debt forced them to slash their operations and throw thousands on to the dole-queue. Bankruptcies soared and a number of major multinationals found themselves in deep trouble – AEG-Telefunken in West Germany. Massey-Ferguson and International Harvesters, Dome Petroleum in Canada, several of the major steel firms and airlines in the United States. According to one observer the American banks were faced with around $100 billion on dodgy loans to corporate customers. [41]
The financial squeeze in the industrial west soon spread to the debtor economies in the third world. The integration of the world financial markets meant that the rise in American interest rates was soon reflected in the Euromarkets. At the same time the slump meant a decline in the markets for raw materials and an even sharper fall in commodity prices. In real terms, on one estimate, interest rates moved from being negative after inflation in 1979, to a positive, rate of 20% in 1981 for the major commodity exporters. [42]
The initial response to these pressures was to go on borrowing, at least by those states such as Mexico and Brazil to which the banks were still willing to lend. But the debt-service ratios were mounting rapidly (see table for figures at end of 1982). An increasing proportion of new borrowing was being used simply to pay off old debt. In 1980 the ‘non-oil developing countries’ received $45 billion from the banks but after paying interest their net receipts were only $8 billion. By 1982 their net receipts had become negative – they were paying more money back than they were receiving. [43] As the table shows the burden had become intolerable: [44]



TABLE II
Debt figures for key borrowers




 


Total debt
$bn


Borrowing
from banks
at end of
1981 $bn


Debt services in 1982 as %
of export of goods and services




 


interest


principal


total




Mexico


80   


56.9


37


92


129




Brazil


75   


52.7


45


77


122




Argentina


37   


24.8


44


135


179




South Korea


32.5


19.9


11


43


  53




Venezuela


18.5


26.2


14


81


  95




Yugoslavia


18   


10.7


14


32


  46




Philippines


15   


10.2


18


74


  91




Chile


15   


10.5


40


76


116




Ecuador


  6.6


  4.5


30


92


122




[Source: Financial Times, 15 October 1982]
 



Where the money went – the state of the debtor economies
In the latter half of the 1970s, the growth of the major borrowing countries in the third world and Eastern Europe was well above that of the industrial west, and in some cases (Mexico, Poland, South Korea) was spectacularly high. Between 1973 and 1979 the countries as a whole grew at an average annual rate of around 5%. That growth, as Nigel Harris has observed, helped to rescue the major industrial economies from the 1974–5 slump, “Providing the markets for the export of consumer and capital goods and sustaining the level of world trade. [45]
In the years 1980-83 that situation was sharply reversed. For the developing countries as a whole growth fell to 3% in 1980 and below 2% in 1982. But the aggregate figures conceal a great diversity of experience, and the severity of the crisis in particular countries. In 1982 the growth of the oil exporters plunged sharply with the fall in the oil price and the disarray of OPEC. In Latin America as a whole overall production fell by 2.4% in 1981 and 1.2% in 1982, before the debt crisis of the last year began to take its toll. In the Eastern bloc chronic stagnation set in. [46]
In some countries talk of economic collapse ceased to be the hyperbole of journalists as the figures registered falls in output not seen in any country, apart from the devastation of war, since the 1930s. In Poland output fell by an estimated 12% in 1981 and by a further 8% in 1982. In Argentina the economy dropped by 6% in 1981 and by another 5% in 1882. In Chile a highly speculative boom burst and output fell by 14% in 1982 alone. The bare statistics of course cannot convey the suffering and humiliation they involved for some, usually the poorest, sections of the population, the shortages of essential goods in Poland or the effects of soaring inflation in Argentina, or indeed the shock to the authoritarian political regimes of all three countries.
Debt, as economists say, is nothing but deferred trade. The borrowing had enabled the countries concerned to finance large current account deficits, in effect to import more than they exported. Now the situation had to be reversed, and the borrowers had to run an even larger current account surplus to cover repayment not just of the money borrowed but of the interest as well. The prospects of them doing so in 1982 or in the foreseeable future were nil.
Whilst the burden of interest payments was rising rapidly, maintaining exports was becoming more and more difficult. Commodity prices fell sharply between 1980 and 1982 by around 30% in nominal terms. [47] In real terms allowing for inflation they hit their lowest level since before the Second World War. [48] In the course of 1980 alone the price of one kilo Argentinian beef fell from 218 (American) cents to 160 cents; of Brazilian coffee from 485 cents to 317 cents; of Chilean and Peruvian copper from 260 cents to 165 cents (only cocaine of the major Latin American commodity exports kept its value). [49] The fall in the price of oil was less severe but combined with a sharp decline in the quantity of exports was sufficient to push the economies of Ecuador, Venezuela, and even non-OPEC Mexico with its special access to markets in the United States, into trouble.
In Brazil remarkable efforts were made to compensate by increasing the level of manufacturing exports, with some success. In 1981 the government deliberately engineered a sharp recession designed to cut back imports and divert resources into exports. Manufacturing exports rose by 30%, especially to markets elsewhere in the third world and oil imports were cut by a quarter. [50] For the first time in four years the economy attained a surplus on its balance of trade. The success was noted with approval by western bankers and for a time Brazil’s credit rating was well above that of other major debtors.
But the exercise was like running on a treadmill. In the first half of 1982 Brazil’s export volume actually rose by 5% whilst its revenues fell by 10% because of the fall in commodity prices. [51] Several of the major Brazilian export markets also collapsed in the course of 1982, notably Nigeria hit by the oil price squeeze, and in Latin America itself. Import controls, especially in the United States, added to their problems. Exports of vehicles and components fell by 20%. Imports of capital goods fell by 16% in 1981 and another 10% in 1982, as oil and interest payments absorbed almost the entire revenue from exports. [52] But as a result sectors of industry were beginning to grind to a halt in the absence of necessary spare parts of essential machinery, thus threatening the export drive itself.
Throughout Latin America it was the marginalised population of the shanty-towns, the unemployed (officially around 10%) and the underemployed scraping a living selling odds and ends on street corners (perhaps as much as another 30% in Brazil and Mexico), and the industrial working-class who suffered. Bankers, IMF economists and journalists would fly in first-class, stay in the local Hilton or Sheraton all expenses paid, examine the figures, talk over dinner with the local officials and make their recommendations – an end to food subsidies (an Economist magazine favourite this one, suggesting slyly that all those billions had been squandered on the poor), cuts in public spending, a general reduction in living standards.
For the bulk of the population after years of repression and savage wage-cuts there was little left to cut – no welfare state, no social security cushion. In Argentina in 1982 real wages were still 50% below their 1975 pre-coup level. In Brazil the union organisation and strikes of 1978–80 had pushed up wages in the industrial areas of Sao Paulo. But still an estimated 50% of the population had seen no benefit at all from the post-1964 ‘economic miracle’. According to the World Bank Brazil is the only country in the world where the richest 10% of the population receive more than half of the national income. (In Mexico the top 20% receive 53% of national incomes and the bottom 20% receive 3%.) Whoever benefited from the foreign borrowing it was not the working-class of Latin America. [53]
Where then did the money go? A common explanation (much in favour in right-wing circles as it diverts attention from the depth of the world crisis and the sheer burden of interest payments) is that the money was simply blown, frittered away on corruption and wasteful projects by governments, or used to subsidise a boom in luxury imports for the middle classes and spirited away across the border to buy up villas and other property in Florida and the Bahamas. If this account is inadequate it nevertheless contains an important element of truth.
The most corrupt and incompetent third world regimes in fact received relatively small sums from the banks. In the case of Zaire in the mid-1970s some of the more starry-eyed bankers seem to have been carried away by the immense mineral reserves of that country and President Mobutu’s heartfelt commitment to western interests. Perhaps some banks came under pressure, or were swayed by government propaganda, because of Zaire’s strategic significance for American plans in Africa. But by 1978 even the most patriotic banker was not prepared to go on lending to a country in which most of the $2 billion worth of loans seem to have ended up in the pockets of the Mobutu family. [54]
Zaire was a dramatic but extreme case. But the squandering of borrowed money by the local ruling-class of the debtor countries was common enough. In the oil-rich economies of Mexico and Venezuela the corruption is legendary. Between 1979 and 1982 money poured out of both countries, into tax-sheltered bank accounts in the Bahamas or property in the United States. ‘Mexicans are reckoned to hold some $30 billion in assets abroad, Venezuelans some $18 billion’ according to The Economist. [55]
In Mexico, as in Argentina, Chile and Venezuela, an overvalued currency made overseas assets relatively cheap and encouraged the flight of capital (as indeed the high value of the pound has done in Britain in recent years). In the years 1981–82 the flight accelerated. Some $8 billion is estimated to have left Mexico in the period between October 1981 and the first major devaluation of the peso in February 1982. In one week alone before the August 1982 crisis broke, and the shutters came down, an estimated $2.5 billion is said to have left the country. [56] Elements of the Mexican ruling-class at least were well aware of how serious the crisis was. In effect anything up to a quarter of the money lent to Mexico flowed straight out again, the dollars, the precious foreign exchange, used by the Mexican rich to buy up assets in the United States itself. They still hold that property. The burden of paying off the accumulated debt rests solely on the shoulders of the majority of the population living at near subsistence levels already.
In Argentina, the foreign borrowing of some $40 billion seems to have produced virtually no additional investment or sustained growth at all. In 1982 the Argentinian gross national product, despite a sharp if temporary boom in 1979, was still 2½% lower than it had been in 1974. The monetarist regime introduced after the military coup in 1975 was less thorough than in Chile but it still helped to wreck most of Argentinian industry. High interest rates and an overvalued peso were supposed to bring down inflation and rationalise the economy. Argentinian industry was faced first with a torrent of cheaper imports then with a soaring inflation rate and a collapse of the peso in 1981. Speculation was a far more profitable business than manufacturing in the years up to 1981. Companies could borrow money on the international markets and then lend it out again in Argentina at four times the rate of interest. Those who got their money out before the peso collapsed trebled the value of their original capital. Those who did not were unable to repay their overseas debts in devalued pesos and some spectacular bankruptcies of financial companies ensued. [57]
The scale of bankruptcies in the course of 1981 was such that the state had to intervene and bail out of the shareholders and take over their foreign debts. The workers thrown on the dole and those who saw their wages cut again in 1981 by over 20% had no such protection. The state was already responsible for some 40% of the economy and over half the capital investment in the country despite all the rhetoric about free enterprise. The Army controlled the steel industry jealously, and the navy the shipyards. [58] On top of that some 50% of the public debt was a result of purchases of military material. [59] In the aftermath of the Falklands war it remains the country most seriously in arrears on its debt repayments. According to former economy minister Aldo Ferrer
Argentina’s foreign debt increased by US$30 billion between 1975 and 1982. Two thirds of this represents capital flight and arms purchases. The remaining third can be traced to luxury imports, foreign tourism, and a subsidy to royalty payments and profit remission by foreign companies operating in the country – a total waste of resources from the national point of view. [60]
In Chile, by contrast, the monetarist regime following the coup 1973 was far more thorough and seemingly much more successful. But the consequences in the end were similar. Under the Allende government Chile had been effectively blacklisted in the national financial markets. The 1973 coup was the condition both for a resumption of American aid and a revival of bank lending. By 1976 wages had fallen by 50–60% from their 1972 level. Pinochet’s economic advisors, the ‘Chicago boys’ had set about a remarkable economic experiment, dismantling exchange and import controls, and uniquely for Latin American regimes dismantling the state sector. Nationalised enterprises were sold off at prices so low that the hidden subsidy to the purchasers amounted to 40–50%. [61]
In the late 1970s the Chilean economy was growing at rates of 8 or 9% a year, inflation was down from over 500% to 10% and the ‘experiment’ was proclaimed a success by economists and bankers alike. In reality the boom was hollow. Despite the rapid inflow of foreign capital, fixed investment in new factories and machinery averaged only 15.2% of GNP between 1977 and 1980, ‘one of the lowest rates in the developing world’ according to the Financial Times. [62] Chile remained dependent upon copper for half its exports and on other raw materials such as timber and fish for most of the rest. As commodity prices fell after 1980 the trading deficit soared. In 1981 several of the largest speculative enterprises collapsed. In 1982 industrial production collapsed, even the official unemployment level topped the 20% level and the state was forced to intervene.
The monetarist and free enterprise rhetoric of the Chilean government, as in Argentina, was exposed by the sheer depth of the crisis. In January 1983 the government was forced to liquidate three major banks and nationalise five others, including the two largest, to prevent their collapse undermining the economy as a whole. In May the state, under strong pressure from the international banks and the IMF, was forced to take on responsibility for repayment of much of the private sector’s foreign debt. [63]
It would be mistaken, however, to generalise too readily from these examples to the other debtor economies. In both Chile and Argentina the banks seem to have been led astray by the combination of ‘free market’ ideology and successful repression into lending large sums of money which were by and large squandered by the military regimes and local ruling-classes. Elsewhere, and notably in Brazil and Mexico, substantial proportions of the money borrowed from the banks was invested in new productive capacity. But as both cases show, investment by itself does not guarantee a sufficient return.
The IMF itself, in its 1983 World Economic Outlook confronts the question directly, of ‘the degree to which the borrowed financial resources have been used to finance the acquisition of productive capital facilities rather than merely to support current consumption.’ [64] It quotes figures showing that the proportion off Gross National Product invested in the ‘Non-Oil Developing Countries’ rose from 18.9% in the years 1968–72, to 21.9% in 1974–77, to 23.6% in 1978–81. The figures it argues ‘tend to negate suggestions that the upsurge of foreign borrowing has been used! predominantly to support unwarranted levels of consumption.’ But it also observes that the figures do not establish either the efficiency of that investment, or the foreign exchange earnings it produces. There lies the critical issue. In a context of world slump the problem generally is not too little productive capacity but too much – too much for stagnant world markets in particular industries, such as steel, shipbuilding, and vehicles, and too much to generate a rate of profit sufficient to meet the demands for interest repayment on borrowed funds.
The clearest example of the problems created by a massive investment programme is Brazil. The Brazilian state in the 1970s launched a whole series of gargantuan investment projects, financed in large part by foreign borrowing – hydroelectric dams and nuclear power stations, steel mills and shipyards, the sugar into alcohol as an alternative to petrol project, the development of vast mining complexes in association with multinational capital. Whilst Brazilian private capital remained weak, the state under the generals took on some 70% of total fixed investment. [65] Its aim was to build up the infrastructure necessary both to attract foreign capital and sustain the Brazilian industrial boom. The success, both in terms of industrial growth and the attraction of foreign capital from 1967 onwards was indeed remarkable. But with the advent of slump again in the 1980s it was clear that Brazil had over-reached itself.
Some of the projects were too ambitious, too capital-intensive (the capital-output ratio in Brazil is now extremely high at 3.8), and far too long-term to produce the returns capable of meeting interest payments on seven-to-eight year term loans. Some, such as the huge Itaipu hydro-electric scheme, have been abandoned though virtually near completion, for want of cash. The Carajas ore project has been delayed for one year, because of the crisis in the world steel industry. The Paragominas bauxite development in association with Rio Tinto Zinc has been postponed indefinitely. [66] The state-owned shipbuilding company is bankrupt, with $2 billion worth of foreign debt in its own right. [67] Finally the state-owned steel company, Siderbras has run into problems because of import controls in the USA and the decline of domestic investment.
In Mexico the state similarly took responsibility for a massive investment programme once the scale of its oil reserves became clear in the mid-1970s. They failed utterly to anticipate the slump in the oil market after 1980. The rest of Mexican industry after years of subsidy and protection from foreign competition remains weak and inefficient. Major private sector borrowers such as the Grupo Alfa, which alone has debts of some $2½ billion, also launched on ambitious expansion and investment programmes only to land themselves in bankruptcy when the crisis hit in 1982. [68]
Some of the major borrowers outside Latin America also had extremely high investment levels in the 1970s. This was especially true of East European economies. Poland used its overseas borrowing to sustain an investment level of 35% of Gross National Product. [69] Yugoslavia’s investment of 43% of Gross National Product in 1980 was considered by the Financial Times to be a world record. [70] One problem was that these industrial investments remained heavily dependent upon imports of components, technology, and raw materials. The cost of the extra imports often more than offset the extra foreign exchange such projects generated from increased exports to the West. In Poland, as in Brazil, several monster projects had to be abandoned unfinished, as the debt squeeze tightened. Others have suffered from a chronic shortage of spare parts and materials as imports were slashed. [71]
The essential point here is a simple one. To repeat, explanations of the crisis in the debtor economies in terms primarily of corruption, capital flight and unnecessary consumption are inadequate and misleading. They ignore the fact that the crisis of capitalism is a result of too much investment – too much to generate the rate of return necessary to satisfy investors or meet the interest payments on borrowed money. The decline in investment which ensued as the slump took hold only accentuated the problems of low profitability and chronic overcapacity, especially in means of production industries such as steel, petrochemicals, and mining.
The roots of the debt crisis lie less with the individual states concerned, or even with the rashness of the bankers who lent so freely, than with the crisis of the system as a whole. The variety of the regimes which have fallen into bankruptcy, from state capitalist Poland to ‘privatised’ Chile, from oil rich Mexico and Venezuela to the largest Newly Industrialised Country (and the world’s tent largest economy) Brazil, itself suggests that the crisis has far deeper roots than mismanagement by particular governments, or patterns of economic policy. There are one or two much-quoted exceptions. Of the major debtor economies, South Korea in particular has been able to avoid serious difficulty. But that does not mean that the other debtors could have successfully emulated its example. South Korea has been able to maintain its growth-rate largely because of its phenomenal export capacity. In terms of industrialisation it is roughly on a par with Brazil, but its economy is far more oriented towards exports (which take around 40% of its GNP compared to only 9% in Brazil and 13% in Mexico). [72] But there is only room on the world market for two or three South Koreas. Its growth in areas such as shipbuilding, where the total market is stagnant or declining, has been the result of cut-throat competition at the expense of rivals who include Brazil. The idea floated by some observers that every economy could be like South Korea is ridiculous.
 
Rescuing the banks – the crash averted
By the spring of 1982, as the world economic crisis persisted with no sign of recovery, the western bankers had worked up a cold sweat over the level of third world debt and the prospect of a major default. Poland’s failure to meet the payments on its $24 billion debt in 1981 had frightened them into cutting off lending to the whole of Eastern Europe, including even such a ‘creditworthy’, western-oriented borrower as Hungary. The bankers, as one indiscreet West German indicated to the Sunday Times, welcomed Jaruselski’s crushing of Solidarity, and the prospects of restoration of ‘order’ to the Polish economy. [73] But it was clear that the restoration of Poland’s economy to a point where it could pay off its debts would be a lengthy affair. The situation in Latin American worried them even more.
Yet, in the classical mould of banking crises, it was the banks’ own action in cutting back on new loans which precipitated the Mexican crisis of August 1982, and threatened the whole precarious house of cards of international lending. The Falklands war in April/May 1982 exposed the bankruptcy of the Argentine economy, and added to the financial squeeze on the whole continent. In June a jumbo Mexican loan of $2.5 billion was turned down by the banks, despite an interest rate 1% higher than Mexico had been paying a year earlier. The writing was on the wall; money poured out of the country, and continued to grow even after a forced devaluation on August 6. The Mexican government announced that it could not meet its debt repayments on schedule, and unilaterally declared a moratorium, a suspension of payment. The world’s biggest debtor, its foreign exchange reserves exhausted, was in a state of financial collapse.
The speed with which the American government and the international financial authorities reacted to the crisis was itself a testimony to its severity. In the course of a weekend the US government put up $2 billion (including $1 billion in advance payment for oil); the Bank of International Settlements (BIS – the organisation of central banks) provided a $1.85 billion bridging loan in anticipation of a major International Monetary Fund package, with half the money coming from the US Federal Reserve; the IMF itself promised $4 billion; even the private banks themselves agreed to an emergency credit of $1 billion.
The fear was partly that the nine largest American banks alone had around 50% their capital and reserves locked into Mexico. But it was also much wider than that. An outright default in Mexico would have precipitated a complete freeze of new international bank lending to the whole of the third world. The debts of Mexico, Brazil and Argentina together were sufficient to wipe out the profits, reserves, and the value of the shareholders’ stocks in the major American banks, a far more important factor than the ideology of Reaganomics. As one Swiss banker put it, the rescue was necessary to ‘ensure continual smooth functioning of the international financing system’. [74] Yet the rescue, at least for a while, was successful. As one expert commented later:
Mexico needed $2.7 billion more in 1982 just to meet interest payments and finance necessary imports. To build reserves to a safe level required another $2.5 billion. The rescue package provides it. The immediate crisis is past, thanks to the amount of money mobilised for Mexico. The rapidity with which the rescue was arranged showed both how dangerous default by a large debtor would be and the capacity of authorities to contain it if the political will exists.
The Reagan administration took the lead in assembling the rescue package. Over a weekend Mexico obtained more money in emergency credits from the US government alone than Costa Rica owes all its creditors. The level of US banks’ Mexican lending helps to explain why ideology did not stand in the way of action. What Poland was for the German banks’ profit pictures, Mexico will be for the US banks ... [75]
In the aftermath of Mexico US policy shifted gear in two decisive respects. It now agreed to support an increase in funding for the IMF. At the same time the US Federal Reserve moved to increase the money supply and bring down American interest rates. What that indicated to the rest of the world was that the American government was indeed willing to print more dollars if necessary to bail-out the world’s debtors and the major banks. But there was an obvious problem here, one which caused agonies for the monetarists in the regime. If the United States government or the Federal Reserve simply agreed to pump more money into the debtor economies, or bail-out any bank in trouble, they would be giving money away to those who had been most incompetent or irresponsible. The cost would be borne by other sections of American capital, whether through higher taxes or inflation. The discipline of the market would indeed disappear under such circumstances, and a collapse would be averted only at the cost of continuing stagflation and financial strain.
If, on the other hand, they refused to come up with the money; if, for example, they followed the line of Margaret Thatcher and her hardline advisor Alan Walters, and let Brazil go bankrupt even at the cost of bringing down Chase Manhattan, Citicorp and Lloyds they risked plunging the world into a slump on the scale of the 1930s or worse. The risks, as Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker insisted were ‘without precedent in the postwar world’. [76] Nor were these risks simply a matter of bank profits and financial stability. As The Economist, ever willing to echo official American thinking put it ‘the political problem is even more dangerous’: [77]
If unemployment, inflation and disappointed hopes produce violence, coups and dogmatic politics [clearly ‘revolution’ is a word The Economist prefers not to use], the chaos will be felt throughout Latin America, and the worries of Nicaragua, Cuba or El Salvador will seem mere pinpricks by comparison.
As for Brazil, Argentina and Chile, their military regimes were even less stable and their debts just as serious. Many of the other debtors, however, just might have been written off – their debts small, their economies insignificant. But even here there were problems. Some – Turkey, Zaire, Morocco, those in Central America – were of strategic significance for the United States. More generally, any sort of open default was feared by the banks. If one country was completely cut off from new loans, others might fear similar treatment and unilaterally renounce their own debts. As the debt problems piled up, as more than 20 countries applied for debt rescheduling, (postponing payment to a later date), in the months after August 1982, so the banks and the international financial agencies such as the BIS and the IMF, were forced to respond with a succession of bail-outs. But there was no question, even in the case of Mexico and Brazil, of making it easy. The task of the IMF was to ensure that as much money as possible was extracted from the debtor economies without provoking either economic collapse, or political revolt. It was a tricky task.
In the past the arrival of the IMF had been the cue for the various banks to clear out, as in Peru in 1977, [78] and in Turkey after 1979. But in the case of Mexico, Argentina and Brazil it was clear that the funds available to the IMF (down to a mere $20 billion by the end of 1982 against a total Latin American debt alone approaching $300 billion) were insufficient to keep their economies afloat. In November 1982 the IMF demanded that the leading commercial banks provide an extra $5 billion in loans to Mexico as part of the overall package. [79] Central bankers in the United States and Europe helped to put the screws on, promising that in return the normal standards for regulating and assessing bad debt would be relaxed. Large banks with most to lose put pressure on the smaller banks (there are 14,000 banks in the United States, most of them operating in a single state only but many with some involvement in lending to Mexico or Brazil). In the case of Mexico, in a remarkable feat of cooperation between international agencies and banks from different countries, the money was raised. But considerable tensions arose as a succession of further demands had to be met.
If the American banks had been far less involved in Poland, the European and Japanese banks were less involved in much of Latin America. The German and Swiss central banks were now inclined to be much more conservative in their attitude to the bail-outs in Latin America. The Japanese banks unilaterally cut their levels of international lending by 10%. The Bundesbank imposed strict limits on the amount the German banks could lend to any one country. And the smaller American banks, unable to rely on being bailed out by the Federal Reserve (over 40 small American banks went bust in 1982) were extremely reluctant to increase the level of their involvement. [80]
Apart from major difficulties in the negotiations with the debtor countries, in both Mexico and Chile in particular, the debt owed by private companies to the banks was seriously in arrears, and both governments were reluctant to take responsibility for it. Ironically the western bankers and the IMF were quietly pleased when first Mexico and then Chile nationalised their domestic banking systems – governments were, in the final analysis, deemed the more reliable borrowers, regardless of their political complexion.
With Argentina there were temporary problems over the role of the British banks, with the Thatcher government disrupting the negotiations mainly it seems, for publicity reasons. The Bank of England, and the banks themselves, were always well aware that the threat of an Argentinian default, and the losses that would mean for Lloyds Bank International and other British interests, demanded that matters of business override the squabbles over the Falklands.
In both Mexico and Brazil, the participation of their domestic banks in the international banking network known as the ‘interbank market’ was itself a serious issue. This is the market in which banks borrow and deposit funds with each other for very short periods of time. Described as ‘the most sensitive mechanism’ in the entire system, it is here that a crisis is most rapidly felt. [81] Banks are supposed to use the system simply to deposit any spare cash they might have, and to borrow when they face a temporary shortage of funds. But in the course of 1982 it became clear that Mexican and Brazilian banks had been using the interbank market to borrow as much as possible to cover their mounting balance of payments problem. Such very ‘short-term lending’ is the easiest to cut off when the going gets rough. In a few months more than $4 billion in deposits were withdrawn from Brazilian banks by other banks. All efforts by the IMF and the major US banks responsible for the rescheduling to get this money back, failed.
The incident revealed both the degree of financial integration of the world’s financial system, and the speed at which particular banks operating within it could be exposed to a rapid withdrawal of funds, not by ordinary commercial or individual depositors but by other banks. Hungary had been thrown into financial crisis by that alone when its National Bank suffered a similar withdrawal of deposits at the beginning of 1982 in the wake of the Polish crisis. It is in this area of the international financial system, unregulated and uncontrollable by any single nation-state, that the threat of a collapse lies.
Yet by the summer of 1983, as this was being written, the danger of a collapse of the banking system of that nature, with major banks suffering a sudden withdrawal of deposits, and the whole fabric of international lending disintegrating, seemed to have been averted. Indeed within ruling-class circles a new argument had arisen. The US government, the IMF and the central banks, in intervening so rapidly, had simply bailed out the banks, it was suggested in some quarters. In the US Congress moves to increase funding for the IMF were running into difficulty. Demands for tighter control of bank-lending, reminiscent of the 1930s, were being made. The argument came from the Republican right as much as from the left. Other sectors of capital were becoming resentful at the way in which the banks had not only been rescued from disaster but were profiting from it into the bargain. [82]
Rescheduling loans simply means that the date of repayment of the principal (the sum originally borrowed) is postponed. It is like turning over an overdraft from year to year. As long as the banks get their interest payments regularly it doesn’t hurt them at all, on the contrary. In Mexico the banks in charge of the rescheduling charged $200 million in fees alone, whilst interest rates on the rescheduled loans rose, nearly doubling the return for many banks. [83] In Brazil Citicorp Bank’s profits jumped 46% to $153 million in 1982, a fifth of their total profits on loans which are only about 5% of their assets. [84] In July the Group of 30 estimated that the banks were making an extra $1.75 billion out of all the reschedulings. [85] Amazing though it may seem Mr Garrett F Bouton, of the Scandinavian bank (one of the biggest ‘consortium banks’ specialising in international lending in London) could say in February, 1983:
The profitability of our Latin American operations is going to shoot up in 1983 because of new business at higher margins. The Latin America manager has a smile on his face. [86]
The important point to remember about this is that banks make money from lending it out. If they were repaid the loans they would only seek to lend them out again – probably to a safer borrower, but probably also with a lower interest-rate. That is why a Brazilian diplomat could joke with Anthony Sampson that ‘If we really wanted to ruin Citibank we would suddenly repay the whole loan’. [87] The extra profits were supposed to compensate for the increased risk on new lending – but it was far from clear what the risk was, with the largest American banks certain that if something did go wrong and they suffered a withdrawal of deposits the Federal Reserve would have to step in and bail them out.
The problem which still exists for the banks, however, is that some of their loans may have to be written off altogether. Banks are normally obliged by the regulatory authorities to balance out their loans and their borrowings. If some of their loans have to be written off as bad debt, they have to be covered out of their reserves and ultimately out of their capital and profits. For the largest banks, it was this ‘insolvency’ threat as it is known, which became the biggest worry of all. [88] As the table shows Citicorp, on conservative estimates of its exposure, has dodgy loans to the third world totalling more than double the value of their equity (the money raised from shareholders). Declaring even a small proportion of that as bad debt would have wiped out their profits for 1982, led to a collapse of the value of their shares on the stock-market, and possibly provoked by itself a serious withdrawal of deposits and a consequent inability to make new loans.



TABLE III
‘Problem exposures’ for major American and British Banks




 


Pre-tax profit


Bad debt reserve
provisions
end 1982


Problem exposures overseas
end 1982




1982
$m


 


1981
$m


$bn


as % of total
assets


as % of group
equity




$m




Citicorp


1,300


855


680


9.8


7.5


204




Bank of America


   545


648


670


6.8


5.6


148




Chase Manhattan


   385


642


558


5.8


7.1


177









 


£m


 


£m


£m


£bn


 




Barclays


   495


567


749


 




NatWest


   439


494


508


2.2


4   


  86




Midlands


   251


232


484


3.4–3.8


7–8


218–244




Lloyds


   316


386


413


 




[Source: FT, 23 March 1983. NB columns have been left blank when data not available]



In reality, the American banks have been left free to decide themselves how large their bad debt provisions are to be. In 1982 they wrote off more bad debt on lending to companies in Britain than they did for the whole of Brazil. [89] That enabled some even to declare higher profits, and increase dividends to shareholders. German and British banks made much higher bad debt provisions, but then they could write most of those off against tax. In all three countries, however, losses declared on loans to industry, or on lending to other failed banks such as Penn Square in the United States, were far higher than those declared for lending to third world governments. [90] With the central banks turning a blind eye, the problem had been covered up and the confidence trick maintained. Indeed as long as the interest continued to flow in, and there was no run on the bank, the crisis as far as the banks were concerned seemed not to exist. Nothing, however, had really been solved. The banks had been rescued from the threat of collapse, bribed with higher interest rates and looser government regulation to go on lending, and subsidised indirectly through the government and IMF money (itself subscribed by the major western powers plus Saudi Arabia) lent to the debtor economies. The fundamental problem had been simply postponed. As one banker admitted ‘We are buying time. But what for? [91] The Financial Times in May, observing that the solutions ‘reached so far offer little more than a temporary palliative’, could only conclude that:
What is now required is a decisive recovery in world trade that will allow hard-pressed debtors to boost their exports to a level that will assure creditors of their ability to service the debt over the medium-term. [92]
Anthony Harris, however, in the same newspaper, labelled this ‘waiting for something to turn up’ stance, ‘the Micawber approach to debt’. [93] The problem as he acutely observed was that the classic remedy for an accumulation of debt lay in the deflationary collapse of the slump itself. The bankrupt were bankrupted, the debt wiped out, and interest rates fell, enabling those that survived to borrow cheaply and more easily again. The whole process of state intervention and central bank rescue in the 1970s and 80s as we noted earlier has prevented that happening. The slump has been limited at the cost of ‘shoring up the ramshackle structure of eurocurrency lending’, and perpetuating inflation and high interest rates.
But if such an insight has the qualities of a Marxist, his own alternative reveals only the pious hopes of a naive liberal. For Harris what is required is a wholesale ‘financial reconstruction’ – with the IMF or some other supranational institution taking over responsibility for the debt from the banks. The banks would lose money but gain security. The borrowers would pay lower interest rates over a longer term. Such plans have multiplied over the last year. Apart from a host of technical problems they all suffer from a major fallacy – the IMF depends for its resources on a United States government which has no intention of providing the funds for such an exercise. It cannot even get a much more limited bill providing a small amount of short-term cash through the US Congress. The plans presuppose a world state capable of regulating world capitalism – and that’s not available. [94]
In the meantime the volume of new funds flowing to the indebted economies is falling rapidly. Despite all the central bank pressure, and the new money raised for Brazil and Mexico, net international banking flows are estimated to have fallen by as much as 70% in the last twelve months (see graph). New bank lending to all non-industrial countries was $65.5 billion in 1981 and fell to $39.5 billion in 1982. But even in those two years it was estimated that the flow of interest payments back to the banks exceeded the flow of new money so that the actual inflow was negative, Now it looks as though new lending to much of the third world has ceased altogether. Lending to all non-OPEC countries in the developing world was only $1.6 billion in the first quarter of 1983. But $3 billion went to Mexico and Brazil alone, which means that there was a fall in outstanding debt everywhere else. [95]


 


This suggests just how nervous the western banks have become, despite the high interest rates on new loans. It also puts into context the common suggestion that the debtors are in a position to blackmail the banks into lending money by the threat of default. Even in the case of Brazil, where Finance Minister Delfim Netto deliberately-increased borrowing above what was needed in the late 1970s in order to lock the banks into an unbreakable commitment to supporting the Brazilian economy, that argument has looked rather dubious. The attempt to exercise that leverage by talking of default during negotiations through the summer of 1983 turned into a poker game, in which it was Brazil not the banks who backed down.
The cutback in new lending is adding to the strains on the world economy. It means that the debt crisis has spread to countries which until very recently were prospering with relatively low levels of debt. OPEC countries in particular, such as Nigeria and Indonesia, with little existing debt but sudden cash-flow problems arising out of the fall in the oil market, have found it impossible to raise money. In the course of 1983 the non-oil developing countries alone were expected by the IMF to run a balance of payments deficit of $70 billion dollars (down sharply from $90 billion dollars in 1982). But in the absence of new bank or IMF lending that will simply not be possible. Instead imports will have to be slashed regardless of the consequences. Such a rapid adjustment will be devastating for the economies concerned. It will also further reduce the level of world trade, cut export markets for goods from the industrial countries, and deepen the crisis.
The IMF simply lacks the funds to make up the gap left by the fall in bank lending. This is the second serious problem currently preoccupying those trying to manage the crisis. The IMF has already committed $6.5 billion more than it actually has in its coffers as part f the rescue packages. Even with the 50% increase in quotas greed in April it will still be seriously short of cash. [96] Because the situation is so desperate the IMF will probably eventually get more money from the USA. But the opposition to the proposal is revealing. As one congressman put it, the IMF increase is ‘only designed to make sure that some of our go-go bankers who got in over their heads on shaky loans to foreign countries would not have to pay for their own mistakes.’ [97]
This it should be emphasised is merely an argument over sharing out the losses between different sectors of capital – the banks on the one hand, or the taxpayer (in effect other sections of American capital) on the other. Both sides are agreed that the losses should be minimised, that the money should not be given away, and that the debtor economies should be squeezed as hard as is possible. The capitalist class of the western world, as indeed the capitalist class of the debtor economies, are, as always, determined that the working-class of Mexico, Brazil, Chile etc will have to be made to pay. Profits, however, they are distributed between different groups of capital, always depend on maintaining the rate of exploitation. It is this issue which constitutes the third and most important preoccupation of bankers, politicians, and IMF alike.
 
Making the workers pay: the IMF and the debtors
The IMF is not an autonomous supranational organisation. It is controlled by the states that put up the money – the western industrial powers plus, in recent years, Saudi Arabia. Nor is it simply a tool of American imperialism, though that is rather closer to the truth. The Fund is based in Washington; the United States puts up 20% of the money (Britain is next largest with 7%) and has a veto over where the money goes. But the Fund’s main task has become that of financial policeman on behalf of the western banks as a whole in managing the debt crisis. [98]
As we have already noted it is not the amount of cash that the IMF provides which is decisive. Its funds are far too limited for the bailing-out operation required by the largest debtors, although many of the smallest and poorest debtor countries, cut off from all bank lending, are completely dependent upon the IMF. In the case of Brazil, Mexico and Argentina its role has been to provide the endorsement without which the banks would refuse to lend more money. The condition of all the rescheduling negotiations has been that the government involved submit to an IMF programme of austerity measures.
The 1970s saw a succession of such programmes, negotiated with countries as diverse as Britain and Italy on the one hand, Jamaica and Turkey on the other. The severity of the conditions varied. In some cases, as in Britain, the negotiations were a charade, designed to divert public anger away from politicians who were just as anxious to impose the cuts demanded as the IMF itself. But in all cases the logic of their measures was the same. The economy, and the living standards of the working-class in particular, would have to be squeezed to provide room for the extra resources needed to increase exports, improve the balance of payments, and pay off the foreign debt.
The programmes usually followed a standard formula: a) cuts in public spending, and increased taxation designed to bring down budget deficits b) monetary restraint and higher interest rates designed to increase savings and rationalise the economy through bankruptcies; c) devaluations of the currency aimed at improving aimed at improving the competitiveness of exports on world markets, and cutting imports; and d) wage cuts through holding down wages whilst import prices and inflation rose with the devaluation, and through reductions in any subsidies for food or other essential goods. [99]
Ensuring that the banks get repaid has not been the only consideration for the IMF. Consistently it has emphasised the opening up of economies to the world market, and has opposed import controls and any measures designed to limit the free movement of capital, into or out of a country. That is not simply a matter of the free-trading ideology which prevails in IMF circles. It expresses the close association of the Fund with the interests of US capital and multinationals generally.
Correspondingly the IMF has tended to impose tougher terms, or refused to lend at all, to regimes in the third world of a leftist hue, or those inclined to nationalise or strictly control the operations of American capital. The most blatant recent example of this was in Jamaica, where the replacement of Manley’s regime by that of right-wing Seaga in 1980 was welcomed with a loan on soft terms, as well as with money from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. [100] In this respect the IMF is more political, less governed by straightforward criteria of profitability, than the banks themselves.
On the other hand the IMF, other international agencies, and sometimes the US government directly, have been willing to make special efforts to prop up repressive military regimes which have a vital strategic role in American policy, or in which American capital has high stakes. As the bankers’ magazine Euromoney put it: ‘In the case of countries such as South Korea, the Philippines, Taiwan or Israel it is reasonable to expect that the day of default would be forestalled indefinitely as long as the stake of the US government in economic and political stability remains high’. [101]
Similar considerations seem to have applied in the course of the last year to IMF loans to the three countries in Eastern Europe are members of the Fund – Romania Yugoslavia and the most recent recruit Hungary. IMF support here has gone hand in hand with measures opening the economies to foreign investment, and in the Hungarian case setting up an export-processing zone of a par with that on the border of Mexico. [102]
All this may seem to support the view of some left-wing observers ch as de Witt and Petras, that the debt crisis has become the ‘major lever’ through which international capital is consolidating its hold on the third world economies and undermining regimes oriented towards policies of ‘independent’ national development. ‘The real issue’ they argue, ‘that seems to be unfolding is the role of the banks in the restructuring of third world economies and societies to facilitate the free flow of international capital’. [103]
One problem with their and similar lines of argument is that they suggest that an alternative economic strategy of autarchic development, in isolation from the world economy, is a viable one. Cheryl Payer, for example, in her otherwise useful The Debt Trap, presents North Korea as a model of a self-reliant economy. More seriously in the present context, however, that analysis underestimates both the sheer severity of the crisis and the threat to the banks themselves. For the moment at least this remains the overriding preoccupation of the IMF.
In both Mexico and Argentina the Fund has proved very flexible over such matters as exchange control, import restrictions and limits on the remission of profits by the subsidiaries of multinationals to their home base. [104] Increasing the trade surplus to provide funds for interest payments to the banks has priority. The devaluation of the peso has made Mexican assets and labour costs substantially cheaper for US companies. This may yet encourage a large inflow of capital especially to the ‘In-Bond’ plants on the Mexican border. But for the moment foreign investment in Mexico has plummeted down to only $20 million in the first quarter of 1983, compared to $478 million for the same period in 1982. [105]
Reformist criticisms of the IMF are legion. A typical example can be found in the second report of the Brandt commission, Common Crisis. This argues that the Fund should raise considerably greater funds, be more flexible about its conditions, and pay greater attention to ‘political realities’. This last perhaps reveals the most serious concern of the so-called liberal wing of the western ruling-class. As the Report puts it:
Even for countries that are in a position to respond to stern measures, it is pointless to press corrective action to the point where political upheaval will result, as happened in Egypt for example, or Sudan in recent years. [106]
The fear is certainly justified. But the proposals for reform tend to miss the point. The primary objective of the IMF is to keep the economies afloat so that the flow of interest payments to the banks continues and the international financial system does not disintegrate. The complexity stems from the difficulty of bankrupting whole countries and flogging off their assets. Even if that was politically possible it would bring down the largest banks in the process. Instead, as one banker told the Financial Times, the IMF ‘has to apply just enough medicine to cure the disease without killing the patient.’ [107]
The political risks are serious. The combination of severe economic crisis and the debt squeeze mean that the pressures on the mass of the population who already live at levels barely above, or often below, subsistence already, are becoming intolerable. A journalist from the American magazine Newsweek, not noted for its radicalism, wrote in July for a feature on Latin America:
The social consequences of the debt crisis have been devastating. Malnutrition has increased significantly in Mexico and Peru as governments reduced welfare programmes and slashed subsidies on basic food items. Physicians have reported a sharp rise in the number of cases of highly contagious diseases such as tuberculosis and typhoid, due to severe housing shortage in already overcrowded cities. At the same time medical care has deteriorated: hospitals simply lack the foreign exchange needed to buy medicines and supplies.
In city after city relief organisations have set up soup kitchens and shelters for the homeless tragically reminiscent of the worldwide Depression of the 1930s. With unemployment rising and the buying power of workers being eroded by devaluations and triple-digit inflations, many people have turned to crime to make ends meet. In Mexico City burglaries and robberies are up 33% over last year. [108]
Over the last few years the pressures of the debt crisis, and IMF imposed austerity programmes, have led to strikes, riots, or massive popular explosions in countries as diverse as South Korea and Egypt, Poland and Morocco. In some countries, as in Turkey and Poland, the pressures of the bankers, the demands of restoring order to the economy have led to military coups and the crushing of the workers’ movement. In others, as in South Korea in 1980, seemingly impregnable regimes have tottered only to re-establish their control in the absence of any coherent strong, socialist opposition. But in Chile, Argentina and Brazil the crisis has exposed, after years of brutal repression, the vulnerability of the military regimes. In all three the ruling-class has split, providing an opportunity for the working-class to reorganise itself and fight back.
The pressures of the debt crisis are not going to diminish. As we emphasised at the very beginning of this article, solving the underlying problem depends upon two developments: a recovery in the world economy which is strong enough to provide a market for the exports of the debtor economies; and being able to increase the rate of exploitation, the mass of surplus-value extracted from the workers of the countries concerned, sufficiently to pay off the bankers. Neither condition on its own would be sufficient. Increasing the production of surplus value as we showed earlier does not generate extra profits unless the commodities produced can be sold on the market – and in this instance that means on the world market for hard currency.
Yet the very measures imposed by the IMF are adding to the slump, and making a strong recovery much less likely. Attempts to increase the production of surplus-value by cutting wage-levels and public spending are adding to the problems of realising that value through depressing the world market. This contradiction lies at the heart of the IMF programme. Measures designed to improve the competitiveness of one country in isolation might be successful. Applied to a whole number of countries they simply cancel one another out. Even US Treasury Secretary, Donald Regan, managed to dimly recognise the problem, last December, when he told reporters: ‘We have a big conundrum. How can the industrialised world import less and export more, and the developing countries import less and export more, and the less developed countries import less and export more? How can the world do this simultaneously and maintain any kind of an international trading system. [109]
What this situation means is that the IMF programmes are unlikely to work for more than one or two countries capable of gaining at the expense of the rest by undercutting them on world markets. Devaluation, for example, on which the IMF places so much stress means lower export prices on world markets, but more expensive imports in terms of the local currency. Lower export prices do not necessarily mean higher sales if world markets are stagnant or protectionism is increasing. But higher import prices will add to accelerating inflation, cutting into real wage levels, and adding to the strains on the economy. [110]
The debt crisis has already led to a significant reduction in the level of world trade. The debtor economies have had to slash their levels of imports by astonishing amounts (in Mexico’s case by 70% in the last year). That as we saw earlier cuts into the markets for other debtor countries, reinforcing the vicious spiral of contraction. It has also reduced the export markets of the industrial countries. US exports to oil-importing developing countries fell by 13% in 1982 (after growth rates averaging 20% in the late seventies). Exports to Latin America alone fell by 40% in the year to April 1983. [111] A third of American exports go to the third world and estimates are that these falls alone will mean 1% less growth in the United States this year. In Mexico crisis by itself has cost some 250,000 jobs north of the border. [112] For France, West Germany and Britain the story is similar, especially now that the OPEC producers, especially Nigeria, are also being squeezed and refused new loans.
In the absence of new bank loans the US government is trying to step up the credit it makes available for trade. Despite paying out $500 million in export credit guarantees to unpaid suppliers to Mexico, it has offered a total of $2 billion in new export credits to Brazil and Mexico. [113] The problem is that these loans are tied to the purchase of imports from American suppliers – they do nothing to solve the problem of paying off existing debts and covering the balance of payments deficit.
Those pressures are going to persist for the foreseeable future, and will probably mean that the value of world trade will fall even further than the 2% decline of 1982.
Nor is the debt problem and its deflationary consequences confined to the third world and Eastern Europe. Portugal has just had to submit to an IMF programme. Spain, Greece, Denmark and Ireland are major borrowers on the Euromarkets, and in 1982 France alone borrowed an estimated $25 billion pushing its total foreign debt up to $60 billion, the third largest in the world. None of these countries is liable to default on its debts or even fall behind on its interest payments. But all are being forced into deflationary measures by the strain, cutting working-class living standards, and reducing their rates of growth. The debt problem may have its roots in the development of the world crisis. But it has now itself become a major factor perpetuating the slump.
It is true that as this was being written the bankers and the IMF were congratulating themselves on their success in Mexico. In the first half of 1983 Mexico ‘achieved’ a trade surplus of $6.5 billion. Its debt had been rescheduled, the interest was still flowing, and the government had even turned down the use of a $5 billion standby loan from its creditor banks, and a further $329 million from the IMF. The Economist went quite over the top: ‘In no other country in modern times, not even post-Weimar Germany, has so radical a programme been instituted so rapidly, so free from hesitation – or with such sudden success.’ [114]
Well, we shall see. It was anyway a curious sort of success which cut the GNP by 5% and living standards for most Mexicans by 30%. The trade surplus was partly a product of the stabilising of the oil price, and the fact that thanks to guaranteed markets in the United States, Mexico along with Britain is the only oil producer to have increased its level of production over the last year. It was even more the result of a cut of 79% in the imports of capital goods, 73% in the imports of consumer goods, and 59% in raw materials. [115] Business Week observed more coolly that:
To head off a collapse of Mexican industry, the Bank of Mexico will have to ease the draconian squeeze on imports, including vital industrial materials and parts, that has slashed factory output ... [de la Madrid, the new President] must ease up on the brakes soon or risk triggering serious labour unrest, despite remarkable restraint so far by Mexican unions. [116]
It was that restraint that seems to have been the basic reason for the self-congratulation. As one banker quoted in the same article declared ‘The political management of the austerity measures has been excellent’. The success was testimony to the deep roots of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (the PRI) in Mexican society, its ability to both incorporate the opposition and the trade union movement, and present a radical populist face whilst pursuing the wishes of the bankers. At a critical moment in September 1982, after the crisis broke, the government was able to defuse the mounting tension by nationalising the banks. De la Madrid has launched a well-publicised drive against corruption, put the former head of the nationalised oil company on a show-trial, and relied on fatalism and fear of the sack to keep the workers quiet.
It remains to be seen how long they can get away with that. As in Chile and Brazil the debt crisis may yet prove the solvent which unleashes an upsurge from below. Certainly the crisis has not been resolved. $20 billion worth of debt owed by bankrupt private companies such as the Grupo Alfa has still not been sorted out. 800,000 new jobs a year are needed just to keep up with the birthrate. One report estimates that the financial crisis will again become acute in 1987 when some $35 billion of rescheduled debt and interest payments will be due in one year. [117]
If they were acclaiming an end to the crisis in Mexico, the worries over Brazil were intensifying. The problem could be summarised in two figures. Brazil was expected to run a trade-surplus of $6 billion in 1983, achieved by the same drastic cut in imports as in Mexico. But its interest payments alone for 1983, even after all payment of the principal had been postponed, amounted to $12 billion. [118] Bridging that gap demanded new finance. But the bankers were running scared. The political situation in Brazil, from their point of view, was by no means as healthy as in Mexico.
In May it was clear that the IMF targets set for Brazil only five months earlier were nowhere near to being met. The public sector deficit was still soaring. Inflation was approaching the 170% a year level. Both the banks and the IMF stopped any further loans, and a series of cliffhanging negotiations began. In particular the IMF demanded an end to subsidies on essential goods, and that the indexation system of wages be altered so that wages rose by only 80% of inflation in each year. With inflation at over 100% it was estimated that the new system would mean that wages would fall in value by more than half every year.
The resistance of the Brazilian regime did not stem from any belief that such cuts were not necessary. The fear, as Delfim Netto the finance minister put it, was that they would be ‘political suicide’. [119] In May the unemployed of Sao Paulo had rioted. In July the workers of the same region came out on strike. Oil refinery workers throughout the country stopped work. The engineering workers of Sao Bernardo do Campo followed. Within 24 hours nearly all the large factories, including those of Ford, Volkswagen, Mercedes and Saab had stopped. [120]
The strike was short-lived, with the leaders of the main state-run trade unions helping to prevent it spreading. But it scared the generals. The IMF negotiators were made of sterner stuff. Interest payments of $2 billion to American banks were now almost 60 days in arrears, the point at which the banks would have to declare those loans as non-performing, exposing their vulnerability to the rest of the world. There was talk of Brazil simply refusing to pay and setting up a debtor’s OPEC. Still the IMF refused to give way. The BIS under pressure from the Swiss and German central banks refused to renew a short-term bridging loan. Partly it was a matter of setting an example, of showing to every other debtor government that the IMF was not a soft touch. More crucially it was because the IMF and the bankers knew very well that they would only get their money at the expense of the Brazilian working-class. The Brazilians submitted, and obtained some of the money that had been held up. But the issue was scarcely settled, and the banks are still holding back on promised loans.
‘The main difference between the Brazilian and the Mexican crises’ said a top Brazilian banker, is that in their case the political framework was known and sound. Our changes are being attempted on shifting political sands.’ [121] The collapse with ill-health of President Figueredo symbolised the weakness of the military regime, in power ever since 1964. Moves towards elections, toleration of opposition parties and parliamentary democracy were designed to defuse the mounting tensions inside Brazil. But they have also, despite continuing repression on the streets and victimisation in the factories, provided an opportunity for the independent trade unions and the Workers’ Party of Lula to organise. The Brazilian industrial working-class is one of the most concentrated and powerful in Latin America. The very pace of industrial growth in the 1970s gave it the opportunity to exercise its muscles. In 1978, 1979, and 1980 they came out on strike led by the car-workers of the Sao Paulo region, and won substantial if temporary gains. [122] They remain the main threat, even in the absence of coherent revolutionary leadership, to the resolution of the debt crisis in Brazil, and thus in the world as a whole.
Recognition of that threat, along with the sheer severity of the demands imposed by the IMF, has led to a significant split in the ruling-class of Brazil. Demands that Brazil unilaterally refuse to pay, declare a default, have been commonplace amongst bourgeois opposition politicians as well as in working-class circles over the last few months. At the beginning of September 1983 [123] even the central bank governor of Brazil, Carlos Langone, resigned, declaring that: ‘I am convinced that [our] recent experience with the original programme of the International Monetary Fund ... indicates the difficulty of undertaking such commitments which can only be reached at an extremely high social cost.’
The Brazilian generals are trapped. If they concede to the opposition and abandon trying to push through the wage cuts, they will expose their own weakness to the Brazilian working-class. They will also cut themselves off from those who have been their friends and backers ever since they seized power in 1964 in the United States, as well as upsetting the multinationals and bankers with whom they had formed so fruitful an alliance. If they continue trying to push through the attack on working-class living standards they will have to rely on severe repression, rather than on the cooperation of trade union and social democratic leaders on which the ruling-class in the West can depend. That repression will quite possibly provoke a backlash, a mass eruption of the workers and unemployed which would be impossible to contain. For the moment the generals are sticking with the IMF and their American backers – but the threat of a Brazilian default, whether out of sheer economic necessity, or as a deliberate act, is a real one.
Fear of a debtor’s OPEC, or simply an outright refusal to pay by Brazil, which would probably be followed by a number of other countries, now haunts the bankers. Such actions would not, as has already been argued, provoke a collapse of the western banks. The Federal Reserve and other central banks would still step in and bail them out. But it would destroy their profits, and greatly accelerate the contraction of international lending which is already going on. The opposition movement in Brazil, as with the Peronists in Argentina and similar currents throughout the third world, does not however offer a satisfactory alternative. A default would mean that a country would no longer have to pay off the heavy interest on its debts, but it would also throw it back into autarchy, cut off from new credit for years to come, its trade disrupted, its assets liable to seizure (Mexican oil tankers, for example, sent to other countries would be seized by the US navy in the Gulf of Mexico on behalf of the banks). [124] A debtor’s OPEC, as suggested by Venezuela, which sought to use the threat of default to negotiate easier terms with the banks on behalf of all the major debtors, seems a more promising proposition. But there are no signs that the debtors are capable of agreeing among themselves, and their recent meeting at Cancun was a damp squib.
The nationalist alternative, of default, ‘self-reliance’, and a return to barter trade as in the 1930s, is simply not viable in the highly integrated interdependent world economy of the 1980s. It would not, as far as the bourgeois opposition in Brazil or Argentina is concerned mean an end to the intense exploitation of the working-class of Latin America – merely that the local ruling class would receive a larger share of the surplus-value. Revolutionaries are in favour of defaults certainly. But only as part of a process of the complete expropriation of capital and the destruction of all bourgeois states.
The roots of the debt crisis lie deep in the fundamental contradictions of world capitalism. The analysis Marx provided of how such banking crises emerge, which we outlined at the beginning of this article, remains relevant today. But the manner in which the crisis has unfolded has been very different from that of the 1930s, and from the boom-slump cycle of the nineteenth century which Marx studied. The internationalisation and concentration of capital have meant that crises have become potentially much more devastating and intractable. But the intervention of major states, capable of mobilising massive resources from other sections of capital to stave off the bankruptcy of companies, banks or countries, has decisively affected the course of the crisis.
The International Monetary Fund, the central banks of the United States, Britain, France, West Germany and Switzerland in particular, led by the United States government, have shown their ability to act as a lender of last resort to the international as well as the domestic banking system. But whilst they have rescued the banks, they have not rescued the debtor economies. All the money received by Mexico and Brazil has passed straight out again as interest payments. For them as for the many smaller economies suffering equally severe pressures if less publicity, the Costa Ricas, Bolivias and Moroccos, the crisis is going to get worse and the intolerable pressures on the mass of the population are going to increase.
The threat of a collapse of the world banking system in spectacular fashion has passed. Even if Brazil defaults on its interest payments, the pain will be felt but for the large American and British banks it will not be fatal. They will suffer losses. They will not be allowed to go bust. Size in the banking world is a guarantee of security – although it is a security which may well go hand in hand with a reassertion of state regulation over the freewheeling international lending market which dominated the 1970s. Instead of a collapse world capitalism is facing instead the prospect of interminable agony – a long drawn out period of strain and stagnation, a contraction in the level of international lending, and in the volume of world trade, and a weak recovery at best from the current slump.
The political instability which that means throughout the system is already evident. In Chile as this is being written, ten years after the coup the Pinochet regime is finding that its middle-class support has deserted, and that shooting down demonstrators on the streets has not stopped the waves of protest. In Argentina, whilst the labour movement is in disarray, the military regime is still crumbling in the wake of the Falklands disaster and the severity of the crisis. In the Philippines, another major debtor economy which is on the verge of bankruptcy, the Marcos regime has been shaken by mass protest in the wake of the murder of an opposition politician. The real possibility of ending the debt crisis lies here – with the working class, whose relative size and strength in Brazil far exceeds that of Russia in 1917; of the working class in the debtor countries deciding that they simply will not pay the price needed to keep the system going.

Notes
1. Warnings were sounded as early as 1977 by Arthur Burns, Chairman of the US Federal Reserve (the American central bank) and Richardson, Governor of the Bank of England. Burns said that US banks ‘must not and cannot continue lending’, but they did. The quote and other predictions can be found in A. Gunder Frank, Crisis in the Third World London 1981.
2. Details on the reschedulings can be found in M.S. Mendelsohn, International Debt Crisis: The Practical Lessons of Rescheduling, The Banker, London, July 1983; and in the World Development Report 1983 issued by the World Bank pp. 22–23.
3. Financial Times (FT henceforth), 23/3/83 – for details of bank ‘exposure’.
4. International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, 1983. This article will contain a large number of figures, many taken from official sources, but most should be taken with a pinch of salt. Nobody knows how much the Mexican state and Mexican companies and banks really owe. The World Development Report, op. cit., gives details of public debt for all third world countries but these tend to be out of date, exclude lending to private companies and underestimate short-term debt, which was rising rapidly as a proportion of all debt, especially in the case of Mexico, Argentina and Venezuela in the years 1980–82. Most up to date and thorough guesstimates of the size and breakdown of individual country debtors are in the reports of the Morgan Guaranty Trust, quoted regularly in the Financial Times. One of its reports was summarised in the FT, 11/10/82, and used here.
5. Sunday Times, 8/5/83; Economist, Survey Banking on Recovery, 26/3/83.
6. Economist, 16/10/82.
7. FT, 4/9/82.
8. C.P. Kindelberger, Manias, Panics and Crashes, London 1978.
9. K. Marx, Capital, Volume 1, London 1976, p. 786.
10. K. Marx, Capital, Volume 3, London 1981, p. 516. (All subsequent page references are to this edition.)
11. V. Lenin, Imperialism; the Highest Stage of Capitalism, Collected Works, Vol. 32 (first written in 1916). The definition of ‘finance capital’ was taken from R. Hilferding, Finance Capital, London 1981 (written 1910). For critical discussion cf. M. Kidron, Imperialism – Highest Stage But One, Capitalism and Theory (1974); N. Harris, The Road from 1910, a review of Hilferding in Economy and Society, Volume 11 No. 3, August 1982; and my Finance Capital, Socialist Review, Issue 51, February 1983.
12. The work of the French Marxist Suzanne de Brunhoff has sought to show the continuing relevance of Marx’s work, cf. her Marx on Money (New York 1976) and State, Capital and Economic Policy (London 1978).
13. R. Parboni, The Dollar and its Rivals, London 1982.
14. Especially the articles by Chris Harman, International Socialism 2 : 9, 2 : 11, 2 : 13, 2 : 16. For the use of levels of abstraction in Marx’s discussion of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall cf. R. Rosdolsky, The Making of Marx’s Capital, London (1977) and B. Fine and L. Harris, Rereading Capital (London 1979).
15. Capital, Volume 2, London 1978, p. 264.
16. F. Engels, Preface to Capital, Volume 3, op. cit.
17. K. Bohn, International Banking in the 19th & 20th Centuries (London 1983).
18. See the references given in note 11.
19. A. Sampson, The Money Lenders (London 1981) and B. Stallings, Peru and the US Banks, in R. Fagen (ed.), Capitalism and the State in US – Latin American Relations (Stanford 1979).
20. For the American banks see J.K. Galbraith, Money (London 1976): for the world slump and the banking crisis as a whole D. Aldcroft, From Versailles to Wall Street 1919–29 (London 1977) and C. Harman, The Crisis Last Time, International Socialism 2 : 13.
21. Figures from E. Varga and L. Mendelsohn, New Data for Lenin’s Imperialism (New York 1940).
22. Details in K. Bohn, International Banking, op. cit.
23. M. Aglietta, A Theory of Capitalist Regulation, London 1979, Chapter 6.
24. I owe this point to Jim Kincaid.
25. A clear summary of the origins of the Euromarkets can be found in J. Aronson, Money and Power (London 1977). See also N. Harris, Of Bread and Guns (London 1983).
26. H. Watchel, A Decade of International Debt, Theory and Society, Vol. 9, 1980.
27. E. Mandel, The Second Slump, London 1978, p. 29.
28. H. Magdoff and P. Sweezy, The End of Prosperity, New York 1977.
29. E. Mandel, op. cit.
30. J. Aronson, op. cit.
31. C. Johnson, What prospects for growth in the international credit markets?, The Banker, January 1983.
32. E.g. D. Lomax, The Recycling Folly, The Banker, August 1982.
33. A. Sampson, op. cit., especially chapter 1.
34. J. Aronson, op. cit.. The table is quoted in Bruce Franklin, Debt Peonage, Monthly Review, March 1982, from Forbes Magazine, July 1981.
35. Quoted in A. Gunder Frank, The Crisis in the Third World, op. cit., p. 148.
36. N. Harris, Of Bread and Guns, op. cit., and IMF, World Economic Outlook 1983.
37. The most coherent argument on these lines is in R. Peter de Witt and James Petras, Political Economy of International Debt: The Dynamics of Finance Capital, in J. Aronson (ed.), Debt and the Less Developed Countries (Westview 1979). See also Franklin, op. cit., especially Chapter 4.
38. Stallings, Peru and the US Banks, in Fagen, op. cit.
39. J. Frieden, Third World indebted industrialisation: international finance and state capitalism in Mexico, Brazil, Algeria and South Korea, in International Organisation 35, 3, Summer 1981.
40. J. Frieden, op. cit.
41. Economist Survey, Banking on Recovery, 26/3/83.
42. South, July 1983; World Development Report, op. cit.
43. C. Johnson, op. cit.; South, July 1983.
44. Table from Financial Times 15/10/82.
45. N. Harris, op. cit., p. 81.
46. World Development Report 1983, op. cit.
47. P.-P. Kuczinski, Latin-American Debt, Foreign Affairs, Winter 1982–3.
48. World Development Report, op. cit.
49. Economist report, Latin America, April 30, 1983.
50. FT, 28/1/82.
51. P. Knight, Brazil: An Economy Transformed, in E. Carim (ed.), Latin America and Caribbean 1983, World of Information Survey, London 1983.
52. Economist, Survey of Brazil, 12/3/1983.
53. World Development Report, op. cit.; A. Gunder Frank, op. cit.
54. A. Sampson, op. cit.
55. Economist report on Latin America, 30/4/83.
56. J. Rettie, Mexico, in Latin America and Caribbean 1983, op. cit.
57. Andrew Thompson on Argentina in South, August 1983.
58. FT, 14/1/82.
59. R. Lindley, Argentina, in Latin America and Caribbean 1983, op. cit.
60. Latin America Regional Report, The Southern Cone, 4/2/83.
61. A. Foxley, Towards a Free Market Economy in Chile 1974–79, in Journal of Development Economics I, No. 1, Feb. 1982.
62. A. Kaletsky, Chile’s Economic Experiment, FT, 9/3/83.
63. FT, 4/5/83.
64. IMF, World Economic Outlook 1983, p. 69.
65. Economist Survey, 12/3/83. See also J. Frieden, op. cit., and R. Munck, State and Capital in Dependent Social Formations: The Brazilian Case, Capital and Class, No. 8, Summer 1979.
66. FT, 25/2/83.
67. FT, Survey of Brazil, 18/11/81; Latin America Weekly Report, 17/12/82.
68. FT, Survey of Mexico, 22/3/82.
69. Business Week, 21/9/81, Why the Socialist Bloc’s Plans Aren’t Working.
70. FT, Survey of Yugoslavia, 7/9/83.
71. For a detailed examination of the state of the Polish economy see Barker & Weber, Solidarnosc – from Gdansk to military dictatorship (International Socialism 2 : 15, Spring 1982).
72. World Development Report 1983, op. cit.
73. Sunday Times, 13/12/81.
74. A. Friedman, A Colossal Mountain of Debt, FT, 20/8/82.
75. Deborah Riner, Guns, Gluts and the Bankers’ Power, in Latin America & Caribbean, 1983.
76. Guardian, 18/11/82.
77. Economist, 21/8/82.
78. B. Stallings, Peru and the US Banks, in R Fagen,.op. cit.
79. P. Montagnon, The New Way with Debt, FT, 31/1/83.
80. W. Hall, The Small Banks Get Nervous, FT, 21/12/82.
81. P. Montagnon, A Jolt to be Remembered, FT, 1/3/83.
82. W. Hall, The Battle with the Banks, FT, 5/9/83.
83. FT, 31/3/83.
84. FT, 6/3/83.
85. Guardian, 11/7/83.
86. Guardian, 8/2/83.
87. A. Sampson, Brazil versus the Bankers, FT, 22/7/83.
88. Economist, 16/10/82.
89. Guardian, 8/2/83.
90. FT, World Banking Survey, Part One, 9/5/83.
91. A. Harris, The Micawber Approach to Debt, FT, op. cit.
92. FT, World Banking Survey, 9/5/83.
93. A. Harris, The Micawber Approach to Debt, op. cit.
94. Every financial expert in the world seems to have produced a plan for solving the debt crisis, it would be tedious to discuss them in any detail. Examples can be found in The Economist of April 30 (M. Zombanakis) and July 9 (Lord Lever).
95. Figures from Bank of International Settlements Report analysed by P. Rodgers in the Guardian, 19/7/83; the FT of 19/8/83 and 23/8/83.
96. FT, 10/8/83.
97. W. Hall, The Battle with the Banks, FT, 5/9/83.
98. Economist, Survey of the IMF, 26/9/81 – and for a useful political analysis see Sue Cockerill in Socialist Review, 1982, No. 9 (Issue 47).
99. Cheryl Payer, The Debt Trap, London 1974, and Wachtel, op. cit.
100. W. James, The Decline and Fall of Michael Manley, Capital and Class 19, Spring 1983, and articles by N. Girvan et al., in Development Dialogue, 1980, No. 2.
101. Quoted by de Witt and Petras, op. cit.
102. N. Harris, Of Bread and Guns, op. cit., chapter 6.
103. De Witt and Petras, op. cit.
104. Economist, The IMF and Latin America, 11/12/83.
105. FT, 6/9/83.
106. Common Crisis, The Brandt Commission 1983 (London 1983).
107. FT, 6/9/83.
108. Newsweek, The Debt Crisis Boils Over, 25/7/83.
109. Quoted in South, July 1983.
110. Common Crisis, op. cit., pp. 30 & 64.
111. Wall Street Journal, 2/8/83.
112. South, July 1983.
113. FT, 31/8/83.
114. Economist, Mexico under the IMF, 20/8/83.
115. Guardian, 6/9/83.
116. Business Week, 5/9/83.
117. Report of Data Resources Inc. reported in Guardian, 27/6/83.
118. A. Whitely, The IMF’s Fragile Lifeline, FT, 23/8/83.
119. A. Sampson, Brazil versus the Bankers, FT, 22/7/83.
120. Socialist Worker, 16/7/83.
121. FT, 23/8/83.
122. See D. Beecham on Brazil in Socialist Review 1982 : 10 (No. 48), and Brazil: State and Struggle, Latin American Bureau, London 1982.
123. A. Whitley, Brazil’s Debt Crisis Tough Talks, Frayed Nerves, FT, 6/9/83.
124. Economist, 7/5/83. For more discussion on the issue which is certainly a real one see A. Sampson, Brazil versus the Bankers, op. cit., and for a sustained argument in defence of the possibility of Mexico defaulting and ‘going it alone’ the article in the third worldist magazine South in November 1982 by Ajit Singh (better known in Britain as a leading member of the Cambridge group of advocates of import controls).
Thanks in particular to Jim Kincaid, Pete Binns and Chris Harman for suggestions and help with this article.
 



The world, as some people say, is getting smaller every day. The marvels of modern communications, supersonic aeroplanes and satellites, have diminished the geographical obstacle of distance. A century or so ago Jules Verne could hail the revolutionary transformation of time and space wrought by industrial capitalism, by having his hero Phineas Fogg travel ‘around the world in eighty days’. That as we now know was just the start.
Communications remain subordinate to the requirements of those with power and money. The financial markets of the world are now open twenty-four hours a day – with London, New York and Hong Kong between them embracing the different time-zones, so that at any second of the day someone somewhere is buying gold or selling pounds. Most of us, however, cannot even afford the cost of a Concorde flight to New York.
The whole system is still predicated on the labour of the world’s workers, those who produce the real wealth to which money is but a claim or token. The workers remain dispersed, isolated, seeing the world only through the distorted parochial prisms of national cultures’. We are, in Nigel Harris’s telling phrase, caught up in the preoccupations of our national villages, obsessed with the comings and goings of the local barons, or the vanities and rhetoric of the Parish council (for governments are, he argues, now little more than Parish councils’ in relation to the world economy).
But the parish councils are impotent, the national villages completely dependent upon the international division of labour, and vulnerable in consequence to the anarchic fluctuations of the world market. The barons themselves have little loyalty to the village, with their loot stashed away in a Swiss bank, always ready, like the Shah of Iran, to clear out should the workers get violent.
The world economy is more integrated today than most of us realise. The forces of production are now thoroughly internationalised, symbolised in the introduction of the ‘world car’ by General Motors – identical cars (apart from the trimmings) produced in locations across the globe, sourced with components from a dozen or so countries. Even the grand autarchies of Russia and China have become monuments to the impossibility of combining growth with isolation from the world market and are being drawn slowly but surely into deals with foreign capital, borrowing from the banks, and the specialised place in the global division of labour that all that entails.
Yet the world remains divided up into nations, with frontiers and barbed wire, passports and immigration controls, customs duties and 180 or so varieties of paper money. Nations are demarcated by states, which have carved up the whole world into often quite arbitrary patches of territory in the last couple of centuries (and now seem to be proceeding to the oceans and space). As Nigel Harris comments:
By now, the division of the globe is so all-embracing, the fences that divide each national garden built so high, that its sheer novelty in human history is no longer apparent (p. 24)
The world economy is also in crisis. The advent of stagnation can be traced back to the mounting tensions of the late 1960s, but the first sharp synchronised turn from boom to slump came in 1974. Since then temporary recoveries, even quite rapid bursts of growth in parts of the system, have simply faded away into even deeper slump. Whilst fluctuations in the overall level of activity continue the underlying crisis persists, resistant to all the exhortations and medicines that are thrown at it.
The crisis produces turmoil. Stagnation in aggregate indices of output conceals widely varying fortunes for different capitals, or industries, or countries. Capital chases the short-term gain across the world’s financial markets. Huge multinational corporations desperately rationalise operations, closing down unprofitable (but often still productive) plant, and relocating chunks of their activities in the cheap labour government subsidised zones of Mexico, Mauritius or South East Asia.
The crisis has provoked an accelerated movement of capital, a rapid growth in rates of ‘foreign’ investment, international bank lending. It has, in some respects, speeded up the integration of the world economy, which had already developed to such an extent in the long boom of the fifties and sixties.
Despite this, states remain jealous of their sovereignty, competing with each other for shares in world production and trade. In the face of the crisis they redouble their efforts to manage national economies, to command the waves which came thundering down upon them. In some cases, notably in the smaller less developed economies dependent upon one or two raw materials, at the mercy of world price fluctuations, the cause was hopeless -though that did not stop governments in places like Ghana and Jamaica trying. In others, notably in the larger Western industrial economies, the pretensions persist, although the reality gets
grimmer. The crisis has exposed the glaring contradiction generated by capitalism between the internationalisation of the forces of production, and the persistence of nation-states. It is a contradiction which contributes to the crisis itself, making the stagnation more protracted. The market limits the power of states. But states can intervene to prevent the crisis resolving itself through the classical mechanisms of slump.
It is this contradiction which is the central theme of Nigel Harris’s bold, ambitious, often brilliant work. It is impossible for me to adequately summarise the riches contained in Of Bread and Guns. Anyone who had heard Nigel Harris speak over the last few years will have some idea of what to expect: the magisterial command of his material; the incisive analysis of those bewildering events thrown up daily by the crisis; the demolition of the myths and rationalisations purveyed by politicians and the media; the passionate commitment to the struggle of the workers of the world which gives his whole work a vigour completely lacking in the dried up, turgid stuff which passes itself off as Marxism in academic textbooks today.
Not that it is always easy reading. The pages are packed with nuggets of information, complex arguments compressed into a few paragraphs. Whole books could easily have been made out of individual chapters. At times the argument becomes too allusive, even cryptic. Nigel’s reluctance to let theoretical complexities or technical jargon intrude upon the flow of his story is understandable. But it means that at times the assumptions upon which his assertions are based are not spelled out, or that the Marxism within which he is working is not clearly in view.
Nevertheless the book is beautifully written, full of compelling images and stunning factual illustrations. The pace and verve of the narrative are matched by the clarity of his occasional summaries of the argument. Of Bread and Guns is a work which will amply repay the effort it demands. Let me urge anyone who has not read it to do so, before bothering with this review. The book opens with a dense but imaginative attempt to reconstruct the arguments of the classical Marxist tradition particular he subjects to a withering exposé the mythology of national identity which pervades, sadly, so much of the thinking even of people on the left. Let me single out just one passage which says so much in just a few sentences:
When the British economy grows that is attributable to the wonderfulness of the British: when it declines, it is the result of the low cunning of foreigners – they work too hard, they cheat, they are too efficient, have low wages, and so on. The fact that the people who inhabit Japan or Germany or Hong Kong are chained to the same machine, running automatically at the same speed to produce an identical output is lost in a welter of moralising. (p. 12)
The book closes with the solution, which bewildered a hapless Guardian reviewer,
The reconstruction of the world system on the foundation of popular control, on the basis that those who labour shall hold the power to determine the system, that the needs of the majority shall govern growth and change in the world’s output. (p. 273)
This conclusion is neither glib nor strident. Socialism emerges as necessary but not inevitable, from an analysis guided by the maxim which introduces the final chapter, the requirement of ‘Pessimism of the intellect; optimism of the will’. The system has produced a rhythm of struggle as well as a rhythm of the trade cycle (although the two do not coincide in any simple fashion).
Though brief, the closing paragraphs of Of Bread and Guns are a stirring tribute to the indomitable currents of resistance amongst the oppressed and exploited of the world. They also contain a sober analysis of the way in which the power which workers can exercise has been dissipated in isolated struggles, disarmed by the absence of organisation and the ‘disintegration of a tradition of revolutionary socialist thought’. They reveal Nigel Harris who is himself a product of the best traditions of International Socialism.
The dominant focus of the book, however, is upon the objective rather than the subjective – upon the impersonal, anarchic workings of the system, rather than upon the ideologies (although these figure, usually as objects of ridicule, in passing) or the resistance. Some may criticise Nigel for this emphasis but I do not. It is necessary for us to be clear about what we are fighting, and to understand that capitalism is indeed a system, not reducible to the consciousness of individuals, or the whims and follies of its rulers.
The scope is vast and the themes are many. The contrast between the astonishing expansion of the productive capacity of the system in the years of the ‘Great Boom’, and the stagnation and waste or the decade of slump which has followed. The way in which capital has tried to shift the burden of the slump onto the working-class and compensate for declining profitability with cheap labour, whether it be in ‘export processing zones’ in selected parts of the ‘Third World’, or the recreation of sweatshops and a ‘black economy’ inside the West itself.
Indeed one of Nigel’s recurrent arguments is that in reality there is only one world – and it is becoming increasingly homogeneous. Rapid industrialisation in parts of the ‘Third World’, is matched by the re-emergence of sweated non-unionised labour on a huge scale in Italy, the creation of ‘free enterprise zones’ in Britain, or the use of illegal immigrants at minimal wages in American agriculture. As for the ‘socialist alternative’, the countries of Eastern Europe are subject to rampant corruption, waste, and burgeoning black markets. In the extreme case of Hungary there is a far-reaching attempt to integrate with the Western economies, with markets, private enterprise and profits all now in favour.
But all these themes are in a sense subordinate to the guiding theme which I have already mentioned – the contradiction between the internationalisation of capital, and the nationalism of states; or between the overwhelming power of the world market, and the attempts by states to control their own national economies. It is on this that I want to focus in the rest of this review.
In particular I want to stress the significance of Nigel Harris’s work as a reappraisal of a whole stream of thought in classical Marxism, and provide a detailed critical commentary on those parts of the argument which are not so satisfactory. There are difficulties in spelling out the issues here.
For one thing we are dealing with complex and interwoven tendencies. The world economy is neither static nor one-dimensional. It is not, for example, possible to construct simple quantitative indices, balancing up so much nationalisation or state intervention here, or so much internationalisation there. As Nigel himself emphasises, the divisions are blurred, the concepts necessarily fuzzy, and the statistics therefore often semi-fictional (see for example his comparison, on page 123, of attempts to distinguish the nationality of companies, with the Nazi attempt to distinguish between Jew and Aryan).
Attempts by states to impose restrictions on capital, or to control their national economies, themselves reinforce the internationalisation of capital. Banks move funds offshore to escape the controls. Japanese manufacturing companies invest in other countries to leap over the protectionist barriers of import control the world market forcing them to nationalise ailing companies, or to support the pursuit of foreign trade with export subsidies, tied aid projects, and diplomatic manoeuvrings.
There is a further difficulty. To make sense of the world we need a theory, a set of concepts, which enables us to construct relationships, to pick out what is significant, and guide us through the bewildering mass of information. But the concepts we possess, almost take for granted, are loaded with the residues of the past. That can be as true of Marxism as of other theories. We think and work with notions of British, or French or Russian capitalism or state capitalisms because those notions have guided us or our forebears effectively in the past. But if Nigel is right they are no longer adequate.
To counter what he sees as an obstacle to understanding Nigel has thrown his weight in the other direction. Of Bread and Guns is an outright challenge to the concepts with which so many of us have operated. But Nigel does not spend space or effort in clarifying his relationship to other species of Marxism, or on dissecting the theoretical tradition from which he himself comes. [1] Only in a short Appendix to chapter 7, The End of Capitalism in One Country, does he confront the issue head on.
Let me proceed then by trying to clarify what I consider to be the crux of the argument, by locating Nigel’s work in the context to which it belongs – the tradition of Lenin and Bukharin, Trotsky and Cliff.
 
State capitalism and the world economy
It was Marx in the Communist Manifesto who first emphasised that capitalism was creating a world economy. Capitalism itself emerged out of the rapid expansion of trade following the opening up of the East Indies (by European merchants) and the colonisation of the Americas. In turn in pursuit of expanding markets or new sources of raw materials the bourgeoisie conquers the world:
To the great chagrin of reactionists, it has drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed. They are dislodged by new industries whose introduction becomes a life and death question for all civilised nations, by industries that no longer work up indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from the remotest zones; industries whose products are consumed not only at home but in every quarter of the globe ... In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency we have intercourse in every direction, universal interdependence of nations. [2]
The argument provided the scientific justification for the insistence that ‘the working men have no country’, and for his final call to ‘Working Men of All Countries Unite’.
In his major economic work, Capital, however, Marx pays relatively little attention to the world market. This is partly a question of levels of abstraction – the argument is developed by dealing with the structure of capital or capital in general in abstraction from time and space. It is not, although many have interpreted it this way, because Marx sees capitalism as a matter of separate national modes of production, the external relations of which, their trade, are only a secondary matter. The outline of what was to have been the complete work shows that Marx intended to write a whole volume on the world market, and would then have dealt with particular national economies only in terms of their interrelationship within the total world system. [3]
That work unfortunately was not written and we are left with only fragments pointing to the emphasis Marx continued to place on the primacy of the world market. But the absence helped make possible the emergence of another current of ‘Marxism’, the current of Kautsky, and later of Stalin and the Communist Parties. This did theoretically confine capitalism within national boundaries, and therefore saw the nation state as capable of exercising control over its own particular capitalism regardless of what happened in the outside world.
This tradition of ‘socialism in one country’ (which, it is often forgotten, was common to both ‘social democracy’ and ‘Stalinism’, both sharing the same rotten nationalism and belief in the state that Marx hated) was of course rejected outright by Lenin and Trotsky. But as Nigel Harris has himself observed, if the debate was about ‘industrialisation in one country’ rather than ‘socialism’ there was a sense in which Trotsky could be seen as wrong and Stalin right. It was possible in the 1930s for the Russian state to deliver the goods, though at an enormous cost. It was possible then for a state to survive its isolation from the world economy, and still build up its industrial base. [4]
More generally, if at times Marx seems to see capitalism as simply dissolving national boundaries and undermining the basis for independent states, the events of the first half of the twentieth century showed that this was at best a partial analysis. The smooth flow of capital congealed into particular forms set by the imperialist states of the industrial core of the system and their colonial or subordinate extensions around the world. The epoch of imperialism described most notably by Bukharin and Lenin was an epoch in which there seemed to be a fusion of national capital (heavily concentrated by monopolies and the banks) and the state.
The events of the 1930s and the response to the devastating crisis of that period confirmed the validity of Bukharin’s analysis of a world divided up into competing state capitals. [5] The retreat into autarchy, of national isolation combined in some cases with formal or informal empires providing the necessary sources of raw materials and protected markets, characterised not just Russia but all the major Imperialist powers.
The situation was unstable, the carving up of the world uneven and a recurrent source of friction. Imperialist rivalries led inexorably to war. But war, or the threat of war, itself substituted for other forms of competition. Military competition also enforced a compulsion to accumulate, demanding the construction of heavy industry to ensure the means of survival and destruction. The competition between national state capitalisms acquired a logic, a dynamic, of its own.
The importance of this analysis for the theoretical tradition of the SWP will be familiar to many readers. It underpinned in particular Cliff’s analysis (in the 1940s) of Russia as state capitalist. Cliff showed that, although Russia was not integrated into the world market, it was part of a world system of competing military powers. It was not subject to the constraints of producing commodities for exchange, for sale on a competitive market. But it was subject to the constraints of the arms race, of having to accumulate and continually increase the pressure on its labour force for greater productivity, to keep up with its rivals.
But Cliff’s path-breaking analysis left open a number of questions. Was Russian state capitalism, and its East European extension, an exceptional development, or did it presage a world of state capitals of the same mould? Could Russia maintain its isolation from the world market, or would it eventually be drawn back in, compelled to share in the international division of labour? Could the Stalinist model of isolated national economic development be replicated in other economically backward countries? Was the state generally becoming the primary agent of accumulation, and what did this mean for the functioning of the world economy?
The influence of the tradition of Bukharin and Cliff, and a concern with the fundamental questions I have just outlined, are evident throughout Of Bread and Guns. It appears in particular in Nigel’s analysis of war and ‘guns’, one area in which states are evidently still paramount. Nigel has no time for those who perversely seek to rationalise away the Russian bombs and tanks in the curious belief that you have to take sides in the lunacies of the cold war. He exposes the absurdities of this world of competing states in which each one claims to possess the monopoly or right and virtue whilst piling up ever higher quantities of instruments which can destroy us all. He observes sardonically that:
Here the achievements seem to dwarf all others; indeed when included in the total picture of the world system, they become so impressive that we are tempted to conclude that the world system is first and foremost a collection of war-making states, a global system of production whose final achievement is auto-destruction. (p. 214)
Few people have done more to develop the theory of state capitalism than Nigel Harris himself. In a whole series of articles stretching back to the 1960s he has applied that analysis to the attempts by some ruling classes in less developed countries to follow the Russian path, to pursue their own route to national economic development. [6] In the unjustly neglected Mandate of Heaven: Marx and Mao in Modern China he anticipated some of the themes in Of Bread and Guns. [7] In Mandate of Heaven he exposes the bankruptcy of the Maoist model and the pressures forcing China into establishing links with the world economy. The Russian model, he convincingly shows was exceptional. The dependence of rapid economic growth on access to the international division of labour and the most advanced technology, have made it impossible to repeat for any sustained period of time, the rapid primitive accumulation of the Stalinist epoch in isolation from the world economy.
In Of Bread and Guns Nigel extends this analysis to the world economy in general, and to the already industrialised Western economies in particular. He notes the way in which the functions of the states have expanded remorselessly in those economies. He is fully aware of the attempts to extend the control of states over their national patches which characterised the heyday of Keynesian ideology and the ‘managed economy’. Yet, he argues:
The appearance of the steady growth of state power was a plausible one only from within a given country; outside, in the world system, the growth of the essentially private system (even if state-owned companies also operated there) was more impressive ... For capital, national loyalty was strictly contingent, a bargain based upon a profit rate which, although influenced by state behaviour and subsidies was ultimately not determined by it. Indeed the world system that stood revealed in the 1970s had a closer resemblance to the classical theory of a capitalist system than any that had existed before – a mass of competing units, none of which was large enough to influence the market’s outcome, and lacking official governance in the interests of all competitors.
But the ending of sustained growth, the growth of unemployment, revived the necessity of states to control more closely their domestic patches. The new structure, however, severely limited their capacity to do so; efforts to do so threatened to damage both the world system and thereby each ‘domestic economy’. The remedies of 1931 looked increasingly utopian: the state as an economic agency was becoming obsolescent, (pp. 67–68)
It is a powerful passage, in its conclusion a startling one. It is also a statement with a sharp political edge. If the remedies of 1931 are utopian, if states can no longer control their national economies, except through damaging the world economy as a whole, then the thinking of the reformist left is ‘utopian’ and ‘reactionary’ too. All the various Alternative Strategies, the elaborate plans, the proposals for import controls, fall apart, apart from other objections, because their basic assumption is invalid – that there is a self-contained national economy which can be planned and ‘protected’.
With that argument, with the central political thrust of Nigel’s work, I am in wholehearted agreement. But we need to be wary of the persuasive, almost rhetorical, force of the passage as a whole. Are states really more economically obsolescent for capital than in the past? (And what does the word ‘economic’ mean here?) If the remedies of 1931 are utopian we still have to consider why so many echoes of the responses of governments in the ’30s can be heard today. Was the 1930s or any other period of capitalism an age in which there was ‘official governance in the interests of all competitors’? If, as is certainly true, no single unit (be it state or corporation) can control the world market, what is the significance of the innumerable attempts to do so?
At times it seems as if Nigel is merely filling out and elaborating the argument put by Chris Harman in 1977 in his criticism of Mike Kidron. [8] Kidron had presented very sketchily a picture of a world divided up into self-contained state capitals – an attempt to generalise Cliff’s analysis of Russia to the world as a whole. Harman argued effectively that this ignored the other trend in the system – the internationalisation of capital. The system was thus characterised by two trends which were both contradictory and complementary – towards state capitalism with states seeking to exercise greater control over their respective national capitals – and towards an internationalisation of capital, the growth of multinationals and international banking, which undermined the effective power of states (especially the smaller or weaker states which constitute the great majority) over the market.
But Nigel Harris has, as I read him, gone further. In his stress on the power of the world market and the impotence of governments it is as if he has adopted the diametrically opposite position to Kidron – the world market is all, the states are obsolescent. More accurately, and fairly, summarised, his argument is that there is now a marked disjuncture between the interests of capital and the interests of states. For capital ‘national loyalty’ is ‘strictly contingent’. States by contrast are necessarily ‘national’, committed (although a particular ruler may not be) to a piece of territory, and its associated population, from which there is no escape.
Or as he puts it in his important appendix ‘The End of Capitalism in One Country’ (the title of which says it all really), Marxists since Lenin have assumed an identity of capital, in the sense of companies, and the state. The state was seen as representing a clearly identifiable national capital, pursuing and protecting its interests at home and abroad. Yet:
The state was indeed fashioned by capital to prosecute its interests. But the state is wedded to territory, to the maintenance of the physical means to control and extend its territorial power; companies are not ... However, the economic system is not governed by the arbitrary lines of national boundaries. The process of the accumulation of capital is constantly driven to internationalisation, towards forming the largest markets, serviced by the largest concentrations of capital ... Company behaviour ultimately depends upon an appraisal of world market advantages of different locations rather than some overriding nationality. For new investment, businessmen shop around between states just as they do between local authorities, seeking the best deal. The transfer of profits thus becomes the mechanism for the relocation of productive assets between different territories ... (pp. 231–34)
I have ignored the mass of supporting evidence Nigel accumulates in support of most of those propositions. I have also omitted the careful qualifications with which he surrounds the argument, in order to highlight the salient point.
The difference, at least of emphasis, between this and what might be called the ‘SWP tradition’, can be seen by comparing the above with some of the sections in Chris Harman’s recent article on the crisis. [9] There he refers to the state’s need to deal with multinationals and the international capital market, and the dependence by multinationals on their home bases, on support from state resources, and on state protection of their international operations (‘e.g. in trade negotiations, against threats from radical governments and so on’). Harman is certainly not arguing that states can control the market – but his repeated emphasis on a world of ‘competing state capitals’ (East and West) implies that it is still possible to associate states with particular blocs of national capital even if the distinctions are increasingly blurred by the internationalisation of capital.
I am not trying to create some spurious notion of a deep theoretical divide here. In part the difference is much more one of emphasis and formulation than of substance or implication. In part it is a matter of the way in which Nigel has thoroughly reworked the terms of the argument. He is not, emphatically not, simply counter-posing the power or autonomy of multinationals to the weakness of individual states. Many people, not least reformists such as Stuart Holland, have done that. [10]
Nigel’s argument about the ‘internationalisation’ of the system is much more thorough and far-reaching. It is a process which has occurred on several levels and penetrated deep into the heart of every domestic economy. It has involved an internationalisation of capital ownership, finance, and tax evasion as well as of production activities. It involves deals between independent companies as well as overseas investment (i.e. the deal between British Leyland and Honda as well as Ford producing in Britain or Peugeot taking over Talbot). It involves above all an accelerating integration of production through trade, corresponding to an increasingly specialised international division of labour. In every country both imports and exports have been growing, and the attention focused on the first invariably neglects the second. As he remarks very early on in the book:
Even the small manufacturing firm depends upon imports to produce. Intra-industry trade has been the core of the growth of world trade since the Second World War – that is trade between the same industry in different countries each producing specialised inputs to the other. The label ‘Made in X’ only indicates where the finished article last came from, not who made fundamental contributions to its making. (pp. 19–20)
All this is supported with an abundance of figures, examples, documented evidence, even some striking graphs. The case is overwhelming, and only those seeking desperately to defend their alternative strategies and schemes for import controls will bother to dispute it. But it leaves open the question of the continuing relationship between particular states and this increasingly internationalised capital.
Here Nigel’s argument becomes less satisfactory. In particular there are problems both with his analysis of ‘national rivalries’, of the competition between states, and with his analysis of the repercussions of state actions on the crisis.
 
States and national rivalries
The fundamental thesis of Of Bread and Guns is absolutely correct – that the world economy should not be seen just as the sum, the aggregate of a collection of self-contained national capitals, but as the totality within which all capitals struggle to survive. It conforms as I have suggested to a fundamental thesis of Marx himself. But, as the subsequent debates among Marxists have shown, that assertion does not by itself settle the question of precisely how national economies and states are connected within that totality.
It is also true that particular capitals need have no loyalty to any particular state – that they will use offshore tax havens, speculate on the currency markets, shift assets between countries, according to the demands of maximising their profitability. They may well have little concern for the impact such actions may have on the fortunes of a national economy, or the policies of a particular government (regardless of its political complexion, although obviously threats of nationalisation will tend to hasten their departure). But it does not follow that the dissociation of capital and nation-states has proceeded quite as far as Nigel sometimes suggests.
Let us examine first where these developments leave the states according to this account. Four types of state activity in particular are emphasised; though this is to over-schematise what Nigel says:

All states have to provide the necessary infrastructure and supply of services. That includes a whole variety of physical resources, energy, roads, airports, and other means of communication. It also includes the provision of the appropriately skilled (and preferably docile) labour-power. These are simply minimal conditions, without which states will be unable to either develop their own economic base or attract international capital. ‘Large public sectors’ will, however, ‘root an important section of private capital’ (p. 233), especially in areas such as construction.
 
The final point also applies to the ‘defence industries’ or the military sector, where, especially, but not exclusively, in the major industrial powers, some of the largest and most profitable companies are dependent upon orders from their ‘own’ government (see p. 224 for the United States example, and the point could equally well be made about Britain, France, South Africa or Israel). This, of course, connects with the point made earlier about the paramountcy of the state in war, and within the ‘military-industrial complex’.
 
In response to the crisis states engage in ‘defensive action’ to protect particular sectors, to prop up bankrupt or declining sections of capital. This has involved a whole range of moves from outright nationalisation, to the formation of cartels (grouping all capitals in a particular industry) and rationalisation schemes (as in the recent case of government subsidised scrapping of foundries in Britain), to subsidies to private capital, and ‘protective’ import controls. But all of these, Nigel argues, are destructive or wasteful – draining resources away from the profitable sectors within the national economy, or damaging the level of world trade and thus the whole world economy (pp. 80–81).
 
States engage in ‘competitive auctions’ (p. 108) to attract the favours of international capital. The bribes and carrots, ranging from tax concessions to huge investment subsidies, have indeed reached staggeringly absurd heights. Nigel has great fun with the example of the Fords engine plant in Bridgend, Wales, where the government ended up contributing £140 million or 78% of the total investment (p. 109). He could have cited many other examples, not least from the motor industry, where General Motors and Nissan have both trailed ‘investment plans’ around half the countries in Europe looking for the best deal. Just as region competes with region, or new town with inner city, within Britain, for new capital without adding anything to the aggregate amount of investment or jobs – so states are competing with each other for a limited pool of new investment by the multinationals. With the growing attractions of ‘export processing zones’ with tax concessions and cheap labour (pp. 147–149) in the less developed countries, even the strongest Western states can no longer afford to opt out of the game.

The argument is, it should be apparent, careful and subtle. It is also qualified in some significant (if rather parenthetical) remarks.
Nigel notes that capital in its productive form (when it is fixed or immobilised in buildings, plant, or offices) is necessarily tied to a piece of territory, and therefore to a particular state (p. 233). Financial or money capital is conversely free to move almost anywhere, and is correspondingly much more internationalised. It is a distinction he could have made more of, because it has definite consequences in a time of slump. For instance, one of his more striking examples of internationalisation is the Shah of Iran’s purchase of a large chunk of the shares of Krupps (p. 122). But, in the current crisis of the West German steel industry, it is the West German state which has intervened to reorganise the whole industry, including Krupps’ steel interests, into two major groups, as a condition of official aid. [11]
Nigel argues that over time ‘all old capital becomes new’ (p. 233) and refers to the ‘extreme’ example of microelectronics companies with high rates of turnover and a potential for shifting locations every five years. But it is an extreme case. Even British companies which are more internationalised than most, and have been shifting assets out of the country at a rate of £8–9 billion a year recently, still have the bulk of their admittedly crumbling assets inside the UK. [12] The point applies even more strongly to that other extremely internationalised sector of capital, American corporations.
In response to the slump some American multinationals have actually retreated back into their home base. Chrysler disposed of all its major foreign assets. International Harvesters is flogging off its truck and construction equipment plant in Europe. [13] Even Ford almost the archetypal multinational, has drained funds from overseas subsidiaries in a desperate attempt to sustain its American investment programme, and hang on to its ‘home market’. Nigel would reply, perhaps, that the United States is a ‘special case’ (p. 236) with the largest domestic market of all, and so it. But then so in a sense are they all special cases.
More generally, what is missing from Nigel’s account is the role of the state as itself an agent of accumulation not just the ‘state and capital’ but the ‘state as capital’. The absence is perhaps the more surprising as Nigel has himself elsewhere emphasised this function of the state especially in Less Developed Countries with a limited supply of private capital. Even in the more successful, the Newly Industrialising Countries, the glorified ‘free enterprise’ city states of Hong Kong and Singapore are the exception.
Otherwise, and notably in Brazil, South Korea, and Taiwan, the state has simultaneously opened up sectors of the economy to the multinationals, fostered its own private capitalist empires, and pumped funds into the heavy industrial sectors of the economy such as steel and shipbuilding. Nigel mentions the fact that Fortune’s list of the top 500 companies in the world now includes 33 registered in the Less Developed Countries (p. 129). He does not mention that the five largest of these are all state-owned petroleum companies. [14] In the West it seems, for the moment, as if the trend is the other way. In Britain profitable nationalised companies are being privatised. In both Britain and the United States, the rundown of public sector investment seems to be generating what Bukharin called ‘negative reproduction’ [15], a deterioration in the essential infrastructure of roads, sewers, railways and buildings. [16] But even here the state is still pumping funds into areas of new technology and research, as well as propping up old industries. The examples of France, Sweden, or West Germany with their ‘automation’ programmes show that the ‘retreat of the state’ is scarcely a general phenomenon.
Nigel, I suspect, would disagree with little of this. He does argue that the boundaries of public and private are ‘blurred and semi-fictional’ (p. 58). He would reply that, to grow and prosper, nationalised companies also have to become multinationals, to gain access to resources and markets on an international scale like their private rivals. So Renault takes over American Motors and the newly nationalised French electrical giant Thomson-Brandt bids for the ailing West German Grundig. Mitterrand, desperately coming to terms with the impossibility of ‘capitalism in one country’, calls for a united European alignment in electronics against the Americans and Japanese. In Britain British Leyland does deals with Honda (an event the significance of which we have perhaps not yet appreciated). There are even a small but growing number of East European multinationals (p. 130).
But it is also true that neither the extent of ‘public ownership’ nor level of state spending are reliable indices of the role of the state. Japan is the lowest of the industrial powers on both counts but it is also one of the most ‘national’ as Nigel observes (in the sense that despite extensive overseas investment in recent years the great bulk of Japanese capital remains firmly tied to Japan and closely integrated with the state). Yet for all his frequent references to this (pp. 126, 130 & 236–7) he never discusses it in any detail. In fact the fusion of Japanese national capital and its state (with extensive overlap between the oligarchs of the long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party and the business elite) remains intact. The role played by MITI (Ministry of Trade and Industry) in organising the rundown of ageing industries and the direction of resources into new industries with the best export potential, has been central to Japan’s exceptional growth. [17]
Again Nigel could reply that he is stressing the tendency, emphasising the primacy of the world market against all those who cling to the illusion of national economic independence, or the possibility of particular states expanding their economies in isolation from the rest. But if national economies have been in varying degrees integrated with the rest they have not been dissolved. They continue to be marked by their distinctive, historically bequeathed patterns of economic activity and combinations of productive sectors. It is still valid to talk about the distinctive problems and fortunes of British capitalism, even if it is increasingly wrong to identify those with the fortunes of much of British capital with its £60 billion worth of overseas assets (or 15% of the world’s stock of foreign direct investment compared to only 7% each for Japan and West Germany). [18]
The issue becomes significant when we try to explain the national rivalries which exploded in a spate of trade disputes and political tensions in the early 1980s. Nigel of course does not ignore these. He examines the import control question in some detail. It is worth examining his argument carefully because its basic political message that such controls are destructive and reactionary is so important. But there is a problem here. If capitalism is now so internationalised, if the autarchic responses of the 1930s are now ‘utopian’, that is simply not feasible, then why are the current trade disputes so intense and the scope of formal and informal import restrictions so extensive?
Nigel’s argument is, crudely, that import controls are now irrational and dangerous from the point of view of capital as well as workers. The argument is not simply about retaliation, about the drastic reduction in world trade caused by a spiralling trade war between the major imperialist powers which of course did occur in the 1930s. It is about the sheer degree of integration with imports and exports amounting (according to one somewhat misleading set of figures) to 80 and 72% respectively of domestic production of goods within Britain in 1979. [19] Those proportions he asserts nearly doubled in the 1970s in most Western economies. Moreover, imports are increasingly inputs into other industries. Keeping out cheaper coal pushes up the price of British cars and ships. The absurdity of it all appears in the complaints directed at each other by the heads of different British nationalised industries, and the inability of successive governments to do more than respond aimlessly to the conflicting pressures.
The argument is reinforced by the fact that trade is increasingly within multinational companies – that Ford the largest British car producer is also the largest importer of vehicles into Britain. Ford will call for a ban on Japanese imports – but it will not tolerate a ban on importing cars in general. All this explains why the moves towards protectionism have been limited – why despite the slump there has not been a repetition of the collapse of world trade of the 1930s – why despite the smoke and the heat many of the disputes have been patched up with unstable compromises and ‘voluntary restraint agreements’.
Nevertheless if world trade has not collapsed it has stopped growing. In a number of recent cases, severe balance of payments difficulties, a chronic shortage of foreign exchange, have forced debt-ridden states into devaluing their currencies and imposing strict controls on imports – squeezing out all but the most essential imports at enormous cost to their economies and the living standards of their workforce – Poland, Mexico, and Nigeria are only the most prominent examples. There has been an increase in barter deals (swopping goods for goods without the use of scarce foreign currency) often negotiated by governments – a device frequently used in Eastern Europe, and now being taken up by some oil exporters such as Iran and Indonesia. [20] That is a sign of a partial disintegration of world trading patterns into the pattern of bilateral deals between countries which characterised the 1930s.
The Western economies are in a rather different position. For them, import controls are a product not of the shortage of foreign currency but of the increasingly savage competition between states. Nigel quotes figures showing the rapid rise in the proportion of Managed’ imports – those subject to restrictions, informal and formal controls, or ‘agreements’ such as the restraint on imports of Japanese cars into Britain and the USA (p. 80). He refers to the range of sectors involved in trade disputes – steel, shipbuilding, clothing, footwear, cars, consumer electronics, and, as has been the case since the 1930s, food.
But his explanation of all this is weak and tenuous. He notes that ‘old capital endlessly pressured states to protect them against imports’ (p. 111) but this receives less emphasis than the split between the economic interests of capital and the political interests of the state. As he sees it:
It was the politics of import controls that were important, the constant emphasis that the state protected its citizens ... Endlessly the popular wisdom was inundated with the argument that, if local industry weakened this was the result not of the failures of local capital but of ‘unfair’ competition (p. 111)
The argument is part of his more general thesis that ‘the need for political stability collided with the economic needs of both national and international capitalism’ (p. 101). Now there is something in this. The ideology of ‘import controls’ is insidious, and does serve effectively to align workers with their own employers against workers elsewhere. But this does not adequately explain why states should undermine the interests of their own national capitalism – profits are rarely sacrificed for the sake of ideology. The mistake, and it has other implications which will be pursued in a moment, lies in simply counter-posing the economic and political – and thereby suggesting that the economic interests of capital are clear-cut and un-contradictory.
As Nigel’s own analysis of ‘food’ shows, the enormous scale of food subsidies, agricultural protection, and surpluses of Common Market butter, meat, and grain, are the result of the power exercised by the extremely well organised farming and ‘agribusiness’ lobbies. This is not a matter of peasants or small farmers, although their votes may be an important political factor. Of the 1979 Common Agricultural Policy budget, 35% went to the food processing companies, 48% to traders, and 14% to storage companies (p. 208). The spate of fishing and food wars in the last few years is the product of the power of these nationally or regionally organised agri-business sectors – it is the consumer, the working-class, which pays in higher food prices.
In some cases there is a marked conflict of interest between different sections of capital based within a country. The steel war is a good example, with conflicting pressures from the steel companies of Europe and America on the one hand and from the steel users and importers of the same countries on the other.
Of course, the retaliation problem remains, as it did in the 1930s. There are, as the ruling class is well aware, enormous dangers in import controls. That is one reason why there has been an increasing stress by Britain and France on imposing controls through the Common Market as a whole – although it is equally true that the fissures inside the EEC are severe, and that attempts to organise European wide cartels have been extremely precarious. It is also why many of the recent restrictions have been directed against Japan where the retaliation danger is seen as less of a problem. Moreover once trade wars start they get out of hand, and acquire a dynamic of their own like all wars. Move leads to countermove, retaliation to bitter response. The deepening of the slump, and pressure from particular sections of national industry, especially in weakening economies such as the United States, Britain and France, may yet have calamitous consequences for the system as a whole. [21]
None of this, of course, is meant as a defence of import controls. On the contrary, my argument is that Nigel’s emphasis on the internationalisation of capital leads him to dissociate the competition of states from the rivalry of nationally based capitals – and therefore to underestimate the dangers of a shift to protectionism.
In particular the decline of American hegemony over the Western bloc as a whole could yet mean a disintegration of the framework within which the internationalisation of capital occurred in the 1950s and 1960s. Of course that is only one side of the picture – the continued integration of capital, and the resistance of multinationals to protectionism in general is the other. But in this respect at least Nigel’s analysis leads to an understatement of the contradictory character of capitalism. This argument can be generalised. Nigel explicitly states that he is concerned to move away from interpretations of the crisis in terms of the rivalries of competing national capitalisms – to stress the contradiction between the internationalisation of capital itself and the system of competing states. Much of what he says is a continuing refutation of those who would reduce the crisis simply to the decline of American hegemony and the conflict of the major national powers [22] – as if an agreement between them could somehow resolve the crisis. But his emphasis may lead his readers into misinterpreting important aspects of the crisis.
Take, for example, Nigel’s discussion of the international monetary system and the role of the Euromarkets (markets which handle currencies outside of their country of origin, and beyond the control of national authorities and central banks such as the Bank of England). The issues here are difficult to summarise, and this is one of the areas in which the account in Of Bread and Guns is extremely condensed. To condense the matter even further, Nigel places a justifiable stress in analysing the long boom, and its end, on the relationship between the overwhelmingly dominant US economy (with some 50% of world industrial capacity at the end of World War 2) and the European and Japanese economies. The flow of dollars across the Atlantic from the late 1940s onwards was a necessary condition of the recovery of the European economies and sustained growth in the United States. The dollars (transmitted through Marshall aid, capital investment, and above all military spending) provided the necessary liquidity, the spare cash, with which the Europeans could purchase American capital goods (pp. 35–41).
But by the late 1960s the problem had reversed. Instead of a dollar shortage there was a dollar glut. The expanding trade surpluses of West Germany, France and Japan, combined with the continued effects of American overseas military spending and capital investment, meant that those countries were flooded with dollars. These they tended to place on the Euromarkets, the international financial markets whose growth accelerated. But this situation was unstable. The permanent threat of dollars being turned into gold or other currencies undermined the role of the dollar as the world currency – and led in 1973 to the collapse of the post-war international order of fixed exchange rates.
The existence of the Euromarkets undermined the American government’s control over its own currency. Since 1973 the operations of the financial markets, the unrestrained movements of short-term funds from one country and its currency to another in search of speculative gains has undermined the power of all governments. But the point is, as Nigel notes in passing that it was: ‘both the unbridled rivalries of the dominant powers and, even more important, the new giant, the uncontrolled Eurocurency market ...’ (p. 43) which created this instability. The ‘and even more’ here, however, is misplaced. The point may seem pedantic but it is crucial to understanding the markets. It was the interaction of the competition between states and the internationalisation of financial capital which was decisive. If the Euromarkets provided the necessary mechanism for undermining the dollar – it was the weakening of the competitive strength of the American economy relative to its West German and Japanese rivals which lay at the root of the matter. [23]
The continuing interest rate war between the rival Western economies reveals a comparable relationship. Governments are effectively competing with each other to attract the volatile sums of speculative funds floating around in the financial countries by pushing up interest rates on short-term assets such as Treasury Bills. Again it is not just a matter of the power of international capital vis a vis the national states – but of the articulation of the competition between states with the operations of the market. The difference between this and Nigel’s account is one of formulation perhaps rather than of substance. But the formulations are important to a clear understanding of the way the system is locked into stagnation.
To summarise my main criticism – in detaching the competition between states from the competition between private capitals (and it is true that the two are not identical) Nigel underestimates the significance of the economic rivalries between what are still identifiably distinct groupings of national capital.
On the other hand, Nigel is right to stress the differences between the current crisis and that of the 1930s. The integration of the different national economies has made a return to the protectionist blocs organised around the imperialist powers of that period impossible. Correspondingly the military integration of the Western bloc within NATO remains intact, if under increasing strain. It is simply absurd to put the rivalry between Japan and the United States today on the same plane as that of the 1930s – at a time when the United States is urging Japan to increase its military spending. The main ‘inter-imperialist’ divide is between the two superpowers, and their admittedly increasingly insubordinate associates. That is itself a proof of the very different structure of the world economy today.
 
States and the crisis
Perhaps the most important conclusion of all in Of Bread and Guns concerns the destructive impact of the actions of the states on the world economy – and the ways in which their attempts to maintain their own national power and shares of world productive capacity are reinforcing the stagnation of the system.
It is a conclusion with revolutionary political consequences – the attempts of reformists to use the state as a lever of expansion in one country are not only doomed to failure but are liable to make the crisis worse. Resolving the crisis demands not just the destruction of the state apparatus as Lenin argued, but an end to the whole system of competing nation-states.
However, Nigel scarcely differentiates at all between the various types of action taken by the states. The actions are all, it might appear from reading his account, equally destructive, and, if there is a difference, propping up and subsidising bankrupt sections of capital is even more destructive than letting them collapse. This is at best extremely misleading.
Part of the problem stems from Nigel’s reluctance to spell out his explanation of the roots of the crisis in any detail.
He repeatedly asserts that low rates of profit, and consequently stagnant or declining levels of investment, constitute the fundamental cause of the crisis. His underlying assumptions are thus explicitly Marxist. The chapter on slump and stagnation stresses the depth and intractability of the crisis, and effectively dismisses those who try to explain it away as a matter of accidents or temporary disorders. He shows how the build-up of productive capacity in the system during the Great Boom, led eventually to the chronic overproduction and absurdly wasteful excess capacity of the slump.
Much of this is extremely valuable and suggestive. His account of the ‘Permanent Arms Economies’ of the post-Second World War epoch shows how military expenditure could both contribute to the length and character of the boom, and add to the strains once the system had begun to enter into crisis. He takes us away from the crude ‘arms spending caused the boom, less arms spending caused the slump’ sort of idea which some critics wrongly attribute to the SWP.
On the other hand, some of his remarks are tantalisingly cryptic. His statement that ‘only religion has the capacity to explain events without examining them at all’ is an understandable sign of impatience with those Marxists who resort to a realm of abstractions and quotes from the hallowed texts without confronting the changes wrought by the dynamics of capital itself. But his subsequent comment that: ‘In any case in the real world it is extraordinarily difficult even to measure the world profit rate, so that it is no wonder that the theory has become almost as mystifying as events’ (p. 25) really should have been followed up in more detail. As it is, amidst a welter of statistics, there is virtually no attempt to analyse the evidence which is available (admittedly in an unsatisfactory ‘national’ format) on the decline of rates of return, especially on industrial capital. For a rigorous Marxist explanation of both the long boom and the crisis, readers will still have to turn to the articles by Chris Harman to which Nigel refers. [24]
I am not suggesting that Nigel should have given us yet another discussion of the theoretical arguments, or constructed another lifeless abstract model of how capitalism works. We have enough of those as it is, and most of them don’t take us any further than Marx himself. There is, though, a danger in divorcing an abstract explanation of the basic tendencies of capital from a location of those tendencies within the complex structure of the world economy today. The methodological importance of the Permanent Arms Economy was that it provided a bridge between the analysis of Marx and the real world of post-war capitalism. We still need to develop comparable ‘middle-range’ theories to explain, for example, the significance of the debt and the international banking crisis which Nigel has done so much to illuminate. [25]
These are matters of omission rather than error, and it is wrong to simply criticise a work of such scope for not being even longer.
Where the omission has serious effects is on the assessment of the impact of state intervention upon the slump. For Nigel fails to adequately explain what is distinctive about the current crisis compared to previous periods of capitalist crisis.
That is perhaps too strong. At one point Nigel provides a crucial summary of the nature of the crisis which is essentially the same as that of Chris Harman – both drawing upon the argument in Marx that slumps can prepare the ground for recovery if they are deep enough to restore the rate of profit:
However, slump could only have the effect of restoring the profit rate if labour costs were radically cut and capital values could be collapsed – through bankruptcies, the writing off of capital. There was some of both, but each competing national state endeavoured to protect its capacity for as long as possible, lest an upturn find it without the means to exploit a boom. No doubt there were also fears in government that their electorates would not accept, so soon after the rosy aspirations of the great boom and the myths of the managed economy, the required degree of pruning and unemployment. Thus the interests of the state collided with the interests of capital as an economic entity. Stagnation was the resulting compromise; investment stayed obstinately low.
The perspective is succinctly put. I agree with all of it except the formulation of the second to last sentence. But that unfortunately has wider implications.
The problem lies, once again, with this notion of ‘the interests of capital as an economic entity.’ I think I know what he means by it – that the survival and return to prosperity of the mass of capitals depend upon the slump effectively working its way through as in the past. The idea is that the interference of the state with the workings of the market delays, or frustrates, the ‘restructuring’ of capital and the ‘rejigging’ of the relationship of capital and labour (increasing the rate of exploitation).
But in focussing so much on the ‘obstructions’ and ‘damage’ inflicted by the states, Nigel is in danger of ignoring what the ‘monetarists’ and ‘free traders’ always forget – that the market is itself unstable and subject to periodic breakdowns; that the crisis could only restore the rate of profit at an enormous cost not just to workers but to large sections of capital; and that if the slump required to clean out the system today has to be much deeper and more devastating than anything we have so far experienced, there is also no guarantee that capitalism could get out again. Despite the scale of the 1930s slump it still took the stimulus of rearmament and war to pull the World economy out of it. Today capitalism could plunge so deep that h would get stuck at the bottom and either disintegrate amidst the destruction of nuclear war, or be strangled by its own labour-force first. It is the action of the major states in propping up their economies, their large companies and increasingly their banks, that is stopping that happening.
Nigel is quite right to stress that these actions by the individual states cannot produce an expansion, or return to sustained boom, but are prolonging the stagnation. He notes, as we saw, that the effect of propping up the old and inefficient capitals is to shift the burden onto the more profitable capitals – through subsidies which directly or indirectly drain resources away from the rest of the economy, and through restricting the markets potentially available to the company’s rivals. Thus Chrysler and British Leyland are propped up both at the expense of higher taxation in the rest of the national economy, and at the expense of Ford, General Motors, and all the other companies who could increase their share of the world car market if the weaker capitals were busted.
But that is only one side of the picture. In talking about the ‘economic interests of capital’ Nigel appears to suggest that those interests are not contradictory – or even that capital is a single homogeneous blob. I don’t think he really means that, but he fails to consider the repercussions which would result if the states all decided to let their unprofitable and subsidised capitals go under. This is not just a matter of the interests of the capitals directly affected. The collapse of British Leyland, British Steel, British Shipbuilders, Rolls Royce, British Rail, the National Coal Board would have extremely destructive repercussions throughout the whole British economy. The impact on all the other segments of capital tied in as components or material suppliers to those companies would probably bring most of them down as well. As unemployment soared towards the six million mark the effects of a lowering of overall demand on the economy would hit many other sections of capital -including capitals abroad seeking to export to the British market. If the government responded to its soaring social security bill by slashing that as well, it would force down wages, but the short term effect would accentuate the problem of declining demand.
To be a bit more technical for two paragraphs: Nigel fails to distinguish between the cost (or price) effects of subsidies on the national economy and the volume (or output) effects. In a full-employment economy (which is always assumed in the neo-classical models of perfectly competitive markets which are the basis of the right-wing attack on subsidies and defence of free trade) only the cost effects matter because all resources are fully utilised. Subsidies etc. then do simply redistribute resources from the profitable to the unprofitable.
But in a period of slump the volume effects (which arise from sustaining the overall level of demand and employment within the economy) may easily more than offset the increased costs which have to be borne by the more profitable capitals. [26] The point is reinforced (as Keynes replied to the ‘crowding out’ argument of his opponents) if subsidies and government spending are financed not out of taxes but out of borrowed ‘savings’ which would not otherwise be utilised for productive investment in the economy (though this may, especially in the current situation, push up interest rates).
This is not meant as a defence of Keynesianism in any of its many varieties. [27] It is meant as a warning against Marxists going so overboard in their criticisms of protectionism and state intervention that they end up sounding like rampant free traders – Marx would not have approved. Nigel is absolutely right to insist that states cannot generate sustained expansion in isolation or without an increase in the underlying rate of profit. But the alternatives before capitalism are not simply those of expansion or slump – they are those of permanent stagnation, with continuing fluctuations in the level of activity, or of a spiralling descent into chronic slump (probably bringing down the banking system at the same time).
In the previous section I argued that Nigel actually underestimated the contradictory character of the system because his analysis allowed insufficient room for the resurgence of protectionism. Here I am arguing that he overestimates the destructive impact of the states in the short-term, through failing to clearly acknowledge the way in which state intervention has continued to prop the system up, preventing an even deeper slump.
The argument did deal with the British economy in relative isolation from its rivals. It is precisely because that economy is so weak, so burdened by the dead weight of ageing or inefficient capital, and chronic overcapacity, that state intervention has been so extensive. It is also for that reason that the ‘monetarist experiment’ in Britain, the half-hearted attempt to abandon the subsidies and let the lame ducks go to the wall, has proved so devastating. But British capitalism is only an extreme instance of a general problem. Only the Japanese have been able to simultaneously savagely prune their old and excess capacity and sustain their overall level of activity – and that ‘miracle’ too is running into difficulty, pulled down by the rest (and growing protectionism).
Moreover, as Nigel’s analysis of the international banking system and the debt crisis lucidly shows – the effects of global monetarism, of ‘bankrupting’ the national economies which are debt-ridden and sunk in slump, are too horrific for either the banks, or the United States, or international institutions like the IMF, to contemplate. Here also the weak are being bailed out, the contradictions desperately patched over, with remedies which, in postponing the collapse, only aggravate the underlying causes of stagnation (pp. 117–122).
None of the criticisms I have made challenge the value of Nigel’s analysis of the debt crisis, or the many other themes I have scarcely touched on, or his fundamental conception of the primacy of the world economy and the impotence of states to master it or even their ‘own national patches within it’. Above all we must warmly welcome what is both a remarkable and path-breaking attempt to encompass world capitalism as a totality, and a powerful restatement of the political necessity of international socialism.
A few years ago I remember saying that what we needed was a new version of Bukharin’s Imperialism and the World Economy. I can think of no greater tribute than to say that Nigel Harris has provided us with one, and in the process challenged very effectively the idea that Bukharinism is still sufficient. Nigel Harris’s previous book The Mandate of Heaven: Marx and Mao in Modern China was generally ignored in political and academic circles, probably because it upset them all – the Maoists and the liberal China watchers, the Third Worldists and the Stalinists, the cold war hacks and the ivory towered scholars, the cooperative freaks, and the consciousness raisers. This book will upset them all too, but they’ll have difficulty in ignoring it. People are looking for an explanation and Penguin (let us bless the contradictions of the profit-motive) have put one on the shelves of W.H. Smiths.
Our task is to use this book as a weapon in our armoury. Everyone should read it. We need the theory – we need even more to destroy the system which Nigel Harris exposes as the vicious, crazy beast that it is.

Notes
All page references in the text are, of course, to Of Bread and Guns by Nigel Harris, published by Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1983.
1. Nigel does discuss the Marxist tradition in more detail in his review of Hilferding’s Finance Capital: The Road from 1910, in Economy and Society, Vol. II No. 3, August 1982; see also his much older Imperialism Today, in N. Harris and J. Palmer (eds.), World Crisis (Hutchinson 1971).
2. Marx, Manifesto of the Communist Party, in The Revolutions of 1848 (ed. D. Fernbach, Penguin), p. 71. First published 1848.
3. Marx’s scheme for the whole work is discussed in Rosdolsky, The Making of Marx’s Capital (Pluto 1977, chap. 2 passim). Important references to the world market created by capitalism can be found in Capital, Vol. 3, p. 266 and pp. 332–4 (Lawrence and Wishart edition 1972).
4. N. Harris, The Asian Boom Economies and the Impossibility of National Economic Development, in International Socialism (series 2), No. 3.
5. N. Bukharin, Imperialism and World Economy (Merlin 1972; first published 1917). See also C. Harman, The Crisis Last Time, in International Socialism (series 2,) No. 13, Summer 1981, for a discussion of the 1930s. The ‘later’ Bukharin is of course quite another matter.
6. See especially N. Harris, The Third World, in International Socialism (series 1), No. 42 – for a very succinct statement of his position in 1970.
7. N. Harris, The Mandate of Heaven: Marx and Mao in Modern China (Quartet 1978) – especially chapters 13, 17 and 18.
8. World Capitalism Today: A debate – M. Kidron and C. Harman in International Socialism (series 1), No. 100 July 1977. This also contains World Crisis and the system by Nigel Harris in which he first broaches some of the ideas in Of Bread and Guns.
9. C. Harman State Capitalism, armaments and the general form of the current crisis, in International Socialism (Series 2), No. 16, Spring 1982. If I have singled this out it is because it is accessible and carefully and clearly written. More extreme portraits of the system as governed by the competition of state capitals can be found in the work of many other comrades including: C. Barker, P. Binns, A. Callinicos and M. Haynes – and indeed myself. What unites us it seems is that we were all bitten by the Bukharinite bug at an early age, as providing the general theory of which Cliff’s Russia (London 1964) was a special case.
10. S. Holland, The Socialist Challenge (Quartet 1975). Holland, the most influential Bennite theoretician, sees multinationals as the enemy to be tamed through planning agreements and nationalisation. There is an obvious contradiction between Holland’s stress on the power of multinationals and his belief that a determined left Labour government could control them. But the deeper problem is his illusion in the neutrality of the state and his identification of socialism with an extension of the state. As Nigel Harris so forcefully observes ‘Now it was not ordinary people who were to be liberated, but only the state.’ (p. 272 in Of Bread and Guns)
11. J. Buchan, The coming of the wise men, Financial Times, 28/1/83
12. For a thorough survey of the overseas assets of British capital see The Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, June 1982.
13. R. Lambert, International Harvester’s Survival Plan, Financial Times, 3/11/82.
14. J. Dunning and R. Pearce, The World’s Largest Industrial Enterprises (Gower, 1981).
15. N. Bukharin, Economics of the Transformation Period (New York 1971; first published 1920), p. 46.
16. See for example Mike Simons on the Water Industry, Socialist Worker, 19/2/83.
17. See the account in C. Harman, op. cit.; J. Halliday, A Political History of Japanese Capitalism (Monthly Review 1975) and recent surveys in the Financial Times, 6/7/81 and 5/7/82.
18. Economist, 19/2/82 – Business Brief – which also strikingly confirms one of Nigel’s theses with its account of the opening up of ‘countries as diverse as Cuba, China and Portugal’ to multinational companies.
19. Misleading because they do not really compare like with like (i.e. imports of goods and services with production of goods alone). Official figures for 1981 show that all exports amounted to 26.6% of GDP and imports to 24.1%. But exports and imports of goods as a proportion of manufacturing production are much higher – in the area of 40% in Britain on one estimate, and rising steadily.
20. F. Gray, Why bad news for many is good news for some, Financial Times, 2/3/83.
21. See my Trade Wars in Socialist Review, 1982 : 4 Sept 15. But also see the critique of the notion of the formation of regional blocs in N. Harris, The State of the World Economy, in Socialist Review, No. 50, January 1983.
22. For example the work of R. Parboni, The Dollar and Its Rivals (New Left Books 1982). See also the criticism of such approaches in C. Harman, Theories of the Crisis, in International Socialism (series 2), No. 9, Summer 1980.
23. Nigel refers to an important work by F. Block, The Origins of International Economic Disorder (London 1977) which does deal in much more detail with the issues raised here. But Block’s own interpretation of events puts overwhelming emphasis on the undermining of US economic power by the faster growth of the European economies and Japan – and the consequent intensification of competition between them. C. Harman, State Capitalism ..., op. cit., locates this shifting balance of economic competitiveness in terms of the differences in levels of military spending
24. C. Harman in International Socialism (series 2), Nos. 9, 11, 13 and 16 – especially No. 11, Marx’s Theory of Crisis and Its Critics, and for further references.
25. C. Harman gives an excellent account of the contradictions of the post-war world economy in terms of the ‘Permanent Arms Economy’. But his discussion in International Socialism (series 2), No. 16, of the banking system, and significance of the growth of debt, is the weakest part of all his articles. He makes no attempt to tie this in to an explanation of the causes or consequences of inflation in particular. Nigel’s discussion of these areas has both called attention to their importance, and been consistently far-sighted about the accumulating contradictions which finally exploded in 1982. But he has not tied this in fully to the broader theory of crisis, nor in particular related it to Marx’s discussion of credit, interest and the banks in Capital, Vol. 3.
26. These arguments have also been used by sophisticated left Keynesians such as Kaldor and the Cambridge Economic Policy Group to justify import controls. But they still take no account of retaliation from other countries; nor of the impact on working class living standards, nor of the much more important causes of job losses with the ongoing displacement of workers by machines throughout the economy in the drive to push up productivity and improve competitiveness which they thoroughly endorse.
27. See my brief critical account of Keynesianism in Socialist Review, 1982, No. 2.
 







Battleship Potemkin and October are probably the two most famous films ever to come out of Russia. Sergei Eisenstein directed both and is one of the greatest directors in the history of film. An exhibition of his work is currently on in London. Pete Green writes about the life and work of Eisenstein.





“THE NEW art must set a limit to the dualism of the spheres of ‘emotion’ and ‘reason’.
It must restore to science its sensuality.
To the intellectual process its fire and passion.
It must plunge the abstract process of thought into the cauldron of practical activity.”
(From Perspectives, S.M. Eisenstein, 2 March 1929)
In 1926 a film made in Russia about the 1905 Revolution was a smash hit in Berlin, running for a year. The German war office declared the cinemas where it was showing off limits for all military personnel.
In Britain and France the film was banned by the censors, but shown widely to much enthusiasm in private film clubs. Many British Communist Party members saw and enjoyed the film.
In 1933 there was a mutiny aboard the Dutch battleship De Zeven Provincien. According to Yon Barna’s biography of the film’s director Sergei Eisenstein, the crew claimed at their court martial to have been inspired by seeing Battleship Potemkin.
In the same year Eisenstein wrote an article entitled Through the Revolution to Art: Through Art to the Revolution.
In 1927 the left opposition led by Trotsky suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of Stalin, Bukharin, and the new bureaucracy. The poet of the revolution, Mayakovsky (who detested bureaucrats, and would commit suicide in 1930), denounced the directors of the Soviet film organisation for only showing Potemkin in second class cinemas until they heard about its foreign success.
In Russia the film played to half empty cinemas. It would be interesting to know if it is being shown there this year, and what the audience’s reaction is.
In Britain there is an exhibition overflowing with documents, drawings, photographs and video extracts to commemorate the 40th anniversary of Eisenstein’s death in 1948 at the age of fifty. It is currently in London and is moving to Manchester in December. No socialist interested in movies or art should miss it.
There are unconfirmed rumours that all the films are to be shown on television over the next two months.
There could have been no Eisenstein without the Revolution. Never a Bolshevik, he volunteered for the Red Army in 1918 at the age of 19 as a draftsman and engineer. In 1920 he became a designer for a front line theatre troupe. In 1921 returning to Moscow he joined the experimental theatre workshop under the direction of Meyerhold, plunging into the furious arguments about art and politics which raged under the benign eye of Lunacharsky, the People’s Commissar for Enlightenment.
Much later, in 1945, Eisenstein remembered:
“we were young and had plenty of time. The whole of the future. The daring creative ideas of the twenties were bubbling all around. They manifested themselves in exuberant young sprouts of crazy imagination, mad inventions, infinite boldness.
“And all this was prompted by a burning desire to find some new, unknown means of expressing new experiences.
“But in defiance of the banished term ‘creation’ (substituted by ‘work’), in spite of ‘construction’ whose bony tentacles were spread out to strangle the image, the exciting epoch gave birth to one creative (yes,creative) achievement after another.”
Eisenstein’s first full length film, Strike, made in 1925, teems with images and beats with political passion. When I first saw it in 1984 during the miners’ strike, my immediate response was that we should take it on tour and show it at meetings. Close friends told me I was mad – show a silent movie, at a meeting, about a strike which ends in bloody defeat? I saw it again recently and only regret that I lacked the conviction of my own emotion.
I laughed at the caricatures of the spies; was gutted by the family without food; thumped my fist down at the sight of the fat, smug bosses; reeled in horror at the final scenes, but left a more convinced revolutionary.
Eisenstein’s own view was that, “in The Strike we have the first instance of revolutionary art where the form has turned out to be more revolutionary than the content”.
It was a provocative statement, designed to shock as much as any collision of images (Eisenstein’s principle of montage) in the films themselves.
This arrogance, coming from the man who in 1928 described Ulysses by James Joyce as “the bible of the new film making”, would lay Eisenstein open to many attacks for his “formalism” in the 1930s.
The critics showed less feeling for dialectics than Eisenstein, who wanted to make a film of Capital, and who understood that Marxism is both a science and an art. His aim was to achieve the same synthesis in the cinema.
But Eisenstein capitulated to Stalinism. That is already evident in the film October. There are brilliant visual sequences in the film. It is particularly effective on the July days and the defeat of Kornilov’s attempted coup. But by 1927 it was no longer possible to make an honest film about the revolution.
The fault is not simply that scenes were cut and the only reference to Trotsky is a lie. One can blame that on Stalin’s direct intervention.
The climactic storming of die winter palace is overblown and historically inaccurate. But it can still inspire. Eisenstein himself quoted Goethe. “For the sake of truthfulness one can afford to defy the truth.”
The film fails because Eisenstein, unable to reproduce the political arguments which decisively affected the result, resorts instead to self-conscious experimentation. The content strains against the form. The imagery obscures the significance of the events, as one of Eisenstein’s former associates, Osip Brik, argued at the time.
Real debate could still happen in 1928. Far worse “abasement” (the word is Eisenstein’s own in his Immoral Memories) was to come. I will not attempt to tell the grim story of Eisenstein’s career after 1928.
If you already know something about the Revolution, and why it was lost, you can learn much from visiting the exhibition.
The films themselves (those that survive) tell the story. We move from the daring imagery of Strike and Potemkin to the manipulations of October, through to the gross patriotism of Alexander Nevsky, and the dark, ponderous, operatic tones of Ivan the Terrible Part One (1944).
Ivan the Terrible Part Two wasn’t allowed to be shown until the 1960s. The film portrays the descent of a strong ruler into a paranoid maniac. Ivan the Terrible Part Three was never made. Eisenstein suffered a heart attack in 1946 whilst dancing vigorously during the wait for Stalin’s verdict on Part Two.
Immoral Memories, written while he was bedridden in the remaining years before his death, never mentions Stalin’s name. It reveals that for all his cowardice Eisenstein remained loyal to many of the ideas and the friends banished from history.
He had acquired a sense of bitter irony. He had lost his optimism.
 



Class, Crisis and the State
Erik Olin Wright
NLB £7.00
Are you a student with a Sociology exam on Marx? This book reads like a set of lecture-notes made for the purpose. It has a simplicity almost unique for someone who invokes a certain L. Althusser as a mentor.
It even comes complete with diagrams full of arrows showing how the ‘structural limitations’ of the Economy on the State diverge from the ‘limits of functional compatibility’ of the State with the Economy. A travesty of Marx’s method of course but they do make him look like just another fashionable theorist of some abstraction called society, and are bound to impress that examiner.
Perhaps you’ve been worrying about the work of N. Poulantzas recently? Especially that book where he says all white-collar workers, State employees etc. aren’t really workers at all but ‘new petty-bourgeois’ and that the working-class amounts to only 20 per cent of the population. Do you think that rather undermines the prospects for socialism?
Rest assured – Erik Olin Wright has sorted it all out. ‘Unproductive workers’ like your dustman really are workers after all, indeed at least 40 per cent of us are, and as for teachers, technicians and the like they occupy ‘contradictory class locations’. The political conclusions are implicitly much the same – the workers only chance is to form some sort of Popular Front with sections of the ‘bourgeoisie’, but at least it doesn’t sound quite so hopeless.
Looking for a neat summary of the four Marxist theories of the crisis? They all get fair treatment here, each allocated an actual historical crisis of its own for which it is correct. Marx’s own theory gets the nineteenth century, Keynes is awarded the 1930s slump, and at the moment it seems that wage-rises and the welfare state are to blame, although the evidence isn’t ‘conclusive’.
You even got a preview of the ‘next stage of capitalist development’, the one we’re going to have when the State’s finally sorted out the current crisis for us. I think he means the US government, the one that’s having so much success with the dollar at the moment, but it’s not very clear. Most of the time the capitalist system exists only within ‘national boundaries’ and there’s this State in the singular capable of planning the whole thing, but there’s also something called Imperialism and even some nasty complicating international factors.
He hasn’t grasped that it’s a world-crisis and that there’s no world-state to deal with it but he’s scarcely alone on the reformist left in that respect.
Got an essay to write: ‘comparing and contrasting the work of Lenin and Weber on bureaucracy’. Erik’s packaged them both up for you, four numbered propositions each, sub-divisions where appropriate, just the thing for the tutor who’s forgotten to renew his subscription to the New Left Review.
Balance is the key-note here – Weber might have ignored the roots of bureaucracy in the class-structure of Capitalism. But Lenin doesn’t have much grasp of ‘the real organisational contradictions of soviet institutions’. Seems that the ‘socialist state’ of China has had a lot of difficulty with bureaucracy too – something to do with the inherent character of ‘technical experts’ apparently.
Finally are you in need for some more reassurance about peaceful roads to socialism? Do you want another dose of ‘parliaments’ supplemented by ‘local forms of popular democracy’ and other such nebulous bodies? In this book you get the truly remarkable idea of socialists ‘using the State to destroy the State’.
Wright does lack the polemical edge of his co-thinkers of the Eurocommunist ‘left’ – but he more than makes up for it by his earnest desire to see all sides of the question. There’s even a quote from Perry Anderson on the need for insurrection and an invocation of the memory of Chile on the second to last page.
He doesn’t mean it though. Academics just have this luxury of being able to hedge their bets. Indeed, the problem is that in ‘the United States in the 1970s no strategy for socialism is particularly plausible’.
Such a promising title too.
 



The Issues at Stake
In the first part of this article I argued that the Labour Theory of Value is the necessary foundation for understanding Capitalism. The object of Marx’s analysis is not some lifeless abstraction called an economy but an historically specific mode of production. To defend the theory is to defend the theoretical premises of revolutionary socialism. However few of us may have read Capital its message has become part of the everyday vocabulary of Marxists. It is not dogmatic to suggest that those who want to abandon the core propositions of that work today are, like so many in the past, really seeking to alter our understanding of the deeply contradictory nature of Capitalism.
It should go without saying that the most important task today is to build on the work discussed in the first part of the article. Capitalism is the most dynamic mode of production in history and its forms have radically changed. But the essentials of the theory remain applicable today. The sale of labour-power and the extraction of surplus-value from the working class, remain the prerequisites of the survival of the system. The enormous growth of the forces of production has not lessened the compulsion of each unit of capital to maximise the ‘productivity’ of the labour force. Technical change still serves not to reduce the length of the working day but to continually recreate a reserve army of labour. The interdependence of the different national economies, the world division of labour, the internationalisation of the forces of production, continue in contradiction with the division of the world into nation states, jealous of their sovereignty and escalating their rivalry in the face of the world-crisis.
Marx’s analysis of the contradiction between the ‘private’ character of the relations of production, and the ‘social’ character of the productive forces, between the division of the system into ‘autonomous’ units and their mutual relations sustained only through the exchange of things, remains acutely relevant, however much the forms of that contradiction may have changed. The working class, those who labour under the command of Capital, the human living force which sustains the system, is still the arbiter of the future course of history.
The Neo-Ricardian critics of Marx are not concerned with these questions. Their focus is on some narrowly selected appearances of the system. They argue that the labour theory of value is either unnecessary to, or incapable of, explaining those appearances, the relative prices of different commodities and the rate of profit. [1] Ian Steedman makes no attempt to show how his ‘Sraffa based analysis’ could generate the understanding of the actual history of Capitalism we derive from Marx’s work. If his criticisms of the logic of the theory of value are correct today they would have been just as correct at the time Capital was written.
Originally this part of the article dealt mainly with the Transformation Question of how values are related to prices, and the general differences of method and perspective between Marx and his critics. It has since been forcefully brought home to me that these are not the decisive matters. They are both easily resolved in Marx’s favour, and of little immediate political concern. Marx’s theory of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall, however, is rejected even by many who want to retain at least some sort of Labour Theory of Value. Andrew Glyn, John Harrison and Sue Himmelweit all fall into the category of those who retain the theory of value as a ‘sociological’ theory of exploitation, or abstract labour, whilst adopting an essentially ‘neo-Ricardian’ method for looking at the rate of profit of the dynamics of the system. [2] The bulk of this article is therefore now taken up by this question.
 
Marx’s Method and the Critics
On the one hand Marx takes for granted that labour is the basis for all hitherto existing societies. Labour is not only human activity but the relationship of man to nature and to other human beings, the production of the goods necessary to the survival of any society. This is a firmly materialist foundation. It goes hand in hand with an insistence upon the decisive importance of the relations between the producers and non-producers, between the ruling and the subordinate classes in any society. It governs Marx’s understanding of history as the succession of different modes of production.
On the other hand, Marx is concerned not with labour and exploitation in general but with the specific form taken is the form of value, the form taken by labour in a society of commodity exchange.
Most critics of Marx follow Smith and Ricardo and see the Labour Theory of Value as nothing other than a theory of relative prices. Their confusion in the face of the first chapter of Capital is therefore understandable. In moving so rapidly from the exchange relation between two commodities to the labour which they both contain Marx appears to simply assume what he is supposed to be proving. But what is at issue is not the actual prices of these two commodities but an exposure of their hidden social character. This rests not just on labour, but labour of a specific sort, abstract labour. It presupposes a division of society into private property-owners who can only relate to each other through exchange, in the competition of the market.
Smith and Ricardo had, unlike their more vulgar successors, understood the materialist basis of society. They had reduced the prices of individual commodities to the labour (direct and indirect) required for their production. They had failed, Marx repeatedly observes, to examine the form of value, to see exchange as the expression of specific social relations of production. [3]
The abstractions of the classical economists served to invoke features of society in general or the laws of nature. They took the existence of exchange and prices for granted. The abstract categories of Marx, of which Value is the most important, capture the essential social relations of Capitalism, the real structure of this mode of production concealed beneath the fluctuations of a market economy.
Marx begins by discussing the most general features of a society of commodity production, abstract labour, exchange-value, money, but proceeds rapidly to an analysis of the whole in which these relations find their fullest extension, Capital. As Rosdolsky has shown, on the basis of the Grundrisse, in the first two volumes of Capital Marx is concerned with ‘Capital-in-General’. [4] This involves an abstraction not from competition or the existence of many Capitals as even Rosdolsky at times suggests. Rather it involves abstracting from certain effects of competition, those deriving from the differences between Capitals when rates of profit are equalised, and the mass of surplus-value distributed in the course of exchange. Nor does it involve ignoring that this is a monetary economy. On the contrary Capital is analysed as but a developed form of Value, and in terms of the generation of surplus-value. These are measured in quantities of labour-time but both suppose that production starts and finishes with the purchase of one set of commodities and the sale of another.
’To the extent that we are considering here, as a relation distinct from that of value and money, capital is capital-in-general, i.e. the incarnation of the qualities which distinguish value as capital from value as pure value or as money. Value, money, circulation etc., prices etc., are presupposed as is labour etc. But we are still concerned neither with a particular form of Capital, nor with an individual capital as distinct from other individual capitals etc. [5]
Having firmly established the nature of Capital as a sum of value dependent upon the sale of labour-power and the performance of labour for its further expansion, Marx proceeds to a thorough discussion of Capitalist production. The relationship between the productivity of labour, the increase of surplus-value and the accumulation of Capital are the central concerns here. In Volume 2 Marx returns to the realm of exchange, only to consider it now in terms of the circulation of Capital. The analysis of the circuit of Capital shows how a given mass of Capital-value must continually pass through periods of production in which its value expands, and periods of circulation in which the mass of commodities is turned into money and back again into means of production and labour-power. The essential point of this is to show both the necessity of exchange, that profits are never made until the commodities have been sold — and that this conceals the fact that the mass of value and surplus-value cannot increase in the course of buying and selling alone.
It is on this basis that Marx comes to discuss the effects of the formation of equal rates of profit and prices of production. Yet this controversial matter is but a preliminary, a stage at which the mass of profit is still regarded as equal to the mass of surplus-value. Yet to be discussed are the further transfer of portions of this mass as interest and rent. Marx never does reach the stage of discussing the effects of international trade, the State and taxation, trade cycles and, not least, the concrete eruption of crises. At each stage the argument is becoming more complex and the actual determinants of particular prices multiplying. The abstract categories of value are not abolished in the course of this development but are continually presupposed. The surface forms can only be grasped on their basis.
The critics of Marx have usually followed Ricardo and identified value and exchange-value. Value becomes merely a relative price, at best distinguishable from the variety of market-prices by virtue of its stability, its function as the equilibrium point around which actual prices fluctuate. If this point is not proportional to the labour contained in the commodity; if, for example, it can as easily be explained in terms of the costs of production and the rate of profit, the labour theory of value in this version collapses. The structure of Marx’s work, the manner in which he contrasts the hidden social reality of value to the fetishistic appearances of the system, the exchange of things, is just ignored. The notion of value as an ‘intrinsic’ property of the commodity becomes metaphysical, an invocation of unseen essences to explain facts which can as readily be explained without them. [6]
If the word ‘value’ is not identified with price it is reduced to the actual performance of labour-time as in Ian Steedman’s use of the term ‘value quantities’. But this does not express Marx’s concept adequately either. Value is the ‘socially-necessary’ labour-time contained in a commodity produced for sale. It is the product of abstract labour, labour of a specific social character. There are three levels, to put it simply, in Capital, not two, each level containing its physical and social dimensions: the performance of labour (concrete and abstract labour); the commodity produced (use-value and value); and the commodity or money received in exchange (here it is the quantity of the use-value which serves as the measure of exchange-value or price, concealing the relations of labour behind the exchange of things). Value expresses the fact that the commodity has to be both produced and sold. The distinctions may appear pedantic but they are essential to a clear understanding of Marx’s theory of value.
Ian Steedman and his associates have no time for any of this. On the one hand; the labour theory of value is assessed only as a possible means of deriving relative prices and the rate of profit. [7] On the other, Steedman’s ‘value-quantities’ are explicitly derived from physical relations, or the technical coefficients of production. [8] The quantities of labour-time are treated as physical data without any reference to the social relations of Capitalism. The result, however much he may deny it, is that his ‘values’ will exist in any society in which labour is actually expended. This is a return to the natural laws of political economy. This conception, like Ricardo’s, completely fails to locate the prices and rate of profit which it invokes in the only context in which they can be understood, the nature of Capital. Ricardo at least had the merit of retaining labour as the basis of his theory of value despite the difficulties he faced in accounting for a whole number of phenomena on the surface of society. Sraffa resolves Ricardo’s difficulties only by abandoning all reference to labour-time. The ‘physical qualities’ picture in this respect is a regression beyond Ricardo, to the Physiocrats of the 18th century.
 
The Transformation Question
With this the question of how prices are related to values is posed. In supposing that Capitalists move between industries in search of the maximum rate of profit on the mass of their Capital, Marx has to consider both how a general rate of profit is formed for the economy as a whole and also the effects of this on the formation of what Marx calls ‘prices of production’, and how these deviate systematically from the values of commodities. Prices of production are themselves only the notional equilibrium points around which market-prices will fluctuate in response to shifts in supply and demand. They in turn will be modified by other influences not taken into account at this stage.
Capitalists do not set prices on the basis of a direct measurement of labour-time. They assess the costs of a unit commodity and add a mark-up for the profit-margin they consider obtainable. In a world of fully mobile Capital, without monopolies, these margins on costs will tend to be equalised across industries. Marx’s prices of production are based on these simple facts. They are given by the formula (C+V)(1+r) where C and V are Constant and Variable Capital respectively, the money spent on means of production and wages, and r is the average rate of profit. When Organic Compositions of Capital (C/V) are unequal, these prices will not be proportional to values.
These variations provide the basis for attempts to present Capital as an additional factor of production capable of creating value. This is how it appears to the individual Capitalist as both parts of Capital play an equal role in securing his profits. This led Adam Smith to abandon the labour theory of ‘value’ altogether in favour of the simplistic idea that prices were composed of the revenues earned by the different factors engaged in production How these revenues were themselves determined he could not really say.
Marx cut the knot which had strangled classical political economy. The premises of his solution have already been outlined. In the aggregate neither total value nor total surplus-value could be affected by the exchange of commodities. Their distribution among particular capitals would, however, be a function of the ratios at which commodities exchange for money. Money is the expression of abstract social labour, and particular sums of money are claims to a share in the total labour of society. Variations in prices will alter these claims but not the total to be distributed. If some prices of production are higher than what have been termed ‘direct prices’ (prices proportional to values), others can only be lower. [9]
The average rate of profit was measured by Marx in value terms, as the ratio of total surplus-value to total Capital. Equal rates of profit will involve a flow of surplus-value from labour-intensive to capital-intensive industries, or between Capitals of low and high Organic Compositions. This is the simple effect of the fact that prices are above ‘values’ in the latter, and below in the former. When Organic Compositions are equal, prices will be proportional to values, as a result of movements of Capital which involve no direct comparison of rewards to labour. In any event changes in the productivity of labour will be the most important causes of shifts in prices of production. Values are the underlying regulators of prices. [10] It is the conclusion which most strikingly establishes the manner in which the laws of value work behind the backs of the producers themselves. [11] None of this has been challenged in the subsequent debate.
This stems from the indisputable fact that, as he himself recognised, Marx’s solution was incomplete. [12] In his numerical examples Marx assumed that the costs on which the rate of profit was calculated were equivalent to the values contained in the commodities concerned. In reality alterations in the prices of means of production and means of subsistence (assuming a given real wage) will in turn alter the costs on which prices of production are based, producing a whole series of further effects.
This problem has been solved. The mathematics of the question are not in doubt although much argument rages about several minor variations. The reader is referred to two recent articles by Gerstein and Shaikh for definitive accounts of the manner in which both a complete set of relative prices and a corresponding rate of profit can be derived from a specification of the labour which enters directly and indirectly into each commodity. [13] There are only two serious problems posed by these solutions.
Firstly Marx’s two ‘invariance’ conditions. Total Value equal to Total Price and Total Surplus-Value equal to Total Profit will, except under restrictive conditions, be incompatible. This is easily resolved. Total Value expresses the total direct and indirect labour contained in the mass of commodities. If the value of money is unaltered, this entails that it is the first condition which must be retained. This is because we are dealing here only with relative prices and money cannot have a relative price (changes in its value will affect all prices equally). [14]
Changes in total profits as a result of the Transformation reflect the fact that profits will be affected by changes in relative prices, rising or falling with overall movements in the costs of production. Since such movements must be balanced by changes in the prices of the goods received by the Capitalists, the actual physical quantities of those goods will not be altered.
Secondly Marx’s formula for the rate of profit in value terms (S/(C+V)) will normally be incorrect. These alterations to the rate can be explained, however, in the same way as the alterations in total profits with which they go hand in hand. Although Steedman and his associates make great play with this, it is in fact just another calculable deviation. Marx’s account of the underlying determinants of the rate of profit is not affected. [15]
Steedman argues that there is no need to transform values into prices because relative prices can perfectly well be explained without them. This ‘redundancy’ argument collapses complete once the structure of Marx’s work is understood. There is only one serious question, given the centrality of quantities of socially necessary labour-time to the functioning of Capitalism, the question of how values and prices are related. Sraffa has shown that the same prices and rate of profit as those in a complete transformation of values can be derived directly from a specification of the different physical conditions of production of commodities (their technical coefficients) and the real wage. In purely formal terms this may even be simpler than what Steedman terms the ‘detour’ through values. But we are not dealing with purely formal matters. Sraffa’s models just do not capture the complex structure of Capitalism. Their deficiencies can be crudely summarised as follows.
Firstly they give us only relative prices, expressed not in terms of money but of ratios between things. Money itself cannot be fitter into Sraffa’s input-output physical tables. [16] It can only be understood as the measure of value, the commodity which represents total social labour. This demands the use of those aggregates such as total value and total price which have no meaning for the Neo-Ricardians.
Secondly a logical ‘derivation’ is not a causal explanation. The derivation of prices from physical conditions of production tells us something negative about supply and demand theories. But the physical data contain within themselves two sets of information which Marx clearly separates, quantities of labour-time and differing ratios of dead to living labour, or compositions of Capital. Such a separation is not unnecessary but essential to understanding the causes at work.
Thirdly labour is represented in the equations only by the means of subsistence which the workers consume, which in turn appear as inputs into production on a par with means of production. An increase in the productivity of labour will be represented by a reduction in the amount of ‘wage-goods’ required for the production of a given output of commodity. Instead of explaining the source of Capital’s ability, as value, to expand itself, it remains an unexplained mystery.
Fourthly input-output models of the physical interdependence of use-values can deal only with the technical relations between industries. The basic social unit of Capital, however, can be a firm, or even a State, but never an industry. This, and the absence of money, means that the essential social character of the competitive relations between Capitals, both within and between industries does not appear. Exchange relations become the mere expression of technical coefficients, not the necessary result of a social division of labour between private units of production which only relate to each other through the unplanned chaos of the market.
Finally Sraffa’s models are purely static exercises in equilibrium analysis. This, like several of the above, is a general feature of Transformation operations whether they start from values or not. In this lifeless, frozen world it doesn’t make any difference whether one substitutes quantities of things for quantities of human labour. This simply shows that one cannot squeeze the content of the theory of value into the material required for equilibrium models of relative price determination.
Sraffa himself cannot be entirely blamed for the use to which his work has been put. He makes no pretentious claims for it and clearly specifies the very restrictive assumptions with which he is working. But his is a world in which we have rates of profit but no Capitals, prices but no money, production but no labour. The consequences of mistaking this for reality are serious and will be seen further in the next section.
 
The falling rate of profit
This is the question which produces the sharpest confrontation of Marx and the Neo-Ricardians. Can the rate of profit only fall (excluding questions of cyclical shifts in demand) if either real wages rise or raw material costs rise as a result of declining productivity? Or will it fall as an expression of the most far-reaching contradictions of Capitalism, of the character of Capitalist Accumulation, the replacement of living by dead labour, the rise in the Organic Composition of Capital, and most basically because of the fact that labour-time remains the measure of value, the basis for exchange, despite the enormous growth of the forces of production? The former was the position of Ricardo, and is held today not only by Steedman but also by many who claim to adhere to the Labour Theory of Value. It provides the basis for an explanation of the current world crisis solely in terms of a distributional struggle between classes.
Marx’s argument explaining the tendency of the rate of profit to fall, followed directly from his understanding of the Labour Theory of Value and the Accumulation of Capital. The basis for it is to be found in his account of the latter in Part 7 of Capital I, although the Law itself is not discussed until Volume 3, after the account of the formation of a general rate of profit for the economy as a whole.
Whereas Ricardo identified the rate of profit with the rate of surplus-value (S/V) Marx shows that the rate depends also upon the size of the Constant Capital employed in the economy. In value terms this is captured by the formula (S/(C+V)). In price terms the rate of profit expresses the ratio of the mass of profits to the mass of money-capital spent by the Capitalist in purchasing means of production and labour-power.
The accumulation of Capital can proceed without altering the Organic Composition of Capital (C/V or the ratio of Constant to Variable Capital), as long as reserves of labour-power are available. Generally, however, it will involve technical change. The Capitalists will not just extend the scale of production but seek to cheaper costs by introducing new sorts of machinery. Increases in the productivity of labour will go hand in hand with the replacement of living labour by dead labour, workers by machines. This process will generally increase the rate of surplus-value, as the proportion of ‘necessary’ labour-time or the value of labour-power falls (assuming that the ‘real wages’ of the workers do not rise). But this increase in the rate of surplus-value goes hand in hand with a tendency to reduce the labour-force and thus the sole source of surplus-value. It also involves a rise in the Organic Composition of Capital, an increase in the mass of Constant Capital tending to bring down the rate of profit. This is a perfect example of what Marx meant by the contradictory nature of Capitalist development.
If accumulation proceeds rapidly enough, the workers displaced by the machines will find jobs elsewhere, the whole process continually displacing labour from one sphere of production and making possible an expansion without technical change in other sectors. The mass of surplus-value will rise, and thus the mass of profit, but the rate of profit may still decline if the Constant Capital rises even faster. If accumulation does not occur, the pressure on the rate of profit will be reduced from this direction but the reserve army of labour will rapidly rise in the face of continual technical change. The mass of surplus-value must decline as a result and the system will enter into crisis.
It is vital to grasp that the rise in the ratio of dead to living labour (or C/(V+S) which in many ways captures the important relationship better than just C/V) involves a rise in the one portion of Total Value which can rise without limit. Given that accumulation is the accumulation of surplus-value, initially as money-Capital and then in the form of means of production and labour-power purchased on the market; and given that reserves of labour will have strict limits, three possibilities follow. Firstly, the accumulation regularly of even a fixed share of surplus-value will lead to a rise in the value of the mass of Capital; or secondly, much of this accumulated Capital is wiped out, losing its value, which, regardless of how it occurs, must be seen as a loss by the Capitalists concerned; or, thirdly mechanisms ensure that Capital is never accumulated faster than the expansion of the available labour-force. These require further consideration, for we are not dealing just with abstract possibilities.
It is also necessary to see that Marx’s analysis of the effects of increases in productivity is radically different from orthodox or even ‘common-sense’ accounts. The latter see an increase in productivity as increasing directly the mass of physical use-values and therefore the mass of value. Marx sees the mass of new value produced in any given period of time as given by the time and effort expended by the labour-force. Increases in productivity entail a devaluation of each commodity (a decline in the amount of socially-necessary labour-time they contain). In price terms (assuming that the value of money is unchanged) the sum of prices will not change if the sum of value does not alter. [17] As output rises the price of each commodity must fall as indeed occurred in the pre-inflationary age of 19th century Capitalism.
Productivity changes cannot therefore directly increase the mass of surplus-value. Relative Surplus-Value will rise with the rise in S/V as a result of increased productivity but only indirectly, as a result of the fall in the value of labour-power. (In a world of falling prices this entails that money-wages are forced down whilst real wages are constant. In a world of inflation the same effect occurs if money-wages are stable while money-prices rise, but this requires a fall in the value of money which can legitimately be ignored without affecting the validity of the argument.) [18]
Ricardo saw the decline in the rate of profit as stemming from diminishing returns in agriculture or a decline in the productivity of labour leading to a rise in the price of corn. This in turn led to a rise in wages forcing down the rate of profit. This made the whole process dependent upon a law of nature and not something inherent to the character of Capitalism. Marx rejects this position firmly both on factual grounds and because he sees that
’The progressive tendency of the general rate of profit to fall is, therefore, just an expression peculiar to the capitalist mode of production of the progressive development of the social productivity of labour’ (Capital III, p: 213) …
’The rate of profit does not fall because labour becomes less productive but because it becomes more productive. Both the rise in the rate of surplus-value and the fall in the rate of profit are but specific forms through which growing productivity of labour is expressed under Capitalism.’ (ibid., p. 240)
But how does this work in practice? The mechanisms can be complicated but it is essential to see that the dependence of the mass of profits upon the surplus labour-time performed by workers is not apparent to the individual capitalist. The result is that the rational actions of each Capitalist in seeking to increase profits can have the effect of reducing the rate of profit for the Capitalist Class as a whole. This can be seen in two stages:

When prices are proportional to values. The advantage of this assumption is that it enables the basic process to emerge clearly. In the course of competition individual Capitalists will be under compulsion to cheapen their costs of production. If they do they will be able to undersell their competitors and make an ‘extra profit’, a profit above the average. If they do not they will themselves be undercut and go out of business. This cheapening of the costs of production will normally involve the introduction of machinery increasing the productivity of the workers. The costs of each individual commodity (C+V) will fall but the ratio of C/V both for the commodity and for the Capital as a whole will rise. If the price of the commodity is still governed by the old value (socially-necessary labour-time before the technological change) profits will rise. But as other Capitalists are forced to introduce new technology and cheapen their costs, the value of the commodity will fall to the new level. Once the price is also forced down to this new level, the excess, or temporary, profits will disappear. If the rate of exploitation is constant, and the value of labour-power unchanged, total profits made in the industry will be no higher at the end of this process and may even be lower if the workforce has declined. But the Organic Composition of Capital (OCC) has risen. The rate of profit must therefore have fallen.
 
When Prices are not proportional to Values. Far from undermining the above argument the existence of such variations can only reinforce it. A rise in the OCC in one industry taken in isolation must lead to a fall in the rate of profit in the economy as a whole. But in the industry in question the effects of rising capital-intensive industries serves to obscure the effects of rising capital-intensity in the economy as a whole. To give a simple example—if ICI invests in a major new capital-intensive Chemical Plant it will have several effects. Firstly, ICI will gain a competitive advantage over the other Chemical firms. Secondly, ICI will receive an extra profit, even with an adjusted price of production, stemming from a flow of value from less developed sectors of the economy. For the economy as a whole the effect will be to raise the OCC and therefore tend to lower the rate of profit. For ICI this will be of lesser concern.

What though of the rise in the rate of surplus-value? This will certainly offset the effects of a rise in the OCC. But there are clear limits to this. The higher the rate of surplus-value, the higher the proportion of the working-day devoted to surplus labour-time. As the system ages, as the rate of surplus-value rises, the scope for further expansion in the mass of surplus-value is limited. [19] It is on this basis that Marx argues that the tendency for the rate of profit to fall will gradually become more marked over time. Other factors, listed by Marx as Counteracting Tendencies, may also prevail for periods of time. [20] But if the OCC continues to rise the underlying pressure on the rate of profit will steadily increase. It is the question of whether the OCC actually does rise in the long-run that has provoked most controversy.
 
The Criticisms
The critics of Marx almost all share one feature in common. They effectively abstract from the context in which alone the law can be understood, the Accumulation of Capital. Operating with the static equilibrium models of technical change typical of bourgeois economics, they treat it in terms of a choice between ‘available techniques’ as if it was a matter of choosing a curtain design. The competitive compulsion to accumulate on the one hand and the manner in which the labour-process is altered on the other, both disappear. The actual criticisms though are varied. They will be taken in order of seriousness, the most trivial first.
(1) Price Rate of Profit not equal to Value Rate of Profit. This stems from the Transformation Debate and has already been considered. Such deviations do not undermine Marx’s location of the basic determinants of the rate of profit. Nor has any evidence been provided to show that in reality such deviations will be significant. If anything such deviations will reinforce any fall in the rate of profit. [21]
(2) Wage-Profit Frontiers. [22] This argument can be made to look very impressive, with diagrams etc., but is in reality almost unbelievably crude. It states that if Capitalists follow profit-maximising policies then for any given level of the real wage, there will be a maximum rate of profit possible at which Capitalists will operate. They will never introduce techniques which give less than this maximum rate.
Now this assumes that Capitalists are able to perceive the effects of their actions, and that there can be no contradiction between the interests of the individual capitalist and the Capitalist class as a whole. Have these people really read Capital?
And even if Capitalists could see the effects of their actions the argument still requires a further assumption—that they act together, that they are effectively a single Capitalist, or that there is no competition within the industry, even in the world-market. This, as noted earlier, is the assumption implicit in the model of Sraffa from which the argument derives. In reality there can be techniques which lower costs of production but, when generalised, also lower the rate of profit. Competition will ensure that such techniques are introduced.
This mistake stems from the misuse of equilibrium models to deal with what are inherently disequilibrium situations. The wage-profit frontier shows that as wages change the rate of profit will change and that new techniques may be introduced as a result. It isolates distribution changes as the sole cause of technical change, abstracting from all other forces, i.e. all those discussed earlier.
(3) Okishio’s Theorem. Faced with such objections to the last argument economists such as Himmelweit and Harrison resort to an obscure piece of mathematical reasoning known as Okishio’s Theorem. Okishio assumes that Capitalists only introduce techniques which lower the costs of production. Unlike the ‘profit-maximisation’ assumption this is perfectly correct. On this basis, however, Okishio argues that any innovation which lowers the costs of production can only increase the overall rate of profit.
This is a more serious argument. But the mathematics seem to exclude a possibility which is perfectly plausible in Marx’s framework. This requires looking at the economy as a whole. The total Value or the total product in physical terms can be broken down into C+V+S or their use-value equivalents. Okishio agrees that these price-changes will have further effects. If they arise in the capital goods or the wage goods sectors they will lower the price of C or V and thereby increase the rate of profit. If they occur in Dept. III they will not affect it at all. [23]
In Himmelweit’s version of the argument the mistake is as follows. Starting from a given set of physical product ratios she sees only the price-effects of changes in labour productivity. But, unlike Transformation exercises, neither the Total Value nor the physical ratios between Departments can be taken as given in this case. The rise in labour productivity is not disembodied but will occur as a result of a rise in the quantity of machinery or Constant Capital in the economy as a whole. As Shaikh has pointed out, Okishio treats all Capital as only Circulating Capital and thus as a matter of raw materials and wages. [24] He abstracts from fixed Capital or machinery and thus from the fact that such increases of labour productivity have to be purchased at a ‘cost’ to the Capitalist.
 
The Cheapening of Constant Capital
This, unlike the rest, is the genuine problem which is often used to give a verbal plausibility to the argument of the Okishio theorem. The fact that a rise in the OCC leading to a fall in the rate of profit can occur does not mean that it will occur. Increases in the productivity of labour can mean a cheapening of the means of production and this can offset the rise in the Value of Constant Capital as a whole. Levels of mechanisation can increase the ‘technical’ composition of Capital, but not the value ratios which are decisive for the rate of profit. Marx himself recognises (indeed clearly formulates) the question but states that
’... with the increasing productivity of labour, the mass of the means of production consumed diminishes. Their value therefore rises absolutely but not in proportion to the mass.’ (Capital I, p. 774)
There is no satisfactory discussion of this question in the literature. The following is but a sketch of an answer to the critics who seize on this as their last resort.
The question is often wrongly posed, in terms of ‘capital-saving’ and labour-saving innovations. As Yaffe correctly insists the notion of ‘capital-saving innovation’ taken by itself is ideological’. [25] If labour is the sole source of value, a cheapening of the value of machinery must itself involve increases in the productivity of labour. These will normally themselves require a rise in the Constant Capital of Department I industries making machinery. This in turn is why Marx is quite correct to argue that it is the rise in the OCC which is the basic tendency and the cheapening of Constant Capital only a ‘counteracting influence’.
It may be objected that the new machines which increase the productivity of labour in Department I can also be cheaper than the machines which they replace. Scientific inventions may occur which make this possible. [26] Marx is supposed to have ignored this yet we find in Capital itself:
’It the productivity of labour has increased in the place where these instruments of labour are constructed (and it does develop continually, owing to the uninterrupted advance of science and technology), the old machines, tools, apparatus etc. will be replaced by more efficient (and considering their increased efficiency) cheaper ones ... science and technology give capital a power of expansion which is independent of the given magnitude of the capital actually functioning. They react at the same time on that part of the original capital which has entered the stage of its renewal. This in passing into its new shape incorporates, free of charge (my emphasis) the social advances made while its old shape was being used up.’ (Capital I, pp. 753–54)
The important point is that such inventions involve no cost to the Capitalist. No accumulation of surplus-value as Capital has occurred. The replacement of existing Capital and the accumulation of new Capital must be clearly distinguished even if they can occur together in reality. If existing Capital is replaced more cheaply, extra funds will be released for further accumulation which will restore the mass of Capital-value to its original level.
Only if either a) such funds released are used for consumption or hoarded rather than assimilated, or b) the cheaper machinery forces a depreciation of fixed Capital of an older variety still; employed by other Capitalists in the same industry (see below), will such innovations lower the Organic Composition of Capital. To the extent moreover that accumulation continues the tendency for the OCC to rise will reappear. Only in periods of stagnation when no net investment is taking place will such ‘intensive’ innovations simply replace more expensive by cheaper machines (microprocessors today perhaps). But in such periods they will go hand in hand with a rapid rise in unemployment and an absolute fall in the production of surplus-value.
However, there is ample evidence to suggest that Capitalists seeking to innovate are usually confronted not with cheaper but with more expensive systems of machinery. It is precisely the enormous scale and accompanying costs of the most up-to-date Steel and Chemical plants which make them unobtainable by the smaller and weaker Capitals in those industries, and demand ever-greater centralisation of Capital. The rise in the mass of profits which goes with seizing a greater share of the market will compensate the larger Capitals for any decline in the rate of profit.
To refer to the contemporary world again, silicon-chip based mini-computers etc may prove to be cheaper than the machines they replace (although living labour employed will also fall dramatically, raising the OCC from the other side). But re-equipping whole car-plants with new automated machinery and robots is still seen as prohibitively expensive by most manufacturers.
Simple numerical examples establish that if the productivity of labour increases uniformly in all Departments, changes in the ‘technical composition’ of Capital (the ratio of Means of Production to the Net Product) will be matched by proportional if smaller changes in the ‘value composition’ (C/(V+S)). The OCC will therefore rise unless either a) the technical composition does not rise (as in the cases discussed in ii) above or b) productivity increases in Department I are greater than average. Even in the latter case the increases in productivity in Department I alone must be sufficient to offset the accumulation of Constant Capital in the economy as a whole. This, however, will require a depreciation of fixed Capital already in existence which will have further severe implications (see below).
No algebraic proof can be provided to show that the OCC must rise in the abstract world of disembodied technical possibilities. The critics are forced to argue that the supposed rise in the ‘technical composition’ itself involves an assumption that technical change has a ‘labour-saving’ bias. It does. In a completely automated world there would certainly be no point in using machines to produce the same quantity of goods, (or more corn to produce a given output of corn in the Ricardian model). But we are in a world in which labour-time remains the measure of value and in which the whole drive towards automation expresses the tendency of Capital to free itself from a dependence on living labour, regardless of whether wages are rising or not. Marx’s whole analysis of machinery, spelled out in great detail [27], showed that this accumulation of means of production was the great historical achievement of Capitalism. That it results in a fall in the rate of profit and crises is simply the expression of the conflict between this growth in the forces of production and the social relations of Capitalism.
If the question is looked at concretely, instead of with arbitrarily chosen examples, and technical change located in its actual historical context, the basic validity of Marx’s argument is confirmed. On the one hand there are several pieces of empirical evidence which show that Capital-Output ratios (a very approximate index, based upon admittedly bourgeois statistics) rise in periods of slump, such as the interwar period, or in war. [28]
On the other hand there is Marx’s own discussion of the mechanisms of accumulation. The decline in the reserve army of labour as expansion proceeds entails that Capital can be accumulated only by raising the Organic Composition of Capital (Capital, Ch. 25 sections 1 and 2). Capitalists will feel confident about introducing techniques which greatly raise both the scale and capital-intensity of production. Whole new systems of machinery will emerge. The cheapening of unit commodity costs will go hand in hand with a greatly enlarged scale of production. As the new methods spread markets in particular industries will be glutted, prices will fall, and the least productive Capitals will be forced out of business. The mass of profit will increase but the rise in OCC will put pressure on the rate of profit. Only a quite remarkable series of ‘Capital-saving innovations’ could offset this tendency. Despite the great increase in productivity, pressures to increase the rate of exploitation will intensify. Speed-ups, continuous shift systems and attempts to hold down wages will all accompany the new machinery. To the extent that the working-class resists successfully they can accelerate the emergent crisis. They can scarcely be considered its cause simply for refusing to be its sacrificial victims.
Periods of slump, however, will involve the destruction of Capital-values, as a simple consequence of bankruptcies on the one hand, the scrapping of old machinery in the face of its rapid depreciation on the other. Marx refers to this repeatedly in his chapter on the Internal Contradictions of the Law [29] (of the fall in the rate of profit). At the same time, the accumulation of new Capital will slow down, and innovation increasingly take the form of cheapening machinery rather than extending the scale in production. A full discussion would however require looking at the mechanisms by which crises occur. There is no space for this.
 
Conclusion
We are not arguing here for some mechanical breakdown theory. The tendency may underlie the regular trade cycle but a major crisis can serve to restore the rate of profit—at an enormous cost. It is in the course of crises that prices are forced down to the level of the most productive capitals. This is but an expression of the manner in which the laws of value work only ‘in and through anarchy’. The forces of competition, so abstractly invoked in Steedman’s models, assume a savage and bloody form, with costs which are scarcely recognised in the harmonious, non-contradictory world of equilibrium.
The system continues to age and with it the historical forms of crisis. The contradictions are resolved, at a severe cost, only to be reproduced at a new and higher levels. The concentration and centralisation of Capitals is accelerated in each major crisis with the elimination of the smaller and weaker firms. The crisis itself end what Marx calls ‘the over-production of capital’ giving breathing room to the Capitals which remain, in which they can expand. But as the units of Capital get larger the consequences of their destruction become more severe. Within each national economy States intervene to sustain the credit-system and prop up the weaker Capitals. Inflation serves to conceal the underlying value relation; even more, the limits set to total surplus-value by surplus labour time obscured by the rise in gross money-profits. In this unprecedented era of stagflation we need to look more than ever at the new forms taken by the current world-crisis.
This requires that we develop Marx’s categories not abandon them. To this work Steedman and company have nothing to contribute, except insofar as they force us to consider what Marx was really up to in writing Capital.

Notes
Both parts of this article owe much to conversations with Derek Howl and Jim Kincaid, and a challenge posed by Dave Turner.
1. I. Steedman, Marx after Sraffa (NLB 1977). Steedman shifts back and forth throughout his book between the ‘redundancy’ and the ‘inconsistency’ argument. See the careful discussion in P. Armstrong, A. Glyn and J. Harrison, In Defence of Value (Capital and Class 5, Summer 1978).
2. See the verbal argument in J. Harrison, Marxist Economics for Socialists (Pluto 1978), pp. 115–17, and mathematical versions in S. Himmelweit, The Continuing Saga of the Falling Rate of Profit (Bulletin of the Conference of Socialist Economists – henceforth CSEB – No. 9, Autumn 1974). In their reply to Steedman, Glyn et al. defend the use of ‘measurements’ in terms of labour-time on ‘pragmatic’ grounds e.g. to clarify the nature of exploitation; Himmelweit and Mohun, The Anomalies of Capital (Capital and Class 6, Autumn 1978) reject any quantitative approach in favour of an odd notion of ‘Abstract Labour’. While they correctly point out the basic differences of Marx and Ricardo their view loses the ‘materialist’ aspect of Marx’s theory. In both case the final result is that Sraffian models are still invoked to handle the movements of prices and the rate of profit, and the Neo-Ricardian offensive can continue unscathed.
3. Capital I, p. 174. (All references to Penguin ed.)
4. R. Rosdolsky, The Making of Marx’s Capital (Pluto 1977), pp. 41–53 esp.
5. Marx, Grundrisse (Penguin 1973), p. 310.
6. Joan Robinson, Economic Philosophy (Penguin 1964), p. 39, remarks echoed in Steedman’s talk of ‘obscurantism’ (op. cit., p. 21). This sort of attitude tends to go with a distaste for Hegelian elements in Marx, and for the notion of ‘contradiction’ in particular.
7. This is seen clearly in Steedman’s article in the New Statesman, 5 January 1979. The editorial preface to this illustrates perfectly how Steedman’s work is being used, stating ‘that the “labour theory” of profit and exploitation has long seemed like a superstition, shutting off the Marxists as a formidable but self-absorbed tribe’.
8. Steedman, op. cit., esp. Chapter 3, and pp. 64–65. See the pointed criticism in B. Fine and L. Harris, Controversial Issues in Marxist Economic Theory (Socialist Register 1976). Steedman’s method of calculating values by simultaneous equations also leads him, not unwillingly, into such absurdities as ‘negative values’. The difficulties of determining quantities of labour-time are a recurrent theme in Steedman reinforcing his main arguments. Most of them stem from the attempt to impose methods of calculation whose relevance is only given by the mathematical constructions at stake. Different methods of calculation produce different results (cf. Armstrong, Glyn and Harrison, op. cit.). Others such as Joint Products (two or more products produced by the same labour-process) express a real indeterminacy which will be resolved by the Capitalists in practice alone. (Capital I, p. 135).
9. The term ‘direct prices’ is taken from an article by A. Shaikh, Marx’s Theory of Value and the “Transformation Problem”, to be found in a collection The Subtle Anatomy of Capitalism, ed. J. Schwarz (Goodyear Pub. Co., California 1977). This unfortunately inaccessible work is by far the best treatment of the Transformation question. A similar idea termed ‘Simple Prices’ is found in D. Yaffe, Value and Price in Marx’s Capital (Revolutionary Communist, No. 1). Yaffe, however, refuses to recognise that there are any problems with Marx’s solution, following Rosdolsky in this respect, in the belief that any attempt to ‘Transform the Inputs’ entails abandoning values altogether.
10. Capital III (L&W 1971), p. 166 & p. 206.
11. Capital I, pp. 166–67.
12. Capital III, p. 161 and pp. 164–65. But he comments ‘However this always resolves itself into one commodity receiving too little of the surplus-value while another receives too much, so that the deviations from value which are embodied in the prices of production compensate one another. Under Capitalist production, the general law acts as the prevailing tendency only in a very complicated and approximate manner as a never ascertainable average of ceaseless “fluctuations”.’ This, while imprecise, is essentially correct.
13. Shaikh, op. cit., and I. Gerstein, Production, Circulation and Value (Economy and Society, 1976, Vol. 5, pp. 243–91). Shaikh presents an alternative method of calculation, the ‘Iterative Solution’ which he strongly argues reveals the actual movements better than the method of Simultaneous Equations preferred by Gerstein and most other commentators. The final results are the same. Gerstein draws on the article by F. Seton, The “Transformation Problem”, in The Economics of Marx, ed. M. Howard and J. King (Penguin 1976), which provides the definitive mathematical version of the question to which Steedman adds nothing. Seton, a bourgeois economist, concluded that “the logical Superstructure” of Marx’s work was “sound enough” whilst rejecting the basic “doctrine”.
14. Von Bortkewiecz confused matters totally by including money in his equations, in which respect, he has been followed by Steedman. This is quite wrong. Sweezy, The Theory of Capitalist Development (MR 1968), does the same thing and then concludes that differences of Total Value and Total Price etc. result simply from moving from a Value unit of account to a Money Unit of Account. This has got nothing to do with it, is in fact clearly left aside by Marx (he had dealt with that question in Vol. 1). G. Hodgson makes the same very confusing mistake in his Marxian Epistemology and the “Transformation Problem” (Economy and Society, Vol. 3, 1974). Yaffe (op. cit.) was the first person to point this out correctly in the recent literature.
15. Sraffa’s own Standard Commodity amounts to an exact specification of an average industry for which the rate of profit will not be affected by the Transformation (see the account in A. Medio, Profit and Surplus-Value: Appearance and Reality in Capitalist Production, in E. Hunt and J. Schwarz (eds.) A Critique of Political Economy (Penguin 1972) ,which argues for putting Sraffa into Marx rather than vice-versa). Sraffa’s formula for the rate of profit (r = Rmax(I−w)) isolates precisely the two factors, the Organic Composition of Capital, and the rate of surplus-value, with which Marx determines the rate of profit. Sraffa’s account however is placed in the distorted context of Ricardo’s search for an invariable measure of value, a commodity whose value would not change as wages and profits altered. For Marx’s comments see Theories of Surplus Value, vol. 3, pp. 133–35 where he calls Ricardo’s problem ‘spurious’. Also see Shaikh (op. cit.) for why a method which takes Marx’s own solution as a ‘first step’ towards a complete answer is preferable.
16. Sraffa simply takes an arbitrarily chosen commodity out of his equations as a unit of account (equal to one) to give him absolute numbers rather than just relative prices (ratios of one thing to another). Money is not an arbitrary commodity, and cannot simply be added onto the equations.
17. See the first part of my article, International Socialism 2:3.
18. Strictly speaking if money wages are stable and money-prices are stable but output rising, the value of labour-power will be falling, and the rate of exploitation increasing. If we follow the strict logic of Marx’s argument, a stable price-level implies that the value of money is falling (if productivity rises and values fall commodity-prices must fall if the value of money is unchanged.) Nobody seems to have discussed the implications of this, not least for the manner in which the underlying value-relations are concealed by movements in money-prices. The neglect of this question undermines attempts to apply value-categories ‘immediately’ to the concrete dynamics of the system.
19. This matter is fully and clearly discussed in both R. Rosdolsky (op. cit., pp. 398–411) and R. Meek, The falling rate of profit, in his Economics and Ideologv and Other Essays (Chapman & Hall 1967). Both are well worth reading.
20. Marx lists several such ‘Counteracting Influences’ in Capital III, Ch. XIV, such as an increasing intensity of labour, the cheapening of Constant Capital, over-population, foreign trade etc. This is only a list however, bearing the marks of an uncompleted work. The question must be looked at historically, taking into account those forces which have in practice diverted large quantises of surplus-value from the Accumulation of Capital, notably Imperialism, Wars, and the Permanent Arms apparatuses of the post-war period.
21. Steedman, op cit., ch. 9 uses this, as well as several other arguments suggesting that he does not find this objection on its own very conclusive. According to Pete Binns, Garcia (in a Spanish revolutionary journal, Debate, 1978) has analysed the effects of actual variations in organic compositions of capital between industries and concluded that they are likely to accentuate any fall in the rate of profit, if they have any effect at all.
22. These can be found in Steedman, op. cit., and Himmelweit (CSEB, No. 9, 1974). They stem from Sraffa’s discussion of the effects of changes in distribution upon the choice of techniques. In this purely static framework they have a valid use, and have served to expose inconsistencies in marginalist economics. But dealing only with industries not firms, and thus abstracting, from the real processes of competition, they are useless for dealing with the effects of accumulation in which wage-changes are the ‘dependent, not the independent variable’. (Capital I, p. 770)
23. The conclusion that changes in the conditions of production in Dept. III producing luxury goods cannot affect the overall rate of profit, corresponds to Sraffa’s argument about non-basic goods, and the famous ‘Von Bortkewiecz corollary’. But the fact that one can drop the equation for Dept. III from an equilibrium model and still obtain a ‘rate of profit’ says nothing at all about what happens in the real world. It is astonishing how readily such an idea, which conflicts with the essence of Marx’s analysis of surplus-value, has been accepted. In an equilibrium model, the conditions of production in Dept. III will be given by a specification of those in Depts. I & II simply by the assumption that the total surplus of goods in the first two departments is sold to Dept. III and that the latter purchases none from elsewhere. The fact that changes in the price of luxury goods cannot affect the overall rate of profit then enables you to drop Dept. III from the equations.
Once money, firms and disequilibrium are introduced the argument collapses. If conditions of production ‘worsen’ in Dept. III causing a fall in the rate of profit firms or money-capital will depart and the price of luxury goods will rise restoring the rate of profit. This change in price will not affect the overall rate of profit. That is as far as the Neo-Ricardians can go. But what of the drop in demand for goods from other Depts. which stems from this contraction of Dept. III? And what of the firms which left the industry? These will enter the other Departments and lower the rate of profit there as a result. These changes in the conditions of production or the technical data in Depts. I & II as a result of changes in Dept. III are excluded by definition from the Sraffian models. The final effect, however, will be to lower the overall rate of profit.
24. A. Shaikh, Political Economy and Capitalism: notes on Dobb’s theory of crisis (Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1978, No. 2). Shaikh makes an important distinction between the profit margin on the costs which enter into the commodity, and the rate of profit calculated on the whole fixed Capital engaged in production. This in turn leads into a series of complications arising from different turnover periods of Capital which Marx discusses in Volume 2 of Capital.
25. D. Yaffe, The Marxian Theory of Crisis, Capital and the State (Economy and Society, Vol. 2 No. 2, 1973). The fact that much of this article is an attack on the theoretical tradition represented by this Journal should not detract from the important and correct points made by Yaffe on the basic tendency of the rate of profit to fall.
26. B. Schefold, Different Forms of Technical Progress (Economic Journal, Dec. 1976, No. 86) calls this case ‘innovation’ as distinct from the ‘mechanisation’ upon which Marx focussed, which will tend to lower the ‘maximum rate of profit’. Schefold is interesting as a Sraffian who rejects Marx’s basic thesis but seems to allow that rises in the Organic Composition of Capital can lower the rate of profit independently of rising wages. This at least permits a sensible discussion of the question which the ‘a priori’ rejections do not.
27. cf. Theories of Surplus Value, vol. III, p. 366.
28. Capital-Output ratios do have to be handled carefully. Physical measures involving heterogeneous commodities are especially problematic as distinct from value or price measures. But the latter will be affected by relative price changes, levels of demand etc. Allowing for these the evidence from several sources shows a remarkably similar pattern. See J. Gillman, The Falling Rate of Profit (Dobson 1957) for American data which show a steady rise in the Organic Composition up until 1920 and, allowing for shifts in capacity utilisation, a steady fall from 1920 to 1950. Hodgson (op. cit.) makes great play with the latter but as Cogoy correctly observes it is absurd to isolate such a fall from the context of a massive world-slump and a world-war. M. Cogoy, The Fall in the Rate of Profit and the Theory of Accumulation (CSEB, II.7, Winter 1973). More recent evidence suggests a steady rise again in Capital-Output ratios since 1950. See for example on Britain the survey Measures of Real Profitability in the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin (Vol. 18 No. 4, Dec. 1978).
29. Capital III, Chap. XV passim.
 






A review article of A. Glyn & J. Harrison,The British Economic Disaster (Pluto Press, London 1980, £2.95); and CSE London Working Group, The Alternative Economic Strategy (CSE Books, London 1980, £2.50)



The two books under review have been well timed. Having barely recovered from the slump of 1974–75, British capitalism is now in the throes of an even more abrupt decline. Manufacturing output has dropped to the level of 1968 (excluding North Sea Oil). Redundancies are running at the rate of 50,000 a month. Predictions of 3–4 million unemployed by 1983, made by the Cambridge Economic Policy Group, are no longer looking far-fetched. A forecast by the ITEM Group of prestigious economists (Guardian, Oct. 13, 1980) predicts falls in total output of 9% and of manufacturing output of 16¼% for the period 1979–1982. Comparable figures in 1929–32, the years of the ‘Great Depression’, were only 7% and 10% respectively. It is true of course that even in an epoch of world crisis, capitalism moves cyclically and there will some sort of upturn in about 1982, just as there was in 1977. De-stocking will have ceased, replacement investment will occur, public expenditure may be raised as the Tories fear an approaching election. Yet only hardline monetarists who take their own models seriously are confident that such an upturn will have any major impact on unemployment levels. Proposals for an Alternative Strategy, backed as they are by the Labour National Executive and even ‘moderates’ such as Sid Weighell on the TUC will therefore grow in appeal.
The Strategy, as presented by the CSE London Group, sounds deceptively simple. Expansion will occur through boosting demand by increasing public expenditure. Planning agreements and selective nationalisation will serve to increase investment in industry. Price controls will prevent inflation and import controls will provide the space within which the British economy, insulated from world when redundancies are very hard to resist, when wage-settlements of 6–8% are being reached despite inflation at 15% – even the most militant workers are looking to London and placing their hopes on the leftward swing in the Labour Party coming to their rescue.
It will be no surprise to anyone acquainted with the politics of this journal that I consider such hopes to be sadly misplaced. It is true that a serious attempt to implement such strategy (an unlikely event even with Michael Foot as Prime Minister) would galvanise the political situation in this country. The conflicts generated would provide a decisive opportunity for revolutionary socialists. However, it is only if we have a clear awareness of the contradictions of attempting to reform a capitalism in crisis, and can make a sober appraisal of the political realities of such a change, that we will be able to seize such an opportunity. That in turn demands that we hold out against the pressures sucking even professed revolutionaries towards the Labour Party, that we lay the foundations now for the rank and file organisations rooted in the workplace which could become a mass force when a ‘left’ government fails to meet the expectations it generates.
It is on this question that Glyn and Harrison for all their trenchant criticism of the Alternative Strategy (AES) are most fundamentally lacking. Their book, despite serious flaws which I will return to in a moment, provides a lucid, coherent account of the course of British capitalism in the 1970s. As I discovered to my annoyance when asked to recommend a simple Marxist account of recent events and debates to a NUPE shop-steward, they have filled a glaring gap in the market. What disturbs me most about their work however, is the nature of that attack on the AES which has received much attention elsewhere. This may surprise those who quite rightly see a lot of similarity between their criticisms and those which have emerged in recent years from the SWP. Yet theirs is a vision of socialism in which the working-class is just as much confined to a walk-on part in elections and demonstrations as it is in the more outright reformism of the bulk of the Labour Left.
To the Alternative Strategy, Glyn and Harrison counterpose a ‘Socialist Plan’. It appears very revolutionary with its call for outright nationalisation of the top 200 monopolies, without compensation, production for need rather than profit, and full-blooded workers control. The arguments about how a socialist society could reorganise production and eliminate waste are to the point. Yet the proposals are mere rhetoric in the absence of a clear statement about how they are to be implemented. It is a perspective in which the plan is to be imposed by a workers’ government but nothing is said about the destruction of the existing state apparatus let alone about the persistence of the national state form itself which they appear not to question. The difference between their Plan and competition, can be modernised and rejuvenated. In a period when unemployment is crippling shop-floor organisation, that of the AES is at heart merely quantitative, a matter of 200 monopolies rather that 50, of total control of foreign trade rather than just import controls. The qualitative upheaval and transformation implied by a mass working-class revolution seem to be beyond the grasp of their imagination. What, for example, and its not a trivial point, if workers in companies other than the 200 monopolies decided to seize control?
An abstract concern for the technical difficulties of ‘balancing foreign trade’, or the number of firms to be taken over, suggests a politics whose central focus remains the world of governments, rather than of the streets and the workplace. At heart it is a matter of the difference between what Hal Draper termed the ‘two souls’ of socialism, one a Statist view common to both Stalinism and Social Democracy, the other rooted in the struggle, the self-activity of the exploited and oppressed. Glyn and Harrison do reveal a sharp awareness of the obstacles to any sort of socialism. They reject the tinkering of the AES. They emphasise that even modest proposals for nationalisation and import controls, will provoke the wrath of international capital, and generate the chaos which undermined the Allende government in Chile before its brutal end. Yet Andrew Glyn is a member of the Militant group whose allegiance to Orthodox Trotskyism has long hidden an increasingly reformist practice, tail-ending the Tribune group within the Labour Party. The impotence of their politics, of Socialist Plans without an agency, will ultimately place them on the same side as the proponents of the AES.
In earlier issues of this journal John Bearman and Sue Cockerill [1] have emphasised the political weakness of the AES, and the contradictions involved in any attempt to isolate the British economy from the world crisis, the ambition which underpins the whole strategy. To the political weaknesses of both books there corresponds a serious deficiency in their analysis of the nature of the current crisis, in particular the difficulties with an explanation of the crisis in terms of working-class militancy and the upward pressure of wages on the rate of profit which is shared by both of them. It is in this light that I want to examine the significance of monetarism and of the revamped Keynesianism which lies at the heart of the AES.
 
Britain and the World Economy
The current crisis is scarcely confined to Britain. Unemployment levels are higher in Belgium and Ireland, almost as high in France, Italy and the USA. Even the German economy is beginning to slow according to recent estimates, pulled down by the rest. The only apparent exception is Japan with its phenomenal export capacity. Yet in the CSE book a critical passage runs:
It must be stated clearly that the features of the slump, which we have described as constituting a crisis – the massive unemployment, the sharp contraction of industry, the prospects of falling living standards – can be attributed directly to government policy ... The crisis is not due to the world recession; indeed exports have been surprisingly high. (p. 31)
The implication of the argument is simple, and simple-minded. It is the same argument used by Michael Foot as he urged the mass demonstration in Liverpool on November 29 to wait for the next election. A slump attributable solely to Government policies can easily be cured by a reversal of those policies. It makes you wonder why nobody else including the last Labour Government has found it possible to solve things. Was it simply pure malevolence on its part?
Certainly the squeeze imposed by the Tories has precipitated a slump in Britain earlier than elsewhere. Monetary squeezes however are not unique to Britain. They are being enforced with varying degrees of intensity by governments in every major industrialised country. Such responses are not without effect but nor are they accidental. They express the inability of the individual nation-state to cope with the deep-rooted contradictions of the world economy. If the consequences of monetarism are more severe in Britain it is because of long-term structural weaknesses in the British economy which no government has been able to reverse.
These weaknesses are relative. They matter only because they undermine the ability of British capitalism to compete in the world economy with which it is totally and inextricably interlocked. In the post-war period British capitalism grew continuously. Yet, productivity growth lagged substantially behind that of its major competitors, with the single exception of the USA which started from a much higher level. Whereas Germany, Japan and France have largely caught up and in a few areas overtaken the American technical lead, Britain has fallen further behind, as Glyn and Harrison (p. 38) indicate with the following table:



Industrial Capital and Productivity, 1953–72




 


Annual Rate
of Growth
of Capital Stock %


Annual Rate
of Growth
of Productivity %




France


  5.8


5.4




W. Germany


  7.0


5.0




Italy


  6.6


5.0




Japan


12.5


8.9




UK


  4.2


3.0




USA


  3.3


2.7



These figures also suggest that the main reason for this has been the low growth of capital stock (or investment in new plant and machinery). Explanations for this are legion. My own emphasis for the decisive period of the 1950s and early 1960s would be on the legacy of Empire. Reliance on guaranteed markets in the aftermath of the war reduced the competitive pressures to which Japan and Germany were subject. The same links delayed British entry into the Common Market, the area of most rapid growth of trade in the 1960s. The legacy bought with it the dominant role of financial interests and multinational companies, which arguably diverted funds away from domestic investment. Not least, the delusions of grandeur quite disproportionate to reduced economic power led successive British governments to sustain high levels of arms spending absorbing resources which elsewhere could be put to more ‘productive’ use.
Whatever the reasons, the British economy was caught by the 1960s in a vicious cycle. Low investment meant low productivity and lower sales on the world market. This in turn entailed low levels of capacity utilisation, lower profits and lower investment. The problem expressed itself through a series of balance of payments crises to which governments responded with deflationary measures, lowering domestic demand and hoping for export-led growth. These government-induced recessions were severe enough to discourage investment but not to eliminate the weaker, or inefficient sectors of British industry.
Glyn and Harrison acknowledge the importance of many of these factors but place overwhelming emphasis on the impact of labour shortage, the strength of working-class organisation, and the supposed decline in the share of output going to profits rather than wages. The CSE London Group refer to ‘the basic conflict underlying capitalism – between Capital and Labour’ which has resulted in ‘falling profit rates and rising inflation’. At first sight the evidence looks convincing. On the figures quoted (Glyn & Harrison, p. 52) the share of company profits fell from 23.0% in 1960 to 14.8% in 1970.
However Chris Harman (IS 2 : 9, Summer 1980, Theories of the Crisis) has suggested a number of reasons why such statistics are open to question. They leave out the share of the total surplus going to interest and rent. They ignore that portion of salary income, expense accounts etc. entered as costs in the accounting books which are really concealed profits. Most crucially they leave out taxation, for a period in which a growing share of working-class income has gone to the state. Given the large share of public expenditure which directly benefits capital (investment grants, regional subsidies, nationalised industry subsidies which keep their prices down etc.), quite apart from the dubious value of defence and most education spending to the working-class, the effect is to markedly distort the actual share of output available for capital.
Yet even if the share of profits has diminished, this does not prove the point Glyn and Harrison are trying to make. The Financial Times (12.8.80) recently published the following table:



Wage Costs in Manufacturing Industry in 1979 (in Deutsch Marks)




 


Average Hourly
Wage


Additional Social
Costs per Hour


Total Labour
Costs per Hour




W. Germany


12.46


8.68


21.14




USA


12.24


4.71


16.95




France


  8.41


6.64


15.05




Italy


  7.33


7.92


15.25




Japan


  9.69


2.08


11.77




UK


  7.85


2.35


10.20



These figures indicate that Britain is now a cheap labour country by comparison with its major competitors. A recent report of Citibank of the US (Financial Times, 29.11.80) gave a similar picture. Now, internationally traded goods (accounting for a large proportion of the British economy given its dependence on world trade) will tend to be sold at the same price, allowing for exchange rates. If British firms are making lower profits on these goods this can only be because of lower levels of productivity, for which even low wages cannot compensate. This whole dimension of competition between capitals is ignored in the concentration on Capital-Labour relations by the authors under discussion. The ‘British’ dimension of the crisis, in other words, is not characterised by high wages as the ‘wage push’ theory might suggest, but by its exceptionally low wages.
Glyn and Harrison have one other argument to support their thesis. This is that worker resistance is itself partly responsible for the low rates of investment in British industry, and thus for poor productivity. This is an argument which has become very popular on the basis of very flimsy evidence. It is given a great deal of prominence for example in the recent Brookings report [2], although the best support they can provide is a statistical correlation between industries of low productivity and a high number of disputes. Yet this can equally well be explained by management seeking to compensate for low investment and poor performance with increased pressure on their workforce. Certainly the history of the British car industry bears this out. In the 1950s with little competition BMC, the predecessor of British Leyland, gave most of its profits away in dividends. [3] The lack of investment, and a failure to rationalise or develop new models left the firm very vulnerable to the resurgence of the European industry. Militancy, far from being the cause of the problem, was the response to a management offensive, a response which has scarcely been very successful.
Other industries suggest a similar picture. In textiles, which has suffered the biggest decline in recent years (250,000 jobs in the last decade), it is arguable that low wages and weak organisation enabled many firms to persist with outdated equipment and low productivity. In steel a sorry history of managerial incompetence, and the private running down of assets in the face of prospective nationalisation, was matched by a right-wing union which called not one national strike between 1926 and 1979. Time and again British capital has sought to shift the burden of its own failure onto the working-class and then blamed any resistance for being the cause of the problem. For socialists to do the same, however much they might endorse that action, is a terrible mistake.
The conclusion, however, that low investment lies at the root of the relative decline of British capitalism, is not one which the CSE London group would question. Their response, that a massive increase in the level of investment is required, is not as unproblematic as it might seem. One obvious difficulty is the scale of the investment required. They themselves quote one estimate by FE Jones that fixed assets per worker in UK manufacturing are only £7,500 compared to £23,000 in West Germany and £30,000 in Japan. It would take £100,000 million worth of investment just to catch up with where the Japanese are now. Another estimate is that an increase of 50% on the recent highest trend of investment sustained over ten years would be required. Resources for this could only be provided by holding back wages and welfare expenditure, even allowing for an effective seizure of the profits of North Sea Oil and the financial sector. The difficulties here are not in other words going to be met except by a sustained assault on either the working class or on some of the most powerful sectors of international capital. Yet the CSE group seems to think that both options can be avoided.
Even if this difficulty of resources is dealt with there is a deeper problem. Crudely, on a world scale the crisis is not the result of too little investment but too much, not the function of a shortage of capital but, as Marx emphasised, of an over-accumulation of capital. It is important to be clear about this paradox. The very measures which might serve to restore British capitalism to health can only serve to worsen the crisis for the system as a whole. The expansion of capital through the reinvestment of surplus-value serves to lower the overall rate of profit. Yet those capitals which fail to reinvest and expand, which fall behind in the competitive race suffer precisely the elimination of these weaker capitals from the race, the destruction of their capital, which is necessary for the recovery of the system.
Two examples can perhaps serve to clarify the point. On a world scale there are too many motor car firms fighting it out for shares of a stagnant world market. With the growth of economies of scale it is estimated that a minimum capacity of 2 million cars is needed for effective competition in this market. The persistence of British Leyland, with a capacity of less than half that, serves as an obstacle to the worldwide rationalisation which is required, and helps to squeeze the profits of all the other car manufacturers. Extra investment in British Leyland may help to secure the prospects of much of the engineering industry in the West Midlands. It may even, though this is very unlikely, restore BL to a strong competitive position. Yet it can only shift the burden of the crisis elsewhere, and prolong the crisis in the industry as a whole. The world steel industry is in a similar situation, demanding a comparable rationalisation. In Britain, British Steel did invest, to the tune of £600 million a year in 1976, in the most up to date equipment. But the new plants came on stream at a time of chronic overcapacity in the world as a whole and have simply served to increase the company’s losses.
 
The retreat from Keynes
It is in the light of the above analysis that we can make sense of the failure of Keynesian policies and the general shift by every major national state towards policies of a ‘monetarist’ hue. The question is important here because the AES can fairly be described as a programme of Keynesianism with teeth. It involves a recognition up to a point of the obstacles to the classic remedy for a slump so widely heralded in the 1950s – that governments could step into the breach and stimulate investment and restore employment through expanding public expenditure and pumping money into the economy.
According to the CSE group, these obstacles were essentially twofold. On the one hand, firms might respond to the increase in demand stimulated by government spending by raising their prices rather than by expanding output and investment. On the other, particularly in a weak economy such as Britain’s, expansion of demand is likely to suck in many imports creating a severe balance of payments crisis. Both of these problems are blamed in part on the growth of multinational companies not subject to the influence of the state, with a penchant for encouraging imports and investing overseas.
Now this analysis, though rather superficial, does capture some of the difficulties. Where it is lacking is in its failure to grasp the depth of the crisis. Keynesian policies were not responsible for the boom. Indeed they were scarcely seriously attempted until the growth of the world economy began to slow in the late 1960s, and this was as much due to the accident of the deficit spending entailed by the Vietnam War in the USA as anything else. In turn the crises of the 1970s were not simply the result of an abandonment of expansionary policies by Governments as at times the CSE group implies.
Glyn & Harrison have a more sophisticated analysis. They locate the worldwide slowdown in the rate of capital investment as central to the crisis, and not something attributable to the vagaries of multinationals. However, their explanation of that slowdown in terms of a decline in the rate of profit attributes the sole responsibility for that fall to a worldwide squeeze on profits from rising wages. Chris Harman has dealt with this thesis in more detail in his articles in this journal, and I have already suggested why it is a false account of specifically British problems. That said, their recognition of the underlying weakness of investment levels enables them to explain the inflationary character of the boom of 1971–75. Internationally all the major western capitalist states responded to the slowdown with expansionary measures, boosting the amount of money in the system enormously. The result was a drastic boom which broke equally spectacularly when the rise in oil prices and accelerating inflation led to a synchronised squeeze.
The point is not to deny the influence that changes in government policy and expenditure can have, but to recognise the constraints imposed by the system which limit what any state can do without generating unintended consequences. In Britain the Tory government of 1970 came in with the intention of holding down prices, and letting the lame ducks go to the wall, thereby restoring the competitiveness of the rest of British capitalism. By 1972 the famous Heath U-turn in the face of unemployment topping a million and the UCS work-in, had led to massive subsidies to British industry and the highly ‘inflationary’ Barber boom. Investment however failed to respond, and money poured into speculative ventures in the City and the property market. As inflation mounted so did interest rates putting the squeeze on industry even more.
It was in response to developments like this worldwide that ‘monetarism’ came back into favour. Fighting inflation became the major ‘priority’, which in practice meant hitting public expenditure, letting unemployment rise, and trying to ensure that wages were held down below the level of prices. In this sense monetarism is scarcely a Tory prerogative and in Britain such ideas first came to the fore with the Labour government of 1974–79. All this Glyn and Harrison describe very well, and their book is worth reading for anyone who simply wants to refresh their memory about how savage that government really was.
The difficulty with Glyn & Harrison’s account is that their own analysis suggests that if the monetarist policy of increasing unemployment and attacking working-class living standards had succeeded in lowering wages, the conditions for renewed expansion would be there. Given the restoration of the underlying rate of profit, they argue that a revival of investment would in itself tend to generate the demand necessary (pp. 6–7).
In fact matters are far more complex than they allow. The restoration of the rate of profit on a world scale requires not just a lowering of real wages but a massive destruction of accumulated capital. Such a process of restructuring cannot be implemented within the framework of a single national capital. It demands, as suggested earlier, the elimination of the British Leylands and the British Steels of this world. Such a process would lay waste whole sectors of industry in the weaker national areas such as Britain. In turn the scale of such a slump would be so great, that there would be no automatic recovery. It took fascism and war to bring the world economy out of the last such crisis. Something comparable would be required in this epoch. Certainly any recovery would demand a degree of international coordination by the major nation states. Yet as the slump deepens competition between those states is intensifying. More likely is a world-wide resort to precisely the sort of protectionism advocated for Britain by proponents of the AES. Yet in reducing the level of world trade such measures could only intensify the slump as they did in the 1930s.
It is in this light that the vacillation of national governments has to be seen. ‘Keynesian’ measures have not been entirely abandoned, far from it. As the slump deepened throughout the 1970s, so did the level of budget deficits despite all the attempts to keep them down. Sustained levels of public expenditure, especially on defence and social security, helped to limit the scale of the crisis. Yet such measures have also helped to sustain the agony, delaying the rationalisation that capitalism requires, and sustaining high levels of inflation. Internationally most governments sought to delay expansion, each hoping to benefit from the expansion of the rest by increasing its exports. The USA, which tried to boost the world economy by itself, simply revealed that it was no longer up to the task. Whilst experiencing quite rapid growth (4.4% in 1978), the US economy was subject to a flood of imports especially from Japan, a traumatic fall in the value of the dollar and mounting inflation.
Monetarism, in part just a new name for old-fashioned deflation, is also subject to acute contradictions. The record to date of the Tories in Britain illustrates the point. The squeeze has not been very severe by Milton Friedman’s standards. Bank lending to firms in trouble has been allowed to soar, limiting the number of bankruptcies which have, nevertheless, still reached record levels. The key ‘lame ducks’ such as British Steel and British Leyland have been forced to pare down but are still being propped up by huge amounts of government money. Yet the Tories have still had to face a chorus of complaint from leaders of the CBI for threatening the very industrial base of Britain.
Glyn and Harrison are right to stress that Tory policies are not irrational, that the aim is to restore profitability by forcing out the least efficient companies and attacking wages. They do recognise that the scale of the recession required to achieve this could get out of hand. Yet because their own theory does not get to grips with the roots of the crisis one is still left with the impression that monetarism, for all the short-term difficulties, could work.
 
Alternative Strategy?
Keynesianism sought to manage the national economy without touching the fundamental structures of capitalist power and the world market. It collapsed from that contradiction as soon as it was seriously tested. The response of monetarism to that failure is a strident call for return to the mythical age of laissez-faire and a sustained old-fashioned assault on working-class living standards and the welfare state. In practice ‘monetarist’ governments have recoiled at the catastrophic implications of such policies and are discovering that their cure for the disease could itself be fatal. What then of the Alternative Strategy?
I have already suggested that the Strategy can be described as Keynesianism with teeth. Import controls to handle the balance of payments, planning agreements, nationalisation of key companies and the finance sector to boost investment, price control to stop inflation – all these can be seen as ways of plugging holes in a simple policy of expanding demand. As such the strategy is just another, rather more radical, plan for curing the deep-seated problems of the British economy. In the CSE book and. elsewhere it is simultaneously presented in a major step in the transition to socialism. A close examination soon reveals that it is the objective of restoring the competitive position of British industry within the world system which has priority.
As Jonathan Bearman outlined at length in his An Anatomy of the Bennite Left (IS 2 : 6, Autumn 1979), the programme is one which challenges existing property relations, but not the underlying relations of production, the structure of capitalism as a world system. Its logic is the logic of state capitalism, variants of which have been adopted by whole numbers of states from the USSR to Tanzania, seeking to bolster their national economic base in the face of the ravages of international competition. However well intentioned their advocates might be, the notion of workers’ control, along with the rhetoric of democratic planning have as their function the incorporation of the working-class and its organisations in that programme. The inescapable constraints of the system will demand the subordination of working-class interests to the programme of rationalisation, sacrifice and hard labour, dressed up with appeals to the national interest and the spirit of socialism (whatever that might be).
Having emphasised that, it is also necessary to insist that such a programme of national economic development is no more workable in Britain than it has been in China or Poland – even less so given the obstacles to eliminating private capital and multinational enterprise. On the one hand the AES will leave the bulk of industry and trade in private hands, the market will persist, money and profit remain the decisive indicators of economic performance. On the other, profits are to be taxed; the most powerful sectors of British capital, the multinationals and the banks, either seized by the state or put under strict control; the links tying Britain with the European and World Economy disrupted.
The contradictions are glaring. They emerge in the disagreements among the advocates of the strategy themselves. Should there, for example, be an incomes policy? Some, such as Brian Sedgemore and others in the Bennite left say yes, to be accompanied this time by a genuine Social Contract and stiff price controls. Others, such as one section of the Communist Party say no. The CSE group hedge their bets but suggest that there is ‘no need to reduce the sphere of output going to wages.’ Why there should be something sacrosanct about the the existing rate of exploitation I am not sure. But then the whole debate points to the absurdity of the idea that you can simultaneously rescue a capitalism in crisis with measures that must as a minimum secure the current levels of profitability, and at the same time shift resources towards the working class. At root there lurks here the thoroughly un-marxist notion of a common national interest embracing everyone except multinationals and bankers (especially when they’re foreign).
On occasion the CSE group are honest enough to confess their own confusion. Thus we find remarks like:
... it is not entirely clear what role profit is supposed to play in the whole process.
Even more astonishingly, having acknowledged that capitalist opposition ‘could certainly be anticipated’, leading to an ‘all-out investment strike and the shift of capital overseas’, they can only say feebly:
Whether this opposition could be overcome is a matter for judgement. We believe that it could, provided the rationale for planning was broadly understood [by whom? – PG] and supported and provided the workforce of the companies involved were committed to its implementation.
This is a programme which rests on the assumption of parliamentary democracy, the belief that the existing apparatus of the state could be so used to implement thorough-going reforms. The necessity of calling, even half-heartedly, for the mobilisation of the working class to overcome resistance, reveals the shallowness of that assumption. Such a mobilisation is of course what capital finds most frightening in the rhetoric of Bennery, the reason why they will bitterly resist even the most diluted version of the strategy. The logic of such a situation points to a decisive class confrontation. At such a moment the choice would be a simple one – either retreat, or a move towards the seizure of power and the creation of socialism. It is that choice the Bennites, the CSE group, and the Communist Party claim to be able to avoid. Yet all such evasion can only lead to the inevitability of retreat and compromise, the very commitment to parliamentary means and constitutional legality, immobilising and disorienting the working class, and inviting disaster.
That is the most decisive contradiction of the strategy but there are others. The fate of even the muted proposals of the last Labour Government suggests the problem. The industrial strategy becomes a means of bolstering up the more distressed sections of private capital and pumping money into the rest. The Social Contract became a device for imposing wage cuts, and workers’ participation in firms such as British Leyland successfully softened up the workforce for the body-blows of the likes of Michael Edwardes. To blame all that on right-wing ideas or the malevolence of the IMF is to ignore the fact that a government trying to steer the British economy through its most serious crisis since the war had no choice but to meet the demands of capital. The very weakness of British capitalism on a world scale limits the freedom of manoeuvre of any government. Once you fall behind in the race to be a big successful capital, there is no way you can catch up except at the expense of your workforce.
The advocates of the AES hope to avoid these consequences by trying to opt out of the system altogether. That is why import controls are so crucial. The aim is to insulate Britain from the world crisis and provide space for the boosting of demand and the expansion which might provide better shares for all. The ambition is Utopian. The CSE group takes the dangers seriously and concedes the inevitability of retaliation. Yet their answer, to negotiate deals ‘with other countries which have suffered from the international trading system’ is pathetic. Such countries are not identified and can only be the slowest-growing parts of the system, those which in most countries can not even pay their oil bills.
Import controls have as their corollary, departure from the EEC which now takes over a third of Britain’s exports. In turn exports account for a bigger proportion of the UK’s Gross Domestic Product than for any of its major competitors (26.5% in 1979, compared with, for instance, 22.5% for West Germany and 7.7% for the USA). The disruption arising from such a break in trading connections would be enormous. On its own such a move would suffice to antagonise every major multinational and every other powerful capitalist state. It would accelerate the worldwide trend to protectionism which can only serve to deepen the crisis. The reply that such controls could be selective (in some versions) or limited and across-the-board (in others) misses the point. Either the controls would be rigorous enough to provoke anger and reprisals – or they will fail to meet the objective of insulating Britain from the world crisis.
Two interrelated but contradictory developments have characterised the world economy in the postwar period. One is the growth of the state, managing the national economy, taking over responsibility for the weakest industrial sectors, intervening in the class struggle, etc. The other is the internationalisation of the production process, the spread of the multinationals, the ever-deepening dependence of national economies upon the world economy as a whole with the growth of trade and the international division of labour. The patterns are complex with degrees of integration into the world economy, a shifting hierarchy of nation states, and the emergence of regional blocs such as the EEC, or the ties between Japan and South East Asia. Nevertheless, within Britain as elsewhere one can see conflicts within the ruling class as a whole over the role of the state and the degree of openness of the economy to the world market.
The deepening polarisation between the Tories’ commitment to exposing the economy to the rigours of international competition, and the advocates of protection and the extension of the state, is not one in which revolutionary socialists should be taking sides. Both strategies are beset by contradictions, both are doomed to failure. For the world working class, to quote the slogan, there’s but one solution, revolution.

Notes
1. Jonathan Bearman, An Anatomy of the Bennite Left, International Socialism 2 : 6 and Sue Cockerill, Reply to Left Reformism, International Socialism 2 : 8.
2. R. Caves and L. Krause (eds.), Britain’s Economic Performance, Brookings Institution, 1980.
3. British Leyland and the Beginning of the End, CIS Report, 1974.
 



Marx’s theory of value is the cornerstone of his whole investigation of capital. It is at this point that he breaks decisively with all bourgeois economics. [1] Value, and the ceaseless pursuit of value, divorced from all consideration of human need, alienated from the human activity which creates it, is the guiding principle of capital, the principle without which capitalism as a mode of production is impenetrable. Once grasped the theory of value reveals the historical specificity of capitalism, and the contradictions which both power its unprecedented dynamic and augur its eventual destruction. It is not simply or even primarily about the reduction of the prices of commodities directly indirectly to the labour-time necessary for their production.
The current assault on the labour theory of value from the academic wing of ‘left reformism’ is thus neither accidental nor innocent. Presented as a break with the stale cliches of the Stalinist era, dressed up in the language of the latest intellectual fashions, the criticisms have taken a variety of forms. Some ascend to the heights of a critique of epistemology and reject all general theories or laws of history, in a manner reminiscent of Karl Popper – of these Hindess and Hirst [2] have at least the merit of explicitly confronting Marx’s method and drawing the appropriate political conclusions. The tendency to be considered in the course of this article, commonly termed Neo-Ricardian, has usually preferred to hide behind a daunting array of matrices. The content of their criticisms though is even less original, echoing v. Bortkiewicz, [3] at the turn of the century, and finding a crude statement in Joan Robinson’s An Essay in Marxian Economics (1942). [4]
The ground here is treacherous. In this mystifying world the labour theory of value is divested of its qualitative and revolutionary dimension, and becomes a matter of the determinacy of equations and the utility of aggregation devices. [5] It becomes almost impossible to distinguish between the mathematically significant or curious and the complexities of the real system that is capitalism. Those who obstinately feel that the exposure of the fetishism of commodities, or the insights into the labour process, or the account of the dynamics of capitalist accumulation provided by Marx have some inherent connection to the theory of value are assured that these matters are beside the point. They are questions for sociological or historical investigation, irrelevant to the equilibrium models of relative price determination of concern to the academic economist. Fetishism and alienation cannot be put into the equations.
With this divorce of the quantitative and qualitative an academic division of labour is sustained, and the argument about the labour theory of value can proceed on a plane in which the doyen of bourgeois economists, Paul Samuelson, can participate with ease. [6] His conclusions are not at all dissimilar, though much less subtly put, to those of Ian Steedman whose work Marx after Sraffa is the most forthright statement of a Neo-Ricardian position. [7] Marx’s value analysis is both inconsistent and redundant. It is a ‘major fetter’, in Steedman’s words, on the development of a ‘materialist account of capitalist societies’. [8]
Behind the equations lies a distinctive view of the world and a well-defined political programme. Neither should prove unfamiliar to readers of this journal once brought to the surface. To the divorce of the quantitative and qualitative there corresponds a divorce of the
economic and social. Production becomes a matter of technology, the social is removed to the spheres of distribution and ownership. Marx’s social relations of production are split up into neutral technical relations between man and nature on the one hand and property relations on the other. Remove the archaic factors interfering with the untrammelled growth of the productive forces, abolish the shareholder and the speculator, regulate the vagaries of the market and the problems of the British economy will be resolved. Class relations cease to be fundamental to the structure of the economy and are defined in terms of the unequal distribution of wealth and income alone. Capitalism ceases to be a mode of production, or a world society, and socialism loses all connections to working-class self-activity. [9]
This truly superficial analysis finds its theoretical rationale in models which abolish the distinction between use-value and exchange-value and its political conclusions in the diverse reformist currents of Tribunite Left and the Communist Party. In the ‘Cambridge School’ renowned in academic circles for its attacks on the tattered neo-classical orthodoxy, and more popularly for its strident advocacy of import controls and a strong dose of economic autarchy, the descendants of Keynes and Stalin have been reconciled. [10] The return to the principles of classical political economy, leavened with a dose of Keynes at the level of Government policy proposals, marks this school out firmly from the ‘vulgar’ economics which still prevails in most bourgeois circles. It has, however, a tendency to explain inflation by trade-union militancy and wage-increases, and a strong penchant for the sort of ‘alternative economic strategies’ also to be found under the name of the Stuart Hollands of this world.
This may seem too speculative for some. Nor will this article be concerned with examining in any depth the economic theory of reformism, though it is a task that needs to be done. Nor is there any one-to-one correlation of political views and theoretical position. Certainly a theory cannot be judged by its politics alone. But the political conclusions may provide the clue to the real content of the criticisms of Marx.
The first part of this article, however, is devoted to restating what I consider to be the decisive features of Marx’s theory of value on which we must build a genuinely revolutionary critique of both the theory and the politics of the critics. [11] In particular I have sought to emphasise the unity of Marx’s work, the impossibility of separating out the labour theory of value for attack without undermining the essential structure of his analysis of capitalism. All that is distinctive about Marx’s discussion of how the working class is exploited, and thus of his entire understanding of the class nature of capitalist society, is lost if the theory of value is abandoned. Similarly, the ‘laws of motion’ of the capitalist system, the compulsion to accumulate, the concentration and centralisation of capitals, the displacement of living labour and the effects of the accompanying rise in the organic composition of capital (the ratio of dead to living labour), are all predicated on the theory value, and in particular, the theory of surplus value.
The second underlying theme of the first part is the nature of Marx’s critique of all ‘political economy’, the radical character of his break with Ricardo, which has been so obscured by defenders and critics of Marx alike. The commonplace understanding of the theory of value as essentially a theory of ‘relative prices’ must be rejected if the full depth and penetration of Marx’s own search into the hidden structure of capitalism is to be revealed. In the first part, therefore, I follow, if at times tangentially, the order of Capital, Volume One, itself. The concern is with such questions as ‘What is money?’, ‘What is price?’ ‘What is capital?’, questions which reach to the heart of capitalism, by asking precisely what sort of society it is; questions which the classical economists, including Ricardo, were unable to pose.
In the second part (to be published in IS 2:4), I will consider specific criticisms levelled at Marx by Ian Steedman and others. There I will argue that the critics have failed to understand the break between Ricardo and Marx, that they have an essentially Ricardian understanding of the nature of the labour theory of value as nothing but a theory of relative prices. I will spell out the differences between Marx’s method and the Neo-Ricardian tendency to see ‘value’ as nothing but a logical tool. Finally, I will consider the real issues involved in the infamous ‘transformation problem’ and the manner in which Marx deals with the determination of specific relative prices. Such a discussion presupposes an understanding of the nature of capital itself, of the basic social framework within which the complicated fluctuations of market-prices can be set. In Marx’s terms, in the terms of the order of Capital, the production of value and surplus value must be discussed before their circulation and distribution in the course of exchange.
 
The laws of value
The laws of value express the most general characteristics of capitalism as a system of commodity production. Private acts of production are regulated by the unplanned phenomenon of exchange. All societies require the expenditure of a certain amount of social labour on producing the goods necessary to the survival and reproduction of that society. Indeed the boundaries of a society can be defined by the extension of its division of labour, by the mutual interdependence of its members. In a society where the division of labour takes the form of a division between private property-owners this interdependence is secured through the mechanisms of exchange. [12]
The social character of labour is not given automatically but is dependent upon whether or not the things it produces are actually sold. Production is no longer immediately for use. We do not normally consume the things we make ourselves, nor do we simply hand them to a collective pool to be allocated according to social criteria such as need. The purpose of production is exchange and if goods are not sold they have no value. The measurement of that value is not a thing’s usefulness, or any natural property of the object, but its price, the amount of money we can get for it.
Hence Marx’s definition of the commodity as a contradictory combination of use-value and exchange-value. [13] Why contradictory? Because in such societies situations can arise in which a mass of commodities lie rotting unsold whilst simultaneously people starve because they haven’t got the money to buy them. Why a combination? Because while the commodity has no use-value for the person selling it, only an exchange-value, or a potential for sale, it must have a use-value or nobody else will be willing to buy it.
In such societies therefore labour still has a social character, is still a matter of producing what other people need or want. But this social character is not given immediately, is not determined by a conscious process of collective decision-making as it is in a primitive society where tasks are shared out in a manner which all can see. Rather the social allocation of labour to the production of use-values is established through the fluctuations of the market, through the rise and fall of prices which determine the movement of producers or firms from one sphere of production to another. The production of use-values is thus subordinate to the production of exchange-values, or, more accurately, values.
The value of a commodity can be regarded, at least as a first approximation, as its potential for exchange, as the property of the commodity which makes it exchangeable. At the most general level, things which are freely available, which require no human labour for their production, such as air, water or the fruits off trees will have no value in this sense. If exchange is seen as a social relation, simply, as a mechanism for assessing the social character of human labour, and for distributing the products of that labour, the exchangeable potential of commodity will be governed by the amount of labour contained in it. The value of the commodity thus expresses the quantity of human effort and sacrifice of time contained in it as a portion of the total expenditure of such effort and time in the society. [14]
At the same time, however, that value is not automatically recognised as such in the course of exchange. On the contrary if exchange is a mechanism by which that expenditure of labour is assessed according to its value to society, as socially necessary, then the prices of commodities must tend to deviate from their ‘values’. If the labour expended upon a commodity is of a lower than average productivity, if the workers in question are slower or less efficient than the others engaged in producing the commodity, then their labour will not be recognised as such on the market. In the ‘eyes of society’ it is wasted effort. If more has been produced than people are willing to buy, if more producers are engaged in the production of the commodity than society requires – then the price will fall and the least efficient producers will be forced out of operation.
There is a danger here. Marx defined the value of a commodity, or more precisely the magnitude of that value, as the quantity of socially necessary labour-time required to produce it. Socially necessary, however, has a double reference as the last paragraph suggests. It refers both to a comparison of individual acts of labour with other such acts engaged in producing the same commodity, and to a comparison of the total labour expended on the commodity with the requirements of society. Marx himself argues that if supply exceeds demand the labour expended by the most productive unit will determine the value regardless of the average, and that if demand exceeds supply then value will be regulated by the productivity of the least efficient producer. This variation of the value with the conditions of the market might suggest that it is the market itself which determines the value of the commodity, that the value is simply given by the price. This is not the case. The value can vary only within the limits set by the range in the conditions of production. It cannot rise higher than the quantity of labour-time expended by the least efficient or fall lower than the limit set by the most efficient. [15]
It is absolutely imperative to clearly distinguish value from exchange-value or the price of a commodity. [16] The former expresses the amount of socially necessary labour-time contained in the commodity; the latter, the quantity of use-values, or the sum of money which can be obtained in exchange by the owner of that commodity. The entire analysis contained in the laws of value of the manner in which production is regulated by exchange depends upon the disparity between the value contained in the commodity and the ‘value’ received by its owner. It is precisely the deviations of prices from values which govern the movement of producers, which encourage, indeed at times enforce, the departure of firms or units of capital from one sphere of production or industry and the entry of new firms etc. into other industries.
There is another danger, however. The laws of value can be taken to imply that when the movement of producers has ceased, when the fluctuations of supply and demand have worked themselves out, that prices will be proportional to values. The continual pursuit of the maximum return on the labour employed will at least tend towards a state in which the ‘rewards’ for the expenditure of different amounts of labour are equalised, in which no producer has any incentive to move from one sphere of production to another. There are two problems with this idea. The first concerns the fact that such a concept of general equilibrium only makes sense in a society of generalised commodity production, where all labour is engaged in production for exchange, and thus applies only to capitalism. Capitals, however, are concerned to maximise their returns, not on the amount of labour they employ invested. Equilibrium here, in the sense of a state in which no unit of capital has any incentive to move, necessarily involves an equalisation of rates of profit on capitals, not, directly at least, of ‘rewards’ to labour. This is the question which Marx considers only in Volume 3 of Capital, the source of what has come to be known as the transformation problem. It will be discussed in the second part of the article.
 
The reality of value
One of the most striking insights to be gained from reading Marx’s Capital concerns the reality of value. It is something which is produced, transferred, circulated, distributed and, not least, accumulated. Once these properties of value are understood the absurdity of interpretations which subsume value under exchange-value or regard it as a type price becomes evident. Nor can value as the product of labour be identified with the act of labour which creates it, or with a simple expenditure of labour-time. Least of all can value be regarded as merely logical tool, or a conceptual category. [17]
The reality of value is not easy to grasp. It is no more observable than gravity, although like gravity we can see its effects, and unlike gravity it assumes an independent bodily existence in money. As something which is not directly accessible, which does not appear as such the surface it demands a scientific investigation to establish its existence. This investigation will necessarily involve a process of abstraction from the concrete appearances precisely in order to establish the determinants of these appearances, their causes. Value therefore is an abstract category, but that does not mean that it is unreal, any more than gravity, evolution or the state are unreal. The failure to grasp the reality of value is thus a scientific failure, a failure to penetrate sufficiently deeply behind the appearances of the system which is capitalism.
The very fact that we need a scientific investigation of capitalism that political economy ever arose at all, says something fundamental about the nature of that society. [18] The reality of value is a purely social reality. The fact that value is unobservable, is hidden in the commodity, is simply an expression of the fact that the social relations of capitalist society are themselves hidden from the participants in that society. In a situation in which human beings relate to each other directly and not through the mediation of things, in which labour is allocated by a conscious process, the social character of labour is obvious. Correspondingly class relations or relations of exploitation are transparent. The feudal serf knows exactly what proportion of his labour-time is spent on maintaining his lord in luxury and what proportion is spent meeting his own needs. Under capitalism this division between necessary and surplus labour is concealed by the forms of value, by the manner in which labour-power is sold, and by the fact that profits are only realised through the sale of commodities.
If we visit a shop or a market all we can see is a thing with a price-tag. This price expresses the exchange-relation of the commodity with another commodity, money. It is measured simply by a quantity of a particular use-value, so many ounces of gold or so many pounds and pence. Value in other words appears only as a relation between two things, or two use-values. This relationship is in fact quite mysterious unless we understand that it is essentially a social relationship-predicated on a particular type of division of labour, or social organisation of production.
To explain exchange therefore we must look at production. The exchange of things must be grasped as an exchange of labour. What is exchanged is not simply the commodities taken in their physical aspect alone, is not simply the product as use-value. What is exchanged is also the commodity as a social substance, as the capacity to be exchanged, as a claim on the products of the labour of others. The seller is clearly losing something in exchange for the money he receives. This cannot be the use value of the commodity for it may have none for him. What is lost is thus the value of the commodity sold which must be clearly distinguished from the value of the commodity received in exchange, the value contained in the sum of money. The two quantities of value may or may not be equal.
To explain this value carried by the commodity we must examine the labour which produces it. Yet if we visit a factory we do not see any production of value going on, only the production of a mass of use-values. The combination of machines and human beings performing a wide variety of different activities has no apparent connection to the prices of the commodities in the shops. What connection there is is established through a costing operation which seems to bear no inherent relation to the character of the labour-process. There is little it seems in principle to distinguish the activity we observe from the labour of slaves building the pyramids other than the technology or the number of machines littered about. The social character of the production process is no more apparent than the social character of the exchange-relation.
Value is always a quantity of dead labour, labour which has been preserved, embodied, in the form of a commodity. The accumulation of value is thus always an accumulation of dead labour, whether it be in the form of a stock of commodities waiting for sale, means of production, or money. It is not simply a matter of dead labour, however. The objectification of labour in things occurs in all societies. Only with the generalisation of exchange does the objectification of labour occur through the alienation of labour, or the creation of value.
Value therefore is labour which is embodied in a commodity destined for sale and thereby separated, alienated from the labourers who produce it. It is thus a specific social relation, expressing both the labour expended on the commodity as a portion of the total social labour, and the manner in which that relationship between the different acts of private labour is secured. [19] Only in the course of sale does this value appear, and take on an independent existence. Hence the necessity of the realisation of value, when the value contained in the commodity as a mere potential is transformed into another commodity or money. The production of value and the realisation of value are necessarily connected but must be distinguished. The value may be realised for more or less than its actual quantity.
 
The social character of abstract labour
The task is only partly to reduce the commodity to the labour which creates it. That was achieved by the classical economists. The more in important objective which Marx set himself was to examine the manner ex in which labour is alienated, in which dead labour is preserved, exchanged and consumed, the different forms of value. Only thereby could Marx investigate the specific social character of the labour itself, something that Ricardo could not grasp because he saw only a natural, technical process of production.
A commodity with a single market-price has only a single value. Already in this idea we have an abstraction from the wide varied different types of labour engaged in producing that commodity. Exchange therefore serves to equalise the labour of different skills, efficiency and intensity spent on producing say coats, as a single quantity of socially necessary labour-time. As such, as a quantity of value, the labour expended upon coats is also directly comparable with the labour expended upon potatoes, houses and all other things to the extent that they have also become commodities and can be bought and sold. This labour which is related to all other labour through exchange is abstract labour.
The abstraction is as real as the value which is its consequence. It is not something that occurs in the heads of economists but it performed by the mechanisms of exchange themselves. These serve to equate the mass of different concrete labours with each other as expenditures of social labour-time at the same time as they measure the mass of heterogeneous use-values against each other as quantities of a single commodity, money.
To the distinction between the use-value and value of a commodity there corresponds the distinction between concrete and abstract labour. The difference is not between two types of activity but between the material and social aspects of the same activity. For Ricardo the labour which governs the value of commodities has no social characteristics, and is in principle no different from the labour of the stone-age. Marx right from the beginning poses the question of the type of labour which can only obtain a social recognition by taking the form of the exchange-value of commodities. Labour which is itself transformed by the requirements of production for exchange, which is subordinated to the dictates of the market, which is assessed only as a given quantitative portion of total social labour-time by mechanisms of which it is scarcely conscious, is abstracted or alienated labour.
Value as the product of abstract labour is a social phenomena over which the producers have lost all control. The labour of human beings is carried by things, commodities and money, and value appears as the natural property of those things. The coercive character of the laws of value discussed in the last section presupposes this ghoulish power of dead labour, the domination of human activity by the acquisition and exchange of things. When labour itself becomes a commodity, is bought and sold as a mere capacity to labour, the subordination of human activity to the value which is its creation is complete. [20] Here the abstraction of the expenditure of time and effort from the personality of the labourer is fully accomplished with the real distinction between the sale of his labour-power by the worker and his actual performance of labour under the command of capital.
 
Money
The necessary counterpart to abstract labour is money. [21] If abstract labour involves the equalisation of private labours as social labour all measurable in units of labour-time, money is the means by which those connections are established. It is the necessary result and precondition of a generalisation of exchange-relations. With money exchange-value as the relation of two use-values, as the measure of the value of one commodity in a quantity of another (l table = 2 chairs) becomes the relation of one commodity to all other commodities. This is measured by the quantity of a thing with the unique social property of being exchangeable for all things (l table = 2 ounces of gold).
Money as the ‘universal equivalent form’ of value is the final development of the fact that value exists only in the form of exchange-value appearing only in the exchange of one commodity for another. With money we are no longer concerned with any particular act of barter or any individual value but with the social relations between all units of production, with value in general.
It is not money that renders the commodities commensurable. Quite the contrary. Because all commodities, as values, are objectified human labour and therefore in themselves commensurable, their values can be communally measured in one and the same specific commodity, and this commodity can be converted into the common measure of their values, that is, into money. Money as a measure of value is the necessary form of appearance of the measure of value which is immanent in commodities, namely labour-time. (Capital, Vol. 1, p. 188)
Marx’s theory of money is both one of the most important and one of the most neglected parts of his work. For the classical economists money was either a mere technical device or a symbol of no real significance for the process of production. [22] The failure to grasp the social character of abstract labour goes hand in hand with the neglect of its counterpart in the realm of exchange. As Marx comments:
All commodities can be reduced to labour as their common element. What Ricardo does not investigate is the specific form in which labour manifests itself as the common element of commodities. That is why he does not understand money. That is why in his work the transformation of commodities into money appears to be something merely formal which does not penetrate deeply into the very essence of capitalist production ... Ricardo does not sufficiently differentiate between labour as it is represented in use-values or in exchange-values. [23]
The consequence of the neglect of money is the inability to grasp value in general as the product of the total social labour expended upon commodities. The relationship between labour and prices is considered only on the basis of individual commodities. Consequently the deviation of prices from values in any particular case poses insuperable problems for Ricardo’s theory of value. The social relations of production as a whole are not grasped, and as a result the absolute amount of value in the system and its expression in money have no meaning for Ricardo, or indeed for his latter-day followers.
More generally the social reality of value distinct from both labour which produces it and the prices in which it appears is understood. It can be argued that only with the emergence of money does value fully exist, and this in a double sense. Firstly only then can abstract labour, as the source of value, become the general form of labour, can labour be totally dependent on the exchange of commodities. Secondly, with money, value itself acquires an independent objective existence separate from the particular commodities produced by human labour. With money, value is ‘realised’ in a commodity whose function is to act as pure ‘value’, and in which it can be preserved and stored and thereby accumulated.
There is no space here to give an adequate account of Marx’s analysis of money or the manner in which it provides the foundation for his whole analysis of capitalism in terms of the production circulation and distribution of value and surplus value. All that can be done is to stress four points in particular which are especially relevant to the themes of this article.
 
1. Prices and value. Marx’s analysis entails that there will always be a definite relation between the sum of money-prices and the sum of value or the total quantity of labour contained in the raw materials and machinery used up and the new products created (or the sum of dead and living labour) in any period of production. The terms of this relation will change with the value of money or the ratio at which money exchanges for all other commodities. It will for example be greatly altered in a period of rapid inflation. If money serves as the measure of value, however, such a relation must always exist and be in principle calculable. [24]
A given quantity of money or a particular price thus always represents a particular sum of value, a definite portion of the total social labour-time. Any commodity thus has a dual relationship to abstract labour, a duality which has not always been fully understood. On the one hand it is itself a quantity of value, referring it back to the labour actually engaged in its production. On the other, it has a price, and thereby is exchangeable for a particular sum of money or a claim on the total product of human labour. Marx does not suppose, contrary to common report, that these two quantities of value will normally be equal, that equal values generally exchange. [25] Again we see the necessity of strictly distinguishing between value a5nd exchange-value, or the production of value and its realisation in the course of sale. Indeed it is possible for things which contain no labour and therefore have no value to be exchanged. Here ‘price ceases altogether to express value’. [26] Land is the most obvious and important example.
The sale of land, or of commodities whose price exceeds their value, can only mean that all other commodities sell at a price below their value. In the aggregate these deviations can only cancel out. Abandon this idea and Marx’s whole analysis of the necessary relationship between total value and the sum of prices collapses.
 
2. The fetishism of commodities. Once value is grasped as a social property which has itself to be produced it becomes obvious that only human labour can create it. Material objects may possess a value, indeed in general value will be preserved only by its embodiment in a commodity of money, but they cannot be its source. By contrast Marx insists that labour is not the sole source of ‘wealth’ or use-values and that both nature and machines can contribute to the production of these. [27]
To attribute the powers of human activity to inanimate things, such as land, machines or money, is to exhibit what Marx termed ‘reification’ – a consequence of the fetishism of commodities. As such it constitutes the appearances of the system, the standpoint of the individual landowner, capitalist or banker for whom land, machines and money do indeed seem to have the power of creating value. They are able not only to replace their own value (which in the case of land is anyway non-existent if uncultivated) but seem to have the power of increasing it, receiving a share of total surplus value as rent, profit and interest. [28]
The fetishism of commodities arises out of the reality that value exists as a property of things, of the fact that, as Marx puts it, capitalism is about ‘material relations between persons and social relations between things’ (Capital 1, p. 166) or the ‘personification of things’ and the ‘reification’ of human activity. [29] With money this total inversion of reality, this ‘topsy-turvey world’ is complete. Value, a quantity of labour-time or human activity, takes on a bodily existence, is transformed into a thing which is nothing but value. With money the sole apparent measure of value appears as the sole source of value. It appears as if money no longer stems from the fact that commodities have a value but that commodities have a value because they are measured by money. [30]
The theory of alienated labour, the theory of commodity fetishism, and the labour theory of value are all aspects of the same theory.[31] They are inseparable. Removed from the labour theory of value, all talk of fetishism becomes a mere critique of illusions, of ideas in people’s heads when in fact it is the fetishism that is real. Similarly taken in isolation the notion of alienation becomes the moralistic ‘utopian’ critique of capitalism that it has so often been taken to be.
 
3. Contradictions and crises. Money, Marx observes repeatedly, resolves the contradiction of use-value and value within the commodity only by reproducing it at a higher level. [32] The commodity as use-value now confronts not another commodity as in barter but money, as pure objectified value. With money we have the generalisation of exchange-relations, the solution to the inherent difficulties of barter which all historians of money recognise. Hence the positive side of money, resolving the ‘contradictions’. The negative side, which the historians completely ignore, is that with money we have a separation of sale and purchase, the fact that you can sell a commodity without immediately buying another. Money in other words can be withdrawn from circulation, disrupting it in the process. With this, Say’s Law, unquestioned by Ricardo, is thrown out of the window and Marx anticipates Keynes by over 60 years. [33]
Money and the generalisation of exchange bring with them the inherent anarchy of the system whereby private labours are related to each other as ‘social labour’ only through the unregulated chaos of the ‘market’. The extended dependence on exchange only accentuates the consequences of a breakdown of that exchange. Workers are no longer peasants who can eat the food they cannot sell. On the one hand, prices serve as the immediate regulators of production as the equilibrating mechanisms acclaimed by Adam Smith and the textbooks of today. On the other, the movement of producers which they provoke continually disrupts all tendencies to equilibrium (a bit like a swing which once started never stops, or the perpetual motion-cyclical in form-of capitalism). The coercive character of the laws of value only begins to apply in this context as they
assert themselves in spite of anarchy, in and through anarchy ... and enforce themselves on the individual producers as compulsory laws of competition. [34]
With money therefore we have the possibility of crises inherent in the very separation of sale and purchase, and really located right back in the contradiction between the utility of a commodity and the fact that it has to be sold. As Marx insists, a proper analysis of crises must consider their real roots in the social character of the production process, in the conflict between the enormous growth of the productive forces under capitalism, and the limits set by capital itself as a social relation. The effect of the equilibrium models in such common use among economists is to abolish these contradictory effects of money-largely by ignoring the social necessity of money itself, as the seam which holds the fragmented society of private property together. [35] In this sense Marx is not an equilibrium theorist at all.
In his criticism of Say’s Law Marx writes of the manner in which the separation of sale and purchase takes the form of a vast over-expansion of production in response to the widening opportunities of exchange made possible by the existence of money, an over-expand which finds its limits eventually in the underlying necessity of a balance between sales and purchases. The crisis is described as the forcible unity of elements which have become separated. In other words, it is the crisis itself that serves as the equilibrating mechanism, one, which like the swing, always goes too far.
It is not, as the bourgeois economists suggest, the crisis which is disequilibrium, generated by the failure of prices to adjust, or the market to work freely. Both Marx and the bourgeois economists see the ‘market’ and the movement of prices as a mechanism for the adjustment of supply and demand, or of the regulation of ‘private’ acts of production by the demands of society, or most fundamentally in Marx the manner in which private, concrete and disparate acts of labour are assessed as social labour, as so much socially-necessary labour-time.
For the bourgeois, however, following Adam Smith this ‘hidden hand’ operating through competition is essentially harmonious, the pursuit of individual self-interest serving the interests of all. For Marx, the whole process is riven with contradictions, between use-value and value, private labour and social labour, concrete labour and abstract labour. It is a system in which social relations are established only through the exchange of things, a system of alienation in which the powers of human beings become the properties of objects, a system out of control, revolutionising human existence but demanding the creation of socialism if its contradictions are to be resolved, its lunacies ended. [36]
The interpretations of the labour theory of value taken over by the critics serve to remove the contradictions at the heart of capitalism. Their failure to understand money, and the role played by money in Marx’s theory of value, epitomises their total confusion over the nature of Marx’s critique both of ‘political economy’ and the capitalist system which it reflected. The use of equilibrium models in which money has only a nominal or symbolic significance, exactly in the spirit of Ricardo, in itself obscures the crisis-prone nature of the system, the manner in which the system can only correct itself at an immense human and social cost.
 
4. Money and capital. The analysis of money as value shorn of its moorings in human activity and moving under its own steam, is the basis for an account of the nature of capital. For Ricardo the categories of capital and profit are defined quite independently of the category of value, as prior to the social relations of exchange. Capital is the stock of machinery or means of production analysed only as accumulated or dead labour and thus as something with prehistoric origins. Distribution is considered in terms of the ‘net product’, or total surplus over and above that required for replacing the stock, as a collection of physical use-values. These are then assumed to be divided up between wages and profits according to criteria which are not really justified but are effectively governed by the assumption that labour only receives a subsistence wage. The fact that wages and profits necessarily take a monetary form, that they are distributed in the course of exchange, has no place. Capital itself becomes a thing, a mere natural relation between values, and thus something which has no history and an eternal future. [37] This despite the fact that machines are considered as quantities of dead labour which is not even acknowledged by the more ‘vulgar’ economists.
The categories of the commodity, value, exchange-value and money are all presupposed in Marx’s analysis of capital. Capital first appears as a sum of money in search of more money, as a quantity of value which seeks more value. In part only is this an historical analysis resting on the emergence of capital out of mercantile or trading capital. [38] More decisively it expresses the actual structure of capitalism as a mode of production. The ceaseless pursuit of profit presupposes the existence of money, of value external to each unit of capital which can be seized and accumulated without limit. The unprecedented dynamism of capitalism has its origins here, although it is only when capital turns to production and revolutionises its forces that it really takes effect.
All previous types of exploitation rested on the consumption of use-values, on the satisfaction of the exploiters’ wants. With money these wants become insatiable. Greed becomes a dominant human passion, money is fetishised as the supremely desirable use-value. This alone does not give us capital however:
Use-values must therefore never be treated as the immediate aim of the capitalist; nor must the profit on any single transaction. His aim is rather the unceasing movement of profit-making. This boundless drive for enrichment, this passionate chase after value is common to the capitalist and the miser, but where the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser. The ceaseless augmentation of value which the miser seeks to attain by saving his money from circulation is achieved by the more acute capitalist by means of throwing his money again and again into circulation. (Capital 1, pp. 254–55)
This self-expansion of value is a complete mystery. With capital value really takes off and dead labour acquires the truly occult ability to regenerate itself. This is absurd, however it may appear to the banker lending out sums of money which return grotesquely enlarged. Value can no more be its own creator than God or money.
The problem therefore is to explain this increase of value, the origins of surplus-value. Adam Smith, and many textbook authors who only recognise profits when they are monopoly or exceptional profits (otherwise they become a type of cost), explain it in terms of unequal exchange or imperfect competition: as something which arises in the course of exchange, by fraud or trickery, or simply by selling a thing for more than its value. The difficulty here is simple. How can the exchange or distribution of value itself serve to increase the total sum of value? If one commodity is sold above its value, another must be sold below. In the aggregate the capitalist class cannot cheat itself and therefore cannot exist on this basis.
At this point for the first time Marx assumes that commodities exchange at their values. [39] It is an assumption made solely for the purpose of considering the essential nature of surplus-value, with the effect of isolating the specific exchange relation between capital and labour. Whilst it does not underlie the whole theory of value as so many suppose, it is only with this assumption that the real secret of capitalism can be exposed.
This is not the place to elaborate the decisive innovation made by Marx in clearly distinguishing the value of labour-power, the commodity which the worker sells, and the value which the labour actively engaged in production creates. The secret of capitalism lies in the fact that a commodity, labour-power, whether purchased at its value or not, has a use-value, labour, with the unique capacity of creating value in the course of its consumption. It could thus be said that value does have its origins in use-value, and thus a material source, but this is a very socially specific type of labour, a fact that must not be forgotten. Capital thus rests on the sale of labour-power as a commodity, which in turn presupposes that labour has been denied access to the means of production, that a class has been created which owns nothing but its labour-power. With this we are thrown into the real bloody history of the origins of capitalism, a tale of class-struggle and revolution, which no bourgeois economists, be they Neo-Classical or Neo-Ricardian, can even dare to admit lest it blow their mathematically beautiful towers of paper skyhigh.
The exchange of capital and labour is only superficially an exchange, and scarcely the exchange of equivalents between equal property-owners as described by the economists.
The exchange of equivalents, the original operation with which we started, is now turned round in such a way that there is only an apparent exchange, since, firstly, the capital which is exchanged for labour is itself merely a portion of the product of the labour of others which has been appropriated without an equivalent; and, secondly, this capital must not only be replaced by its producer, the worker, but replaced together with an added surplus. The relation of exchange between capitalist and worker becomes a mere semblance belonging only to the process of circulation, it becomes a mere form which is alien to the content of the transaction itself and merely mystifies it. (Capital 1, pp. 729–30)
But there is a sense in which this form is not ‘mere’ as Marx goes on to argue. It is the form taken by exploitation under capitalism and thereby serves to distinguish it from all other class societies. It is wage-labour we are talking about, not slave-labour, and labour which is paid in kind provides no basis for capitalism even with a collection of state-capitals. Only the theory of value can explain both the reality and the manner in which it appears, not just the existence of exploitation but reason why workers do not immediately, or always, see it as such.
 
Some definitions of capital
I have argued that the labour theory of value is just a fuller expression of the theory of alienation and the theory of commodity fetishism. It should now be apparent that it is also the basis for Marx’s account of exploitation and thus of his whole analysis of the character of classes and class struggle under capitalism. Abandon the theory of value and one is left either with no theory of exploitation at all or the simple assertion that labour does not receive all of the product. [40] The latter is scarcely a matter of contention and simply leads to moralistic arguments about whether it should, or not. One can follow Ricardo and reduce surplus value to a mere physical quantity, a surplus-product, and thus abolish all that is specific to capitalism as distinct from feudal and slave societies (and indeed socialism – given that surplus-product is defined as the excess of the product over that required for the subsistence of the workers!). Or one can follow the vulgar economists and engage in futile attempts to explain profits as the reward for the productivity of machinery or the sacrifice of capitalists not consuming all of their millions.
Capital is not just a product of labour. Many a bourgeois has said as much. Capital is the product of labour which has become embodied in a commodity and congealed in money, which has taken the form of value divorced from its own creators. Capital is dead labour, alienated labour which has come to dominate living labour. It is not a thing but a process of production but such means monopolised by one class and actually utilised to subordinate another. [41] This domination is not given simply by the nature of the technology, by the character of the machines, but is indeed contained in capital as simply a sum of money, a sum of value, used to purchase labour-power on the market.
Capitalism is, and has always been, a system full of paradoxes. Each individual capital is engaged in a limitless pursuit of value, of money external to each unit of the system, a pursuit which presupposes the existence of exchange, competition, and thus ‘many capitals’. Yet the constraints of the system drive each capital to the point where it will cannibalise other capitals, where growth occurs by means of war, conquest, and violence as well as ‘peaceful’ trade; and where the concentration and centralisation of capitals reaches the level of the nation-state, and the ‘planned’ economy, only to reproduce the anarchy of the system on a world-scale. [42]
It is a system which remains dependent on living labour, whilst continually seeking to free itself from that dependence, to mechanise, automate at all costs. The pace of technical change reaches unprecedented speeds, disrupting whole industries, intensifying the competitive pressures, wiping out even large units of capital or, at least, enforcing even greater concentration under the aegis of the state. The rise in the productivity of labour multiplies enormously the mass of use-values in existence, but can only serve to lower the value of each commodity (the amount of labour-time socially necessary for its production). This is the fundamental contradiction of capitalism. An increase in the amount of dead labour in the system, in the ratio of machinery, or means of production to living labour, will serve to increase the productivity of labour, or the amount of use-values produced in any period of time. It cannot increase the amount of value created in the same period, an amount given simply by the size of the labour-force and the length of the working day. [43]
Hence such fundamental distinctions, introduced only by Marx and constituting again a radical break with the classical economists, as: the difference between constant and variable capital (between that capital used to purchase means of production the value of which enters into the commodities they help to produce but which cannot create any new or surplus value – and that capital used to purchase labour-power which alone has the power of increasing itself), or the difference between absolute and relative surplus value (the former obtained simply by extending the length of the working day, the latter through a reduction in the value of labour-power, or the proportion of that day devoted to necessary rather than surplus labour).
Neither of these two basic distinctions are to be found in any version of bourgeois economics. Even Neo-Ricardian economics obscures the difference between constant and variable capital, as it returns to Ricardo’s old emphasis on the secondary distinction between fixed and circulating capital. Confusing use-value and value, the critics of Marx are unable to grasp what is absolutely distinctive about the human contribution to the production process, to see that the vast expansion of use-values is accompanied by a ‘devaluation’ of each commodity. Isolating technology from the social relations of capital they can perceive only the ‘positive’ contribution of machinery, its productive role. They fail to see that capital is interested not in ‘use-values’ but ‘value’, not in a quantity of surplus-product, however gargantuan, but in a quantity of surplus value, in the monetary return it can obtain for those goods in exchange – a monetary return the basis of which in surplus labour-time is obscured by the character of money but is always there.
The fundamental contradiction between use-value and value finds its most far-reaching manifestation deep within capitalism, in the dual character of the labour process as the production of both use-value and value. The conflict between the two aspects is perhaps better known as the conflict between the growth of the forces of production and the social relations of capitalism. The real basis of the crises made possible by the existence of money lies here. Capitalism discovers its own limits in the limits set to the values of commodities by the fact that they have to be exchanged. In seeking to overcome this limit by increasing the productivity of labour and utilising technical change capitalism accentuates the problem, increasing the mass of use-values and acclerating their devaluation. [44]
A failure to distinguish between use-value and value will thus have the most far-reaching and incalculable consequences. With the orthodox neo-classical economics of the textbooks these are not too difficult to discern. As Rubin so clearly puts it, they either (1) derive social phenomena directly from technical phenomena, or value from use-value, such as capital’s ability to yield profit from the role of the means of production, or (2) they derive technical phenomena directly from social phenomena, e.g. the power of machinery to increase the productivity of labour is attributed to capital as a class relation. [45]
The latter-day Neo-Ricardians are nowhere near so crude as this. On the contrary they insist on rigidly distinguishing between capital defined as machinery and means of production and capital as private property or a sum of money the possession of which enables its owner to receive a profit. [46] Some even claim that this is an essentially Marxist distinction and it would appear that they are merely echoing the remarks of Rubin which I have just summarised. Nobody has done more than Rubin however to stress that capital really does appear as the property of things, as the intrinsic power of means of production. For the Neo-Ricardians Capital is either a thing, means of production, at best seen simply as a quantity of ‘dated labour’, as dead labour in Ricardo’s sense, and thus something which has always and will always exist; or Capital is merely a matter of private property, something superficial which does not reach into the heart of the production process, something which is in no way subject to the ‘laws of motion’ discussed by Marx, and which provides no basis for understanding capitalism as a mode of production, as the world system we are still confronted with today.
This feature of their work appears most clearly in their discussion of distribution of the product between wages and profits. Here we are right back to Ricardo and the procedure just discussed. Wages and profits are ‘explained’ by abstracting from their monetary form-and thus from exchange, and postulating a physical quantity of use-values as the ‘net product’. This is then divided up according to criteria which are either quite arbitrary or have a seemingly radical aura such as ‘class struggle’. The main achievement of the Neo-Ricardians m academic terms has been to have distribution characterised as ‘exogenous’ as something given prior to, and thus inexplicable within economic analysis. [47] The bourgeois definition of the economic is not challenged by this, merely limited in scope. There is a failure here to analyse distribution as, in the first place, a distribution of the conditions of production, as a division between classes, one controlling the means of production and the other owning only its labour-power.[48] As a consequence the social character of the production process is not recognised, nor the manner in which surplus value is extracted in the course of forcing the worker to work longer than is necessary to replace her labour power.
Matters go deeper than this however. Surplus value can only be understood as the form taken by the surplus-product in a monetary economy. The specific social character of the capitalist production-process stems from the fact that it is simultaneously a production of values and use-values. With the abolition of exchange, value and with it abstract labour disappear and wage-labour is nothing but the reality of abstract labour under capitalism. This moreover is but one aspect of the general inability to grasp the significance of the fact that we live in what is a monetary economy through to its roots, and of the general Neo-Ricardian tendency to collapse exchange-value into use-values. As so often Marx has said it before, commenting on Ricardo that:
Money and exchange itself (circulation) therefore appear only as formal elements in his economics; and although, according to him, economics is concerned only with exchange value, profit etc. appears there only as a percentage share of the product, which happens just as much on the basis of slavery. He never investigated the forms of the mediation. [49]
Neo-Ricardian economics has been subject to a variety of interpretations. The equations can be closed in a variety of ways, and a whole number of other sets of equations or theories can be added on to provide a more comprehensive ‘picture’. In particular the use of Sraffa for a ‘general equilibrium’ theory of prices tends to be supplemented by an essentially Keynesian model to deal with the ‘dynamics’ of the system, or monetary phenomena. These are complicated matters which cannot be adequately dealt with here. I would just like to conclude with two observations.
The first concerns the fact that, whereas in all bourgeois economics the theory of value is defined as a matter of ‘relative prices’, filling an academic box on its own, to which other boxes labelled ‘money’, ‘aggregate demand’, ‘trade-cycles’ can be ‘added on’, piled on top of each other in higgledy-piggledy fashion – in Marx’s Capital such divisions do not exist. The theory of value captures the deeply hidden reality of the social relations of capitalism. It expresses the underlying structure of the whole system. Money, for example, is not something that can be ‘added on’ to the equations, but is central to the whole theory of value, and the manner in which it is simultaneously the theory of alienated labour, commodity fetishism, and capitalist exploitation.
The second very important thing about Marx’s theory of value which must be stressed, is that the notion of contradiction lies at its heart. In the most radical versions of Neo-Ricardian theory, all of the contradictions of the system are subsumed into a single conflict struggle between classes over the distribution of the product. It is absolutely wrong to suppose that Marx had a similar view. The contradiction at the root of the system, appears in Capital long before the entrance of the working class, or the sale of labour-power. It is located in the commodity as both use-value and exchange-value, for as Lenin observed:
In this very simple phenomenon (in the cell of bourgeois society) analysis reveals all the contradictions (or the germ of all the contradictions) of modern society. [50]
The contradictions of capitalism are really not difficult to observe: the fact that production is for exchange rather than immediately for use; for profit rather than for human need. They are apparent in the capitalism of today - a world in which mountains of butter coexist with mass famine in the ‘Third World’, in which the introduction of new technology produces mass redundancies and fear and insecurity for the workforce which remains, in which tens of millions are unemployed while the various states cut back on schools, hospitals and housing. For all this the Neo-Ricardians blame a struggle over ‘distribution’, the class struggle. But it is not the working class that is to blame for the crisis, it rests instead with the system whose contradictions will only be resolved with its destruction. It is the labour theory of value that provides the necessary basis for fully understanding it.

Notes
1. This is by no means generally acknowledged. Standard works such as M. Dobb, Theories of Value and Distribution (CUP 1973), R. Meek, Studies in the Labour Theory of Value (L&W 1973, 2nd ed.) and M. Howard and J. King, The Political Economy of Marx (Longmans 1975), all tend to obscure the difference between Marx and Ricardo’s Labour Theory of Value. This is located by them in such areas as the sale of labour-power, or the analysis of capital, but Ricardo’s failures here are not related to the fundamental character of his whole conception of value particularly his understanding of the very nature of price and money. Marx’s repeated criticism of Ricardo’s neglect of the ‘form of value are turned into a matter of the latter’s neglect of history which is only part of the point. Althusser in Reading Capital (NLB 1973) is quite correct to criticise this view of Marx as merely ‘Ricardo set in motion’ (p. 92) and to emphasise Marx s understanding of the ‘structure’ of capitalism, but his own discussion of the matter is so up in the air that we lose all sight of Ricardo, and the break in ‘problematic’ becomes quite mystical.
2. A. Cutler, B. Hindess, P. Hirst, A. Hussein; Marx’s Capital and Capitalism Today 1 (London 1977). See the review by Alex Callinicos in IS 2:2.
3. Value and Price in the Marxian System (International Economic Papers, No. 2), which is a far more revealing work than the essay included in E. von Böhm-Bawerk, Karl Marx and the Close of his System (1977 London). Von Bortkiewicz was the first explicit Ricardian to take on Marx and to criticise Marx s failure to use the method of simultaneous equations. His conclusions anticipate many of the recurrent features of Neo-Ricardian work, especially the overwhelming emphasis placed on wage-rises as a cause of a fall in the rate of profit.
4. For a criticism of Robinson cf. R. Rosdolsky, The Making of Marx’s Capital, Ch. 33 (London 1977), who captures the relationship between her ‘populist’ politics and her theory very succinctly.
5. If you are interested in these questions have a look at M. Morishima, Marx’s Economics (CUP 1973), which is a truly astonishing example of how to read Marx through mathematical blinkers and not understand the point of it at all.
6. P. Samuelson, Transforming the Marxian Notion of Exploitation, Journal of Economic Literature, June 1971.
7. I. Steedman, Marx after Sraffa (NLB 1977). Sraffa’s own work, The Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities (CUP 1960), has had an astonishing history. Originally it seems designed as a critique of orthodox neo-classical theory in its own terms using the most abstract of equilibrium models. It was then taken up by CP economists such as Dobb and Meek as a return to classical principles and a vindication of Marx. Dobb jointly edited with Sraffa the works of Ricardo and his later work strongly bears his influence. Meek’s Introduction to the 2nd ed. of his book (op. cit.) states his belief that ‘our Sraffa-type sequence of models does essentially the same set of jobs which the Marxian theory was designed to do.’ This is true only to the extent that both isolate conditions of production and the distribution between wages and profits as the determinants of prices of production when rates of profits are equalised. Sraffa’s work can thus be regarded as a purely technical exercise which sheds light on a number of specific problems concerning the effects of distribution on relative prices. It can in no way serve as an alternative basis for a theory of value in the Marxist sense. Steedman’s use of Sraffa for a full-blooded attack on the labour theory of value is a quite recent turn of events, indicative perhaps of the changing political climate. The ground for it is however laid by Sraffa’s own isolation of ‘technical relations’ or the physical conditions of production from the social relations of capitalism. This undermines any claims that Sraffa might have to be a Marxist although it is worth noting that according to Joan Robinson ‘Piero has always stuck close to pure unadulterated Marx and regards my amendments with suspicion’ (Review of Meek (op. cit.) in Monthly Review, Dec. 1977, Vol. 29, No. 7). The best summary of Sraffa in Marxist terms is in a chapter in R. Meek’s Economics and Ideology and other Essays (London 1967).
8. Steedman, op. cit., p. 207.
9. This is a very sweeping summary. For a useful selection of quotations from various Neo-Ricardian authors, especially Joan Robinson, and an elaboration of the points in this paragraph cf. F. Roosevelt, Cambridge Economics as Commodity Fetishism in Review of Radical Political Economics (USA), Vol. 7, pp. 1–32; for a shorter but more hard-hitting version try M. Lebowitz, The Current Crisis of Economic Theory in Science and Society, Vol. 37, No. 4, Winter 1973–4. Lebowitz describes Neo-Ricardianism as the ‘Economic Theory of the Technostructure’.
10. Just examine the dedication, consider the affiliations of its editorial board, and the history of its patrons, in any issue of the Cambridge Journal of Economics.
11. The most important influences on my reading of Marx have been the works of Rosdolsky (op. cit.) and I. Rubin Essays on Marx’s Theory of Value (Black and Red, Detroit 1972). This and my approach in the first section of this article will lay me open to the charge of ‘fundamentalism’ used to bracket Rosdolsky with such thinkers as Mandel and Yaffe. To the extent that all three fail to develop Marx’s categories in the face of the changing nature of world capitalism, and all three are unable to grasp the state-capitalist nature of Russia, the accusation is justified (cf. C. Harman, review of Late Capitalism in IS 2:1). Fine and Harris though are wrong to treat fundamentalism and Neo-Ricardianism as somehow errors of equal weight in opposite directions. Their middle position becomes very wobbly at times (Controversial Issues in Marxist Economic Theory, Socialist Register 1977). There is all the difference at this level of having some grasp of Marx’s categories and having no grasp at all, the difference between a revolutionary, however dogmatic, and a reformist. To the extent that this work has an excavatory character, simply reasserting a tradition which has been lost, it too fails to develop Marx s categories, a fact of which I am all too conscious.
12. Marx, Letter to Kugelmann, July 1868, M/E Selected Correspondence (Moscow 1975). It is worth emphasising following the last footnote that it is the autonomy of the units of capital that matters here, not their character as private property, a point that Engels stresses very strongly in the Critique of the Erfurt Programme (see K. Marx & F. Engels, Werke, Berlin 1963, Vol. 22, pp. 231–2, quoted in P. Binns, The Theory of State Capitalism, IS 1:74, p. 22).
13. K. Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, Ch. 1 (Penguin, London 1976). The rest of this section and the whole of the next two can be taken as a commentary on Parts One and Two of Capital 1. References in detail except for a few particular points would be superfluous.
14. M. Kidron, Marx’s Theory of Value in Capitalism and Theory (Pluto 1974) has a brief but useful discussion along these lines.
15. K. Marx, Capital, Vol. 3 (Moscow 1972), pp. 182–86. This is a complicated matter. I have preferred Marx’s definition but there are problems with it. Both Rosdolsky (op. cit., pp. 89–95) and Rubin (op. cit., ch. 16 & 17) have an extended analysis of the issues at stake.
16. Marx’s own intellectual history reveals how he moved from the essentially Ricardian identification or rather confusion of the concepts of value and exchange-value (distinguished from market prices) in both the Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (Moscow 1971) and the Grundrisse (Penguin 1973) to a clear distinction between the two in Capital 1 (pp. 126–8 & p. 152). Exchange-value is always in Capital seen as the relation of one commodity to another and is measured in the quantity of the other use-value for which the commodity exchanges. Price is thus merely a developed form of exchange-value measured in a quantity of money. This leaves us with a notion of value as something absolute, an inherent property of the commodity but as Marx commented, any particular value is still the expression of a social relation. Marx defends Ricardo against the attacks of the ‘value is only relative’ school with the comment: ‘He has reduced the apparent relativity which these things (diamonds, pearls etc.) possess to the true relations hidden behind their appearance, namely their relativity as mere expressions of human labour.’ (Capital 1, p. 177).
17. This is the position usually adopted by those who enjoy playing with the equations including several who want to defend the theory of value against Steedman’s attacks; e.g. P. Armstrong, A. Glyn and J. Harrison, In Defence of Value (Capital and Class 5, Summer 1978) and M. Morishima & G. Catephores, Value, Exploitation and Growth (London 1978). To the extent that these authors are prepared to take Steedman on his own ground they provide a useful service. They are not however capable of really challenging the Neo-Ricardian interpretation of the theory of value which they obviously share to a great extent. My views on their overall understanding of value will emerge in the course of the article.
18. See the discussion in Capital 1, pp. 166–76, comparing societies of commodity production with other earlier societies and with socialism.
19. On value as a social relation which necessarily takes the form of a relation between things nobody is more insightful than Rubin (op. cit.).
20. See the excellent account of abstract labour generally in L. Colletti, From Rousseau to Lenin (NLB 1972), pp. 82–88.
21. The neglect of money as the counterpart of abstract labour vitiates Rubin’s otherwise painstaking account of abstract labour (op. cit., ch. 14). As a result he gets bogged down in trying to distinguish abstract labour from the notion of ‘socially-equalised labour’ as something applicable to all societies. His discussion of the theory of value as an equilibrium theory suffers from the same neglect of money, and thus lays itself open to the charge that it implies that any deviation from equilibrium will lead to the collapse of social organisation, levelled at it by Cutler and co. (op. cit., ch. 3).
22. Capital 1, p. 185, and Rosdolsky, op. cit., p. 113. The acceptance of Say’s Law by Ricardo was merely the other side of the same coin, the inability to grasp the real difference made by the shift from a barter economy to a monetary economy. See Marx’s very sarcastic remarks on James Mill and Say, which could be applied to almost all ‘vulgar economy’ since (Capital 1, pp. 209–10).
23. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Vol. 3 (1969), p. 138.
24. There are a number of very complex issues here again. Marx argues that money either is a commodity, and therefore produced by labour, or that in the case of credit of paper money, it bears a definite relation to gold or a money-commodity base. On this basis he assumes that the exchange-relation of money with all other commodities will be given by the value of money. The sum of prices will be given by the sum of values divided by the value of a unit of money. Marx thus rejects the crude quantity theory of money which fails to grasp that the exchange of money for any good is a special case of the exchange of any two commodities. With paper money, however, an expansion of its quantity in relation to the amount of gold in circulation amounts to a devaluation, or a fall in the hidden labour content of each piece of paper, and the quantity theory which explains inflation on the basis of an increase in the money-supply is confirmed in accordance with the labour theory of value (Capital, Vol. 1, Ch. 3). The theory rests on the idea that money must always have a base in a commodity produced by labour such as gold and this has been questioned as inapplicable to contemporary capitalism. I would argue, however, that gold still constitutes the basis of the world monetary system (cf. the discussion by Mandel in his introduction to Capital, Vol. 1 (Penguin ed.), pp. 74–79.).
25. G. Kay, Why Labour is the Starting Point of Capital (Critique 7), a review of Böhm-Bawerk, is one of the few to emphasise this point. He argues that interpretations of the theory of value as a theory of equal exchange involve a ‘positivism which is utterly inconsistent with Marxism’.
26. Capital, Vol. 1, p. 197.
27. Ibid., p. 31 and the Critique of the Gotha Programme in Marx/Engels, Selected Works (Moscow 1968), p. 319. The failure to grasp this distinction is a common source of confusion, and the effect of reducing exchange-values to relations between use-values (as Sraffa and Steedman do) is to deprive labour of its position as the source of value. Hence the view put by Robinson that ‘a language which compels us to say that capital (as opposed to ownership of capital) is not productive rather obscures the issue’ (Robinson, op. cit., p. 19). Capital here becomes a thing, machinery.
28. Some of the most striking passages on ‘fetishism’ in Marx occur in his discussion of ‘distribution’ in Capital, Vol. 3, esp. Ch. 24 on Interest Bearing Capital and Ch. 48 on the Trinity Formula.
29. cf. Rubin (op. cit.), especially Ch. 3.
30. Capital, Vol. 1, p. 187.
31. Colletti (op. cit.), pp. 88–91, and Rubin are almost alone in the literature I have read in emphasising this.
32. Capital, Vol. 1, p. 198. ‘The further development of the commodity does not abolish these contradictions, but rather provides the form within which they have room to move. This is, in general, the way in which real contradictions are resolved.’ I am indebted in this section to Rosdolsky (op. cit., Ch. 5), who carefully elucidates some very Hegelian passages on the same theme in the Grundrisse, and emphasises the centrality of the notion of ‘contradiction’ to Marx’s theory of value.
33. Keynesians however have tended to regard monetary phenomena as the basic cause of the crises of capitalism, failing to distinguish between the ‘possibility’ of crises created by money, and the nature of capitalist accumulation which turns the possibility into a reality.
34. F. Engels, Anti-Dühring (New York 1972), p. 297.
35. The exclusion of money from Sraffa’s analysis in particular renders the social character of the economy his equations are supposed to represent somewhat vague. Whilst we are clearly supposed to be in a capitalist economy in which there are rates of profit, the units of production with which he deals are industries not firms, connected by their technical inter- dependence and not by money. We could for example be in a single autonomous planned economy in which prices and rates of profit have a purely notional significance as accounting devices. In other words the social character of exchange as a relation between ‘private’ units of production does not appear. In such a world, value, as external to each capital, no longer exists and the surplus is just a collection of use-values appropriated directly by this single all-embracing capital. Surplus value becomes surplus-product (see later in the article) and, despite its title, with Sraffa we are not really in a world of commodities at all.
36. This is the character of Ricardo’s famous corn-model, in which corn is supposed to be the sole input apart from labour into the production of corn, giving a corn ‘rate of profit’ measurable in terms of a single use-value, as a physical ratio independently of money. The obvious difficulty with such a model is that it excludes exchange altogether (why bother to exchange corn for corn?). For a clear summary see the chapter on Ricardo in Dobb (Theories, op. cit.), Sraffa’s own introduction to Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (CUP 1951), and the excellent critical discussion by D. Levine, Ricardo and the Conditions of Classical Political Economy (Economy and Society, Vol. 3, 1974, pp. 292–314). Sraffa’s own Standard Commodity is nothing but an attempt to reproduce the properties of a ‘corn-model’ by reducing a mass of different use-values to what is effectively a single use-value. The effect is similarly to abstract from exchange (see the previous footnote) and to reduce profits to a quantity of surplus-product not surplus value.
37. Marx Grundrisse (op. cit.), pp. 257–8, for an important criticism of Ricardo, making just this point.
38. The question of the relationship between Marx’s ‘logical development’ of the categories and the actual history of capitalism is complex. Meek in his Karl Marx’s Economic Method (in Economics and Ideology, op. cit.) argues that Marx’s approach has an essential historical element, but is important to remember the passage in the Introduction to the Grundrisse: ‘It would therefore be unfeasible and wrong to let the economic categories follow one another in the same sequence as that in which they were historically decisive. Their sequence is determined, rather, by their relation to one another in modern bourgeois society …’ (p. 107).
39. cf. note 25. Certain passages earlier in Capital, Vol. 1 can be interpreted as making this assertion but they are not I think in accord with the general tenor of the argument and only at this point does the assumption of equal exchange become vital to the analysis.
40. Steedman’s (op. cit., pp. 57–9) argument that you can retain a notion of exploitation in his analysis in terms of physical quantities, amounts to little more than this.
41. Capital, Vol. 3, pp. 814–15.
42. N. Bukharin, Imperialism and World Economy (London 1972).
43. Marx Grundrisse (op. cit., pp. 415–16) which locates this limit as but an expression of the basic contradiction between use-value and exchange-value, of the fact that an increase in the productivity of labour increases the mass of use-values produced whilst the value of each commodity (the amount of labour-time socially necessary for its production) falls. This in turn underlies the ‘limit, not inherent to production generally, but to production founded on capital’.
44. I have deliberately made no reference to the rate of profit in this analysis. Criticism of Marx in this area has failed to grasp that the fall in the rate of profit is but a particular index of this more basic contradiction which is inherent in the labour theory of value and irrefutable in its terms (note 43). This emerges more clearly in the Grundrisse (pp. 704–8).
45. Rubin (op. cit.), p. 28.
46. cf. Roosevelt (op. cit., note 9) for several lengthy quotations; note 27 for Joan Robinson, and the articles by E. Nell, Theories of Growth and Theories of Value, and A. Bhaduri, On the Significance of Recent Controversies in Capital Theory: a Marxian View, in the Penguin collection Capital and Growth, ed. G. Harcourt and N. Laing (London 1971).
47. Sraffa (op. cit.) – his one degree of ‘indeterminacy’, although Sraffa himself suggests, rather oddly, that it might be closed by the money rate of interest determining the rate of profit (p. 33). It was people such as Dobb who introduced the class struggle, out of mid air as it were, to fill the gap. The result in Neo-Ricardian analysis generally has been to make trade-union militancy largely responsible for the fall in the rate of profit and the onset of the world crisis.
48. Marx, Capital, Vol. 3, pp. 878–79, part of a savage attack on those, such as J.S. Mill, who separated relations of distribution from relations of production and saw only the former as ‘historical’ and open to change.
49. Marx, Grundrisse, p. 327.
50. V. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 38, Moscow (n.d.), p. 36.
 

