


By this time the consumer has learned to expect from the War Food Administration nothing but practical jokes.
Whenever it gets big-hearted and offers something extra special, we housewives have to be careful lest it be like one of those April fool cigars that explode in the face of the smoker.
When a supply of butter was thrown on the market not long ago, its quality was suited more for pigs than for people; a quantity of eggs released for civilian use was of such dubious quality that dealers refused to buy them; canned milk sent to public institutions out of government stocks made patients sick. It’s about as funny as a crutch!
Now the practical joker has made cheaper meats ration-free. And what’s the result? The papers all announce that the housewife is shunning these meats, expressing a decided preference for roasts and steaks.
Of course, we have a preference for roasts and steaks. But –
The prices force us to put our preferences in the back seat. So, if the working class housewife is turning up her nose at the cheaper and ration-free meats, THERE IS A GOOD REASON.
Maybe the up-turned nose can be accounted for by the kind and quality of the meat rather than the snootiness of the housewife. And that is exactly the case!
The New York Times reports that the quality of several carloads of spring lamb from the Southwest “was rather poor” – “a large percentage grading commercial and utility.”
The New York Post writes that “it was admitted that many carloads of newly-arrived lamb, pork and mutton are not of the best quality.”
*
The War Food Administration – as is the case with all the other government agencies controlling war and civilian supplies – is honeycombed with dollar-a-year men connected with big business. The pattern of the actions taken by the WFA indicates very clearly who is benefiting by these practical jokes of which the consumer has become the butt.
Tremendous government orders are placed with the big dairy, farm and packing house corporations – naturally through the “good offices” of the dollar-a-year men – at prices yielding a pretty penny of profit. The orders placed through the dollar-a-year men are actually greater than this government needs; storage, space is filled to overflowing; then the poorer grades or the stuff long in storage is released to the consumer. That accounts for the inferior quality of the butter, eggs, milk, meat that the WFA has so “generously” allowed us lately.
It’s time to put a stop to such practical jokes that make only the big capitalists laugh as they stack away their profits!
*
The battle fronts of World War II are piled high with corpses and the earth is soaked with human blood. But the German high command is reported to be already preparing for World War III. The rock-bottom necessity for waging a war is soldiers. This is where the women come in on the ground floor, so to speak. The ruling class of Germany is exhorting the people to have children.
“Every stout boy born in 1943 can become a brave soldier in 1963. Every new-born healthy boy is one strong soldier more in twenty years.” So states a new instruction manual issued by the German high command, according to an Associated Press dispatch from Stockholm.
Boys of eighteen and less are encouraged to marry and do their duty before they gp to the front because “Then even if the present war is lost, tomorrow’s war can be won by the children of today’s soldiers.” German parents are warned by this authorities against advising their adolescent boys not to marry.
*
But the German high command and the German ruling class are not alone in fighting World War II with one eye cocked to get a head start for World War III. In its own way, every great nation is doing exactly this. If the preparations for World War III are not so open in the United States, it is because the material and human resources here are so tremendous. The American birth rate is still high and. American casualties are still counted in the hundreds of thousands, whereas the German birth rate has fallen off and German casualties run into many millions. In this country, therefore, the preparations for World War III are in the chemical and engineering laboratories, where more perfect instruments for destruction are being developed. Preparations are going on in the halls of Congress, where it is planned to pass war-making laws such as one for the universal military training of American youth.
We read in the papers the most horrible accounts of the present slaughter, like the story told by a first aid man on the Italian front, who said: “When I reached the other shore I found bodies piled up like the carcasses of hogs which used to die from cholera in Iowa a long time ago. I hesitated to walk across the bodies, and a fellow on the other side yelled: ‘Walk on ’em; you can’t hurt ’em now.’”
This is the awful thing that is happening now, and while it happens, both sides are planning and preparing for it to happen again – in even more devastating fashion – to the next generation.
*
The plans of the Allies to break up the German nation and put it under military rule won’t end wars. History has taught that this kind of “settlement” is like putting a lid on a volcano. But even if the “menace of German aggression” were removed permanently, the cause of wars would still remain.
There is, for instance, the rivalry between Great Britain and America, which is making news in a way more outstanding than the war news itself. For it foreshadows that the competition for markets, natural resources, domination of the airways – the the same things for which the German ruling class allowed Hitler to organize the Nazi war machine – will have the same result.
What shall we do to prevent this? The last sentence of the platform of the Workers Party reads as follows: “A socialist world will destroy capitalist imperialism, recurrent wars, fascist barbarism, oppression and exploitation, and establish a new order of freedom, plenty, peace and security, and world brotherhood!”
Yes, a socialist world will prevent World War III., To get it, all the working people of the world must unite against their present ruling classes! American mothers whose hearts burst with pain at the thought of American boys “piled up like the carcasses of hogs” – German parents whose protest against the war is expressed in the advice they give their boys not to bring new lives into the world as they go forth to give up their own – English, Russian, French, Italian, Chinese, Japanese little people who are together the victims of the war brought about by capitalist competition for profits and world power – all must make common cause against capitalism and world imperialism.
That is what we can and must do!
 




Get out those bank books and those war bonds and stamps. Take them out from under the mattress or from the jug on the top kitchen shelf. Take them out and open them up and let us see – for somehow or other wartime savings of around $130,000,000,000 have to be accounted for.
Yes, that’s what we are told. During the three-four war years $130,000,000,000 have been salted away in sayings. A nice, comfortable back-log! No big bad wolf can scare us Americans with those $130,000,000,000 to use against a rainy day.
But wait a second. Do “us Americans” share and share alike in these savings from the war boom? Harvey E. Runner, business editor of the New York Herald Tribune, gives us an idea of how this enormous wartime swag is divided. He says:
“Estimates place only from $7,000,000,000 to $8,000,000,000 in savings with families earning less than $3,000 annually. This group represents about seventy-five per cent of the entire population.”
No wonder your bank account and your few war bonds look like less than a drop in the bucket. According to Mr. Runner’s figures, seventy-five per cent of the population has only a five to six per cent share of the wartime savings. The other ninety-lour or ninety-five per cent is in the war charts of the twenty-five per cent minority – and the richer they are the more they have salted away.
So we see once-more how imperialist war plays favorites!
*
If we break down Mr. Runner’s figures a bit more, what have we?
The seventy-five per cent of the population in the less than $3,000 income bracket consists of over 20,000,000 American families – and since the Lord blesses the poor with children, these are the largest families. Doing a little long division, we find, according to Mr. Runner’s figures, that during the three-four war years, over 20,000,000 families could save on the average only $300, That’s how rich the war has made them!
Now what becomes of some of the pipe dreams of post-war buying? Who is going to do the buying? The the mothers of these 20,000,0000 families able to get washing machines, vacuum cleaners, much-needed furniture, clothing for their children, vital doctors’ and dentists’ services – to say nothing of that piano for the little girl to take lessons, a down payment on an automobile, or perhaps also on a post-war house which everyone is supposed to buy lickety-split?
Working class housewives have learned to stretch money far – by dint of necessity, but they can’t perform miracles. The small minority whom the war favored will enjoy those things which workers need – while mothers stand guard over their paltry $300 for use in a family emergency.
The big talk about the flow of milk and honey after the war fools no working class housewife as she stares at her microscopic bank balance. Her hope lies in labor’s demands for a guaranteed annual wage, for full employment, for ample social security. Her efforts should be exerted to win a workers’ government through which labor’s demands can be fulfilled,
*
Paris is today a city of poverty and privation, as everyone knows. Not only is the population gaunt and emaciated from years of Nazi blood-sucking, but present prospects are gloomy indeed. Bread is so scarce it is a luxury; coal and other fuel for the winter practically do not exist; warm clothing or clothing of any kind is conspicuous by its absence. That is one picture of Paris.
Another is brought to us by the lady reporters writing about the gorgeous fashion shows in the Paris salons and by the photographs of the lovely creations displayed there. Nothing is too luxurious for fashions the working women will never wear. There are handsome fully-cut coats, stunning furs. dresses with skirts yards and yards wide and with billowy sleeves, big hats – all indicating no lack of cloth for those who can pay for it.
And there are those who can. Salons are jammed. Couturiers are doing a bonanza business. Prices are unbelievably high, not in terms of the franc but of the American dollar. And the customers are all French; there are no customers from foreign countries today.
That is another picture of Paris!
The earnest elements making up the French resistance movement, composed of working people, don’t like either picture. Misery-as-usual for the workers – luxury-as-usual for the exploiters! That is not why they fought Nazism. They want the kind of society that will supply the needs of all first, and then later luxuries also for all. However, de Gaulle, and Roosevelt-Churchill-Stalin, who back him, are out to disarm the resistance movement and take all the resistance out of it – so that the class society of poor and rich can be maintained.
 




It will be recalled that at the beginning of the war, Walter Reuther, vice-president of the United Automobile Workers, submitted what he believed to be a practically fool-proof scheme for the speedy conversion of the automobile industry to war production. The scheme was heartily approved by impartial industrial engineers but was viciously kicked into a government cubby-hole by the auto interests. For Mr. Reuther’s plan met the industrial problem involved, but didn’t bother too much with the sacred property rights of the auto barons.
That, the latter did not like. They raised all kinds of phony objections to Mr. Reuther’s plan. They just did not want labor’s “helpful” co-operation in planning conversion to war production. They wanted no “outside” interference in their industrial domain.
Now Mr. Reuther comes out with another plan of even more vital interest to labor. At the CIO convention just held in Chicago he made a significant proposal for the post-war utilization of aircraft plants – which, by the way, were built to their present proportions mainly by government money. Mr. Reuther believes that the aircraft industry can be converted to the manufacture of prefabricated houses, and urges that those plants not needed for peacetime production of planes be put to this needed civilian use.
The alternative, says Mr. Reuther, is to see 1,800,000 aircraft workers pounding the pavements in the army of unemployed. For of the 2,000,000 aircraft workers now employed, Mr. Reuther predicts that only 200,000 will be needed for peacetime production of planes.
So the conversion of aircraft plants into house-building plants would provide employment for 1,800,000 workers. But not only that. Large-scale mass production of pre-fabricated modern homes would reduce their price from the present $8,000 to around $3,000, thus making decent living quarters available to a greater section of the population.
This is the Reuther plan for the aircraft industry. He most certainly has something there. If peacetime jobs are to be provided for war workers and returned servicemen, this is the kind of far-sighted conversion to civilian production that must be planned and carried out on a wide scale.
So far – so good. BUT —
 
The auto barons and big business in general feel as hostile to any of labor’s plans for reconversion of industry to peacetime production as they did about labor’s ideas for conversion to war production. Big business wants a hands-off policy – not only with respect to its own plants but with respect to the tens of billions of dollars in government plants which – though public property – big business considers its own by the capitalist custom that those who have should get still more.
Every propaganda ruse will be used by the big boys to discredit the Reuther plan and other plans of labor for peacetime reconversion to make jobs for all and to produce the needs of life abundantly. Labor’s ideas will be “proved” absolutely “impracticable” by the capitalist propaganda artists. Wait and see!
Labor was given a foretaste of this tactic in the spring of this year when the Navy cancelled its contracts with the Brewster plants for the building of Corsair planes. The workers, on their splendid sit-in strike, demanded other work. In their placards they proclaimed: “We’ve got the tools; we’ve got the ability; we’ve got the experience; we’ve got the will – we’re sitting tight. We want work!”
At that time a bombardment of propaganda was let loose to the effect that the Brewster plants, being constructed to put out the Corsair planes, were practically useless for anything else. So what could the Navy do? What could the corporation do? They were very sorry, of course, about the plight of the thousands of locked-out workers, but, after all, what could they do?
The answer is: PLENTY – if they had wanted to! And here’s why:
 
It Depends on Who Converts
The industrial engineers of this country are wizards at converting plants from one use to another, quickly and economically. Both in speed and scope they make changes that look like magic. A Wall Street writer, William J. Baxter, puts his readers straight on the subject in the following:
“Many imagine that an armament plant, a shipyard or some other plant facility made for specialized war production must necessarily be dismantled because it cannot be used for anything else. They are overlooking the new science of plant conversion adopted by our engineers.”
As a matter of fact, while labor is still passing resolutions at its conventions, big business is surveying the field and buying up war plants to do with them as they wish. For instance the duPont interests acquired the San Jacinto Shipyards at Houston, Texas, used for the construction of concrete barges, to be remade into a chemical plant – a far cry from constructing barges, and illustrating what can be done in the field of reconversion.
Again, the United States Rubber Co. and the Kelly Springfield Tire Co. purchased government plants manufacturing ordnance, to be changed by these companies into tire factories. With the help of the Surplus Property Board, big business is already getting government property at bargain prices – and all ITS plans are of course, “practicable.”
In the light of the above, the demand of the Brewster workers last spring to be allowed to use their tools, ability, experience and will to produce something other than Corsair planes was a good, practical demand. The plan of Reuther to utilize aircraft plants for the production of pre-fabricated houses is a sound, workable idea. So are other plans of labor of a similar nature. The plank of the Workers Party, fully endorsed by Labor Action, that NO government-owned plants be turned over to private interests but be held as public property and converted to civilian production immediately under the control of the workers, is sane and sensible. This is an ABC requirement to prevent these plants from being gobbled up by private interests for next to nothing, to be shut down by them or used by them as their profits dictate.
If labor is to get to first base in solving its unemployment problem, it must make up its mind to fight to the finish on this point of FULL reconversion to peacetime production. NO government plants should be turned over to private capitalists but all should be immediately converted to useful civilian production under the control of workers through their unions and shop committees. NO private plants should be allowed to stand idle while workers are without jobs and the people need consumer goods.
The science of industrial engineering can make all the wheels of industry – now turning out instruments of war – revolve to produce the things people need by the people who need jobs. Labor can and must make this come true.
 




The “forgotten man” has again been pushed into public view. The hearings on Senator Pepper’s sixty-five-cent minimum wage bill have done the trick. And, lo and behold! we discover a curious phenomenon. Whereas, when the big white father, FDR, came into power some twelve years ago he spoke of a mere one-third of the nation being forgotten men, the hearings in Congress reveal that this unfortunate group now constitutes TWO-FIFTHS of the workers of the nation.
Yes, you read that right. Forty per cent of America’s workers make less than sixty-five cents an hour during this so-called war boom when workers are supposed to be rolling in money.
A breakdown of the situation shows that these substandard workers are found in large numbers in every branch of industry and agriculture.
To illustrate: In the manufacturing trades, one out of every four workers makes less than sixty-five cents an hour. In the retail trades, EIGHTY-SIX PER CENT of the workers are so poorly rewarded for their labor. Three hundred thousand railroad workers are in the same boat!
What does such miserable pay mean in the bread-and-butter equivalent?
A sixty-five-cents-an-hour minimum would equal a weekly wage of $26 on the forty-hour basis. If luck holds for fifty-two weeks a year, at sixty-five cents an hour wages would add up to $1,352 a year.
Many reliable estimates from labor and other sources show that today it takes about $3,000 a year for a family of four just to maintain itself on the ragged edge of decency. Put $1,352 up against $3,000, and what does it look like! Yet forty per cent of America’s workers get LESS than what that looks like because they earn less than sixty-five cents an hour.
But here is still another way of estimating how substandard are the substandard workers of the country. The cost of living budget of the Works Progress Administration is fixed at $1,730 a year for a family of four. Furthermore, this is admittedly “an emergency standard which may be necessary under depressed conditions.” It is also admitted that this WPA budget might prove to be “harmful to both health and morale” if continued for any length of time. Of this there is indeed no doubt. For this figure of the WPA is so shockingly inadequate that it allows a pittance of only $16 a month for rent for a family of four!
 
“American Way of Life”
Bad enough, isn’t it? But still a sixty-five cent minimum wage adds up to only $1,352 a year – which is $378 less than the miserable WPA budget. And keep on remembering that FORTY PER CENT of America’s workers get EVEN LESS than that!
Such is the American way of life!
Philip Murray, president of the CIO, testified at the hearings on Senator Pepper’s sixty-five-cent minimum wage bill that in 1943 THIRTY PER CENT of the families and other consumer units of this country received less than $1,500 a year. He stated that 7,093,000 consumer units got below $1,000 in that year, while 5,130,000 got along on between $1,000 and $1,500 for the whole year. Thus we see that some 12,213,000 families and other consumer units are worse off by over $230 to $730 per year than people on WPA. In the same year, 1943, war profits of industry were 303 per cent over the 1936–39 peace levels! Such is the American way of life.
These congressional hearings made very graphic the plight of the forgotten men and women of this country. Many of them were there in person. Mrs. Christine Gardner, Piedmont, N.C., a cannery worker, broke down when she testified that one of her children died because she was unable to afford proper medical care. Mrs. Ruth Decker, another cannery worker, stated that her fellow workers had to take up a collection to get her some clothes so she could get to the hearings in Washington. John Vernon, textile worker, father of seven, testified to receiving the munificent wage of 51½ cents an hour. There were laundry, workers, shoe workers clothing workers at the hearings, all victims of substandard wages, wages below sixty-five cents an hour.
There was likewise produced in evidence an advertisement by the Postal Telegraph Co., which speaks for itself. The ad is for a manager for its Atchison, Kan., office. Here it is:
“Qualifications – combination Morse and Teletype operator. Must have knowledge of operating routine and ability to turn out satisfactory copies in both Morse and Teletype. Must be able to make up payrolls, to rate messages, speedily and accurately. Also experience in handling foreign and domestic money orders and special collections necessary. Must have knowledge of accounting practices, daily statements, call and delivery desk. Must have past successful record on both productive and developing selling in an office of this size. Must be neat in appearance and work. Must be aggressive, persistent, resourceful and industrious. WAGES $.30 AN HOUR.”
Are there any words in the dictionary to describe the gall of this big business company! Presumably the $.30 is written with the dollar sign instead of just 30c to make it look like more. But it is still only twelve dollars a week!
Above, in brief outline, is the shameless exploitation to which forty per cent of America’s workers are submitted. It is time for a full stop. THE MINIMUM WAGE MUST BE RAISED!
But should labor fall on its knees in thanks and adoration before Senator Pepper and the advocates of his sixty-five-cent minimum wage bill – as the CIO and AFL seem to be doing?
 
A Dollar an Hour Minimum!
True the sixty-five cents an hour minimum is better than the forty-cent minimum now on the statute books. True, sixty-five cents is better than fifty cents, below which regional boards of the WLB now consider wages substandard, acknowledging to that meager extent that there has been a rise in the cost of living since the passage of the Wagner law. True, sixty-five cents is more than fifty-six cents, the figure conceded by the WLB to the Textile Workers Union when it asked that wages below sixty cents be considered substandard. But the following is also true:
A sixty-five-cent minimum wage still leaves the income of forty-five per cent of the workers of this country so low that it is $378 per year less than the emergency budget allowed by the Works Progress Administration!
Is this all that the workers who have made this land the richest in the world are entitled to?
At the above mentioned hearings the representatives of the railroad unions demanded A ONE DOLLAR MINIMUM HOURLY WAGE. Answering the bosses’ false argument that this will add to the cost of living, these railroad union men pointed out that there are “spreads” of more than 100 per cent between the cost of production and prices demanded of consumers leaving ample room to raise wages without raising prices.
The Workers Party has a demand in its platform reading: “For a $1.00-an-hour minimum wage law, with time and a half for overtime, double time for Sunday and holiday work, and equal pay for equal work for all industrial and agricultural workers.”
 




If another nail was needed to make secure the lid on the coffin of the Little Steel wage freeze, that nail has now been hammered in good and proper.
It will be remembered that even the figures of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which organized labor claimed to be far below the facts of the cost of living, admitted that costs have risen 23.4 per cent above January 1, 1941 – which is already 8.4 per cent above the 15 per cent grudgingly permitted by the Little Steel formula.
Now come R.J. Thomas of the CIO and Thomas Meaney of the AFL, the labor members of the President’s Cost of Living Committee, with their factual report.
They put the figure at 43.5 per cent above January 1941 – or nearly twice as much as the flukey index of the Bureau of Labor Statistics – and 28.5 per cent above the 15 per cent basis of the Little Steel formula.
That cadaver is definitely buried.
 
How Report Was Made
The report of Thomas and Meaney is by no means a slipshod affair. It is heavily documented, based on field surveys, on consultations with experts in government, business and organized labor, on interviews with hundreds of workers and housewives.
One of the field surveys covered 1,500 steel workers of the, CIO and the method used was so outstandingly fair that even the acting chief of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in charge of its index, had to offer his praise.
*As a result of this painstaking work to arrive at the truth, Thomas and Meaney find that today it takes $143.50 to buy what in January 1941 it took only $100 to buy.
How many of you rich (?) war workers have received a wage increase of 43.5 per cent since January 1941?
However, the report makes it clear that this figure is only tentative. It was difficult to arrive at an accurate estimate of the rise in costs effected by such factors as quality deterioration and selling of low quality merchandise at the same price as higher quality. “It is apparent,” the report adds, “that our findings with regard to the overall increase in the cost of living will need to be adjusted upward when these data become finally available.”
That Little Steel formula is not only dead and buried – but rapidly decomposing.
The other members of the President’s Cost of Living Committee are William H. Davis, chairman of the War Labor Board, heading the committee; H. B. Horton, president of the Chicago Bridge & Iron Co., and, George K. Batt, vice-president of Dugan Brothers, both representing business on the President’s committee.
Naturally, not one of these three agrees with the figures presented by the labor members. They are pretty worried about what these figures will mean in terms of wage demands to catch up with that 43.5 per cent rise in costs.
So Mr. Davis hastened to comment that the report of Thomas and Meaney is “not in any sense the report of the committee.” And the business contingent pompously declared that the “committee is under the responsibility not to make a final report to the President and to the public until careful consideration has been given to all the relevant data.”
But even the New York Times, right in the midst of a long editorial “disproving” (the labor figures, admits that “It is undoubtedly true that the BLS index somewhat understates the rise in living costs.” THAT SLIGHT UNDERSTATEMENT AMOUNTS TO ALMOST 100 PER CENT.
Breaking down this slight understatement, the labor report gives the cost of food as going up 74.2 per cent as against 40.2 per cent in the BLS index; clothing 72.2 per cent as against only 33.7 per cent; rent 15 per cent, against a meager 3 per cent admitted by the BLS; household furnishings 62 per cent against 27.8 per cent.
 
Statisticians and Statistics
How come there is such a discrepancy? Very simple. When statisticians have a certain purpose in mind, they can do almost anything with statistics. REMEMBER THE PURPOSE IN THIS CASE WAS TO MAKE IT APPEAR THAT THE 15 PER CENT FREEZE OF THE LITTLE STEEL FORMULA WAS FAIR.
So, for instance, the BLS index does not take into account the disappearance of cheaper goods, compelling people to buy the dearer commodities. This even Price Administrator Bowles admits. Furthermore, the BLS food index was the guide for keeping prices down on only those foods that are listed there. The labor report shows that many
categories of foods used just as extensively were left out of the index and went skyward.
These are only two of the numerous ways in which the BLS statisticians kept the cost of living “down.”
On the other hand, while the labor report remedies these convenient “oversights” of the BLS, it by no means takes into account every one of the items boosting living costs. For example, the effects of the black market, of changes in living conditions, of higher taxes, were not considered even by the labor report.
What conclusions are to be drawn?
Apparently, labor can only trust itself – even in the matter of ascertaining the facts and figures of a situation – or shall we say especially in such a situation which involves wages against profits?
Second, the Little Steel formula being six feet under, labor’s campaign to obtain wages commensurate with the real cost of living should assume real vigor.
Wage demands need to be upgraded not only to the existing cost of living, but should be escalated upward periodically in step with the cost of living.
And to put teeth into labor’s demands, the no-strike pledge has to be ditched, so that labor can step out in its full strength.
 




The extreme shortage of low-priced textiles has been felt by every housewife trying to keep her end up. Take children’s panties, for instance. Those nice soft garments in white or pink that you could buy for ten or fifteen cents in Woolworth’s or almost anywhere else – they have gone with the wind.
But here comes the War Production Board to your rescue. It has allowed material for the production of these indispensable panties. But wait a bit. It’s too soon to rub your hands in anticipatory glee. There’s a catch.
The WPB order says that panties from sizes two to twelve may be manufactured, not to cost more than FIFTY CENTS retail. How do you like that? Do you think any manufacturer is going to make them to sell for ten or fifteen cents?
You will pay three, four and five times as much for your textiles. The textile manufacturers will make three, four and five time’s as much profits.
*
Would you like to know why the WPB is so very considerate of the textile manufacturers? Would you like to know why this so-called government agency, supposed to represent the interests of the people, works hand-in-glove with the war profiteers? Live and learn.
The man at the head of the WPB in charge of textiles, clothing and leather is J. Spencer Love – whose love for his own interests surmounts all else.
For this man Love is the president of Burlington Mills Corporation – WHICH PRODUCES TEXTILE GOODS. No two-by-four concern is Burlington Mills Corporation. It has forty-four plants in North Carolina and is worth $50,000,000.
On the WPB Mr. Love is paid one dollar a year. In 1942, however, he received from his connection with Burlington Mills a remuneration of $196,340. That was made up of his base salary of $52,800 a year and the balance of $143,540 was his 3% per cent slice of the net profits of the corporation.
Why wouldn’t Mr. Love be in favor of charging fifty cents for ten or fifteen cents’ worth of pantie? THE MORE NET PROFITS FOR HIS CORPORATION, THE MORE “TAKE-HOME PAY” FOR MR. LOVE.
*
Want to know something else about Mr. Love and his Burlington Mills Corporation?
HE AND HIS OUTFIT ARE RABIDLY ANTI-LABOR AND ANTI-UNION.
As president of this great manufacturing chain he has put up a die-hard fight against labor organization – -and he still fights labor. All of his plants are on an open-shop basis.
In the last two years the Textile Workers Union, CIO, succeeded in winning collective bargaining rights through a War Labor Board election in three of the corporation’s plants. Then what happened?
So rock-bedded is Mr. Love’s opposition to labor’s rights to organize and bargain collectively that he closed down those three plants in which the union won recognition – rather than deal with the union!
*
This is the type of man who is placed at the head of the important textile, clothing and leather department of the WPB – presumably to protect the “public” interest, including that of labor and the consumer.
Every department of government is honeycombed with the gentry typified by Mr. Love of Burlington Mills Corporation. It is high time to throw them out – together with these government agencies which are camouflages for big business.
Throughout the length and breadth of the land should arise a cry of angry protest. Let us demand that committees of workers, housewives, working farmers and the common people take charge of the business of supplying consumer needs at fair prices.
*
This column’s hat is off to the 2,700 workers in the Roebling’s Sons Company plant at Trenton, N.J.
Recently they walked out on strike in sympathy with nineteen women employees whose demand for equal pay for equal work had been refused by the War Labor Board. The women involved are wrappers of wire, who are getting fifteen per cent less pay than men doing the same job.
Charles Kovacs of the United Steel Workers, CIO, called this flagrant injustice a “minor grievance.” The 2,700 fellow workers of the nineteen aggrieved women, didn’t think so.
Kovacs tried to do the dirty work heretofore done exclusively by the capitalists, namely, break the strike. “Only the nation’s enemies can profit from this walkout,” he said.
However, looking the situation squarely in the eye, the 2,100 men and women workers saw clearly that only the enemies of labor profit from wage differentials between men and women workers.
*
Readers of this column have become acquainted with “We, the Mothers, Mobilize for America.” The outfit smells to high heaven with America First and other fascistic connections.
Now it is planning to hold a national convention in Chicago in the hear future – to call for “an immediate armistice and a negotiated peace.”
“Peace” is a wonderful word – and the contents of real peace we all yearn for. Already this monstrous war has taken a world toll of 25,000,000 missing, wounded and dead. We shudder away from visualizing this gigantic mass of human carnage.
The share of the United States in this useless human sacrifice is still comparatively small, but from all sidles come official warnings that casualty lists of American boys are going to increase arid multiply to what ghastly figure nobody knows.
It is only natural that the mothers of American boys in the armed forces should be interested in armistice and peace. But they must keep away from “We the Mothers, Mobilize for America” and similar fascistic organizations. Their purpose is only to utilize the honest suffering of mothers in a DISHONEST, REACTIONARY CAUSE.
What is that cause? The cause of Coughlin, of Gerald K. Smith, of McWilliams. The cause of the anti-Semitic gangs. The cause of the Jim Crow pogromists. The cause of the union smashers. The cause of the fascists in this country.
What kind of peace can these enemies of human progress stand for?
Does Labor Action want “an armistice and a negotiated peace”? Yes, indeed – but with the realization that peace to be lasting and to give the world the real contents of peace cannot be had with the existing powers.
The armistice must be made by workers’ governments that have replaced the present regimes in all belligerent countries. The terms of peace must be negotiated between such workers’ governments talking for the suffering peoples of the would.
Labor Action appeals to the mothers of America to help in the struggle for a workers’ government in America – to set the example for all working people to follow.
 




“We wish to stress again, as we have pointed out in our public testimony, that the preponderance of war contractors are in a sufficiently strong position to weather the period of conversion to peacetime production. The reserves of American industry have never been as high as they are today. American workers, on the contrary, enjoy no such favorable position. When contracts are terminated, the soldiers of production face bleak prospects.”
The above paragraph is from a letter sent by the CIO, the AFL and railway labor to Congress in ah effort to get that august body to consider the interests of labor in connection with the cancellation of war contracts.
The letter and testimony had as little effect on the capitalist government as a breeze has in moving a mountain. The Senate ignored entirely the demands of the heads of labor unions speaking for 12,000,000 organized workers. It passed in record time the Murray-George contract termination bill providing very liberal cash payment out of the U.S. Treasury to big war contractors – BUT NARY A LINE, WORD OR SYLLABLE PROVIDING FOR WORKERS THROWN OUT OF THEIR JOBS BY THE TERMINATION OF WAR CONTRACTS.
Here is concrete action by a branch of the capitalist government on post-war problems.
How it contrasts with the beautiful speeches about the post-war millennium promised so glibly by the ruling class! Here is the pattern of the post-war paradise that capitalism holds for labor!
At the same time that the Senate railroaded through this bill, rightly described as “raiding the government on behalf of the big contractors, who have already made record-breaking profits out of the war,” in Philadelphia the representatives of labor, capital and the governments of the United Nations were holding forth in flowery oratory on “plans” for the post-war period. What a mockery! What a farce! In Washington where things are really done, it was blatantly proclaimed by the passage of the Murray-George bill that “freedom from want” applies only to the capitalists – while the only freedom the workers can rely on is freedom TO want the necessities of life.
 
The Kilgore Amendment
Although the bill is very long and full of technical clauses, although it involves niching of billions of dollars of public funds, the Military Affairs Committee reported the bill out after only a cursory and superficial consideration of it. And the Senate took but a day to make legal a gift of more billions to the already bloated war profiteers.
An attempt was made to combine with the Murray-George bill, the Kilgore bill, which would have provided unemployment benefits for war workers and discharged servicemen, as well as other help, such as traveling expenses to other places of employment. But neither in the Military Affairs Committee nor on the floor of the Senate was the Kilgore bill given a tumble.
Senator Kilgore offered his measure as an amendment to the war contract termination bill, but his amendment was beaten with less than a quorum of the senators present – many having walked out before the vote so as not to have to commit themselves. It should be noted well that among these absentees were many senators who the labor and liberal leaders were hoping would vote for the Kilgore amendment.
The Murray-George bill, which not only provides for outright cash payments to war contractors; which not only permits minor government officials to make final settlements for such cash payments; which has no adequate provisions against fraud; which is full of jokers and loopholes through which Scandalous amounts of public money can flow into the pockets of the rich – has a history worth mentioning.
 
The Pressure of Big Business
The bill came out of Senator George’s Post-War Committee, as the pet, of big business. Counsel of the George committee is Scott Russell. Until recently Scott Russell, who had much to do with the Murray-George bill, was president of the Bibb Mfg. Co., a Southern textile firm. Russell’s company was one of those that appeared before Congress last year with loud protests against the renegotiation law which attempts to put a mild check on war profits.
In contrast to the speed – ONLY ONE DAY – with which the Senate passed this big business-sponsored bill and killed the Kilgore amendment, is the Wagner-Murray-Dingell bill for social insurance, including unemployment benefits for the post-war period. This bill has been gathering dust on a congressional shelf for over a year.
The leaders of the CIO, AFL and railway labor stated in their letter to Congress:
“You will agree that every, contract terminated means the discharge of workers. Certainly, provision for these workers, whose resources must be conserved and fulls, utilized, is at least as important as settling the financial claims of war contracts.”
Ah, but that’s just the point! The capitalist government does NOT agree. To it financial claims of contractors are much more important than the claims to the needs of life of the millions of workers. To it, it is much more important to add another pile of dough to the war profits, which will amount to at least ten billion dollars this year; to the cash reserves of big business, already estimated at $58,000,000,000; to the value of government plants that big business has its eye on to the tune of $20,000,000,000; to the surplus war materials, amounting to around $75,000,000,000, to which big business wants to be heir,
The Senate was in a great hurry to add many more billions to this fabulous mass of wealth in the hands of big business. It had no time to consider the claims of labor for unemployment payments and other life-and-death needs.
 
Workers Must Learn from This
It is from such actions as that of the Senate that the working people of the country must learn.
The blatant flouting [1] of labor’s claims by the Senate should make it clear to every working man and woman that the working people cannot rely on the capitalist politicians to take care of their interests. The exploited of the land must rely upon themselves to get rid of exploitation, unemployment and misery.
The vital problems of the post-war period stare the working people in the face and put fear in their hearts. The capitalist government, however, is concerned with the “problems” of the ruling class. Labor must – without loss of time – set itself the goal of a workers’ government. Only a workers’ government can solve labor’s problems.
The first step is the organization of an independent Labor Party to unite and use the political, strength of the working people as a class. Thus they will be able to combat their class enemies and march determinedly toward the goal of a workers’ government.

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed text “flaunting”, which however doesn’t fit the context.
 




Who is Mrs. Neame?
Drew Middleton, New York Times correspondent from London, gave many details of her life, her family, her activities, her outlook, in a recent article he wrote for his paper under the heading: “Why the British Are Wonderful: Meet Plain, Stalwart Mrs. Neame.”
Mrs. Neame, wrote Mr, Middleton, “is the sort of person American correspondents have, in mind when, in discussing air attacks on London, they say that the British are wonderful.”
You want to know more about Mrs. Neame. She is a British working woman. She has lost her husband and two sons in the war. Two of her remaining four children are fighting and may have the same fate as their brothers. Mrs. Neame walks two miles to work at four o’clock each morning, to clean buildings near St. James’ Palace. She cleans her house and takes care of her dead son’s baby daughter, having naturally never known what it means to have a maid.
She gives time to the fire service station near her home, putting out incendiaries when they fall. When the sirens blow, she packs up and. trudges along to the public shelter; and when the “all-clear” sounds, she drags herself home again. She lives in the London slums, which have been pounded relentlessly by the German Luftwaffe. She has been bombed out of her flat, and has seen human beings buried under rubble. “Mrs. Neame could tell you something about sacrifice,” said Mr. Middleton.
 
A Pat on the Back
This write-up of Mrs. Neame is as neat a bit of capitalist-class propaganda as can be found anywhere – by way of a pat on the back.
It is not necessary for the capitalist press to inform the world about the wonderful human qualities inherent in the masses. Of course they have loyalty and bravery, endurance and self-sacrifice, imagination, sympathy and generosity. Believe it or not, the working people have had these virtues before they were “discovered” by those literary geniuses who are giving glib and unqualified approval to the imperialist war.
But it is pathetic – not wonderful; it is a great waste of the human spirit – not wonderful; that such qualities should be detoured into a holocaust imposed on the world by the laws of capitalist imperialism and out of which civilization itself may not come alive.
What is wonderful, for example, about “British boys being burned to death in airplanes while they are roasting to death the -population down below,” as radio reporter Edward Murrow recently described the bombing of Germany?
Those British boys and their American pals are brave, loyal, enduring, self-sacrificing – unquestionably! But there are in the German towns and cities they are drenching in liquid fire, many German editions of Mrs. Neame – yes, German working women as “stalwart” as this British working woman. Also, the German boys who come over to make rubble out of the London slums are brave, loyal, enduring, self-sacrificing.
The common people in both warring camps share these human traits. Of this there can be no doubt. But here is the tragedy: ALL THESE PEOPLE ARE EQUALLY DUPED!
The German people have been stuffed with Hitler’s propaganda that they are fighting to redress the wrongs of the Versailles Treaty and to build a new, glorious world order. The British and American people have it dinned into their ears that this is a war to defeat the fascist aggressors and to bring a new world of peace. And the masses of no country – as a whole – really understand what so many millions of people of all nationalities all over the world are dying for, and why this most agonizing of all wars is being fought.
For sad it is but true, the masses of all countries are merely the meek tools of their imperialist masters. The German people are going through hell so that their ruling class may ACQUIRE a world empire into which to spread their power and from which to glean profits. The British people are fighting so that the British imperialists may KEEP the colonial empire from which flow their power and their profits. Whereas the American people are unwittingly backing the plans of American capitalists who aim for world ASCENDANCY over all other powers.
That is why the Mrs. Neames all over the world are by no means wonderful. How can people who permit themselves to be used as the tools of their ruling classes be anything but pitiful?
 
“I’d Think It Was a Pity”
Do you want to know more about Mrs. Neame? She has no great hate for the Germans, as Mr. Middleton reports, and she does not want to see them all killed. “They have their families and homes, too,” she says. “If it wasn’t that they’d do that and more to us, I’d think it was a pity. Even now I sometimes feel sorry for them.”
Mrs. Neame’s words strike a true note! The working people of the world undoubtedly have Sympathy for each other’s sufferings. But here, in Mrs. Neame’s words, you have, above all, the reflection of the propaganda used by the ruling classes in both Germany and the Allied countries. The propaganda is to the effect that each country must continue to spread death and destruction over the other – TO PREVENT THE OTHER FROM DOING THE SAME TO IT!
But this is a vicious and endless circle in which humanity is caught. It must be broken. It can be broken. And only in one way. The working people of all countries must join in allegiance to each other, realizing their common interests against all the ruling classes of the world.
The Mr. Middletons are so very enthusiastic about the Mrs. Neames because they are NOT joining together against their capitalist classes! “She is wonderful,” Mr. Middleton wrote, “for all the familiar reasons – because she is frail and brave, underfed and enduring ...”
 
Wonderful for Capitalists
Yes, for the ruling classes this unenlightened conduct on the part of working people is wonderful – but maddeningly foolish from the point of view of working class interests and indeed from the point of view of simple justice.
For why should the “frail” be “brave” and the “underfed” be “enduring” in. a cause which is not their own? Those for whom this war is being fought are neither frail nor underfed. The capitalist classes of all countries are getting rich out of the war!
The war profits of the American capitalist class top all the rest, but they are not the only ones by any means. Business is very good for the British industrial owners and overlords. It is good for the same class in Germany. Even in occupied France, industrialists who are playing ball with the Germans are getting theirs. In Russia, while the people are bled white to support the war, the class of bureaucratic rulers becomes more powerful.
Be it in America, England, Russia, Germany or Japan, the contrast between the war sufferings of the poor and the ease and profiteering of the rich is disgustingly apparent. Just as was the case in London during the blitz, when the rich had their luxurious shelters all ready while the working people had brimstone hailed on them from the sky, so in German towns and cities, and in all war-bombed places, the rich have real protection while the masses are provided with unsafe makeshifts.
In France, in Italy, in Greece, in every country where disease and starvation plague the poor and their children, the rich are amply supplied through the black markets – where money is no consideration.
While the masses of stricken Europe wander from place to place, homeless, in rags, starving, the rich managed to get most of their money and some of their other wealth into safer quarters abroad. DESTITUTION IS THE LOT OF ONLY THE POOR IN WAR.
What is wonderful about the “frail” and the “underfed” being “brave” and “enduring” such injustice? What else can be the answer but this: “It is wonderful for the ruling classes that the Mrs. Neames still are that way.”
 
What Civilization?
Mr. Middleton’s admiration for Mrs. Neame is. indeed boundless. She is wonderful “also because although civilization has offered her so little and her children only a bit more, she is willing to go on fighting for it.”
It is not “civilization” as such that has offered her so little. The word must be qualified. It is CAPITALIST civilization that keeps her “frail” and “underfed,” and bombs her out of house and home; that robbed her of husband and two sons, and may rain destruction from the sky upon her little grandchild.
The Mrs. Neames do not yet know that civilization, FREED FROM THE POISONOUS HOLD OF THE CAPITALIST CLASS, can offer them everything human beings want in life – plus peace for the enjoyment of the things of life. But they will learn!
In fact, the learning process is going on at a rapid pace – not only in Britain but all over the world.
From the standard of working class interests, British labor is doing truly remarkable things. Tens of thousands of British miners struck against the SO LITTLE that British capitalism offers them, while taking for itself SO MUCH. Workers in other war industries have done the same. Even after the government announced new penalties for “fomenting” strikes, the bus drivers of London and gas house workers struck, understanding very well that,it is not “brave” to “endure” for the sake of capitalist profits.
In America the rank and file of labor is thoroughly dissatisfied to “endure” wage stabilization while profits are very much unstabilized. They decidedly do not like the arrangement whereby the government and big business cooperate so that the workers get “so little.” The miners’ strike, the threatened rail strike, the many “unauthorized” strikes, the widespread wage demands, are ample evidence.
As far away as China and Japan the realization grows in the minds of the most backward and most propagandized workers and peasants that the war is used as a pretext to grind them down. Peasants’ and workers’ strikes in the Far East attest to the awakening of the masses.
But the most revolutionary thought and action comes from the working people in those parts of the world where capitalist civilization has collapsed most completely. From the workers of France, through their underground organizations, comes the demand for a socialist reorganization of society. The most advanced workers there will undoubtedly fight against the return of the capitalist masters and their capitalist governments – yes, against the return of the CAPITALIST civilization which threw them into the depths of degradation and misery.
In Italy the working class indicates in action its opposition to the restoration of CAPITALIST civilization. The Italian masses have been ground down by fascist tyranny, decimated by hunger; they are still under the German heel in the North, and in the South under the suppressive “guidance” of the Allied military government – but they know what they want. They don’t want that kind of “civilization” that has given them and Mrs. Neame “so little.” They want the real civilization Of a socialist society.
 
World Workers, Unite!
Around the world, the working people are in motion – and all in the same direction. Some in one way, some in another; some more, others less; the workers of the world are fed up with their capitalist masters. When those great human qualities of loyalty, bravery, endurance, self-sacrifice, imagination, sympathy, generosity which the Mrs. Neames and all working people possess in abundance, are employed in the cause of finally ousting those capitalist masters, that will be truly wonderful!
For then the workers of the world will unite, to put into a dishonored grave the capitalist system on whose head lie all the crimes being today inflicted upon humanity.
 




During the electioneering just ended, no words were tossed about more recklessly than the two words “full employment.” To get the labor vote, all candidates beat their chests resoundingly and pledged themselves, first, last and all the time, to provide 60,000,000 jobs, more or less, for that many American workers.
Labor leaders accused Dewey of double-talk and lying – and, of course, they were right. But they threw all caution to the wind when they spoke about Roosevelt and the Democrats. CIO leaders especially filled their union papers with the most fantastic nonsense about a vote for Roosevelt meaning a vote for full employment; union halls echoed with loudly spoken dreams about Roosevelt and 60,000,000 jobs; the air waves carried the same absolutely unfounded promises by labor leaders.
The campaign fanfare being over, the sobering facts stand out once more with all their implications. What about the 2,000,000 workers now building ships, whose number will be cut down to 350,000 in a couple of years or less? What about the 2,500,000 workers in the automobile and aircraft field, whose number will be reduced to around 500,000 in the near future? What about similar drastic job-cutting all along the line? Will the hero of labor leaders, just returned to the White House for another four years, solve this vital problem – as per campaign promises?
 
Bretton Woods Enters Game
Mr. Roosevelt, of course, does not carry on in a vacuum of good intentions. He carries on within the capitalist, private profit system – which throughout the campaign he took every ocasion to endorse and pledge his allegiance to. Working thus within the limits set by the economic masters, Mr. Roosevelt still claims certain great accomplishments. The Bretton Woods conference, for example, is supposed to be a giant step toward economic stability and prosperity – in fact, it has been described as a “basic discussion on how world trade can help make lots of jobs.”
Yet at this very Bretton Woods conference, one of the delegations taking part – the Peruvian delegation – spoke these damning words:
“When we come to compare the various measures advocated to assure prosperity and full employment permanently in the world, we are baffled not only by the disparity of the suggestions but also by the criticism which each one of them seems to imply, in one way or another, of the others. No one can be blamed for being afraid that too much perhaps may be taken for granted, that wishful thinking may be having the better of cold, reasoned analysis and that, if and when a depression sets in, it may prove almost as difficult to overcome as in the thirties.”
Can there be a more clear-cut way of saying that the Bretton Woods conference – made so much of during the campaign as the groundwork of world prosperity – was really a huge fiasco and farce?
The reason why this and other conferences are only jabbering parties – from the point of view of the working people – is that the diplomats assembled represent the interests of their own groups of capitalists, and try to grab the biggest pieces of bacon to bring home to their respective master classes.
 
Employment Where?
This is the kind of politics that Roosevelt is engaged in. That is why the problem of unemployment will not be solved by him or by any other capitalist politician or capitalist party. That is why such a staunch pro-
Roosevelt man as the journalist, I.F. Stone, has been constrained to admit: “I see no evidence of any steps, private or public, that can insure anything like full employment.”
Naturally so. The problem of unemployment can be solved only on the basis of production for human needs. Roosevelt has placed himself squarely on the other side of the fence – for the preservation of private profits and the capitalist system. Being a capitalist politician and the head of a capitalist party, he naturally can do nothing else. He is the servant of the master class.
And does the master class served by Roosevelt want the full employment he so glibly promised? A reading of their press in recent months leaves no doubts. A windy discussion goes on daily on – of all things – what “full employment” means. It is funny that no high-sounding definition of full employment had to be made when, at the peak of war production the entire unemployment slack was taken up. But when it comes to peacetime employment, the capitalist writers are anxious about definitions.
Thus the Saturday Evening Post writes:
“Mechanical devices have been advanced as a result of manpower shortages, and we are quite likely to see another important revolution in the use of human labor in industry. But this does not mean that a man not needed at the kind of job he now has will be ‘unemployed’.”
What, pray, will he be?
And here is an anti-labor columnist of the New York Sun, camouflaged as a babe in the woods, who wants to know: “Is a worker who works nine but not twelve months a year in a seasonal industry unemployed for three months?” That, problem in kindergarten arithmetic is counterposed to the great problem of unemployment.
 
FDR Operates Under Capital
Let no worker be deluded by the so-called liberalism handed out for election purposes. The capitalist class and the profit system have not changed their character. Neither have capitalist politicians changed theirs.
In this campaign the great mass of workers was misled by their leaders. Roosevelt has no solution for the unemployment problem. Unemployment is a problem for labor itself to tackle and defeat. The government that will bring full employment to the workers will have to be a WORKERS’ government.
The power of labor, this year diverted through the PAC to back Roosevelt and other capitalist politicians, must be used now to build an independent Labor Party, free from all capitalist connections, with an employment program motivated by human needs – and ready to kick Mr. Roosevelt’s dear system of private profit into the limbo where now rest the equally cruel systems of chattel slavery and feudalism of the past.
 




Women are supposed to be more interested in marriages than men are, so I don’t, want you to miss this one – in case you haven’t read about it.
King Peter of Yugoslavia – who is ruling his country long-distance from London – married Princess Alexandra of Greece, of the royal family of King George – ruling the Greeks long-distance also from London.
Of course, you want all the juicy tidbits. Well, Peter is twenty – and, Alexandra is twenty-three. Do you think they can be happy with the woman three years older? Alexandra didn’t seem to be aware of this problem as she displayed “a flash of silken hose beneath a mink coat.” The groom wore the light blue uniform of the Yugoslav Air Force.
Of course, all the long-distance royalty was at the wedding, including Haakon of Norway and Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands. There were red carpets, flags and candles, as became the occasion. Large sleek limousines conveyed the guests to the Yugoslav delegation, where the wedding was held. And so that there might be no partiality, the ceremony was performed by priests of the. countries of both the bride and groom.
Everything was in order – except, alas, for one thing. Tradition calls for weddings of Yugoslav rulers to be held on home soil – WHILE THE PEOPLE HAVE A NATIONAL HOLIDAY FOR MERRYMAKING.
How kind! How noble this custom! Such touching unity between the great and the lowly!
But it’s quite possible the people of Yugoslavia are thinking of other things these days. Maybe they are, considering ways and means of keeping the royal bloodsuckers from returning to their old business. Maybe, they are thinking of forming a democratic government of, for and by the working people.
*
Eighty-five per cent of the 350,000 women members of the CIO United Auto Workers have signified, their belief that their place is no longer in the home. They are industrial workers and intend to remain industrial workers for the same reason that motivates all, workers – THE NEED TO EARN A LIVING.
At the same time we hear from the Office of War Information that women are hardest hit in cut-backs on war employment because they were “last to enter the labor market.”
Unless full employment is insured for all, says Dr. Eveline M. Burns, formerly connected with the National Resources Planning Board, “our only hope of holding our gains and widening our fields if the competition for jobs becomes keen is to use the economic motive, to offer to do the same work for less.”
This must not happen. It would mean knocking the bottom out of all wage standards. The profits of the capitalists would soar – but poverty, disease, misery would mount up for the working people.
Dr. Burns is absolutely right. Only by giving full employment to all can disastrous competition for jobs and wage slashing be avoided.
However, people like Dr. Burns do not have a solution that will bring full employment. Neither, for that matter, has R.J. Thomas, head of the UAW-CIO. For he naively relies on “The new Bill of Rights outlined by President Roosevelt.”
*
Will President Roosevelt fight for a thirty-hour week to make room for all workers who want to work? No – because he stands, for the profit system, and the profit-makers would rather have an army of unemployed receiving a dole from the government than pay their workers a decent wage for a thirty-hour week.
Will President Roosevelt fight to keep government plants from going to big business to be shut down and kept idle if big business wants it that way? Will he fight to operate government plants for the production of civilian goods for people to use and to give jobs to workers? No – because he is for the Baruch plan, which gives big business full grabbing and grubbing rights.
Will Roosevelt fight for the right of the workers in shut-down plants belonging to private capitalists, to open up the plants and work on goods that people so badly need but don’t have the money to buy? No – because Roosevelt stands for the “inviolable” rights of private property.
Will Roosevelt fight for a huge, public program for building, houses, schools, hospitals, nurseries, playgrounds, parks, beaches for the people – a program large enough to give full peacetime employment, just as the nearly hundred-billion, yearly expenditure for destructive war has given full wartime employment? No – because a capitalist government doles not spend such sums of money on the needs of the people but only on the power-and-profit needs of the ruling class. And Roosevelt heads a capitalist government.
The points enumerated above form a program for full employment for all workers. This program can be fought for and achieved only by the workers themselves, relying on their own economic strnegth in solidarity; on their own political power exercised through an Independent Labor Party fighting the capitalist parties and politicians; on their own ability to form a workers’ government.
The women workers should be right up in front, supporting, rooting and working, for this program that Labor Action and the Workers Party stand for!
*
Since the start of the war child mortality in Europe has risen thirty-one per cent.
At least 50,000,000 homeless, orphaned children wander about Europe, trying to find food and shelter in the woods, or in any way conceivable, becoming little animals.
In some places the population is 100 per cent diseased, suffering from one ailment or another due to hunger, homelessness, shock, infection, lack of medical care.
Tuberculosis plagues up to fifty per cent of the population in some localities of war-ravaged Europe.
In her column, My Day, Mrs. Roosevelt callously commented on the situation described above:
“I know that one of the arguments is that feeding children will help us to win the war. It is said that the people in the occupied countries are becoming weaker and bitter, and that they will not feel that we are any better than their present suppressors when we attack. That again is question for the military to decide. We have not as much information as they have, but even a layman like myself cannot believe that the peoples of the nations now subjugated can be so short-sighted.”
This column, in which the First Lady accuses the starving, dying people of Europe of short-sightedness for wanting to eat, starts with this sentence: “FRIDAY NIGHT THE CABINET DINNER WAS GIVEN TO THE PRESIDENT IN THE WHITE HOUSE ...”
*
What more information is required about the miserable European masses than the facts printed above – which cannot be disputed?
These days every inhuman or reactionary policy is excused by so-called: “military considerations.”
In the case of withholding food and medical supplies from the European people – to the extent that it. is possible to get these there – the reason is not military but political.
What does that mean? Simply this:
Saving lives and relieving the suffering of people are not really the concern of the powers that be. What kind of government will the European masses support? Will it be the kind Roosevelt, Churchill, Stalin will approve of? These are the questions. Food and medical supplies will be handed out through a government of THEIR choosing when they see fit. Food and medical supplies will be used as “arguments” against workers’ socialist governments being formed.
In the meantime, you wretched ones, don’t be short-sighted! The Cabinet dines in the White House.
 




The vast range of commodities that go under the name of textiles makes that field of manufacturing of special interest to women. Whether it’s panties for the baby or overalls for the man of the house, whether it’s a kitchen towel or drapes for the living room, the housewife is dealing with textiles.
And they are plenty dear these days – and the quality is terrible.
You have heard it said, no doubt, that it is those awful wages that account for skyrocketing prices. With textile prices as high as they are, on that theory, the wages of textile workers should be right up on top.
However, when you pay fifty cents for a pair of panties that used to cost ten or fifteen cents, it it NOT because the wages of textile workers are making war millionaires out of them. Here are the facts about textile wages.
The CIO Texile Workers Union is now, arguing before the War Labor Board for a raise for textile workers. The average cotton-rayon textile worker makes fifty-seven cents an hour. If he works a forty-hour week, he earns $23.80, from which taxes, etc., are deducted. He can’t exactly roll in milk and honey on that wage.
Taking five typical textile communities in the North and South, the union showed that on the basis of a budget devised, BACK IN 1935, by the WPA for relief workers, it would take $29.33 a week for a family of four to subsist. That miserable budget allows for only the cheapest food and housing; for no automobile, of course; but not even for haircuts or newspapers; and for no recreation other than one movie a month. This budget is based on making an overcoat last six years, a summer suit five years, a sweater four years, a work shirt three years.
Now get this point straight! The textile workers can’t afford even this kind of substandard budget that was the miserable lot of WPA relief workers in 1935! And this is at the height of a war boom that is making the war profiteers Midas-rich.
*
The interest of women in the textile industry is not only that of the housewife buying wearing apparel and household furnishings. Women workers have always been employed in the textile industry in large numbers.
In fact, about the first machines to be used in manufacture were textile machines, and a great majority of those first mill workers were women. Before the war over a half million women operated the machines in the textile mills of the country, by far outnumbering the men.
Textile employers’ preference for women workers is not that they want the feminine influence in their mills, but because women workers were and are paid low wages. Cheaper labor equals higher profits. For the same reason, a great deal of child labor has been used in textile mills, and textile companies have been bitter enemies of child labor laws.
This is the background of the textile industry. It was built on cheap labor – on the meanest exploitation of women and children. In1944 the textile companies are living up to their traditional practices. The wages of textile workers are so low that the WPA relief worker of 1935 was better off.
*
The prize package, to be unwrapped last, is this:
The textile companies have the gall to declare before the War Labor Board that if the textile workers get “any substantial wage increase” it will have to be passed on to the public in the form of higher ceiling prices “on practically all cotton products.”
But the OPA doesn’t even wait until the wages of textile workers are increased to raise prices on textiles.
A week or so ago a New York Times headline read: “TEXTILE PRODUCERS GET PRICE RELIEF.” The OPA allowed the manufacturers to pep up their prices on chambray shirting, basic denim and other weights and finishes of denim. In other words, the prices of work clothes will be going up some more.
You may think you need relief from the already exorbitant prices of textiles. But the OPA doesn’t see eye to eye with you. It figures that when textile mills doubled their profits in 1942 over 1941, that wasn’t yet enough. When fifty-three specific textile companies made even more than that and in 1942 tripled their pre-war profits, that still was not enough. So you will pay more for shirts, overalls and many other things – WITHOUT THE TEXTILE WORKERS GETTING A PENNY MORE IN WAGES.
*
While on the subject of prices, profits and wages, here’s a morsel much more juicy than the kind of steak a working class family can get these days.
With prices of meats doing their bit to have made the increase in food prices today nearly 75 per cent over 1941 prices – and packing house wages so inadequate that workers leave that industry to try for better jobs – George A. Eastwood, president of Armour & Co., is one of those who do all right for themselves.
IN 1943 HE COLLECTED A SALARY OF $102,560.
Do you think there may possibly be some connection between the high prices you pay for meat and the high salaries the packing house big shots pay themselves?
*
Just as happened during the last war, so now talk is beginning about women sitting in at the peace conference. Mrs. Roosevelt, who says she “adores being sixty,” feels she is too old to fill the bill. Such women as Madam Chiang Kai-shek and Queen Wilhelmina, Mrs. Roosevelt thinks, should be included – Wilhelmina not being too old because she has spent all her life in the field of diplomacy. Mrs. Roosevelt believes that Anne O’Hare McCormick, columnist for the New York Times, would be a good choice – and so on.
Can serious people really read such nonsense?
What, in the name of common sense, has age or sex to do with the matter of making peace?
From the point of view of working men and women, Queen Wilhelmina does not qualify because she is the head of the old Dutch Empire, living off the exploitation of workers at home and of colonial slaves. Madam Chiang Kai-shek cannot represent the workers because the Chiang Kai-shek regime is for building up the capitalist class of China at the expense of the Chinese workers and peasants. Anne McCormick could not be a well-paid columnist in the No. 1 capitalist paper of America if she stood for workers’ interests against capitalist interests. And Mrs. Roosevelt herself – were she a chick of twenty-one – is a member of America’s ruling class, and by “benevolence” to the working class goes only as far as ruling class interests permit.
But even members of the working class sitting in at a conference of imperialist governments, would be about as effective as a hot water bag to cure cancer.
The thoughts of all working people today should go to the problem of cutting out the cancer of capitalist imperialism which will always bring wars – no matter how many women and representatives of labor sit in at imperialist “peace” conferences.
WHAT THE WORLD NEEDS TO BRING PERMANENT PEACE IS AN INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF WORKING CLASS GOVERNMENTS SET UP IN EVERY NATION OF THE WORLD.
 




Irving S. Olds, chairman of the United States Steel Corporation, recently answered this question – IN THE NEGATIVE.
He was speaking at the yearly meeting of the Travelers Aid Society.
The financial editor of the New York Sun reports Mr. Olds as taking “a crack at those who are making so much fuss over the ‘obligation’ of industry to provide jobs for every one after the war – to avoid the accusation that the capitalist system has fallen down.”
Mr. Olds reminded his audience that industry “can employ men ONLY when it has a ready SALE for the goods the men produce.”
In a word, to Mr. Olds, industry has no obligation to provide jobs. To expect the capitalist system to abolish unemployment is to make a silly fuss. There has always been unemployment under capitalism – so why talk about its falling down? There has always been unemployment because privately owned industry employs men only when there is a profitable market for its product.
That’s the answer of a top-notch industrialist to the unemployment question: IT HAS ALWAYS BEEN – IT ALWAYS WILL BE – UNDER CAPITALISM!
By his brutal frankness Mr. Olds illuminates the falseness of all the “plans” that come from those who profess it is possible to “reform” capitalism. For as long as industry is owned by the class typified by the United States Steel Corporation and Mr. Olds, they are the ones who determine how industry will function.
 
“Simple and Fundamental”
Mr. Olds made the position of the industrial masters very clear and concrete for he went on to point out that “It costs United States Steel, for example, around $5,000,000 a day to carry on its present daily output – an outgo it couldn’t stand many days if there were no income.”
By “income” Mr. Olds, of course, means PROFIT – and he doesn’t mean any old kind of profit either!
The financial editor of the New York Sun comments very sharply and briefly on Mr. Olds’s statement: “That all is very SIMPLE AND FUNDAMENTAL, but a powerful lot of people either don’t understand it or don’t wish to admit that they do.”
Now everything is settled. Unemployment is “very simple and fundamental.” All that is necessary is to “understand” this.
What have Labor Action and the Workers Party to say about this simplicity and fundamentalism of capitalism?
First of all, they do indeed admit that it is fantastic to expect the United States Steel Corporation or any other private enterprise to lay out $5,000,000 OR $5 A DAY to run its plants so that workers may have jobs.
But Labor Action and the Workers Party do not admit that for this reason unemployment is inevitable. They do not admit this because the United States Steel Corporation and private ownership of industry are not inevitable, not ordained to everlasting life.
On the contrary, Labor Action and the Workers Party point out that the capitalist system is doomed to go down in defeat. It is doomed exactly because, as Mr. Olds states, it is based on “a ready sale for goods” rather than THE HUMAN NEED FOR GOODS.
The human need for goods never ceases – even though the money to buy goods may be lacking. FULL EMPLOYMENT, THEREFORE, WILL RESULT WHEN INDUSTRY IS RUN TO FULFILL HUMAN NEEDS. And labor will fight till it wins this objective!
 
Relieve Mr. Olds and U.S. Steel
The idea is to relieve United States Steel Corporation and Mr. Olds of their RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE PROFITS OUT OF INDUSTRY. The idea is to nationalize all industry, and place it under the direct control of qualified workers’ committees. The idea is that men and women can be fully employed in producing the never-ceasing needs of the population – with no concern about profits out of sales. The idea is that men, women and children can consume and enjoy everything that is produced by hand and brain, limited only by their capacity to produce.
It is for this that a workers’ government must be formed. A workers’ government will set itself the task of ending the capitalist system which – as frankly admitted by the capitalists themselves – has no solution for unemployment!
The admission of top capitalists that their system cannot provide security for the workers is an admission of abysmal failure and defeat, from the workers’ point of view. At the same time it is a challenge to the workers to take over production themselves for the benefit of the whole people.
The fight for the thirty-hour week, to provide more jobs, is a fight in this direction! The fight to prevent government war plants from being turned over to private industry is also a fight in this direction. These plants must not be shut down for lack of “sales” but held as public property and operated, by the workers to produce civilian go.ods. The demands for a peacetime public improvement program to equal the .enormous war program is in the right direction.
All these things the workers will be able to accomplish only by and for themselves, as they end their dependence on the capitalist class – as they break with the Siamese-twin political parties of the capitalist class – as they strike out on the path of independent political action through an Independent Labor Party.
This is the path leading to a workers’ government, to the end of capitalism, to the permanent solution of the unemployment question.
 




While the eyes of all of us are focused on national and international affairs centered in Washington, our information as to what transpires in the capitals of the states of these United States is none too plentiful. Our attention was sharply called to the fact that state legislatures exist and function – for good or bad – by the recent adoption by the House of Representatives of the State of South Carolina of a Hitler-model race-supremacy resolution – though it would be more accurate to say that the South Carolina brand of race-supremacy existed before Hitler’s model.
In this resolution that reads like a product of the Dark Ages, these poll-tax “representatives of the people of the state” reaffirmed “our belief in and our allegiance to established white supremacy as now prevailing in the South, and we solemnly pledge our lives and our sacred honor to maintaining it, whatever the cost, in war and in peace.”
We know what this language means in actual practice – intimidation, brow-beating, KKK violence, lynching. And the resolution warns “the damned agitators of the North” to leave “the South alone” in the enforcement of “race supremacy.”
What else is going on in the sovereign states of the Union while “democracy” is being made safe on the battlefields of the globe?
 
Laws to Break Unions
In the state of Arkansas the Christian American Association – a fascistic, KKK type of organization subsidized by anti-union employers – is engaged in a vicious campaign to break the unions in that state. They maintain a powerful legislative lobby. Combining with that a petition campaign, they hope to have passed a so-called “freedom to work” amendment to the Constitution. The amendment aims to abolish the closed shop.
The lying propaganda carried on by the CAA is to fool people into believing that the amendment will “guarantee these fighting sons and daughters of yours and ours an equal opportunity to earn when they return – the right to work, regardless of membership in some labor union ...”
The unions of Arkansas have organized, to resist the passage of this boss-supported amendment. Its passage would mean that both workers and returning soldiers would be without the indispensable protection of the unions and at the complete mercy of the capitalists. The Arkansas Voters. League has been organized to defeat the proposition.
In Alabama, the Bradford law was recently passed, requiring all of the local unions to file with the state, union by-laws, names and salaries of officers, union receipts and expenditures. This is equivalent to giving the employers detailed information on all union affairs. The fact that the law was passed during a series of coal strikes indicates its strike-breaking purpose.
Four hundred of the five hundred AFL locals in Alabama have served notice of non-compliance with the law, which they designate as “a labor baiting law designed to destroy labor unions in Alabama.” The law provides the penalty of jailing leaders and stopping the collection of dues if the unions fail to file reports. The latter could easily be accomplished by ordering accommodating employers to halt the check-off.
The same Christian American Association – which is neither Christian nor American but just pro-capitalist – was the force behind this Alabama law. W.O. Hare, executive secretary of the State Federation of Labor, defiantly says: “It would be worth a couple of years in jail to win out in this fight.”
 
More of the Same
In the state of Mississippi the Legislature is considering a law to outlaw the union shop and to prohibit referral of men to jobs through unions, thus giving the employers’ unrestricted rights of exploitation of labor in that state.
In the state of Washington a labor-baiting organization with the innocuous name “Citizens Committee for Industrial Peace,” is – like the Christian American Association – carrying on a petition campaign. The petition is for a referendum on a law prohibiting “closed shop” agreements, curbing picketing and giving the employers the right to dictate union internal affairs through their politicians.
 
Powers Behind Politics
It is important to note that the “Citizens Committee for Industrial Peace” is a front organization for the notorious “Associated Farmers” – the organization of big business farmers that has won itself a reputation for unequalled ruthlessness in fighting labor in the West. Also noteworthy is the fact that Vance Muse, leader of the Christian American Association, was formerly secretary-treasurer of “American Taxpayers Association,” financed by du Ponts, Mellons, Insull and others, for carrying on lobbies to reduce income taxes on the rich. John Henry Kirby, another backer of the CAA, is a millionaire lumberman, in whose edifice, the Kirby Building, the CAA is housed.
These are the forces labor is pitted against. Labor is putting up a legal fight at present in at least half a dozen states, contesting the constitutionality of anti-labor laws already on the books. Among the states are Colorado, Texas and Florida. In most cases the enforcement of the law is
held in abeyance until the decision of the case. However, in sunny Florida, the “attorney general is in a hurry and is trying to compel union organizers to register with the state and unions to open their books for inspection – even though a suit is pending on the question of constitutionality.
The Virginia bourbons, not content with poll-tax control of politics, are backing legislation requiring any person coming into the state after January 1, 1945, “who desires to gain residence as to right of suffrage,” to file a declaration of intention to vote ONE FULL YEAR BEFORE HE WILL BE ALLOWED TO EXERCISE THIS RIGHT. This, plainly, is another method of disfranchising the common people.
 
Here’s the Point
It is no accident that the anti-labor and reactionary legislation reported above is in poll-tax states, i.e., Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia – though the battle against labor and progress is not confined to these states, as witness the State of Washington.
Free franchise must, of course, be given to all the black and white population of the nation, in every state of the Union, to break the power of the poll-taxers. Labor is vigorously supporting the anti-poll-tax bill which is due soon in Congress. What will happen, however, if the Southern bloc stages another filibuster?
The cardinal point brought out by. the die-hard fight against labor and progress both in Washington and in the state capitals, is as clear as crystal. The political machinery of the country is rotten to the core. It is becoming infected with the poison of capitalist KKK-fascist combines. The gangrene is impartial to both the Democratic and Republican parties.
What is plainer than that labor needs above all else its own class political party? What is more necessary than to have as candidates of such a party well known and reliable union men and women to sit in the places of government, instead of the elements now in control?
 




President Roosevelt has pronounced the New Deal outmoded, belonging to the horse-and-buggy political category – dead. Thus the “father” of the New Deal buries his eleven-year-old offspring.
He took occasion to do this when an out-of-town correspondent, Dilworth Lupton, columnist of the Cleveland Press, visited a White House press conference and stopped to exchange greetings with the President. Later Mr. Lupton reported what the President said.
Stephen Early, presidential secretary, hastened to confirm Mr. Lupton’s report. Yes, said Mr. Early, the President wishes to drop the New Deal label and adopt a “Win the War” slogan. Mr. Early also profoundly observed that “The term New Deal was born in 1932. It is now 1943.”
 
What About the CIO?
This unceremonious action by President Roosevelt leaves the CIO Committee on Political Action holding the bag. This committee, with Sidney Hillman and other CIO leaders at its head, and with $700,000 of good union money to do it with, has been organizing for Mr. Roosevelt and the New Deal the waning support of the rank and file of labor and the working people.
To be sure the statement on political action adopted by the 1943 convention of the CIO criticizes the government for its failure on occasion to act with sufficient militancy and vigor. And Mr. Hillman got so “militant” as to assert: “We will make our commitment for 1944 in 1944.” But there was no doubt in anybody’s mind that the CIO Committee on Political Action is pro-Roosevelt-New Deal.
There has been propagated by labor leaders the most inexcusable rot about the New Deal. It has been presented as a shining chariot on which the working people will ride to a capitalist paradise – with Roosevelt, of course, in the driver’s seat. The fact is that the New Deal was designed not to save the working people but to save the capitalist class.
The crisis of 1929 was so deep and devastating that the capitalists were scared out of their wits. Their profit system was shaking at its foundations. Crashing banks, closed factories, million-hordes of unemployed, all looked like doom to them.
They were then in favor of any kind of a deal just so as to get their system functioning again – even with a few new features. Roosevelt was their man to try to stem the tide of mass discontent and to give the reeling capitalist system a leaning post.
But today the outlook of the capitalist class is very different. The majority is through with the so-called “socialistic trends and ideologies of the New Deal.” It is through with “coddling” labor. It is bent on putting the government out of business, and business on the basis of unrestricted “private enterprise.” If it has any fears about the stability of the capitalist system, it feels it can bolster it up by suppressing: labor – even to the extent of using fascist methods.
In a word, Mr. Early is quite right. The year 1943 is not the year 1932. Which means that Mr. Roosevelt has naturally and inevitably yielded to the reactionary trend of the capitalist class which he serves. This is the disease of which the New Deal died.
 
Not a Surprise
Though Mr. Roosevelt’s burial of the New Deal is not ceremonious, being done very quietly by making a statement to a single reporter, it is not unexpected. The corpse has certainly been smelling up the place for a long time.
The President’s anti-labor actions and his buckling under to congressional reactionaries have long ago indicated the moribund condition of the New Deal. Furthermore, there is. a considerable list of “fired” New Dealers – from Leon Henderson, bounced off the OPA, to Vice-President Wallace, bounced off the Board of Economic Welfare. In all cases Mr. Roosevelt has put into office men more acceptable to the reactionaries.
As much as he hated to do so, even the kow-towing Sidney Hillman has had to express his “disagreement with many of the things practised, not only through the agencies carrying out executive orders, but some of the things written into the executive orders themselves.” Mr. Roosevelt, be it remembered, is the man who issues executive orders these days – and they have very little of the New Deal about them.
 
Things on FDR’s Mind
Though the CIO leadership insists on rewarding its “friend” even after its “friend” has had a change of heart, Mr. Roosevelt has other fish to fry.
The CIO leadership plaintively begs: “Come back to the New Deal, Frank, and all will be forgiven.” But Franklin Delano Roosevelt answers: “That old thing is dead! I’ve got other things on my mind.”
Mr. Roosevelt is now so used to the shameful spectacle of labor leaders licking his boots that he isn’t too worried about their support.
Now he has on his mind the National Association of Manufacturers, who are going all-out against the same so-called “socialistic trends and ideologies of the New Deal.” Now he has on his mind the Bourbon Southern Democrats, who also don’t like the New Deal, to put it mildly. It is the favor of such as these that Roosevelt now curries. He officially buries the New Deal in order to enter into a new political deal with the whole gamut of reactionaries in this country.
 
Implications of CIO Position
Mr. Roosevelt is not frightened by the criticism of the labor leaders. He thinks he still has the labor movement bull-dozed to get its support for a fourth term. And no wonder! Did not the most militant labor organization in the country, the CIO, come out definitely with the capitulating statement: “We have no desire to organize another political party.”
As long as the labor movement is not confident enough to project its own class party, Mr. Roosevelt is not afraid. He thinks that as against a Republican – even the “liberal” Willkie – he can still pass as the better “friend” of labor.
Just consider the implications of what the CIO has done in regard to political action.
With the New Deal dead and its guardian angel about to bury it, the CIO leadership at its convention was so behind the times that it decided to go to town for both.
With big business, as always, financing the Democratic and Republican Parties to be sure to have its special interests protected, no matter which way an election goes, the CIO leadership can do no better than hog-tie labor to one of these boss outfits. With the president of the General Electric Company, now on the War Production Board, making public the fact that big business is supporting fascist elements, the CIO leadership is still opposed to labor taking political action independent of big business.
 
On to an Independent Labor Party!
The $700,000 of union money used by the CIO committee to, boost Roosevelt should have been the nest-egg for forming an independent Labor Party. Labor has no time to lose. Action as a class in its own interest is urgent. Pressing problems such as unemployment, soldier relief, fascism at home, can be solved only by labor itself – through its own class party working toward the establishment of a labor government.
Let Roosevelt bury his dead New Deal. For labor it was a harmful decoy. Labor’s next step is to turn its back on Roosevelt, on Wallace, on Willkie, on all so-called “friends” of labor, on all boss politics.
On to an independent Labor Party of the working class!
 




A woman writes to the editor of the New York Sun as follows:
“Listening to the radio, I heard, purporting to come from Madame Perkins, that the cost of living had risen only three per cent. I never got beyond the simple rudiments of arithmetic, so cannot determine how this figure was arrived at. One thing I do know: whereas I could buy six lamb chops cut thinly for forty cents, now two thin chops cost forty cents. Take eggs at sixty cents a dozen against thirty-five cents; three pounds of onions formerly cost ten cents, but one pound now costs nine cents. I cannot get Secretary Perkins’ three per cent rise in food costs to fit into this pattern.”
Neither can any other woman concerned with feeding, clothing and sheltering a family.
Jackpot question: How can a government that doesn’t even state the price situation honestly, solve that problem to the satisfaction of working people?
Labor Action has been calling for the formation of committees of organized labor, organized housewives and organized working farmers to tackle on their own the food food problem. At least, such committees would start with the real facts about high prices – AND THEY WOULD LOOK AT THE QUESTION WITH THE SOBER EYES OF PEOPLE LIKE THIS WOMAN WHO WRITES TO THE EDITOR OF THE NEW YORK SUN.
*
And here is another reason why Labor Action continues its campaign for the organization of people’s committees to solve people’s problems.
A few days ago Mayor LaGuardia bawled out Chester Bowles, head of the OPA, for not keeping his promises to protect consumers and for not keeping the skirts of the OPA clean of “political influences.”
But what else could be expected from Mr. Bowles except that he should break promises to the consumers and dabble in politics?
Mr. Bowles is a top-shelf advertising executive, boss of the Benton & Bowles advertising agency. Catering to big business and pulling political strings are in the very life-blood of men with his background.
Furthermore, Mr. Bowles has given jobs in OPA to many of his former associates in the firm of Benton & Bowles, who brought with them into OPA the same qualities and methods that made them valuable as employees of a business serving big business.
As boss of OPA, Mr. Bowles’ accomplishments are mainly those of catering to big business – just as he did as boss of Benton & Bowles. Thus even the Wall Street Journal is obliged to admit: “The OPA is permitting dozens of higher prices, but rolls back few.”
In this way big business permeates and dominates all government departments, supposedly concerned with the problems of the working people – and that is why these problems are “solved” by big business getting more profits.
*
Under pressure of dire necessity, Congress enacted a bill providing a minimum of financial help in defraying the expenses of childbirth to the wives of men in the armed forces. Naturally, the pay of the soldier is not munificent enough to cover the unusual expense involved in childbirth.
Many sad cases of neglect brought a clamor for government help. Finally, provision was made for a physician’s fee of fifty dollars and for hospital confinement of sixty dollars.
You may think now things are not so bad for the expectant mothers of soldiers’ children. But if you do, you figure without the many ramifications of that atrocious institution known as “free enterprise.”
One of the staunchest upholders of this system of freedom for the few at the expense of the many is the American Medical Association. With all its state and county branches, AMA is the big business organization in medicine in this country. Just as the National Association of Manufacturers protects the profits for big industrialists, so the AMA protects big fees for the big shots in medicine.
These big shots look down their noses at fifty dollars as a fee for a delivery. They much prefer fees running into the hundreds. So they set up a shout that Congress was “socializing medicine.” They went ahead and sabotaged the plan to help soldiers’ wives. They as good as instructed their members to be “TOO BUSY” to take the cases of soldiers’ wives. These champions of “free enterprise” threatened individual physicians with loss of all hospital connections if they did not obey orders. At this writing this shameful spectacle still goes on.
This is one of the things about the system of private profit that makes words poor instruments for expressing one’s feelings. The only outlet is to grit one’s teeth in determination to work like sixty to make the working people see the need for socialism as the means to end private profit in all its hideous forms.
*
The wives of soldiers and workers have plenty of heartaches bringing their children into the world and keeping them here – and you can’t any longer say: “It shouldn’t happen to a dog.” For the life of a dog of the social set, at any rate, is something to be envied.
There is, for example, the Dog Bath Club in the swanky Fifties off Park Avenue in New York. There a pedigreed dog or unpedigreed mutt whose. owner has the do-re-mi can get sprayed with coconut oil, shampooed, dried and curled by electric dryers. A modern barber shop has been installed for the little dears, with electric clippers for manicuring their tootsies.
These precious pets have their teeth examined and scaled, and their pyorrhea treated – AS MANY MILLION CHILDREN OF WORKING CLASS FAMILIES SHOULD HAVE DONE AND CANNOT. A veterinarian is in charge. To climax this canine paradise, there is a private swimming pool where their royal highness can frolic about.
We have no grudge against dogs – not even against the dogs of the rich. But we oppose such injustice in the distribution of the wealth of the wealth of the nation that the dogs of the rich are better off than the children of the workers who produce that wealth.
*
Over the radio the other night, Dorothy Thompson, radio commentator and newspaper columnist, declared herself to be an optimist about the post-war period. She thinks that the rate of war production can, continue into peacetime, that everybody can have jobs, good wages and more of the good things of life.
It’s nice to be cheerful – provided there is a foundation for it. However, when Miss Thompson began to substantiate her cheerfulness, an intelligence was being insulted.
For instance, Miss Thompson came out with whole-hearted praise of Beardsley Ruml’s plan for a “new America in each generation.” What is this new idea of the genius who devised the pay-as-you-go tax plan? Mr Ruml is in favor of tearing down all factories, buildings, schools, roads, bridges, etc., every twenty to thirty years. And why engage in this orgy of destruction? To be able to rebuild it all – to be able to use up material, employ labor, pay wages, etc.
Such fantastic ideas only indicate the inability of the capitalists to give a really sensible answer to the problem of post-war production and employment – so important to every man, woman and child. Especially is this apparent when – as Miss Thompson herself pointed out – even this crazy scheme of creating work by tearing down and rebuilding everything, would employ only 6,000,000 men and cost only $10,000,000,000. This is only onetenth of the manpower employed today and about one fourteenth of national war income.
The only basis for cheerfulness for the future is the revolutionary reorganization of society to produce for the needs of human beings and no longer for the acquisition of profits for the few.
However, we haven’t heard that Miss Thompson is in favor of the working class solving its problems this way.
 




Every worker has heard the phrase, “checks and balances.” It’s another way of putting the idea that what the left hand gives the right hand takes away. Thus legislatures may pass pro-labor laws which the courts can “check and balance” off by declaring them unconstitutional.
The above story of a so-called wildcat strike in a Jersey shipyard exemplifies how the system of “checks and balances” works for American labor. In a nutshell, all the checks are put on labor – while the big profit balances pile up for the shipyard owners and their brethren.
The War Labor Board is itself an outstanding illustration. Labor representatives of the so-called “public.”
And who are these representatives of the public – supposed to be a cross-section of the American people seen by Mr. Johnson, who narrates the above story? He had dealings with three of them, namely Dr. John Steelman, Dean Wayne Morse and William Hammond Davis. Who are these men, besides being members of the multifarious public? Dr. John Steelman is professor of sociology and economics at Alabama University. Dean Wayne Morse is deal of the Law School at the University of Wisconsin. William Hammond Davis is a patent lawyer. Are these men free, unbiased, interested only in balancing the scales of justice in labor disputes? People are what their backgrounds make them.
The Universities of Alabama and Wisconsin are institutions of capitalist education – even though they may be state colleges. Their BASIC outlook – no matter in what “liberal” guise it is concealed – is that of private property. This is the background of Dr. Steelman and of Dean Morse.
Mr. Davis is a patent lawyer. Patent lawyers function for big fees paid by the captains of industry to protect and enlarge their profits by using and abusing the patent laws. Patent lawyers have a niche of their own in the capitalist structure.
How can such men represent the public interest when the public is made up overwhelmingly of the little people? THEY DON’T!
That does not mean that the War Labor Board granted absolutely none of labor’s demands in absolutely every dispute. Not at all! Enough minor demands are granted to give the appearance of fairness. BUT LABOR AS A WHOLE IS KEPT UNDER THE FREEZE.
 
From Smiles to Threats
The methods of the government men with whom the yard committee came in unhappy contact are in themselves an application of the system of “checks and balances.” Dr. Steelman, you noted, is “straightforward and democratic,” calling the shipyard committeemen “Bud.” He is the smiling receptionist, putting the horny-handed sons of toil at ease.
Dean Morse follows through with “sympathy.” He agrees with the yard committeemen that “that’s a pretty big speed-up you have ... the accident report shows it.” So the worried representatives of the shipworkers begin to feel they are among friends.
But then comes the balancing factor. Mr. Davis, patent lawyer, is the “other extreme.” He is not concerned about the “night shift that had already walked off the job.” Not he. He makes “his not very witty wisecracks about what he had done, to John L. Lewis” – while all the time the yard committee knows that Davis refers to what he had done to “500,000 sweating, underpaid miners.”
So the yard committee interprets Davis’s wisecracks as a warning to them. And sure enough, it was “checked and balanced” with an empty promise that the case will be taken out of the graveyard files of the WLB “some time in the near future.”
 
Why Was Hague Interested?
It is noteworthy that the politicians also come in as a factor. The Hague gang became a bit worried. Why? Because the WLB is part of the machinery of the New Deal, and Hague’s political wheels are important parts of the New Deal Democratic National Committee.
Boss Hague is kept in power by people such as these shipyard workers foolishly and blindly voting for his candidates. If the large body of shipyard workers are dissatisfied with the New Deal WLB, they might stop throwing away their votes on Hague’s dummies.
That is why Hague sent his nephew down to Washington with the yard committee to “check” on the WLB.
With what result? This “check” is balanced off by the WLB referring the case to the Shipbuilding Commission, which was, however, in the act of being reorganized and couldn’t take up the case just then.
 
Johnny Green’s Role
After two months of WLB “working” on their case – when the bitterness of the men, was great and spontaneous work stoppages, slowdown and sitdowns ended in a “sitdown that we couldn’t keep from the public.”
The WLB decides another “check” is in order. So Johnny Green – in person – is ORDERED BY DAVIS (!) to get the men back to work. Didn’t the WLB give Johnny the check-off in that yard in return for his promise to keep the men from striking? And doesn’t Green owe greater loyalty to the WLB than to his own men?
The rank and file did not reward their president “with boos and catcalls” – as sometimes is the response given by shipyard workers to the “friendly” admirals who exhort them not to strike while the company fleeces them. To Green they gave a painful, icy, “respectful, deadly silence.” But he deserved the same censure as anybody else who cripples the striking arm of labor.
 
The Last Straw
When, at long last, the WLB made its rulings in the case, they were a fine example of giving with one hand and taking away with the other. But modest as the rulings of the WLB were, the shipyard owners objected. Granting vacations, they claimed, was really a “wage raise” which was only more “checking and balancing” against labor.
That was the match that lit the tinder. After three months of shameful “checking and balancing” – with the union leadership working hand-in-glove with the pro-boss WLB ,and through it with the bosses themselves – “thirteen thousand men hit the bricks over the pleas of union officials’ and shop stewards.” THAT IS WHAT IT TOOK TO GET ACTION OUT OF THE WLB.
What are the lessons to be learned from Mr. Johnson’s graphic description of how the workers are being kept in check?
First, foremost and outstanding is the fact that it was only when “thirteen thousand men hit the bricks” that smug Mr. Davis in Washington stopped wise-cracking about what he
had done to the miners. There is no substitute for the might of the working people – no substitute for the, right to strike – no other way to make the industrial owners and their “public” servants heed the demands of the workers.
Therefore, the no-strike pledge has to be finally and officially rescinded by every international union: There must be an end of the “sad sight” of labor leaders pleading with the workers who pay them fat salaries, TO CAPITULATE TO THE CAPITALISTS.
Furthermore, the no-strike pledge is a hidden weapon against UNIONISM ITSELF. The unorganised workers in the yard could certainly see no reason for joining a union that was keeping its own members down, just as, the enemies of labor are. “The unorganized were more for striking than the organized. Non-unionists baited us for being afraid to strike.” That was the big hit the union made with the unorganized workers.
 
Labor or Capitalist Politics?
Mr. Johnson draws some very sound conclusions in his enumeration above. However, his last point is fundamentally wrong. It is indeed the fundamental wrongness of this point that makes it possible for labor to be “checked and balanced” as in the case of this shipyard strike.
Mr. Johnson says:
“Come election time, it will be difficult for Mr, Roosevelt to explain away the activities, of these gentlemen. Undoubtedly the closed shop, maintenance of membership and check-offs will hold the top labor officials, both AFL and CIO, on the President’s bandwagon. But rank and file workers who have been through the ordeal of the WLB, and who have been more or less coerced into acceptance of its decisions, will be on the lookout for a liberal candidate of presidential stature who will give the whole set-up the blasting it deserves.”
But wasn’t Mr. Roosevelt “a liberal candidate of presidential stature” who promised to give the whole setup that labor hated and writhed under the blasting it deserved? Why should labor run around in circles? Will Willkie be better than Roosevelt? Will the Republican Party be better than the Democratic Party? Will anything be changed except the names of the political job-holders?
It is high time to stop this nonsense of jumping from the frying pan into the fire. Labor needs and must organise its own political party based on the unions and absolutely free and clear of all capitalist ties. Through the medium of an independent Labor Party it can proclaim a program to solve labor’s problems, on class lines. ASIDE FROM A CLASS SOLUTION, THERE IS NO OTHER.
And, of course, who, reading Mr. Johnson’s excellent story, does not want to shout: “LABOR MUST GET OFF THE WLB!”?
 




Yes, it can happen here. It can happen that the lower wages paid to women workers will become the norm for all wages. And this is not just scare talk. For here is the columnist of the New York Times writing under the headline Topics of the Time who put that very idea into print.
Commenting on the report of the New York State Department of Labor that among office and clerical workers, women earn less than men in comparable jobs, he says:
“But when we say that women clerical workers earn less than men in the same kind of work, it is the same thing as saying that the men earn more than the women. In that case you are bound to ask why the profit-seeking employer should choose to overpay his male employees.”
There it is – the standard of wages paid to men after decades of bitter struggle is a sign of the employer OVERPAYING his male employees! By implication, the lower wages received by women workers should be the normal wage for all workers.
The columnist quoted above puts a touch of so-called humor into his piece. But many an anti-labor thrust starts with a little jibe to find out how much comeback labor has. *
That is why the rash of strikes spreading in England at the present time to gain for women the same pay as for men in the same jobs, are of such tremendous importance. In the past months thousands of women workers in England have demanded equal pay for equal work – AND HAVE GONE TO BAT TO GET IT.
More important still, men workers begin to understand the necessity to raise the wage level of women workers up to their own – for their own protection. In some cases men have struck together with the fighting women. This was true when 3,000 male workers joined 2,000 women workers in a Scottish war plant in a struggle for equal pay for both sexes.
Three cheers for these militant workers!
Labor solidarity is labor strength – and any kind of discrimination against any group of workers because of sex or color or religion injures all the workers.
*
If you have tears, prepare to shed them for the poor, downtrodden landlords. Imagine the nerve of the OPA issuing a rent-freezing order!
It is true, of course, that landlords are collecting the same and higher rents – and giving much less in service. Where a large apartment house once had a night and a day man, besides the superintendent – now, in a great many cases, the superintendent gets along with one helper or with none at all. However, this saving of wages must naturally not be held against the landlords. Oh, no!
Where landlords once painted and repaired apartments for both old. and new tenants, now they do neither for either. This additional saving must also be overlooked.
Where once tenants raised hell if the heat and hot water supply were not sufficient, now tenants are intimidated by the fuel shortage. Landlords – whether they have to or not – cut down on both. In spite of the increase in the cost of fuel, they still are not the losers by the transaction.
Once there was quite a turnover in the housing market and to-let shingles decorated the exterior of houses all year around. Now the housing situation makes every hovel rentable and vacancies so rare that the flow of income is uninterrupted and yearly profits much greater.
But why mention such facts, so damaging to the landlords’ demand for a ten per cent rent increase?
Yes, why mention them – unless they are acted upon by tenant committees working together with organized labor to give these profit-grubbers a dose of what they need! *
This year the problem of buying herself an adequate winter coat has been a very serious one for every working woman. It has been nearly impossible to get a warm and durable coat for the money a working woman could afford to spend.
Of course, Secretary of Labor Perkins assured us – bright and early on January 1, 1944 – that the cost of living has gone up a mere three and a half per cent during 1943. Here is a woman who most definitely did not go out during 1943 with $22.75 in her pocket for a winter coat. If she had, she would have discovered that the $22.75 coat of 1942 would have cost her $32.75 in 1943. That looks like an increase of almost fifty per cent – not three and a half per cent!
Another person who did not have this experience with a winter coat is Mrs. Henry Ford. She will probably make her Russian sable coat valued at $100,000 do for the duration.
Don’t look at me that way! That’s right – $100,000 for one fur coat! But then, there is a lot of profit in the automobile industry – especially with fat war orders on the books and the wages of auto workers frozen stiff.
People who live off profits filched from labor don’t have to be too particular about whether cost of living indices are right dr wrong. They are delighted to accept the Perkinese way of figuring – since that gives them “statistical backing” for opposing wage increases.
*
The American public – especially the women back home – are being diplomatically prepared for the casualties that the big push in Europe will inevitably mean. The toll of human life is expected to rise to half a million in the next three months.
From Algiers comes the warning of Surgeon Joseph I. Martin of the Fifth Army in Italy that families are bound to have a psychological shock when their crippled and wounded sons, brothers and husbands return home. “The people must expect to see the results of the war,” he said.
Those who will be the wounded and the dead of World War II were the infants and children whose elders were the casualties of World War I. These were the little ones who were supposed to grow up in a world made “better to live in” by the Allied victory in 1918.
This was not so – judging by the horrible fate that is being meted out to them.
Can a woman today look at her baby with any assurance that it will not be a shocking casualty of World War III when it grows up?
She could only if the working people of the world join hands to set aside the whole world system of capitalist imperialism and to establish workers’ governments throughout the world – and WORLD SOCIALISM. OUT OF THE PRESENT SYSTEM CAN COME ONLY INTERNATIONAL POWER POLITICS THAT WILL HAVE TO EXPLODE INTO ANOTHER WORLD WAR.
LET US WORK FOR A SOCIALIST WORLD!
 




There is no doubt at all that the purpose of a national service law, or conscription of labor, proposed by the President, is a strike-breaking device.
Only the uninformed can believe that this measure is proposed to solve the manpower question. The simple fact is that the “manpower situation” has turned into the beginning of an unemployment situation.
Steel workers are being laid off because of cut-backs in war orders. The same is true of aluminum workers and many others. As R.J. Thomas, president of the United Automobile Workers, stared: “Great numbers of our war workers are being laid off. Others are denied full-time employment.”
With this development in unemployment, there are no two ways about the meaning of the proposed conscription of labor: IT IS AN ATTEMPT TO TAKE AWAY FROM LABOR ITS BASIC RIGHT TO STRIKE. And the President said as much in his message to Congress.
A further fact that makes it quite clear that labor conscription is not prompted by a manpower shortage is the fact that thousands upon thousands of capable and skilled Negro workers are kept out of jobs for which they are suited.
It may, therefore, be confusing to some workers why there should be opposition in Congress to the President’s proposal to conscript labor as an anti-strike measure. Opposition in Congress is pretty strong. The latest news from Washington, as Labor Action goes to press, is that the House Military Affairs Committee voted to “postpone indefinitely further consideration of such legislation” as recommended by the President.
 
In the Halls of Congress
Does this perchance indicate a pro-labor attitude in the halls of Congress? Banish the thought. What the anti-labor contingent in Congress is looking for is to put more teeth into the Smith-Connally bill, Mr. Smith, one of the authors of that boss law aimed at the very heart of labor and that specimen of capitalist politician known as a Southern Democrat – has already proposed a brand new bill that “would outlaw strikes for the duration through the application of sanctions.”
In a word, while the President, in his usual suave way, seeks to take away from the working class the right to strike in a round-about fashion, his opponents in Congress want no monkey-shines, but a direct, definite and unmistakable anti-strike law with sharper teeth than the Smith-Connally law has.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE PRESIDENT AND HIS CONGRESSIONAL OPPOSITION IS ONE OF METHOD – AND NOT ONE OF PURPOSE.
 
An Attack on Unionism
Naturally every attempt to take away from labor its strike weapon is also an attack on unionism itself! Very bluntly this angle is covered by Phelps Adams, reporting in the New York Sun on the new Smith bill. Mr. Adams stated: “The effect of the legislation would be to wipe an offending union out of existence for the duration of the war.”
No less than that – “to wipe an offending union out of existence”! At least that’s stated so every worker can understand its meaning.
But how about President Roosevelt’s way? Is his way less anti-union? Let us see what Presidents Green and Murray of the AFL and CIO have to say about that?
These misguided labor leaders who have been so busy around Washington pointed out that the Senate committee considering the Austin-Wadsworth national service bill – which is along the lines of the President’s proposal – has written into the bill an anti-closed shop provision. This committee also proposes what is called by labor a “Pegler” amendment giving any worker conscripted by the government for a certain job, the right to refuse to join a union.
The Austin-Wadsworth bill is a little more involved and veiled than the proposed new Smith bill. But the big stick with which to hit labor’s organizations is stamped all over it.
 
Heads or Tails
For the workers, the Roosevelt way and the Smith way add up to a case of “Heads you win – tails I lose!” Victory for either the national service bill or for direct anti-strike legislation means defeat for the workers – and a loss of ground for the worker-soldiers who will be well off when they get back home only if labor defends and enlarges the rights of labor. And the anger against the Roosevelt proposal from all labor – except the disloyal Stalinist-controlled unions – indicates that labor knows what this is all about.
Labor, official weekly of fifteen railroad brotherhoods, has gone to town in denunciation of the President’s labor conscription plan. But still it cannot get over the deep hurt it feels that Roosevelt has gone back on the workers. It makes the point:
“It was incomprehensible to them that the man who, since he was first elected Governor of New York in 1928 has been the recipient of the support and devotion of American workers, could, in all seriousness, urge that these workers be subjected to involuntary servitude.”
What is really incomprehensible is that American labor should still be messing around in capitalist politics, becoming “devoted” now to this capitalist politician and now to another who beats his chest and calls himself a “friend of labor.”
The lesson to be drawn from this vile attack on the labor movement from all sides – from the side of its self-proclaimed “friends” and from the side of its outspoken enemies – is that labor must move forward politically. Its political strength can be realized only through the medium of a national independent Labor Party – protecting the class interests and projecting the class demands of the workers.
 




The swelling tide of anti-Semitic acts makes necessary a review of the various actions being taken to combat this menace.
Most naturally, the Jewish people, through their own organizations, have begun to take measures. Thus the Anti-Defamation League of the B’nai B’rith compiled a detailed report of the recent attacks on Jewish children in New York, involving slashings with knives, as well as of the defacing of synagogues with swastikas and of the damaging of Jewish properties.
The report of the B’nai B’rith has stirred up widespread indignation in New York City and forced the attention of Mayor LaGuardia to this burning question. Public opinion has compelled Police Commissioner Valentine, who at first was very complacent about the whole matter, to assign additional police patrols to the districts of New York most affected. How efficacious they will be remains to be seen.
 
Anti-Semitic Cops
More important, however, is the fact that the composition of the whole police force is now under fire, the height of public clamor having been reached over the case of James L. Drew, the policeman exonerated by Commissioner Valentine in spite of the fact that his connection with such fascists as Christian Mobilizer Joseph McWilliams has been proved and in spite of the further fact that the Department of Investigation of the city knew he had large bundles of anti-Jewish literature in his home. Mayor LaGuardia informed the city over the radio the other day that the case of Drew is under review.
Along these lines, Victor Riesel calls attention in his column in the New York Post that the metropolitan police force is honeycombed with Christian Fronters and sympathizers. He recalls that several years ago FBI Chief J. Edgar Hoover handed LaGuardia the names of 1,500 cops who had applied for membership in the Christian Front. In 1940 LaGuardia himself conducted a poll of 19,000 policemen and discovered that 80 admittedly had been in the Christian Front. Twenty confessed to paying dues to the fascist outfit at the time of the poll.
Nothing at all has been done with this damning information, and hundreds of anti-Semitic cops are supposed to be protecting the Jewish people from anti-Semitic attacks. This situation is alarming, not only in New York, but in every other large city. Coordinated action to end this dangerous infiltration is indeed urgent.
 
Some Steps Already Taken
However, the Jewish people must realize that what we have come to know as filthy politics is so ingrained in capitalist society that the best preparation is self-reliance. The CIO Community Council in the Jewish populated Brownsville-East New York sections of Brooklyn is possibly a step in this direction.
This community council has been active in the Drew Case, calling mass meetings, etc. Neighborhood defense should also be a problem of such committees. They, of course, will have to avoid the danger of getting into the control of Stalinists and others who would manipulate affairs in their own interests rather than those of the community. The most trustworthy as neighborhood leaders would be the most militant and progressive union rank and filers.
Action along an altogether different line has been taken by the Textbook Commission to Eliminate Anti-Semitic Statements from American Textbooks. Nearly three thousand ministers have thus far pledged themselves to tackle anti-Semitism in the field of education and in the home. They will attempt to puncture the ages-old myth that the Jewish people killed Christ and expose other more insidious forms of anti-Jewish propaganda in the churches, schools and Sunday schools.
Other, organizational efforts, more or Jess militant, could be listed. However, the most important thus far announced is the National Committee to Combat Anti-Semitism. The CIO News reports it as an organization “dedicated to the proposition that anti-Semitism in any of its forms is fascism.” Considering the times “we live in, there can be no two ways about that!
The National Committee to Combat Anti-Semitism sets itself the immediate task “to effect the introduction and help in the passage of national legislation outlawing anti-Semitism.” Sponsoring this committee, are not only writers, actors, churchmen and politicos, but among the initial sponsors are included labor leaders, i.e., Presidents Philip Murray of the CIO, R.J. Thomas, of the UAW, Albert J, Fitzgerald of the UE, S.H. Dalrymple of the URW, and Clinton S. Golden of the USW.
It is to be expected that organized labor be in the forefront of the fight against anti-Semitism, which is part of the fight against fascism. But what labor must understand, and quickly, is that it cannot afford to be the tail to any liberal kite. Labor must be the heart, head and body of the anti-fascist movement, around which all anti-fascist elements can rally.
This is not said with a desire to impugn the honesty of the many liberal and public spirited men and women on the National Committee to Combat Anti-Semitism nor to question the propriety of labor leaders working with them on such a committee. But from the standpoint of realistic politics, it is undeniable that both present-day anti-Semitism and its sire, fascism, aim primarily at the annihilation of the labor movement. Labor must be the hard core of anti-fascist resistance.
A law outlawing anti-Semitism is desirable, by all means. But to rely solely on a law on the statute books is folly. For labor to take the lead in the fight against anti-Semitism and fascism does not mean for its leaders merely to participate on committees such as this one. It means rather that, aside from all such activities, every union local must be ready to guard its national and local union bodies – and also to guard with the Jewish people or the Negro people their neighborhoods from fascist attacks. If the triumph of Nazism in Germany has taught anything, it has taught this: Anti-Semitism and fascism can be nipped in the bud by counterposing labor’s organized strength – IN TIME!
 




It is one thing to acknowledge the existence of an evil and quite another to have a program for removing the evil.
Informative it is indeed to get the figures of Chester Bowles, OPA head, that the black market in food alone; costs the housewives of the country $1,200,000,000 annually.
As individual consumers we have all known that the black market reduces our dollars and our standard of living. It is interesting indeed to be told the extent of the black market squeeze on a nation-wide scale.
But what is to be done about it? That’s the question.
Mr. Bowles gave a long talk on black market machinations at a panel discussion on The Black Market vs. the American Housewife, sponsored by the New York Times.
A few days before Mr. Bowles’s speech the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor asserted that the figures of the CIO and AFL that the cost of living had gone up 43.5 per cent since January 1, 1943, are “absolutely wrong.”
Government vs. Housewife
However, the statistics of the report on the cost of living are “based on evidence from hundreds of American housewives.” In a joint statement, Meany, secretary-treasurer of the American Federation of Labor, and Thomas, president of the United Automobile Workers, CIO, added that
“No group of government bureaucrats have ever before had the audacity to insult millions of American housewives by telling them that their experiences are all wrong and that they should instead try to live on Bureau of Labor Statistics statistics.”
What conclusions must we draw from the above? Mustn’t we conclude the obvious, that not only is the Black Market vs. the American Housewife, but that Government vs. Housewife is also a fact?
What housewife who knows her onions, and most of them do, does not laugh out of the other side of her mouth at the “statistics” of the Bureau of Labor Statistics that the cost of living has gone up only 23.4 per cent in the past three years!
If all the facts presented by Mr. Bowles on the operation of the black market were included in the cost of living – which even the Meany-Thomas report did not do – that is no doubt that Mr. Bowles himself would be supporting the CIO-AFL contentions on the cost of living rather than those of the BLS.
The OP A head spoke not only of the food black market but of over-charges for clothing, tires, gasoline, furniture, second-hand refrigerators and other home equipment – whose effect can be only roughly estimated.
And the question is still: What is going to be done about it?
Mr. Bowles talked about public understanding, about some arrests, about checking done on wholesalers, about the honesty of most merchants – and about his own very good intentions.
 
We Have Our Doubts
Can the American housewife rely on this same old palaver? We doubt it.
We doubt it for exceptionally good reasons. The reasons are:

First, as indicated in the so-called statistics of the Department of Labor, the government itself does not face the facts of the cost of living – but minimizes it. In this case it minimizes it by no small figure. For the difference between the report of the CIO-AFL and the government is a slice-down from 43.5 per cent to 23.4 per cent.
 
Second, the government agencies in charge of production and price regulation are honeycombed with dollar-a-year men, whose concern is primarily with their corporations’ war profits and whose outlook on the whole situation is not too far removed from that of the black market, namely, profits at any price.

It is all right for Mr. Bowles to reveal the function of “the man named Gus” who “simply stops in for a talk before an order is delivered and says that on payment to him of $100 the order will be delivered on schedule and at the ceiling price.”
This individual black market stuff is, after all, comparatively small-time as compared with the “legitimate” take of individual war profiteering with Washington connections.
 
A Working Class Problem
Let no American housewife be lulled into inaction by speeches like those of Mr. Bowles. As stated at the beginning of this article, giving information is one thing – acting on the information to remedy the evil is quite another.
The whole question of the high cost of living, involving the black market, ceiling violations, ration violations, unnecessary shortages, can be handled to relieve the working people only by working people.
The call for the organization of committees of labor, housewives and working farmers to tackle this problem must be heard and acted on.
What better proof is there that the working people must demand control of the food situation through their own organization than the facts revealed by Mr. Bowles?
After years of so-called fighting the black market from Washington, this is still the deplorable and menacing situation that prevails.
 




There isn’t one section of Italian society – except the outright fascists – that favors Badoglio. When Churchill in his recent speech approved of Badoglio and the King, all of Allied-occupied Italy was stirred to protest, In fact, nearly everyone in the world has nothing but contempt and condemnation for the pal of Mussolini and his unstable government.
But Stalin, with the brazenness employed by dictators, has unceremoniously recognized Badoglio and his government, and the exchange of ambassadors is now in progress.
Liberals, “leftists” and the regular party-liners have, of course, been stunned, bewildered and chagrined. This is because they – or at least the well meaning ones among them – resent and resist all the horrid facts about Stalin and persist in imagining a socialistic halo around his head.
However, those who remember facts recall that Stalin, not too long ago, made an alliance with Hitler which gave the latter the green light for starting the war. Going back a bit further into recent history, this is not the first alliance between Stalin and Badoglio – or the latter’s then chief, Mussolini. For when General Badoglio was fighting in Africa, to acquire an empire for the Italian ruling class, it was Stalin’s oil that burned in the weapons used against the Ethiopians.
Earl Browder, of course, was not available to comment on this new evidence of the counter-revolutionary role Stalin plays in world history. He was not in, had not been in for several days, and could not be reached.
The Italian Communists have announced that the recognition of Badoglio by Stalin makes no difference to them and that they are still opposed to Badoglio and the King. What else can they say without losing all hold on the Italian masses?
But here, too, a little memory is a useful thing. For a week ago, when the anger against Churchill’s endorsement of Badoglio was at its height and a strike demonstration was planned, the Communists yielded to pressure from General Solodovnik, Stalin’s representative in Italy, to call off the strike. By the admission of the Communists themselves, they already knew at that time that Stalin was about to give official recognition to Badoglio.
Here is an illustration of typical Stalinist double-crossing. They will doubtless continue to put their false-face toward the masses while turning their real face toward the light from the Kremlin.
There are various speculations as to why Stalin leads the rest in recognizing the fascist outfit. Some commentators say it has something to do with the division of the Italian fleet. Others are of the opinion that Stalin wants to demonstrate again that there is no need to fear “Communist” revolutions nurtured by him. Still others point with alarm to Stalin’s worming his way into the Western part of Europe – supposedly the territory of British and American imperialism. Again there is talk of a deal between Churchill and Stalin.
The last is an interesting conjecture. Churchill, wanting to recognize Badoglio, as indicated in his speech, was fearful of the overwhelming popular resentment against him in England, in Italy and everywhere else; But, because of the victories of the Russian army and the lingering illusion in the masses that Russia still stands for socialism, Churchill conceived the usefulness to him if Stalin would lead the way in recognizing the fascist Badoglio.
This sounds like one lively explanation. What do you suppose Stalin gets as a reward for this favor to Churchill, who – with the United States – will now also confer official status upon the Badoglio mockery of a government! That may come out into the open when the working class of Europe can get at the secret archives of their present rulers.
Will Stalin’s endorsement of Badoglio give him more prestige in the eyes of the Italian masses? They know their fascists, with or without Stalin’s endorsement.
No doubt the move by Stalin has spread confusion among those who still misguidedly consider him the head of a socialist state which does not exist. But this confusion will subside and turn into knowledge. It will turn into the knowledge that in this revolutionary crisis in their land when they are struggling to free themselves from oppression from fascists within and from imperialists from without, Stalin sided against them.
In revolutionary times people learn fast. Disillusionment with Stalin and the Communist Party that follows his dictates, is absolutely necessary for the revolutionary progress of the Italian masses. Stalin’s recognition of Badoglio furthers that disillusionment.
 




To say that there is a war on and that this is why there are shortages of vital commodities is really not explaining anything.
Take the scarcity of meats, for example.
Most of us visualize cargo ships going to foreign ports laden with meats for the overseas forces and for lend-lease as the reason for the wide-open spaces in the butcher’s icebox.
But Lewis J. Clark, president of the United Packinghouse Workers of America, CIO, has another story to tell about the critical meat situation.
“Hundreds of thousands of livestock are cluttering the stockyards of the nation, with slaughtering and packing facilities lying idle because the industry’s low wage policy and bad working conditions drive people to other jobs,” says Mr. Clark.
This is something every housewife should know.
Furthermore, packinghouse workers are putting in seventy, eighty and ninety hours a week – in some cases even as many as 120 hours. The strain on the workers is terrific, and all because the low wage policy of the rich companies drives skilled men into other industries where wages and hours may be better.
At the present times the packinghouse workers are demanding a modest ten-cent-per-hour wage increase, but Armour & Co. and the other meat packers are fighting this reasonable demand tooth and nail.
“The meat packers claim,” says Mr. Clark, that they can’t raise wages unless they are allowed to raise prices to the consumer. This claim is false. THE MEAT PACKERS ARE MAKING TRIPLE THE PROFITS THEY MADE BEFORE THE WAR, AND THEY WEREN’T EXACTLY STARVING THEN. They can pay decent wages without gouging the consumer any further.
This is something to know when you regard the clean stretches of white enamel in the butcher shop – unbroken by sight or sign of red meat:
With war profits triple the ample profits of pre-war days, the profiteers would rather deepen the meat crisis than cough up a paltry raise so their workers can hold their own against prices that have risen by 43.5 per cent since 1941.
*
And while on the subject of war profits, here’s another tidbit worth stopping over:
All winter woolens have been as dear as diamonds. Most of us have been compromising on all sorts of shoddy substitutes that have neither the warmth nor the durability of woolens. But do have the same prices that formerly bought woolens.
Now if we trace this situation back to the manufacturers, it means of course that they are selling less woolen goods to the civilian population, which can’t afford the prices.
The American Woolen Co., one of the giant concerns of the industry, as a matter of fact reports that its sales in the year 1943 actually fell $7,676,325 below the year before.
But before weeping in sympathy with the American Woolen Co., consider this additional fact: In spite of the fall in gross sales, the net profits of the company ROSE BY SEVENTEEN PER CENT over the net profits of 1942.
So why should big business worry about high prices? Their gross sales may fall because prices are so high that you and I cannot afford to buy many necessities – but their profits still continue upward.
What irony that the dollar-a-year men of big business are in Washington supposedly to “hold the price line” for you and me!
*
As the war proceeds all talk of equality of sacrifice becomes more and more nauseating because of its blatant hypocrisy.
To workers whose wages have been frozen at the 1941 level while prices have gone up 43.5 per cent, the ten per cent cut out of wages to buy war bonds really means a sacrifice that hurts.
To the capitalist class whose war profits accrued at the rate of $8,600,000,000 for 1943 and will be over $10,000,000,000 for 1944, buying war bonds is not only a lucrative investment – because their wealth permits them to buy the bonds in great bulk – but is also a source of ribald pleasure.
It sticks like gall in the throat to read about the swanky parties where the “four hundred” make whoopie while performing their “pay-triotic” duty buying bonds.
Bejeweled on every part of the anatomy available for the purpose – including the ankles in some cases – and bedecked in gowns perhaps coming from the salons of Nazi-occupied Paris, Park Avenue dowagers playfully bid up their bond purchases by the tens of thousands in competition with each other for such a prize as maybe a live pig. The males of the species amuse themselves bidding, in bonds for maybe a bottle of rare scotch or perhaps a pedigreed dog.
All this “sacrificing” goes on in the gleeful surroundings of a hot night club or private party. You can be sure that not one of the female “sacrificers” has to give up a single diamond tiara, bracelet or anklet – because of war bond purchases. Nor does any of the male “sacrificers” have to give up even as little as his private cigar humidor rented at Dunhill’s to keep his favorite “weeds” at just the right moisture.
*
The other day Mrs. Roosevelt quoted in her column, My Day, a letter she received from a friend.
“It seems, to have been necessary for both of my sons to give their lives in this war,” wrote the friend. “I am willing, and able, to take it if their deaths and those thousands of others who are dying far away from home can be justified by a better and more equalized world when the war is over. If we get anything like the ‘status quo’ or ‘back to normalcy,’ it can be nothing but a hideous waste.”
Mrs. Roosevelt, of course, agrees that we must have “a better and more equalized world.” In fact, the First Lady is full of good intentions, which she voices at every possible opportunity. Lately at a meeting of two thousand women in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, she said: “Either we are going to have a brotherhood of man or we are going to have war.”
Fine words, but only words – and here is the proof:
There is before Congress the May bill under which boys of seventeen years would be required IN PEACETIME to go into either military or naval training for at least one year. Representative May is a realistic capitalist politician who knows that capitalism will bring future wars and so goes ahead to prepare for them by militarizing the youth of the land.
But how about the idealistic First Lady who talks about “a responsibility toward the boys who have died” and who spouts about the “brotherhood of man”?
Mrs. Roosevelt also thinks the military regimentation – IN THE POST-WAR PERIOD – of boys of seventeen “quite all right if they don’t go overseas before eighteen.” She even goes further and wants girls included!
This is how the First Lady stands on the subject of peacetime military training for the youth of the country. The lady of oh so many good intentions approves the vile system of compulsory all-time military training for boys and girls because she thinks in terms of future wars. Otherwise she could not have said “if they don’t go overseas before eighteen.” For going “overseas” means going to war.
For the purposes of oratory, Mrs. Roosevelt is all for the “brotherhood of man.” When it comes to practical measures, she goes along with the other supporters of the capitalist system who are preparing for World War III.
On this planet there is not room for both the capitalist system and the brotherhood of man. Labor Action wants to push off the profit system to make room for the socialist brotherhood of man.
 




The Nazi vogue of exterminating whole peoples has filled the normal human being with loathing for the barbarians guilty of such contempt for mankind.
Today, however, with the Nazi armies on the run, WE are being propagandized to follow the vogue set by the Nazis themselves, and exterminate not the Nazis as such – but the whole German people. Even so-called men of God, quoting the Bible as authority, come out with such ungodly statements as, “What remains to be done is to kill every German.”
It is easy to understand how the embittered European peoples, so long under the Nazi heel – suffering torture, horror and degradation in the cruelly refined manner the Nazis have mastered – might passionately hate all Germans and, out of bitterness, believe that all of them are capable of such inhumanity.
 
The Propaganda Mill
But the truth is that “Exterminate the Germans” is not as much a cry from the hearts of tortured people as grist in the propaganda mills of the United Nations. We are expected to believe that all Germans alike are responsible for the murder factories on the Lublin model. Newspaper reports, editorials, radio comments increasingly have that slant. And there is a reason why now, more than ever before, hatred of all Germans is the theme of the propaganda of the United Nations. With this propaganda they are laying the so-called moral basis for their plans regarding Germany, namely: to divide the country among the victor nations, dismantle its industries, and impose foreign dictatorships over every phase of life of the German people.
At this crucial stage in human history, the working people here and everywhere can little afford to be duped by lying propaganda. They must have a complete and realistic understanding of Nazism and its relation to the German people. To draw no line between the Nazis and their first and foremost victims – THE GERMAN PEOPLE – is to play directly into the hands of the very elements responsible for Nazism.
In reading about the extermination factories the Nazis established in conquered Europe, we must not forget that the Nazi butchers started their human slaughter houses inside of Germany first. In shaking our heads over the torture and terror the Nazis inflicted on Europe, we must remember that the Nazis came into power – and to this day continue in power – by torturing and terrorizing the Germans!
The working people of this country, of England, of Russia, of France, of Italy, have been encouraged by United Nations leaders to forget that the German workers once stood foremost in the world because of the strength of their economic and political organizations, and the class-consciousness of their political views. The Nazis annihilated a generation of advanced working people before they could go ahead and twist the minds and feelings of German youth to do the dirty work of Nazism.
To serve the imperialist plans of the United Nations powers, we are supposed to forget such facts. Let us see what other facts we are supposed to forget – facts that give evidence to the truth that German working people are like all other working people.
 
They Fought Back
There are the eye-witness reports about German common people aiding the Jews in the days of the terrible pogroms – and being themselves jailed and tortured for giving such aid. There are the personal stories of foreign workers escaped from Germany, telling of the comradeship shown by German workers to the slave-workers from Poland, Russia, France, Italy; the sharing of meager rations with those who had less; the assistance in escapes given to foreign workers who wanted to join: the partisan forces of their own countries – all done at the risk of death at the hands of the Gestapo.
There are, furthermore, the accounts of how older German workers, still clinging to the ideals of working class emancipation, sought to teach the Nazified young workers some of the principles of working class struggle – this with Gestapo spies honeycombing every factory. There are reports of strikes by German workers and demonstrations by German housewives – even under the machine guns of the Nazi rulers. And there is an underground in Germany; yes, an underground in Germany, and a secret labor movement, even after
the extermination of the working class vanguard, the intellectuals and the progressives.
In a word, the line of demarcation between the Nazi overlords and the German people is no less than a battlefront. And lying propaganda, lumping all Germans under the head of Nazi, attributing the villainies of the Nazis to all Germans, and calling for the extermination of “every German” has – to put it mildly – held out neither hope nor help to the German people in their grim and un-publicized struggle against the Nazis.
 
Allied Plans for Germany
The Roosevelt-Churchill-Stalin triumvirate has not given the German masses any hope or help in their anti-Nazi struggle because these supermen are frightened by the mere thought of the overthrow of the Nazis by the German people. For this would mean the establishment of a people’s government in Germany, claiming the land and industries as their own, establishing their complete independence from foreign rule, and instituting socialist solutions to the overwhelming social problems facing them.
Roosevelt-Churchill-Stalin aim for a military debacle of the whole German people, for the division of Germany among themselves, for plundering the industries of the country, for the complete subjugation of the sincerely anti-Nazi German working people.
 




This article will deal with the political coloration of the convention of the Industrial Union, of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers, CIO. The tenth annual convention of the IUMSWA certainly had plenty of political coloration. Estimating the division of convention time, it is fair to say that at least as much time was spent on campaign speeches for the re-election of President Roosevelt as in attending to union business.
Furthermore, the political decisions of the delegates had great bearing on the decisions on union policy. For once the convention went on record to support President Roosevelt, it became consistent and logical for delegates – especially the wily Stalinists – to argue that supporting Roosevelt means to support his labor policies, i.e., the crippling no-strike pledge and the tricky War Labor Board.
But to estimate truly the political temper of the convention, one must go further. There was a realization among the delegates that the problems facing the working people – and indeed the whole of society – are political problems whose solution can only come about if labor controls government. This is the basis of rank-and-file enthusiasm for the PAC as the first attempt at organized political action by labor.
 
Political Huckstering
But here is the rub. The PAC takes the aroused energy of labor and turns it into the channels of capitalist politics. This was the line brazenly and shamelessly followed in all the speeches made before the shipyard workers. By the out-and-out politicians like Vice-President Wallace and Senator Pepper, and by the union leaders including Green and Van Gelder of the IUMSWA, Phil Murray, Thomas of the UAW and Hillman of the ACW and PAC, the absolutely false and fantastic promise was made that full employment, complete social security, permanent world peace and a brave new world would be ushered in by re-electing Roosevelt on November 7.
From none of these capitalist-minded labor leaders came so much as a peep that labor does not have to limit its choice between the capitalist candidate Dewey and the capitalist candidate Roosevelt, but has the numbers, the influence and the means to form an independent Labor Party, running labor candidates, with the final goal of a workers’ government.
No, none of the accredited labor leaders present spoke a syllable on the subject of a Labor Party. But Vice-President Wallace’s keen political nose smelled the possibilities for labor’s independent political action, and he took occasion to sow seeds of discouragement by stating – not once but several times – that “labor can’t swing this country by itself.”
Wallace thereby not only tried to sow seeds of discouragement but also a false conception. For independent labor politics, does not mean that labor will swing this country “by itself.” It means that by coming out as political contestants on their own, with a program climaxed in production for use instead of for profit, organized labor can rally behind itself the great mass of professional and white collar workers, farm laborers and small farmers, small business. people and other sections of the middle class, all of whom would be beneficiaries of labor’s political leadership.
But instead of a bold advance of labor along the road of political action independent of the capitalist parties, Wallace wants labor to use its overwhelming strength “needling business into an abundance policy instead of a scarcity policy.” Was it for this that the delegates, representing 400,000 shipyard workers, shouted themselves hoarse, clamoring “We want Wallace!”?
Senator Claude Pepper, Florida Democrat, who recently did some fancy side-stepping on the question of Negro equality in order to get his nomination in the primaries, showed his training in Congress as a wordslinger when he addressed the convention! Sprinkling his speech amply with such phrases as “Wall Street against Main Street,” “the country club against the country”; wisecracking that Dewey if elected would put in Westbrook Pegler as Secretary of Labor; condemning the Republican Party for “their imperialistic style,” Pepper’s spellbinding methods succeeded in making most of the delegates forget that both the Republican and Democratic Parties are cut from the same cloth.
As for the speeches of the labor leaders, this reporter has never before heard such loose and irresponsible talk. Philip Murray, for instance, made the mouth of every delegate water with his outline of a post-war plan he had laid before President Roosevelt. It envisaged the building of extensive airports and highways; the expansion of industry, schools, hospitals; comprehensive planning to give full employment, social security, good health, adequate education, industrial safety and all the rest. Then he made it appear that all this and heaven too would come to labor if it elects a “friendly” Congress and re-elects Roosevelt in November.
Does Murray forget that the capitalists of this country, back in 1940, could not be made to convert from peace to war production to fight their own war, until “adequate” profits were assured them by the President and Congress? Will a President and a Congress that believe in capitalist profits – as every Republican and Democratic candidate does – get by with, or want to get by with, a plan to serve the needs of the people as against capitalist profits? Only a workers’ government could do that!
 
Communist Line Again
A most dangerous note was struck by Phil Van Gelder, secretary-treasurer of the IUMSWA and Communist Party-liner. He not only implied, but plainly stated, that now that labor has branched out into political action through the PAC it has no further use for the strike. Van Gelder is through with what he called the “good old-fashioned militant strike.” Since he has joined the Army, it seems he has become not only a military strategist but the formulator of a new union strategy. “You move up scattered and cautious,” said Van Gelder. The might of organized action is passé, according to him. Van Gelder would permanently give up the right to strike – along with those in the camp of Harry Bridges – and leave the destiny of labor in the hands of the “friends” that PAC wants elected.
However, it is more likely that organized labor will throw out their misleaders rather than give up their right to strike. As for political action, which was so much talked about at the tenth annual convention of the IUMSWA, the basic error of PAC policies will force labor to strike out into independent labor politics.
 




For the first time in the history of the United Rubber Workers, President Sherman H. Dalrymple was opposed for re-election as head of the 190,000 members of the union. The opposition candidate, George Bass, president of Goodrich Local 5, polled 394 votes – nearly thirty-five per cent of the total – to Dalrymple’s 756.
The forces behind Bass, which shook the earth under the feet of the Dalrymple administration – represented the rank and file discontent of the powerful Akron locals and included some of the small unions.
This vote can be understood properly only in the light of all the surrounding circumstances. It was apparent from the beginning of the convention proceedings that the Dalrymple strategists would take every advantage that their official position afforded them. Thus they steam-rollered through a convention rule to hold the elections on Friday morning – come hell or high water. Consequently the elections took place before hearing the appeals of the General Tire workers, of the Goodrich workers and of other locals. The appeals, which were the crux of the case against the administration, were not heard until Saturday. By that time many of the delegates had gone home, all were tired out, all welcomed a compromise; so that not only was the case against Dalrymple and the outgoing General Executive Board not heard before the election of new officers – it was not properly heard at all.
Under the circumstances, the vote of 394 for Candidate Bass opposing Dalrymple, of 422 for Wheeler of Local 2 opposing Buckmaster for vice-president, of 370 for Watson of Local 7 opposing Lanning for general secretary-treasurer, means more of a shake-up than the mere numbers indicate. A truly democratic convention procedure on the appeals would have influenced the elections.
Aside from the cases on appeal – which will be dealt with later – the big issue before this ninth convention of the rubber workers was the rescinding of the no-st|ike pledge. This is true not only because of the growing rank and file sentiment throughout organized labor for repudiating this anti-union policy, but because the rubber workers specifically have been so grossly victimized by it.
The question was on the floor of the convention for practically a full day.
It was apparent that there were three distinct divisions among the delegates: (1) those who had learned nothing fom the abuses under the pledge and those who wanted to learn nothing – the flag-waving Stalinists prominent among the latter – standing for reaffirming the pledge; (2) those who had learned their lessons well – strongest among these being the Akron locals – who are unshakably for rescinding; (3) those middle-of-the-road delegates who had come to do something about the abuses under the no-strike pledge, but were not yet wise enough to see that the only thing to be done was to repudiate it. It was right here that the unpreparedness of the opposition became apparent. Basing itself primarily upon the fight to dislodge Dalrymple for his unconstitutional and high-handed conduct, it neglected to give adequate formulation to a program of union policies. Such a clear-cut statement of progressive union aims by the opposition was necessary to enlighten arid influence the doubtful delegates. But fearful that they might alienate the doubtful delegates on the appeals cases and on the elections if they pressed too hard on questions of policy such as rescinding of the no-strike pledge, the opposition was hurt from this fundamental point of view.
 
They Fought a Good Fight
Still, a darned good fight was put up to rescind the no-strike pledge and some excellent speeches were made. Harrell, Local 5, compared the no-strike pledge to a yellow-dog contract. Watson, Local 7, said the no-strike pledge gives flag-wavers a chance to tie workers’ hands in order to frisk their pockets. A delegate pointed out that Dalrymple was going further than the Smith-Connally law. A delegate from Local 102 – a small local – showed how under the no-strike pledge, the company calls on the union president to do its dirty work against the rank arid file. Delegate Treash, Local 5, enumerated what the workers have under the “equality of sacrifice” farce, namely, violations of contracts, firing of union militants, break-down of collective bargaining, wage and job freeze, Smith-Connally law, with prices and profits sky-high.
The flag-waving performed by Dalrymple was repeated by many well-known Stalinists, especially from Local 101. Vice-President Buckmaster, on the other hand, set himself the task of befuddling the doubtful delegates. The gist of his argument was that the no-strike pledge must be separated from the abuses committed because of it. He admitted the justice of complaints against management and the WLB, but stated these must be covered “by another attack.” “Attack WLB from front and not from back,” he said. Yet in the statement of policy – adopted Saturday afternoon, when many delegates had gone home and others were asleep, reading or kibitzing at their tables – there is a clause complimenting the WLB for its “courageous” blah-blah-blah.
The vote on the no-strike pledge was 782 to reaffirm and 375 opposed. The opposition unfortunately did not take occasion to call for a referendum vote on the no-strike pledge by the union membership, as was done at the United Auto Workers convention, although it was given an opening to do so when Buckmaster stated his doubts that the 35,000 rubber workers’ of Akron are against the no-strike pledge.
 
The Appeals Compromise
The long-delayed report of the Committee on Appeals, which should have come up before the elections, finally saw the light of day Saturday morning. The majority report on the case of the sixty-two General Tire workers was to uphold Dalrymple and the GEB. There was also a minority report by one member of the committee, Delegate Culver of Local 98. However, he never got to reading it because a motion came from the floor to take up the case of Howard Haas immediately. Haas had been granted permission by his commanding officer to attend the convention, on unanimous request of that body, and he wanted to get to see his family in Akron before returning to the Army.
The motion passed, and much time was consumed reading documents. After lunch, as time was getting short and it was evident a real airing of the appeals would be impossible, Delegate Bass moved for a compromise to cover all the cases: The body finally agreed to have two leading delegates from each side withdraw to prepare a compromise motion.
The motion finally submitted was a. four-point compromise: (1) all suspended or expelled members to be reinstated with all their rights; (2) claims for back pay to be denied; (3) Local 5’s appeal from the GEB on the Dalrymple case to be denied; (4) fifty per cent of the fines collected from penalized members to be refunded.
The motion was adopted overwhelmingly. Whereupon Harold Haas was called on to speak. The convention rose and applauded him with spirit. He said that he had in his briefcase material which would not further the unity the compromise aimed to achieve. And as he shook hands with Dalrymple, the uniform he wore was itself an eloquent condemnation of Dalrymple’s conduct. The delegates had indicated their good feeling toward Haas by taking up a collection of $212 for him.
 




The autumn wind begins to have a threat of winter in it. We start out very optimistically for the department stores to get a woolen blanket and some woolen clothes, but because of the prices return home with cotton, rayon, wool and shoddy mixtures. But this winter the warehouses of the government will be nice and cozy, loaded down with the hundreds of millions of pounds of surplus wool stored in them.
Yes, according to the Wall Street Journal, which makes it its business to know about such things, the governments Defense Supplies Corporation holds some 192,000,000 pounds of Australian wool and 4,800,000 pounds of South African fleece. The Commodity Credit Corporation, another government agency, has more than 150,000,000 pounds of the 1943 domestic clip and almost 80,000,000 pounds of the 1944 clip. All this, plus a few odd and end million pounds here and there, adds up to a lot of woolen blankets, sweaters, coats, suits, dresses – and because of the great surplus, prices should be very reasonable. Besides, there is more wool and fleece where these supplies came from.
*
But why should manufacturers want these huge surpluses released for consumption when they get more for cotton, rayon, wool and shoddy mixtures than they used to get for all-wool merchandise? Arid why should any capitalist government want to interfere with the sacred right of the capitalist to make profits? So while you shiver, think of the soft, warm wool and fleece stored in government warehouses.
*
“That Priceless Boy of Yours” is the heading over a big advertisement recently run in the metropolitan press by the Bendix Aviation Corporation. “To save the lives of our boys – that’s why we’ve been working,” runs this publicity stuff. Then there is a long sob story of how little – how very little – are the war profits of this so altruistic corporation which sells the government hundreds of scientific aviation instruments, controls and other war material produced by the Bendix workers – ONLY for the protection of “American boys, yours and ours.”
This is typical big business publicity.
If it’s “that priceless boy of yours” that “big business has at heart, why did the stocks of the giant corporations, bloated with war orders, take a tumble a few weeks ago? When people were getting a little dizzy with joy at the premature predictions that the war against Germany would be over by the end of October, Wall Street went into mourning at the prospect of a speedy end of hostilities.
Why?
*
The United States Treasury states that net profits – AFTER TAXES – will total $39,500,000 for the war years 1940-44. These official war profits – Which do not reveal billions of hidden profits – average more for one war year than for the years 1936 and 1937 combined.
“That priceless boy of yours” does have a price!
*
Labor Action has from time to time warned against the passage of the equal rights amendment to the constitution. This is a measure sponsored by society, career and club women, who feel “discriminated against,” and by politicians who see in such a supposedly democratic amendment a chance for the greater exploitation of women workers. Organized labor has raised its voice against this camouflaged attack on working women, pointing out that under the pretense of “equal rights,” labor’s exploiters would claim there is not further need for the measures won for the special protection of women workers after long years of struggle.
What is not so widely known is that, this anti-labor amendment is incorporated in the platform of the Democratic Party, for whose standard-bearer labor leaders are wrongly urging labor to vote. And Vice-President Wallace – that self-appointed “friend of the common man” – glibly brushes aside the dangers to working women inherent in the amendment. He said:
“However much the opponents of this amendment may fear some possible temporary disadvantages to some women, may I suggest that in the end all such disadvantages, if they exist, weigh little beside the greater advantage of inner freedom, which will come for all women when real equality is established.”
In other words, if the equal rights amendment is passed and the bosses use it as an excuse for taking away lest and safety facilities from working women, what matter their outward slavery! They will have INNER freedom!
Here, in an instance especially vital to working women, you can see why Labor Action keeps hammering home the truth that neither a a Dewey nor a Willkie, a Roosevelt nor a Wallace can solve labor’s problems. ONLY REPRESENTATIVE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN, ACTING THROUGH AN INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY, CAN DO POLITICAL BATTLE FOR THE WORKING PEOPLE AS A WHOLE.
*
All governments are today worried about the populations of their countries. One can rightfully ask why they don’t worry about that angle before wars – rather than after. But the fact is that they are now worried
There is only one known way of replenishing war-depleted populations – by women having babies. Because their babies of a score of years ago have been “depleted” as young men, many women don’t feel an urge to bring more babies into the world.
By way of inducement, Stalin’s government offers certain pittances to poor women to have children up to eleven in number, regardless of the lack of housing and other requisites for child survival. The barbaric theory is that enough will survive – if enough are born. Somehow or other there must be a large post-war army to meet the needs of Russia’s imperialist aims.
In England, Miss Eleanor Rathbone, member of Parliament, bluntly stated the militaristic reasons behind some features of the Beveridge and other so-called social security plans. “At a crisis,” wrote this Englishwoman, “the supply of munitions can be accelerated, but it takes at least nineteen years to produce an adult citizen. A plain promise of an extra five shillings [per week] will induce parents, especially the more thoughtful and ambitious, to have more children.”
The de Gaulle government comes out with a plan to raise the health of the colonial peoples of imperialist France’s African and other possessions. Why? So that these enslaved peoples may be strong enough specimens to fight for France in the next war!
What about Dumbarton Oaks? What about all the plans for world peace? THE PLANNERS DO NOT THEMSELVES TRUST THEIR OWN PLANS. Why should we – the women of the world – who are being pressured into bearing the soldiers for World War III, trust them?
To break the vicious circle of populations being depleted by war and built up again only to be depleted by another war, the working people of the world must unite in socialist brotherhood.
 




CIO President Philip Murray and AFL President William Green have again put the Little Steel formula at the top of the agenda. They have gone to the White House and meekly submitted to their new “friend” there the demand that the basic wage rates, be increased by twenty per cent. That means breaking the wage freeze.
About one and a half years ago the fight against the wage freeze began with the demand of the steel workers for a seven-teen-cent an hour increase. Lengthy hearings were held before Congress and before the War Labor Board. Statistics were gathered on the rise in the cost of living. Labor’s case was strong. However, Murray allowed the matter to be kicked around, prevented the workers from taking strike action, and before long election was here. And how could Roosevelt’s labor lieutenants bother the President at election time With such a trifling question as breaking the Little Steel formula!
Instead, labor leaders, especially in the CIO, talked as if wage increases were actually in the bag. According to them, the first thing Mr. Roosevelt would do after election would be to order the lid lifted off wages. But nothing like that happened. The steel workers’ case was settled by throwing them a bare bone. The Little Steel formula still stands.
So what is the general wage situation today?
AFL President Green estimates that the take-home pay of the workers is due to be cut by $23,000,000,000 in the reconversion period. That’s an i enormous sum. Overtime is going, going, and will soon be gone. Workers will be lucky if they get pay for forty hours. Part-time jobs will once more be in style. Many workers will be downgraded to lower paying jobs. Skilled workers will be forced into unskilled work. The take-home pay will all but fade out in many cases.
But these considerations have not moved Mr. Truman. He remains loyal to the late President and to the capitalists. After Messrs. Murray and Green respectfully left the White House, Mr. Truman informed his press conference that the Little Steel formula stands as firm as the Rock of Gibraltar – but, of course, he would take the requests of the heads of the CIO and the AFL under advisement.
Yet the demand for a twenty per cent increase in basic hourly pay is modest enough. Murray states that the object is to bring about the same relation between wages and prices and the productivity of labor as existed in 1940. However, the twenty per cent increase would not do that, as the following simple arithmetic will show.
Murray says that ten per cent of the twenty per cent asked for is to take care of the increase in prices since 1940 above the fifteen per cent allowed hy the Little Steel formula. But, according to the figures of the CIO itself, hack in the early part of 1944, living costs had increased by over forty-five per cent. This leaves not only ten per cent but thirty per cent owing to the workers for price increases – the difference between the fifteen per cent of the Little Steel formula and the actual rise in living costs.
The other ten per cent of the twenty per cent asked by Murray is for the rise in the productivity of labor per hour since 1940.
But ten per cent is too low a figure. Twenty per cent increase in labor’s productivity per hour is nearer the truth. It is estimated that 38,000,000 workers will be able to do what 46,000,000 did in 1940, and that means an increased productivity of labor of more than seventeen per cent.
Certainly, in view of the above, a twenty per cent basic wage increase is modest enough. AFL President Green estimates that it would cover only $13,000,000,000 of the $23,000,000,000 lost take-home pay in the reconversion period. But still Mr. Truman says NO.
Can industry “afford” to raise wages? It, of course, claims it can’t. But let us see.
Industry’s profits for 1944 before taxes reached a high of $25,000,000,000. Industry’s capital reserves in cash and government bonds will amount to $58,000,000,000 after government contracts have been cleared up. That answers the question of whether industry can “afford” to raise workers’ wages.
What have the workers in reserve?
Back in 1942 the OPA found that two-thirds of all the consumers earned less thin $50 a week, and that these two-thirds owned only one-ninth of the nation’s savings. Last September the Department of Commerce again substantiated this fact. Since then from other sources comes proof that workers’ families have been able to accumulate little if any savings.
For this situation the Little Steel formula is directly responsible. It has prevented labor from getting its share of the tremendous wealth it has produced during these war years. In fact, there are outstanding cases of labor’s share in corporation revenue having decreased steadily during the war years. A few examples are in order.

While the revenue of Douglas Aircraft increased from $61,000,000 in 1940 to over a billion in 1944, wages and salaries decreased from 44.4 per cent to 33.6 per cent of the total.
 
While the sales of General Motors rose from over three billion in 1943 to over four billion in 1944, the percentage that went for wages and salaries dropped from 34.8 per cent to 32.4 per cent.
 
The business of General Electric rose from $411,900,000 in 1940 to $1,353,000,000 in 1944, but the share of wages and salaries decreased from 37.3 per cent to 34.3 per cent.

There are scores of other examples along these lines. And remember that the tremendous war salaries of corporation officials are included in these percentages, leaving even less to the workers.
 
Wages and Profits
Above, in graphic form, is the purpose of the Little Steel formula. As always, wages and profits stand in this simple relationship: The more there is of one, the less there remains of the other. The war profits of industry prove that the legalized robbery of the workers by the capitalists, has been intensified. For this, the labor leaders must take their share of blame. In tolerating the Little Steel formula, when it is so flagrantly a weapon of the capitalists, and in crippling labor’s striking power with the no-strike pledge, the Murrays and Greens have willy-nilly played the game of the profit-grubbing capitalists.

It is high time to change this treacherous technique.
 
The Little Steel freeze must end.
 
Wages must be raised.
 
The technique of the Washington run-around will not do.
 
Workers must again assert their freedom to strike, and make their demands with the economic might of organized labor behind them.
 
The Workers Party calls for a reduction of the work-week with no reduction take-home pay!
 
For a guaranteed annual wage!
 
For a 100% tax on all war profits!
 
For government operation of government-owned plants under workers’ control.

 




China is split into two antagonistic sections. There is Kuomintang China with its capital at Chungking, and Communist China with its capital at Yenan in the northwest. The hostility between the two Chinas verges on civil war. About Communist China, until quite recently, very little has been known for the simple reason that the Generalissimo’s blockade of so-called Red China has excluded the press from the area.
However, in an inadvertent moment at a press conference, the official Chungking spokesman denied that there was a blockade. Whereupon a group of correspondents pressed their advantage and asked permission to go to Yenan. After months of squirming, Chungking granted permission. Mr. Forman was one of the group to go. He reported on his six months’ stay in Communist China in the book here reviewed.
In a way, Mr. Forman’s book reminds one of the reports that used to come out of Russia in the early ’30s when the starry-eyed friends went to see what was good, beautiful, brave attd progressive – and naturally saw only that. However, Mr. Forman is supposed to have gone to Yenan with no preconceived views. Be that as it may, much of what he reports has been authenticated from other sources. Some of his account is based on official statements of the Communist Party; some consists of verbatim interviews with Communist leaders; so that, all in all, a reader can piece out a pretty comprehensive picture – if he applies some critical sense of his own.
 
Russian Connections
The section where Mr. Forman tries to show that the connection between Communist China and Stalin’s Russia is negligible has to be taken with a grain of salt. “In the five months I spent with the Chinese Communists I saw not the slightest tangible connection with Russia. There were no Russian supplies – no guns, planes or equipment. There were no Russian military or political advisers.” Thus writes Mr. Forman.
Again, Mr. Forman makes the point that “the Chinese Communists are not Communists” in the Marxian-Leninist sense; and this is true. But neither are the Russian Stalinists communists in the Marxian-Leninist sense or in any settle. Nor are the Stalinists anywhere communists in the Marxian-Leninist sense. On the contrary, they have become a major counter-revolutionary force in the world. In America, the Stalinists are now staunch supporters of capitalism and enemies of all working class militancy. All of this, far from indicating a slackening of connections with the Kremlin, reveals how the puppet parties of the world dance to Moscow’s fiddle.
The reader must pause and consider the policy of the Chinese Communists to accept only one-third of all elective offices – even if they receive more votes. This, supposedly, is evidence of the democratic intentions of the Communist Party. Has it, then, given up the primary objective of every political party, namely, power? Of course, it has not. Po Ku, member of the Politburo, made this clear to Edgar Snow of the Saturday Evening Post: “We must struggle for leadership everywhere and at all times. We do not deny that. A political party that does not lead has no reason for existence.” Presumably, there are other ways of gaining influence and making friends, and that one-third business is only a token concession – to what?
Red China seeks the military and economic help of the so-called western democracies, especially of the United States. Knowing the American disapproval of the Russian one-party system, is it not likely that the Chinese Stalinists have swept the dust under the carpet to make a democratic impression?
Mr. Forman’s story of the military achievements of the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army and the peoples’ militia or partisans has been substantiated by others, including General Stillwell and Ambassador Hurley. These men, interested in winning the war against Japan for America, soon saw that the Chinese Communists were doing a businesslike job against the invaders, while the Chungking government was more concerned with doing such a job against the Chinese Communists.
 
Policy of Communists
Another pretty well substantiated fact is, that the Communist Party has instituted a number of reforms in its extensive Border Region with a population of some 90,000,000. There is a very close connection between the military plans of the Communist leaders and such reforms as were granted the people. No party could get the ear of the poverty-stricken, landlord-oppressed peasants subjected also to the assaults of the Japanese invader, unless that party came with a program of agrarian relief and governmental change. On the other hand, tightly blockaded from the outside world, the Communist leaders just had to secure the active support of the people.
The Communists advocate lower rents and lower taxes. At the same time an intensive production driye was started to supply food and the materials of war. Cooperative labor exchanges facilitated the division of labor between working and fighting. To remove the old-time objection of poor peasants to billeting an army, the army also rolled up its sleeves, participating in the production program and making itself as self-supporting as possible. Local self-government in the villages – such as it can be under Communist domination – has been established. Education, within the limited facilities, becomes available to larger sections of the people. Much of the education is, however, propaganda pure and simple, as are also the cultural efforts which Mr. Forman describes as being so thoroughly enjoyed by the villagers.
By quoting Mao Tze-tung, big chief of the Communist Party, Mr. Forman makes it quite clear that the party program is not revolutionary. The agrarian reforms consist mainly in inducing the landlords to reduce rents; and then, by intensifying production, making it possible for the peasants to pay rent where formerly they couldn’t. For the rest, the Communists stand for competition, private enterprise, and encouragement of foreign capital investments.
Neither is a revolutionary people’s government on the slate of the Chinese party. It calls for a government representing landlords, merchants, capitalists, petty bourgeois, as well as peasants and workers. At the time of Mr. Forman’s writing, the Communists were willing to make peace with Chiang Kai-shek. The latter’s terms, however, were not acceptable; consisting of reducing the 570,000 Communist army to a mere 100,000, disbanding the 2,200,000 people’s militia, and appointing Kuomintang dictators for the anti-Japanese bases in North China.
 




Before the 1944 national election all kinds of reconversion plans were announced that would give full employment. At labor conventions last fall, CIO President Murray and other leaders gave the rosy details of a reconversion plan that they intimated was on President Roosevelt’s desk and all but had his signature.
(After election, however, reconversion talk was hushed. Labor leaders were ordered to hold their tongues – and the wage line! The people were told that reconversion plans were premature – that there was a war to be won. The reconversion plans fathered by Murray and others were put in the waste basket, since Roosevelt’s concern with them was merely to serve for electioneering purposes.
Now labor suddenly finds itself in the midst of partial reconversion without any plan for full employment adopted in Washington. War orders are being cut down drastically. War plants are being shut down all over the country. WPB Chairman Krug foresees 2,000,000 more unemployed two months from now. Senator O’Mahoney of Wyoming warns that if the war with Japan should end suddenly, the unemployment crisis would be greater than that of the “great depression.” Furthermore, his realistic estimate for the post-reconversion period is that only one-third of war production workers will find jobs in the same plants.
This unemployment catastrophe is not, as every worker knows, a sudden visitation from heaven or hell. It was fully foreseen by all thinking people. More than a year ago the Workers Party came out with its reconversion program for giving every worker a job and a guaranteed annual wage. Labor Action has been urging upon the labor movement that it adopt the demands presented by the Workers Party and fight for them under the banner of an independent Labor Party.
But the labor leaders held fast to FDR’s misleading hand. Then hurriedly and nervously they transferred their grasp to Truman. Now labor is holding the reconversion bag. And it is labor alone that is, as always, holding the bag.
 
Capital Taken Care Of
For, while the worshipful labor leaders shut up like dams on the subject of reconversion when FDR ordered them to do so, capital got busy looking after itself. Quietly and efficiently, with government help, re-planning and retooling of plants began, and priorities were obtained.
Another point won by capitalists was to get a government prime policy high enough to provide profits even though plants operate at less than capacity and workers are unemployed. And the pressure for still higher prices continues.
Next, President Truman gave his sanction to Congress to present big business with $5,700,000,000 in the next two years in the shape of refunds, and reduced taxes – just a tidbit to induce capital over the rough reconversion road, with the promise of more substantial fare to come.
Finally, the other day WPB Chairman Krug reported on government reconversion policy, which the New York Times found “admirable.” In essence, the WPB policy is to keep hands off business and let it reconvert as its own profit-seeking fancy wills. While controls on labor, such as the Little Steel freeze and the no-strike pledge, are still in force, Mr. Krug revealed that many wartime controls on industry have already been dropped and that the government intends to let go entirely as soon as war production needs permit. Thus freedom is assured to “free enterprise.”
 
Truman’s Proposal
Against this background, President Truman has seen a “loophole.” “Dear me. We’ve forgotten all about the workers, haven’t we!” So he made his request to Congress to increase unemployment benefits to $25 a week and to lengthen the period for benefit payments to twenty-six weeks. However, even the slight and wholly inadequate improvement implied in the President’s request seems fated not to be realized – judging by the reception the recommendation received.
While the jobless multiply daily, such headlines as the following meet the eye: “Truman’s $25 a Week Jobless Pay Proposal Provides Material for Debate” – NOT for food, clothing and shelter that the unemployed workers need. One reads such comments as: “Congressional circles apparently viewed the President’s plan coldly.” But the most outstanding crack on the President’s proposal came from Chairman Doughton of the House Ways and Means Committee: “I don’t know when we will take it up. We have got a good many other things to do.” For contemptuous disregard of the vital needs of. the workers, this statement by a “representative of the people” takes the cake.
The only other attempt in Washington to meet the unemployment crisis is in the Murray bill. This contains the provision that the government should be responsible for jobs that private industry cannot provide. Commentators say about this bill that its prospects are not bright. They predict that it will be “under discussion for months.” They recall that the Murray-Truman-Kilgore bill, a much milder one, was lost in the last Congress.
So, while the army of unemployed grows day by day what have the jobless workers and their families to rely upon?
Is it on the unemployment insurance that the states now provide? We know that these average payments are from $15 to $18 a week for an average sixteen-week period. These insulting pittances are not always that high when you realize that in some states payments are $10 and less per week.
The CIO, realizing that in a depression a year of unemployment is not unusual, translated the state unemployment payments into terms of yearly allowances. It found that thirty-one states provide maximum payments which average less than $6.00 a week if the worker stretched them out over a year. For a family of four, that would mean $1.50 per person per week. Comments the CIO: “Today $1.50 would just about buy in most cities one quart of milk per day and one loaf of bread per day for a week.”
But the “representatives of the people” are too busy doing other things to bother with the problem of unemployment!
However, the workers have something else to rely upon than insulting unemployment doles and capitalist politicians. They have their own economic and political strength. With an enlightened and realizable program for lull employment such as the Workers Party has, the workers can go places and do things.
 
Workers Party Program
To face the issues squarely, organized labor must come out for a progressively shorter work week with the same pay, to provide more Jobs. Likewise every worker must be guaranteed a wage of $2,500 a year. To make jobs for war workers there must be a housing and public works program of at least $250,000,000,000 for a five-year period. The money for public expenditures should come by paring down the swollen war profits of the merchants of death – a paring down to five per cent on invested capital and no more – and by taxing accumulated wealth.
Other absolutely essential demands to help full employment involve keeping government-owned war plants as national property to produce civilian goods. The big monopolists must be ousted, and finance, big industry and transportation have to be nationalized. To assure that industry is run for the benefit of the common people, labor must insist on workers’ control of production.
The Workers Party and Labor Action say to the organized labor movement: Only by such measures as outlined above can jobs be provided for all workers and can the consumption needs of all the people be produced. We urge organized labor to cut loose from capitalist parties and politicians, to launch its own independent Labor Party with this program for full employment.
 

   Not only does the capitalist system inevitably cause wars with all their horrors; it benefits the capitalists with enormous war profits. Even that is not enough. When the soldiers return home, certain sections of the ruling class begin to think up ways and means for using those soldiers to break unions and to weaken the working people. In this category is the Rankin bill, sneaked through the House Veterans Committee on July 6th in the absence of a majority of the members. The union-busting bill is proposed “to help veterans get jobs.” It would exempt them from union member-ship, regardless of contract conditions in the plant, regardless of closed shop agreements. One would think that what is keeping the returning GI’s from jobs is union dues that they can’t afford to pay. The fact is that pretty nearly every union has special provisions for returning GI’s. The fact is that if veterans can’t get jobs it’s because the private profit system hasn’t got them to offer. But the ranking, panting member of the House, Rankin, cares nothing about these facts. He speaks for the capitalist contingent wanting to make scabs and union-busters out of soldiers. No bones are being made that this is the purpose of Rankin and those with him and behind him. The New York Sun’s Washington reporter started his piece of July 9th: “A bill to use veterans for breaking defense plant strikes was being pushed rapidly toward congressional consideration today.” Rankin himself has openly labelled his measure “a blow at closed shops.” The strong opposition of organized labor has produced a minority report. But this minority report is by the majority of the House Veterans Committee, the majority having been absent when the Rankin measure slipped through. The minority report considers the Rankin recommendation premature; it says the necessity for such a measure to get jobs for GI’s is not established; it says that the measure as not shown to be in the best interests of the veterans; it calls for hearings on the subject.  What Bill Would Do Now there are before the House both the Rankin union-busting bill and the minority report of the majority. There is also in the offing the Knutson bill dealing with returned GI’s. The latter has not received too much publicity as yet. But it also has a provision exempting veterans from union membership, however limiting the time to one year. Except for the time limit, this is like the Rankin provision. It is the nub of the whole question. There you have it. Rankin, Democrat from Mississippi, and Knutson, Republican from Minnesota. Both would like the soldiers to act as scabs and union-busters. The capitalist press, notably such sheets asThe Daily News raises its voice for the cause of “helping the veterans.” However, the Rankins will have to go some to fool the veterans. There are in the armed forces several million union men. Many more are unorganized workers either of hand or brain. Millions of army young men would have gone into the mines, mills, factories and offices of the country, if the army had not got them first. Any weakening of the unions would hurt these men in the armed forces as much as the workers who remained home on the job. All workers are helpless without their unions. The fact that workers are ex-servicemen will not stop the profit-seeking employers from exploiting them ruthlessly. What colossal gall on the part of the industrial barons of this country to call on the ex-servicemen to help break up the organizations which alone can give them protection against unrestricted exploitation! What lying hypocrites to claim they are doing, this to help the GI’s!  Insults Veteran What these “friends” of the soldiers really think of them was demonstrated by Rankin. When a veteran, Reuben Schafer, of Long Island City, who served three and a half years in the infantry, called at Rankin’s office to talk to him about the bill, Rankin had the veteran arrested, after first insulting him by calling him insane. Rankin is reported to have shouted at Schafer, “Get out of here – this is private property.” In answer to Schafer’s request for a polite conversation, Rankin exploded:“I’m taking care of veterans’ legislation, not you.” Schafer reminded Rankin that pushing people around was OK in Nazi Germany, but not here. Whereupon Rankin called the cops: “Take this man away – he’s insane.” We’ll let our readers judge who was insane. The veterans are hard-headed enough to see through the Rankins. The unions – not the Rankins – are the protectors of their interests.   
   All sections of the working people of the City of New York are vitally concerned about jobs and a guaranteed annual wage; about good housing and health-centers; about post-war planning for a better life. And of all the working class millions of this teeming city, the people of Harlem are in direst need. The people of Harlem suffer doubly – once as working people and as Negroes. Unemployment hits them hardest; economic insecurity is more fearful to them because of discrimination. The housing shortage is felt more by the Negro people because of Ghetto-like restrictions, and rent gouging runs high. Hospitals, parks and playgrounds, so much needed in congested Harlem, are conspicuous by their absence. The post-war crisis will worsen conditions in Harlem.  Politics in Harlem This part of the city has been dominated by the Communist-controlled American Labor Party, which in turn in this election is tied in with the Tammany-controlled Democratic Party. Something of a bomb exploded within this set-up last week when Abraham Thomas, ALP leader of the Eleventh A.D., and Kathryn Ward, secretary of the Communist Marcantonio Club of Harlem, announced their break-away from William O’Dwyer, to give their support to Jonah J. Goldstein, candidate of the Republican-Liberal-Fusion ticket. The Harlem leaders stated that the Marcantonio Club membership felt that to support the ALP-Democratic ticket headed by O’Dwyer would not be a true expression of the desires “of the people of the district whom the club has pledged itself to serve.” About Judge Goldstein, the statement said that the Negro people have “an abiding faith in his will, his determination and his ability to lead our city and all its people into a better world.” In spite of Marcantonio’s denial of the rift in Harlem, it is a fact that New York City Negroes are as disillusioned as are Negroes all over the country. Undoubtedly the Negro people want something different and that accounts for the break with the Democrat, O’Dwyer. But where on earth do Abraham Thomas and Kathryn Ward get the gall to proclaim the “faith” of the Negroes in the Republican, Goldstein? And how, in the name of facts, has the Republican, Goldstein, proved “his will, his determination and his ability to lead our city and all its people into a better world”?  Demicans and Republocrats Both the Democrats and Republicans are cut from the same cloth. They are both political parties of the capitalist class, of the ruling class, of the boss class, This class does not want economic, political or social equality between white and black working people. Whatever disunites the working people strengthens the ruling class. Its policy has been, is and will be to divide and rule. Both O’Dwyer and Goldstein represent the same class of capitalists, rulers, bosses. Whatever the differences between the candidates may be, they are superficial compared with this basic likeness. That the Negroes of Harlem want something else, and break away from the Democrat, O’Dwyer, is good. That their leaders are turning their support to the Republican, Goldstein, is bad. Their leaders want to make the soot on the bottom of the Republican kettle appear whiter than that on the bottom of the Democratic pot. The Negroes of Harlem and of the entire country must turn to a class program and a class party. The Workers Party has entered the municipal campaign with such a program. Max Shachtman, mayoralty candidate of the Workers Party, stands for certain definite things:  Workers Party Program  A job for every worker regardless of race, color or creed – without any ifs, ands or buts.  A guaranteed minimum annual wage of $50 a week for every worker so that he can live like a human being fifty-two weeks of the year – without discrimination of any kind.  Not for war but for peace, a $250 billion five-year program to provide decent housing, health centers, nurseries, playgrounds and public works in general for the use of black and white people alike.  Taxing the colossal war profits of big business and the huge war incomes of the rich, and not the pay envelopes of the poor.  These are some of the working-class demands in the platform on which Max Shachtman is running for mayor. He is not saying that his“determination, will and ability” will make a better world – though he has plenty of all these ingredients. What he says is that the working people can make for themselves a better world – if they stop supporting capitalist candidates and capitalist parties. The demands enumerated above can all be realized by the Negro and white workers if they use their overwhelming political power to form an independent Labor Party – not a party like the American Labor Party or the Liberal Party. These are only tails to the kites of the Democratic and Republican Parties. No – what labor needs is a party entirely free from all capitalist, ruling class, boss influence – a party of workers, black and white.   
   It is astonishing to read in the CIO News of July 2 that in its plank for jobs the CIO Marine & Shipbuilding Workers Union demands “a first class modernized Navy,” according to reporter Helen Kay. The same reporter quotes union president John Green as calling, among other things, for “the experimental part of a naval program.” If this means, anything at all, which it does, it is tantamount to a proposal for a constantly improving United States navy. This point in the ship union’s program hits one between the eyes even more forcefully because the first page of the July 2 issue of the CIO News is devoted to Ships for Peace and the inside article by Helen Kay is. also entitled Ships for Peace. Is building a navy second to none, the ship union officials’ conception of ships for peace? The plan calls also for merchant shipping, of 20 to 25 million deadweight tons of first class efficiency, which means scrapping old tubs and building far beyond present capacity. But the union planners do not expect even their 400,000 union members of the 1,722,500 war-peak shipyard employed to get jobs, building ships for peaceful trade. So without more ado, they call, for ships for war, however, still calling their plan “Ships for Peace.”  Fallacy in Ship Program In this there is grave danger for the labor movement. It means that union leaders are getting on the imperialist bandwagon heading straight for militarism and the next war. The capitalist spokesmen for peacetime universal training want military regimentation of youth – of course, to keep world peace. The brass-hat advocates of an all-powerful air force and an unbeatable navy also, of course, do so in the interest of world peace. And all the groups who favor the San Francisco charter, coverup its plain implications by shouting loudly that the armed might of the Big Three will be used for peace, not for war. It is sad to see that the CIO and AFL have officially given their endorsement to the San Francisco charter and have joined the supporters of capitalist “armed peace.” They have succumbed to the siren song of American imperialism, that, in the words of the New York Times: “... the United Nations have now organized themselves to harness force to the interests of peace.” Certainly union president Green should, know better. In the old days John Green was a socialist. He should remember from the teachings of Marx and should have learned from the facts of life, that when rival imperialist nations are armed to the teeth, sooner or later they will resort to arms, to settle their disputes over power and profit. Who can doubt from the unconcealed rivalry of the Big Three, with the contentious little nations in the background, that not human, but imperialist interests are behind all their actions? In spite of the transcendent question of employment no worker in his right mind will support a program of war preparedness for the sake of jobs, if the case is put to him squarely and not camouflaged with the words “Ships for Peace.” Let it not be forgotten that Hitler gave jobs to over six million unemployed German workers – gave them jobs making the death-dealing instruments for World War II. At the same time he was staging tremendously impressive “peace demonstrations” to delude the workers into a sense that, after all, they were not producing war materials for war – but for peace. This object lesson should be learned by all workers everywhere. Armies, navies and air forces, by their very nature, and by nature of the capitalist-imperialist nations which have them, sooner or later serve the purpose for which they are built. To build navies is to produce ships for war – for World War III.  Real Ships for Peace There are, of course, other peace-time uses for ships of every kind. How about replacing antiquated boats that ply the rivers as ferries? How about scrapping the unseaworthy excursion boats that cause so many accidents and deaths? How about replacing these and building “a first class modernized” pleasure fleet for the people to enjoy the beautiful rivers and lakes that nature has given them? How about also building a “navy” of ocean liners; for quick and inexpensive travel so the human race can intermingle in enjoyment and friendship, instead of in fire and blood? But try to get the capitalist private profit system to build ships for such “unnecessary” uses! Why, even the urgent need of the people for ordinary houses does not bring an adequate building program from the capitalist planners! Then what about jobs? The ship union’s demand for the reduction of the work week to thirty hours, is a good one. The demand for a guaranteed annual wage is also basic. Of course, the thirty hour week should be instituted with no reduction in pay; and the guaranteed annual wage should be a living wage of at least $2500 for every worker. The CIO reconversion program for all its unions also has many good points, but it doesn’t go far enough. For instance, it contents itself with asking for an unemployment insurance maximum of $25 a week for only 26 weeks. Why not $30 for single workers, with upward gradation for men and women with dependents? And why not for the full period of unemployment, not for only 26 weeks? However, the ship and all workers must understand that economic protections and jobs cannot be secured without, changing the status quo. It’s the case of the sacred rights of human life against the “sacred rights” of private property. Labor Action and the Workers Party declare that the letter must give ground. To achieve labor’s demands war industries have to be conscripted and placed under democratic worker control. The banks, big industrial monopolies and transportation systems must be nationalized and similarly placed under the control of democratically elected workers’ committees. Furthermore, a dent has to be made in the money piles of the ruling class. A 100 percent tax on all war profits above a five percent return on invested capital, will yield, money for making adequate unemployment payments to workers and for the public building program. More money for these worthy purposes, must be procured by putting a $25,000 ceiling on all individual incomes, and a graduated capital tax on all accumulated wealth over $50,000. Unless organized labor comes out with a plan for how to achieve its demands, they will remain, among the good intentions which pave the way to failure. And it is obvious that such necessary infringements on the “sacred rights” of private property and such overdue taxes on accumulated wealth will never be undertaken by a capitalist government, but only by a workers’ government. From the above it is plain that the question of jobs is apolitical one involving a break by the workers with the capitalist class and the capitalist government. And this, in turn, can be accomplished only through the initial step of forming an Independent Labor Party, free from all capitalist connections, which will establish a workers’ government. For only such a government will make the necessary inroads on the parasitic capitalist class demanded by human needs.   
   A special committee of the House of Representatives has just closed hearings on the subject of peacetime conscription. Before the committee came representatives of organized labor and farmers, of veterans, of educators, of socialists and liberals, and of big business, of the Army and Navy. Although the findings of the committee have not yet been officially stated, its chairman is confident that the committee will recommend to the House passage of a peacetime conscription bill. Certainly this recommendation will not be based on the majority opinion as expressed by witnesses before the committee. It is true that the greatest publicity was given to what was said by admirals and generals and big business. But if you consider that the CIO, the AFL and the National Farmers Union oppose compulsory military training; that the “public opinion” voiced by people like Norman Thomas and other liberals also oppose it; that educators either oppose it outright or are for postponing the matter until after the war; then you see that the recommendation of the committee will NOT represent the opinion of the American people. In other words, the hearings just closed are another instance of congressional hocus-pocus. The support by the committee of a peacetime conscription law could have been predicted by anyone with an ear to the ground.  Preparing for War For whatever the democratic trimmings may be, the fundamental interests of American imperialism will be served. And today we are at the threshold of an era of world militarism with all; the imperialist powers armed to the teeth. Bluntly David Lawrence, ace capitalist columnist, stated the point: “This is apparently to be a world where force alone talks.” And again: “Physical force is to be the basis of the coming era of balanced power.” It is no accident that in Moscow at the celebration of the defeat of Germany, Marshal Zhukov did not glory in the blow struck at German militarism as much as he did in the growth of Russian militarism. He boasted that Russia has emerged from the war with the largest army on earth. The world-situation being what it is, it was a foregone conclusion that the committee would support a post-war conscription bill – no matter what the hearings revealed about real public opinion on the subject. Drew Pearson reports that a survey shows that fifty-six per cent of the people prefer spending the estimated $4, 000, 000, 000 annual cost for military training, for education instead. But American imperialism is out to be firstest with the mostest in military power. This is the raw fact that the working people of this country must face. Millions of immigrants came to this country to escape the militarism of Europe. But so does the development of capitalism worsen the lot of the masses, that, if they allow it, they will be the pawns of the No. 1 militarist nation of the world. It is quite in order for General Patton to look at a group of Sunday schoolchildren and see only soldiers and nurses of the wounded in the next war. Who will pay the bill for keeping American imperialism armed in the style demanded by modern warfare? An inkling is already given in the fact that steps are being taken to lower the taxes on big business while keeping the heavy pay-as-you-go taxes on the working people. The bill will be staggering. There is the estimated $4, 000, 000, 000 per year for military training alone. But that is the least of it. The armed might of the United States extends into occupied Europe and will include Asia after the war. There will be extensive and expensive bases in the Atlantic and Pacific spheres where war strategy dictates. There will be a Navy second to none and an air force to master the skies, with the necessary ground forces. Rough estimates are that the Navy will require 1, 000, 000 men; the Army 3, 000, 000 to 3, 000, 000; and reserves another 3, 000, 000.  Strange Way to Peace Spokesmen for capitalism do not usually admit that peacetime conscription is needed for the next imperialist war. But many witnesses at the hearing openly spoke of war with Russia. However, this unguarded frankness was corrected and in the main the line followed by the advocates of militarism is, in the words of General Marshall, Chief of Staff: “It is evidence that we are going to back up the peace.” Other spokesmen for peacetime conscription say it will assure the world “that at last America is taking seriously its international responsibilities.” But all this is so much sand in the eyes of the people. Imperialist powers with antagonistic interests, armed to the teeth, do not keep peace but make Poland, Syria, Trieste illuminate the deep-seated conflicts. The gag about stopping aggressors is also pretty transparent. For who would dare “aggress” against the United States, or against a little nation in the sphere of influence of the United States, except another big power fully armed. So it all boils down to the big powers arming against each other.  A Change Is Needed While the U.S. Chamber of Commerce brushes aside the play-acting at San Francisco and gets down to the business of preparing for the next blood-letting, Nathan E. Cowan, speaking for the CIO before the House committee, still naively championed “collective security”and a capitalist-imperialist “world free from war.” The move for peacetime conscription disturbs this pipe dream of CIO officialdom. On the other hand, it was a bit; hard to see on what ground Lewis G. Hines, the AFL spokesman, could logically oppose, compulsory training since he believes “our country must maintain an Army, an Air Force and Navy adequate to make our views on national and international policies respected.” This is another way of agreeing that force shall rule the world. Labor’s correct course is clear. The militarization of this country must be fought tooth and nail. Peacetime conscription must be opposed as a step to military dictatorship. Complete disarmament of all the world is what labor wants. But it must make these demands with open eyes, knowing full well that they cannot be realized without abolishing imperialism. Preventing the world from being turned into hostile armed camps can be accomplished only by dislodging the capitalist classes of this country, of Great Britain, of all countries, and the bureaucratic rulers of Russia. Complete disarmament can exist only between peoples bound by mutual interests, not ruled by rival imperialists.   



The program of the British Labor Party, entitled Let Us Face the Future, contains the introductory statement: “The Labor Party is a socialist party, and proud of it. Its ultimate purpose at home is the establishment of the Socialist Commonwealth of Great Britain.”
The parliamentary triumph of this party, which has now been in power for nearly six months, has been hailed by world labor. With deep interest, world labor watches to see how this party will carry out its alleged aim. At long last, through its Prime Minister, Clement Attlee, it has presented to the House of Commons its bill to nationalize the Bank of England, and the measure has been passed by that body.
Reporters have dubbed the bill the “first socialist measure.” The expectation- is that this bill will serve as a model for the entire nationalization program sponsored by the Labor Party. Therefore, world labor must ask and answer the question: “Is this, in fact, a socialist measure?”
In the first place, the bill, before the House of Commons provides compensation to the stockholders of the Bank of England. Is this correct in principle? The owners and manipulators of British finances are the core of the class enriched by the exploitation of British labor and by the enslavement of the colonial peoples of the British Empire. These are the exploiters for whom the blood of Indonesians and Palestinians is today being shed and for whom the blood of the Indian people periodically flows. These are the exploiters Who were willing to finance Hitler to a certain point, and when their imperialist interests were threatened were just as willing to engage the world in devastating war. What do the British people owe these anti-social elements?
In the past twenty years Bank of England dividends have annually averaged twelve per cent, or, to put it differently, dividends in those years alone have totaled 240 per cent of invested capital. Speculators in bank stocks have also pocketed plenty on their “risks.” What do the British people owe these parasites? There are, of course, a scattering of small stockholders who rely for actual living expenses on dividends. For these the government should provide jobs, if they can work, and if they are too old to work they should get old age security. But what do the British people owe the financial magnates of their country?
Nothing – nothing but condemnation and the assurance of a speedy departure from the stage of history!
 
Mortgaging Workers
Yet the bill proposed by the Attlee government not only provides payment but such abundant payment that it makes a worker’s blood boil in angry protest. The stockholders of the Bank of England are to receive four times the amount of the capital stock now outstanding. The $58,212,000 of bank stock will be taken up by government bonds totalling $282,848,000; the latter figure is just four times the former. And this would be no mere paper transaction, for the bonds would be redeemable AT PAR in twenty years if the holder should wish to cash in.
Why, just why, in the post-war impoverishment of England, should any government, let alone one that calls itself socialist, mortgage the people to this extent? Well, you see, it’s this way. The British government wants to pay only three per cent interest on the bonds it issues. But the bigwigs of the bank, who have been averaging twelve per cent returns during he past twenty years, are so sorry, but they just can’t see themselves taking less. So the government effects a “compromise.” It will not pay more than three per cent interest, but it will issue four times as much in bonds. This makes everybody happy – except the working people, for whose benefit the Labor Government is supposed to function.
For the working people of Great Britain this kind of nationalization means that the great skin game of capitalism continues. It means that instead of an economy designed to build houses and hospitals, to raise the frightfully low standard of living, to provide the things the people are deprived of, the economy will continue to serve the dividend collectors. For the colonial peoples it means more deaths from British tanks and planes when the people fight for their independence, because the twelve-percenters in London must have their income from the colonies.
So much for the financial side. Now let us see WHO would control the Bank of England to be nationalized under the bill presented by the Labor Government.
Professor Laski, chairman of the Labor Party, promised after the election: “We are now prepared to give the little man ... all the progressive change that he requires.” It almost goes without saying that any progressive change must be based on the little man, the worker, getting control of the affairs of economy and government. In a word, in the case of the nationalization of the bank, if it is to mean anything to the working people, it has to be put under management. That new management has to be a committee chosen by the working people, responsible to them, acting for them.
Now watch this. The bill, supposed to be the “first socialist measure,” provides that the nationalized bank will be administered by a governor, a deputy governor and a board of directors, all appointed BY THE KING. Furthermore, it is tacitly understood that the present governor of the bank, Lord Catto, will be appointed by the Crown the first governor of the nationalized bank. The same old capitalist-imperialist gang will be in control!
No wonder Lord Catto has assured Chancellor of Exchequer Hugh Dalton that the banking community will give their cooperation! And why shouldn’t they? At a time when British finances are at the breaking point, in the depths of post-war national impoverishment, in a crisis of foreign trade, all the burdens and risks are removed from the shoulders of foreign trade, and they are assured many happy returns at twelve per cent!
This “first socialist measure” of the Labor government is not that at all. Itis a measure for large scale relief for the bankers, not for the war-weary working people of England.
 
Other Measures
Can anything different be expected from the bill for the nationalization of the British mines, which the government has introduced as a Christmas present? The same policy of paying the mine-owners with interest-bearing government bonds will be followed. A further mortgage on the labor of workers will thus be given to capitalists. These mine owners have for years not invested a shilling in the mines. The mines are not mechanized to give high production. Miners in some mines must walk three or four miles underground to get to the diggings. Coal is the only major natural resource that England has at home, and the mine owners have let the industry get so sick that it will take half a billion dollars to restore it to health. Having well-nigh killed the goose that laid the golden eggs, the mine owners are now more than willing to turn the bird over to the government – collecting unearned interest on government bonds, wealth of which the tolling masses will be deprived.
The Labor Party stands for the public ownership of other industries besides banking and mining. It says it will nationalize iron and steel production, inland transportation, gas and electricity, communication, civil aviation. However, nationalization is per se not socialism. Nationalization will do the working people little good if it mortgages their labor in perpetuity. It will bring the working people little good if the same exploiting gang is left to control and manage the nationalised industries – to yield happy returns at twelve per cent!
Socialism means throwing the parasites off labor’s back. And socialism means workers’ control of industry. Only measures in this direction are socialist measures
 




>Mr. Wallace’s plan for “Sixty Million Jobs” as presented in his book of that title, has been embodied in the Full Employment Bill, now almost choked to death in the labyrinth of Congressional red tape. In view of the flagrant unconcern with which the problem of unemployment has .been approached by the guardians of private enterprise, Mr. Wallace’s optimism that capitalism can provide full employment appears well-nigh ridiculous.
It isn’t that Mr. Wallace doesn’t understand that there are those who “wrap themselves in the flag of patriotism and do the dirty work of scoundrels.” He says: “... the goal if sixty million jobs is attainable provided that the pressure groups cooperate for the common good. This may be a big ‘if.’ True enough, it is. But it is also a realistic and not a wishful ‘if.’” So Mr. Wallace keeps smiling and believes that the FACTS will cause the capitalists to change their ingrained greed and lust for self-aggrandizement.
Some of the facts are, indeed, colossal. For instance, Mr. Wallace tells us that from 1930 to 1941 there was a loss of 88,000,000 man-years of production – due to unemployment. That amount of labor power could have been transformed into $350,000,000,000 of wealth. To equate this sum to the things of life could mean 70,000,000 homes at a cost of $5,000 each, which is about three times what is necessary to clear all the slums of the country. Or that waste can be equated to twice the value of all the capital stock of all the private corporations in the United States. Or it can be expressed in terms of three hundred and fifty river valley developments like the magnificent TVA.
 
Citing the Great Needs
Apparently such facts are not the ones that determine the conduct of the capitalists and their politicians. The facts that influence this gentry are contained in fat corporation ledgers and in the figures of dividend checks.
Similarly, Mr. Wallace’s array of unfulfilled needs that can form “the backlog to give us the driving power for peace” is very impressive, and without any doubt the needs are there – waiting to be fulfilled. His list of “unfilled orders” includes houses, hospitals, schools, rural electrification, soil conservation, river-valley developments, improved and increased transportation facilities, industrialization of the South and other backward regions where people are under-employed and don’t produce enough for consumption. And Wallace also lists the undeveloped human and national resources in other lands, that have to be built up.
But again all these bursting human needs Mr. Wallace confines within the fences of private enterprise and, according to him, they must wait for the private capitalists to be won over “to the demands of peace and general welfare.”
Now Mr. Wallace tells us in his book that even with FULL employment at WARTIME wages eight million city families – not counting their country cousins – would still be getting less than $1,000 a year and would be unable to “buy enough meat, eggs, dairy products to raise healthy children” or keep themselves in good health. Yet private capital, in which Mr. Wallace places so much hope, is now fighting like a wild tigress for its cubs, against the demands of labor to keep wages at these inadequate wartime totals. Where, pray, is the basis for Mr. Wallace’s hope that private enterprise will submit to planning for full employment?
In fact, Mr. Wallace reveals himself as a bundle of contradictions. On the one hand, he stands for an economy of abundance, as, of course, is implicit in any program for full employment. On the other hand, however, he is the advocate of small business and small farms. While it is true that small enterprises contribute to total production, the basic truth is that both industry and agriculture have gone beyond the horse-and-buggy days, that big business dominates both, and that plenty for all the people can be produced only on the basis of large-scale industry.
The question, of course, is what to do with the giant industrial establishments which are here to stay and which are absolutely indispensable to an economy of abundance. Mr. Wallace says he is opposed to monopolies by great corporations and cartels. It is always fashionable to be against monopolies. But the proof of the pudding is the means proposed to abolish them. Mr. Wallace approaches the question with the outlook of the small business man that he is. He wants the big business government to help the small business man against the great corporations and cartels. Might as well try to make Niagara fall the other way.
Like all pro-capitalist liberals, Mr. Wallace makes sense till it comes to the point of HOW. He is a great champion of the “common good,” but only in so far as it can be fitted into the system of private profit. He sees the social evil in the powerful economic and financial monopolies, but does not take the logical step, namely, that these industrial giants needed for an economy of abundance, must become the common property of all the . people. Instead, he yearns for the good old horse-and-buggy days of the small company and the small farm – and small production!
 
No Planning?
Similarly he hedges around the need for social planning. Indeed, his program, embodied in the unfortunate Full Employment Bill, involves some kind of planning. It would provide for a budget of annual employment to see how many jobs private business is expected to provide, how many municipal, state and federal government can be expected to furnish, and how many more would be needed for sixty million jobs. Then the government would stimulate business into certain further production by offering subsidies and other inducements; and then the President would suggest to Congress additional government expenditures to make up the difference still needed to give jobs to sixty million workers.
This Wallace calls “democratic planning,” but please, please don’t call it “Economic Planning” with capital letters, because that means the end of private enterprise.
Unfortunately, Wallace is still a favorite with organized labor. In 1944 many CIO union conventions acclaimed him as their 1948 choice for president. By throwing in their lot with a pro-capitalist liberal, with a selfcontradictory approach to the vital problems of the day, labor retards the solution of these problems.
 
A Way Out
There are jobs for all – but not within the profit-grabbing restrictions of private enterprise. There can be plenty for all – but only by socializing the means of production and placing production under control of workers’ committees. There is a new and full life to be built – but not by bills gathering dust in the desks of capitalist politicians nor by fattening up the capitalists with more government subsidies.
The way to a new and fuller life is via a Workers’ Government that will end private profit and lead the nation to Socialist endeavor. To break with the Wallaces and to take the road to independent political action on working class lines, that is the task at hand for labor.
Wallace’s book simply proves how true this is.
 




LINDEN, N.J., Nov. 27 – To this reporter’s question: Do you think the company is out to break the union? strikers and members of the strike committee gathered at headquarters of Local 595, UAW-CIO, in this city, shouted a resounding Yes! To the question: Can they do it? the rafters rang with 4 thunderous NO! One striker put it, “They have as much chance as that snowball in hell.” A member of the strike committee thinks unionism is as indestructible as the worker himself. He said:
“I can remember when my father was a union man striking for things the workers demanded. He remembered his father doing so. I expect my son and his son to do so. There will always be more good union men.”
While the Linden General Motors plant is the largest in the east, the UAW men on strike number only some five hundred. This is due to the fact that the plant is in process of reconversion from airplane production to auto production. At the height of war production 14,000 working men and women were turning out 300 planes of the Wildcat type monthly. When reconversion is finished some 5,500 workers will slide Buicks, Pontiacs and Oldsmobiles off the production lines. What about those 8,500 workers for whom there will no longer be jobs at the Linden division of GM? Six thousand women workers have been fired, along with the other 2,500 deemed dispensable.
The UAW-CIO men have been joined by about a thousand AFL ironworkers, tinsmiths and others engaged in reconverting the machinery, and the plant is shut tight as a drum. The pickets have permitted entry only for protection. Office workers have stayed away. The union has offered to pass some fifty office workers to allow the payrolls to be made up, since the company owes the workers substantial back pay. However, the company declines to unbend, even to the extent of arranging to pay workers their earned wages.
At each of the plant gates groups of pickets were on the job under their strike captains. Strike buttons bore the slogan: “30% or Fight” Placards much in evidence read: “We fought the Axis – now we fight GM for a living wage.” “Mussolini, Tojo, Hitler learned we were tough – soon GM will say they had enough.” “You. supported us in Pacific, Africa, Europe – back us now against GM.” It is noteworthy that the strikers put GM, economically speaking, in the same category as the Axis and their thoroughly discredited dictators. The last slogan applies to the veterans of World War II on strike who joined the picket line.
In one section of the plant yard about three hundred brand new trucks squatted on their motionless wheels. These are en route from Baltimore to New York to be loaded on ships and exported – evidence of GM’s bid for post-war foreign trade. The trucks will keep the pickets company until the strike is won.
The strike committee and the men are confident of themselves and of the strength of their case. Asked if there was a chance- of accepting the company’s high-handed terms for reopening negotiations, namely, that the union recede from the demand for a thirty per cent wage increase to be paid out of profits, not higher prices, the chairman of the strike committee, John Connolly, said: “Emphatically no! We believe that we are running this strike, not the company.”
It was the opinion of the men at union headquarters that they have plenty of evidence in their own plant that GM wouldn’t mind breaking the union. They said that real negotiations never took place with the Linden division of GM because the company kept stalling on trivial issues. Before the present controversy GM’s anti-union tactics were shown in their refusal to have grievances settled through shop committees, thus letting the accumulation of grievances bring the workers to their wits’ end. One member of the strike committee attributed such provocations by the company to the no-strike pledge.
 
Attitude of Workers
The men well understand why the Big Three auto companies now come out in open combat for a show-down. The men know that industry is in a most favorable position, due to tax rebates, to great reserves from war profits, to the opportunity to buy government machinery and plants for a song, etc. The workers are in no such position and definitely cannot expect government money and privileges, as can the companies. The most the workers get is unemployment doles – and not even that when they are on strike. As to the backlog the workers have accumulated out of their “fabulous” war wages, Chairman Connolly referred to the survey made by the United Steel Workers-CIO showing that the average savings in cash and bonds is $300 per family.
All the men were most anxious to talk and answer questions put by this reporter. Asked if they thought the company has the right to keep its books secret, the answer came back: “Not when a company becomes as large as GM. Then its business is everybody’s business – the workers’ and-everybody else’s.” Ford’s demand for “company security’’ was treated with grand derision. “We have no security from Ford,” they said. “What about a guaranteed annual wage? What about reinstating workers’ seniority? What about eliminating physical examinations that put workers of forty on the scrap heap?”
The workers in the Linden division have suffered at least a thirty per cent cut in take-home pay due to reduction in working time to forty hours, due to down-grading of skilled workers, and for similar reasons.
Asked whether the families of strikers are ready for a long fight,
Chairman Connolly replied that they were. He said that with take-home pay now averaging $32 and $33 a week, their wives are right behind the men, joining the picket line and giving full support. He also said that the town of Linden was very sympathetic to the strikers, judging by contributions. The people realize that unless the workers make enough to buy a decent standard of living, the town as a whole cannot be prosperous.
The strike committee was very emphatic on the point of taking care of every striker. None shall want for food and shelter. At union headquarters the culinary department was replete with coffee, sandwiches, soup and stew. At the plant gates were little cupboards for coffee and soup to keep the men on four-hour picket shifts satisfied.
Everything, in short, points to the ability and determination of the men out in-Linden to fight the good fight to a good finish. It is up to all organized and unorganized labor, and to all who realize that labor is fighting for a better life for all of us, to give unstinted evidence of solidarity – and material support!
 




Prices are going up!
The Kiplinger letter of November 17 to businessmen predicts: “The prices of most things consumers buy are heading upward.”
Recently Senator Taft complacently declared that a ten percent cost-of-living increase would be “a secondary consideration” if full peacetime production could thereby be established. This is only another way of stating that the industrial overlords will bar full production until they get higher prices.
These incidents are more than straws in the wind. They are signs of the drive unleashed by business to sweep away all price controls.
Price Administrator Bowles, inside and outside of Congress, is fighting for the very life of OPA. The National Association of Manufacturers seeks the end of price control within sixty days. Bowles warns big business that its aim is “reckless,” “utterly foolhardy,” “a most dangerous threat to the future health and success of our entire free enterprise system.”
 
How Bowles Fights
Bowles accuses the powerful lobbies of manufacturers, wholesale and retail dealers and real estate boards of a determination to “make a killing on uncontrolled rising prices and rents” – which is of course true. And he is chagrined that these naughty boys are doing this bad thing in spite of the fact that, under OPA, “The truth is that never in our history have business profits been so large and business failures so few, and this applies to practically all types and sizes of business.”
But the super-profit-seeking big boys remain unimpressed. Their spokesmen, in and out of Congress, press the attack on price control. Senator Wherry, Republican from Nebraska, produces two ladies’ slips, both peach color, one of good material and fit, and the other like a shapeless sack. The first, the Senator points out, was made to sell at $1.95 but OPA ceilings forced the maker to discontinue the line. Whereupon the second garment, shoddy and sack-like, was put out by another manufacturer, as a new model to sell at $3.95. This, according to the Senator, is evidence of the evil of price control – not, of course, of the crooked profit-scheming of private enterprise, which incidentally, Bowles also fully supports!
More confusion around price control is contributed by the government.
On one hand, through Bowles it is supposedly trying to keep prices down; on the other hand, Stabilization Director Collet tells manufacturers that they can ask for price boosts if the average hourly wages of their employees have been upped thirty-three percent since 1941, that being officially set as the rise in prices since then.
 
Leaks in Price Control
So we ask: If, as Mr. Bowles so adequately proves, profits are better than ever before in history, why should manufacturers be allowed higher prices? It is also quite pertinent once more to call the lie on government figures. The cost of living since 1941 has been hiked not thirty-three percent but conservatively forty-five percent and more likely fifty percent, according to CIO President Murray’s figures.
Not only is Bowles thus left out on a limb by other government departments, he is himself acting like a dual personality. While he shouts for all to hear that leather profits for 1944 – along with textile profits – were 730 percent over prewar prices, he grants shoe manufacturers a four and half percent price increase. Of course he hastens to assure the public that the retail prices of shoes will not rise, but that wholesalers and retailers will absorb the increase.
Naturally the big-business foes of OPA point up these inconsistencies of Mr. Bowles. While they benefit from his “control of prices” upward, as with coal, steel, building materials, meat, milk, to mention .only a few, they prefer no control at all. Poor Mr. Bowles, so bravely “helping the consumer” with an eye cocked to keep profits the highest in history – and getting no thanks from big business!
To complete the picture of the current price situation is the expose of the black market in textiles. While low-income families pay twice and three times more than before the war for worse clothing, OPA price violations have been allowed to skyrocket to between one hundred and two hundred percent above ceilings. Every type of clothing, fabrics, linens, sheets, pillow cases, towels, blankets, sold in every little store on every Main Street, are under black market control. An ex-GI cannot get a suit of civilian clothes and his young wife cannot get household furnishings. Cheese cloth is being sold for marquisette at three and four times more. Unbleached muslin is palmed off as taffeta – at taffeta prices.
 
The Textile Scandal
But here is the pay-off on the textile scandal. While the Justice Department promises to go after the black marketeers in textiles, the government itself is holding a load of cotton. It owns 4,705,000 bales and has 2,000,000 more under loan. This is considered much “more than the normal carry-over” and the government is “seeking new uses for it.” Why not use it to make textiles for the consumer? Or would that be competing with sacred private enterprise – and with the black marketeers?
Out of this composite picture of the price situation, let us see wherein we can make rhyme or reason – rhyme or reason for the worker and for the housewife who are threatened with a further price squeeze.
There must, of course, be price control. Without it, the profit-lust of private enterprise let loose in the present market, would result in Stratospheric prices and ultimate catastrophic collapse. However, the OPA is like a kettle-cover that doesn’t fit and lets the steam escape all around. Textile prices one hundred to two hundred percent above ceilings vividly demonstrate the point. Also demonstrating the point are Mr. Bowles’ own figures showing that pre-tax profits of department and other stores in 1944 were 1,324 percent above 1936–39, and that profits of all businesses have been the largest in history. The OPA has proved that the needs of the common people cannot be served by the capitalist government concerned with the “rights of private enterprise” and with maintaining unprecedented profits.
To control prices in the interest of the worker who produces the goods and of the housewife who needs the goods, something else is required. Labor Action and the WORKERS PARTY have consistently called for the formation of price-control committees of these very workers and housewives. Only such committees, right from the people, can fix fair prices and see that price ceilings are enforced. But such committees could not function without emphatically pushing aside the so-called “rights of private enterprise.” The books of big business would have to be opened, the facts of costs arid profits made available. This is the only basis on which price control for the benefit of the majority of the people can be effectuated.
The CIO auto workers, demanding a thirty percent wage increase, without any price increase because the profits of the auto barons would still be twice prewar levels, have pioneered in taking, a fundamental approach to the question of prices. This also involves opening the books of big business to public view, and has therefore met with the most stubborn antagonism of the auto bosses.
The next demand of labor and the consumer has to be, as stated above, for price-control committees of workers and housewives, with access to all the facts of production – including above all the facts of profits, that lion’s share that goes to the capitalist parasites on production.
 




The mountain labored and brought forth a mouse. This is the saying that came to mind on reading the new WPB-OPA program regarding textiles and clothing.
The first aspect of the plan that hits one smack in the face is that it will be April before new supplies begin to come in, in dribbles, and it will take until September before the plan is “wholly operative.” That means that for the rest of the winter and for spring and summer buying, pretty much the same condition will probably prevail, both as to supplies and as to prices.
Yet the plan of the WPB and OPA glosses over this period and does nothing about reducing prices on existing supplies.
When the price cuts do come in, they will amount to only SIX OR SEVEN PER CENT. Yet OPA Administrator Bowles himself admits that the cost of clothing has increased ELEVEN PER CENT in the last eighteen months. Just why Mr. Bowles picked the number “eleven” out of the hat is hard to say, when every housewife knows that she is paying as much as 100 per cent more, on many items of textiles and other clothing. But even on his own basis, Mr. Bowles does not hold the line.
Another loophole is the ever-present question of quality. Though the WPB-OP A order has many words on this subject, it winds up with the conclusion that “quality controls will be imposed WHERE FEASIBLE” – and you know what that means in practice!
Indefinite indeed are the benefits to accrue to the consumer. But very definite was Mr. Bowles on the subject of profits. He was very emphatic that the textile and clothing business all up and down the line – WHICH HAS MADE AS MUCH AS TEN TIMES PRE-WAR PROFITS – will continue to make more profits than in pre-war days. It is easy to understand why the working people can’t really go into rhapsodies over the profit system.
*
Has anyone ever stopped to think what would become of our vaunted “civilization” – such as capitalist civilization is – if all the workers in the service trade would refuse to do “menial” labor? Restaurants, hotels, office and apartment buildings, stores, subways, laundries, dry-cleaning establishments all are kept clean or “serviced” or operated by the “menial” workers. Without them, dirt would so clog the wheels of modern life that it would come to a standstill. Food could not be served outside the home; hotels could not be run. But why go on? The point is amply made.
These so important service jobs are “manned” to a great extent by women, white and black. Indispensable as is their labor, they are treated like the scum of the earth. The measure of this is the wages they receive.
The Women’s Bureau of the Department of Labor recently made a survey showing that wages of women workers in service trades scrape a bottom of TWELVE AND FIFTEEN CENTS AN HOUR. For a forty-hour week, the munificent reward is $4.80 and $6.00!
The survey pertained to eleven states which have no minimum wage laws. Of course, male workers also come in for all the “benefits” of unrestricted exploitation. But there is nothing like the exploitation to which women workers are subjected. Restaurant, hotel, laundry and store workers average eighteen cents an hour in eighty-eight cities. Waitresses get less than twenty-five cents an hour. And so all along the line.
Pressure is being exerted by organized labor to get minimum wage laws passed in these unspeakably backward states. This is good. But it does not mitigate the real need to give these women workers a sense of the importance of their labor and of their belonging to the whole body of labor – and above all to help to organize them into powerful unions through,which to fight for their rights as useful workers and as human beings!
*
Eleanor Fowler, secretary-treasurer of the Women’s Auxiliaries of the CIO, writes a column in the CIO News. Her column in the January 22nd issue begins as follows: “It is significant that four of our eight women members of Congress have been chosen to serve on the Foreign Relations Committee of the House of Representatives. Their appointment emphasizes the very great concern which American women have with building a secure peace.”
The first mistake Mrs. Fowler makes is in the word “our.” How come that the eight women in Congress who are all either Democrats or Republicans, having run on capitalist party tickets, committed to a capitalist government – how come that they can be called “our,” meaning belonging to LABOR? The mere fact of womanhood has nothing to do with classes or with politics.
But the great error Mrs. Fowler falls into is the old bewhiskered one that women are somehow better equipped than men to bring about a better world and lasting peace. In her own column Mrs. Fowler proves how false this assumption is. She states her belief that “The groundwork [for peace] has been laid in the Bretton Woods and Dumbarton Oaks agreements.” Her belief in these scraps of paper only show that a woman can be just as deluded about the capitalist system and its international machinations as a man.
While the great nations are competing for world power and jockeying for position in a mad game that can only prepare the ground for the next war, Mrs. Fowler – along with other well-intentioned people of both sexes who refuse to see world capitalism for what it is – clutch frantically at agreements already discredited by the very ones who made them.
Neither sex nor color nor race nor creed has anything to do with the qualifications of people to represent labor in the struggle for a better world and lasting peace. The best qualified people of both sexes to speak for the working masses are the revolutionary socialists. They look at capitalism with the eyes of realists. They see that it holds no future but of more devastation and more wars. They are fighting to sweep capitalism off the stage of history, to make way for a socialist world based on human needs and aspirations. MEN AND WOMEN ALIKE WORK FOR THIS END.
 




In November 1942, the Nazi-fascist regime held sway over Europe, from the Arctic across the Mediterranean into Africa and from the Atlantic to the steppes of Russia.
Hitler and his pals, with Mussolini in the role of inflated errand boy, acted as though their power were as eternal as the seasons. They had military control of a vast empire. The economic assets of the Nazis had been multiplied to include the industries, mines, oil wells and transportation of all industrial Europe. The invaders squeezed all the produce out of the fertile lands. They enslaved the best manpower of Europe to produce in their factories. To convince themselves of their fictitious superiority, with machine-like unconcern for human values, they exterminated millions of Jews, Poles and other unfortunate people. To prepare themselves for future mastery of the world, they robbed Europe of its wealth.
The threat of world fascism was then as real as the map of Europe could make it. But that threat was not realized. Today, two and a half years from the acme of its power, the nazi-fascist regime lies defeated and shattered. First to collapse was the weaker Mussolini regime. Then steadily Hitler’s “New Order” retreated and finally fell apart – in complete disorder.
 
Reasons for Fascist Collapse
There are three important elements that contributed to the defeat of the nazi-fascist regime in Europe. Each one must be given its due.
The military and economic might of England, Russia and the United States surpassed that of Germany, Italy and Hitler’s newly acquired European empire. It must never be forgotten that World War II is a contest between two groups of imperialists. It was one thing for Hitler to suppress the German labor movement in blood, but when he made his military bid for a greater share of the earth, he ran into the military opposition of imperialists with other plans. The combined manpower, resources, material and military talents of , the Allied powers proved more than a match for the “New Order” – and, of course, Allied might stood entrenched in the almost miraculous productivity of American labor.
The nazi-fascist regime ran into another force of considerable strength – the will of the European peoples to rebel against enslavement by a foreign invader. We do not want to exaggerate, but it should be remembered that never before in the history of mankind have such extensive underground movements been organized nor against such powerful odds, Not only did the liberation movements hamper and harass, the Germans, not only did they give invaluable aid to the Allied forces, but they fought guerrilla. warfare and formed partisan armies.
The French themselves helped to drive the Nazis out of Paris; the Poles fought heroically in Warsaw, only to be betrayed by the Russians; the Italians helped drive the Germans out of Milan; the Czechs fought the remnants of Hitler’s army in Prague.
When the Allied Military Command takes over in Europe, its primary concern is to disarm the liberation movements that struggled so valiantly. But the Allies give government jobs to fascists and collaborators. This is how Allied imperialism rewards the people’s movements which undermined the nazi-fascist regime. This happens because the Allied rulers fear the people.
The third factor contributing to the collapse of the “New Order” is in the German nation itself. While there was no widespread or important underground movement in Germany, because of the thoroughness of the Nazi terror in the homeland, there was some sabotage and opposition expressed in the many ways that the masses know so well. Most important about Germany was the cold passivity of the people. Only Allied policy, threats to exterminate the German nation and the call for German slaves, kept an explosion from taking place. The enthusiasm in Germany came primarily from indoctrinated youth and fanatical S.S. men. There was no mass enthusiasm for the war.
The complete disintegration of the German army and home front, toppling like a house of cards, showed that the Nazis had neither the strength of a firm mass foundation nor of sturdy walls. If the Allied powers had recognized this, had promised the German people that they would not be punished for the crimes of their rulers, had encouraged the German masses to overthrow the Hitler regime, the end would have come much sooner. But that would be encouraging revolution – something imperialists fear greatly.
However, the end has come. The nazi-fascist regime is kaput. Hitler, Mussolini and their nazi-fascist lieutenants are either dead, in hiding or in flight from the anger of the world.
 
Struggle Still Ahead
Yet the masses of the world cannot yield to wild and unreasoning rejoicing. While the regimes of Hitler and Mussolini have fallen apart, the threat of fascism still remains.
It remains in the fascists and nazis still at large. It remains, in the policy of the Allied Military Command to place fascists in government posts in European countries. It remains in the Franco regime, in organized fascist groups in Mexico, in Argentina, in the Cliveden Set of England, in the Coughlins of this country.
The threat of fascism remains because the capitalist system remains. We must never forget that German nazism was the political arm of German capitalism, adopted by it to save itself from the rising working class.
We must always remember that American and British capital helped Hitler cement his power against the German working class and turned against him only when he began to poach on their own imperialist precincts.
We must ever bear in mind that Churchill, as a capitalist statesman, praised Mussolini as a labor-suppressing dictator; and that this same Churchill fervently hoped that, if British capitalism should reach the crisis that German capitalism found itself in, there might arise a British Hitler to do the same dirty work.
That world capitalism in the post-war period will find itself in severe crises, one following on the heels of another, there is no doubt. That there will be many like Churchill ready to. adopt the Hitler solution, is also beyond doubt. Therefore, the collapse of the nazi-fascist regime in Europe may well be another case of “The King is dead – long live the King.” This is a sobering realization. The issue before the working peoples of the world is still fascism or socialism. Capitalism, in its era of desperate contradictions and crises, will increasingly consider democracy and the rights of labor unprofitable luxuries, and will seek to bolster itself through one form or another of fascist dictatorship.
Militant labor should celebrate the fall of the Hitler and Mussolini regimes with a resolution to prevent the reconstitution of fascist forces and the establishment of other fascist regimes. And this labor can do by undertaking the struggle against capitalism itself, with the positive aim of establishing workers’ governments and socialism – in our time!
 




We want to explain to our Detroit reader, W.P., that the rapid pace of world news is responsible for the delay in taking up his letter of March 10th in which he goes to bat against Labor Action writer Joe Leonard.
In the issue of March 5th, Joe Leonard wrote an article on the German people, the gist of which is that the brutal Nazi rulers are not the whole German people and that the American workers must make this distinction between oppressor and oppressed. Otherwise, the imperialist schemes of the Big Three will be assisted.
W.P., our Detroit reader contends that this distinction should not be made. He says that all the Germans – with the exception of children under ten – are alike. And W.P. tries to prove this fallacious point of view.
In the first place, he makes the statement that before September 1939, only five to ten per cent of the German people could be called innocent, the rest supporting the Hitler program. One who knows the history of Nazism has a right to question such an assertion. It is well established that the Nazi movement was based on a section of the impoverished German middle class, supported, instigated and brutalized by the German industrial rulers and their Hitlerite henchmen. The rest of the population was actually set upon by the Hitler hordes. The working class was terrorized, their organizations and press destroyed, their leaders and militant rank-and-filers killed and jailed. The Jews were killed, tortured, put in concentration camps. Christians who were too persistent in proclaiming the doctrines of Christianity, soon wound up in concentration camps. Honest intellectuals, scientists and professional people received the same treatment. Can it be that mass layers of the German people constituted only five or ten per cent of the population? Surely they were not exterminated, imprisoned and intimidated into silence by Hitler as a mark of appreciation for supporting him!
 
Who Were The Enthusiasts?
And if ninety to ninety-five per cent of the population supported him, why was it necessary for Hitler to station his Gestapo in every hamlet and on every city street, to plant his spies in every apartment house, to build machine gun implacements at strategic street corners? Are these the actions of a leader who has popular support?
Again, our Detroit reader is impressed by the demonstrations staged at Hitler’s public appearances in his heyday; the applause and the yelling, he considers signs of popular acclaim. But these demonstrations were made to order. Workers were taken out of their factories, conducted to the demonstrations and commanded to show enthusiasm. The crowd was peppered with Gestapo spies to see that the people did not maintain their normal sullen silence. Nazi claques and yelling squads were planted to raise a racket. These demonstrations were as spontaneous as the lifting of the arms by a person ordered to do so at the point of a gun.
Our reader indulges in other fallacies. He believes that Hitler’s successful military blitz was possible only because the majority in the army and on the home front “were with Hitler.” A discussion of the German army is, however, a subject for another discussion. There is involved the whole question of Allied preparation for war when the conflict broke out. That Hitler’s mass army – with the exception of an SS minority and, youthful fanatics – was a slave army, is partly proven by the way in which it has fallen apart, sustained neither by exhortations, threats nor a belief in Hitler. In Munich, the birthplace and citadel of Nazism, German soldiers are, at this writing, fighting like revolting slaves against Hitler’s Gestapo and Elite Guard.
As to the home front during the blitz, even then – when there was no crack in the bright armor of Hitler’s successes – there was plenty of mass hostility. Writing of those days, Curt Riess and other writers reported many instances of clever sabotage by factory workers; of fraternization, between German workers and the, foreign workers they were ordered, to shun; of giving succor to the persecuted Jews; of trying to keep alive, in an unorganized way, the remnants of union solidarity.
As Hitler’s successes melted like winter’s snow, naturally the home front became bolder in its resentment, and Nazi punishment was? meted out to fit the “crime.” Nazi prisons, accommodate thousands upon thousands of “offenders.” American reporters speaking with German prisoners in captured German towns, have learned that the offenses range from repeating anti-Hitler jokes and listening to the foreign radio, to more serious “crimes.” German soil holds the bodies of thousands of Germans murdered by the Nazis for demanding more food, staging peace demonstrations, or for just acting suspiciously.
In stating that only German children under ten should get our sympathy, our Detroit reader condemns the whole German youth. While it is bitterly true that the Nazi machine pumped its poisonous propaganda mainly into the youth, by no means all the young people succumbed. Right along there have been reports of organized student resistance to Hitler and of an underground students’ movement. There is good evidence that the fall of the Ludendorff bridge at Remagen to American soldiers was made possible by the work of the German student members of the underground at the University of Bonn. As to the feelings of individual young people, there is a story of a German girl of twenty who ran out of her farmhouse to help wounded Americans in the thick of a battle. How many such incidents must take place that are not reported!
Our Detroit reader also tells of his experience with German farmers in Canada where he worked, and how these Germans looked down on him because he is “a lousy American of Polish descent.” To go by such personal experiences in judging a whole people, is very narrow and gets us nowhere. W.P. had a bad experience with a “boss.” It only proves that the capitalist spirit even affects small people who hire others to work for them. It has nothing whatever to do with racial or national traits. On the other hand, the long array of details cited above about the German people as a whole under the Hitler regime definitely shows that they abhor Hitler and Nazism as much as the common people everywhere hate dictatorship and slavery.
Nothing written above should be interpreted by our readers as minimizing the unprecedented horrors’ practised by the Nazi regime. And it goes without saying that to carry out its extensive program of human torture and extermination, the Nazi leaders chose the lowest and most brutal elements of the population, the sadists and criminals, and trained them for the jobs of heartless guards and mechanical executioners.
 
Defend All Labor
We of Labor Action and the Workers Party are as much appalled and angered at these authenticated atrocities as are all decent people. We understand also how easy it is to condemn all the German people for the acts of the brutish regime, and especially how natural it is for Poles and Jews to feel that way. But what we want above all and at all times, is to get at the reasons for social phenomenon so as to be able to remove the causes that produce evils.Would it be correct to say that all the English people are brutes because the British imperialist army periodically slaughters, in cold blood, masses of Indian people wanting only bread and liberty? When such organizations in America as the Klu Klux Klan brought terror, death and devastation to poor Negroes and blacklisted whites in the interest of southern bourbons and northern capitalists, could the whole American people be branded as cold-blooded murderers?
The acts of the Nazi regime are of the same kind, but of greater quantity – to conform with the grander schemes of the German ruling class and with a ruthlessness born of a desperate hid for its imperialist life.
The hope for humanity lies in the fact that there is a difference between the common people of all lands and their rulers. The difference is as broad and basic as a battle front – the front of the class war. On the one side belong alike the British and Indian workers and common people, the Negro and white American masses, the German workers and common people, and the working masses of all countries; on the other, belong the British imperialists, the southern bourbons and northern capitalists of America, the German industrial magnates and their Nazi party and the exploiting rulers of every land.
To exclude the German masses from their proper class alignment is merely to defer the day when the workers of the world will unite to end ruling class atrocities once and for all. This is what Joe Leonard pointed out in his article. This is the truth which our Detroit reader and all workers must learn.
 




Women are supposed to be bored by figures. But here are figures guaranteed to stir up plenty of feeling.
Food and clothing prices are a very sore spot for all housewives. With malice aforethought, this column is going to put salt on the sore by telling you something about the profits that industry is getting out of those high prices that we are paying.
The OPA made a study of 1,900 companies, comparing their profits in war year 1943 with the average of peace years 1936–39. Of special interest to women are the OPA findings regarding the food and clothing industries. Here are the shocking facts:

The canned and frozen foods industry in 1943 increased its profits over 1936–39 by THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-THREE per cent.
 
Dairy products companies pocketed TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY per cent more profits in 1943 than in the 1936–39 period.
 
Meat packers gained FOUR HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOUR per cent during those war years.
 
Sugar concerns boosted their gain EIGHTY-SIX per cent.
 
The cotton textile manufacturers take climbed by SEVEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-TWO per cent.
 
The leather tanning and finishing industry hit a jackpot with a FIFTEEN HUNDRED per cent increase.

These are figures of the OPA – the government agency which was supposed to but failed to keep prices down; succeeding very well, however, in helping profits up.
But what is this loud protest we hear from these profiteers of a nation’s sweat and blood? Oh, yes; they are shouting that these profits were before taxes, and that the government took a large share. To be sure, the government took some, but not enough. Every housewife will agree that whatever the government takes from the war profiteers, it isn’t enough. Why should the capitalists be permitted to make one cent more war profits than peace profits, while the people sacrifice everything?
But the matter doesn’t end here. There is another important aspect. It concerns wages.
Many unions have been clamoring for wage increases. They demand that the Little Steel formula be dumped for a very good reason. That formula freezes wages at a fifteen per cent increase while the cost of living has gone up at least three times that figure.
And how do the industrialists respond to demands for Wage increases? These bloated profiteers beat their chests and swear they cannot afford to grant wages increases unless they also raise prices to the consumer.
So the War Labor Board and Congress and President Truman all agree that wage increases would be too, too terrible. More wages would, alas and alack, bring about uncontrolled inflation.
However, even a housewife who may not understand trigonometry and calculus can still smell an odorous lie. Why cannot companies making up to 1,500 per cent war profits over peace profits, give their workers wage increases without passing the cost on to the housewife?
Not only could wages be increased, but prices could be reduced and still war profits would exceed peace profits.
While the capitalists and their politicians scare the people with the bogey of inflation, they are protecting tremendously inflated war profits.
*
Thus the policy of Washington is determined by the war profiteers. As a concrete example, take the problem of textiles and clothing.
Some weeks ago the WPB and OPA announced a very optimistic plan to produce more low-priced textiles and clothing. We were promised that by spring there would surely be a marked increase in the supply of children’s things, work clothes and women’s wear, at prices working people can pay. What happened?
That textile industry which in 1943 made 772 per cent more war profits that it did in the peace years descended upon Washington with objections. Congress held hearings. Much time was killed; much hot air was dispelled; but real pressure was brought to bear by the textile barons. The WPB and OPA fell back steadily. The much-publicized plan got lost in the shuffle.
The housewife looks in vain for the low-priced garments promised. She will still pay around a dollar for a boy’s cotton sport shirt that used to cost around thirty-nine cents before the war.
And as for the wages of textile workers, the WLB grudgingly allowed a five-cent increase in minimum wages, from fifty cents to fifty-five cents an hour – thus raising the substandard minimum wage from $20 to $22 a week, still very much “sub” by any standard.
By any standard, the profits of the textile capitalists are “super.” And the politicos in Washington are right behind them.
*
Washington backs huge war profits not only in policy But in taxpayers’ money – the pay-as-you-go money taken out of wage envelopes.
The sugar monopolists during the war got government priming to the extent of $84,000,000 of taxpayers’ money.
Chapter can be added to chapter in this story of a very successful marriage of government and industry. One of the most touching ones is the latest plan of Congress and the Administration to make available to war-profiteering business nearly $6,000,000,000 in tax exemptions and refunds – while prices stay high, wages stay lower, the pay envelope continues to be flattened by taxes and other touches, and tens of thousands of workers become jobless and wageless.
 




“For my part, I simply cannot conceive of any tolerable enduring order in which there exists widespread organisation of workers along occupational, industrial functional lines,” writes the union-busting Henry C. Simons, professor of political economy of the University of Chicago.
What has the reactionary Professor Simons to do with the class war raging between the Big Three automobile companies and the United Auto Workers-CIO? Everything – and this is no exaggeration. For at the negotiations between the officials of General Motors and of the union, GM Economist Stephen de Brul quoted the above fascistic approach of the professor as representing the company’s point of view. In a word, the Big Three billion-dollar automobile companies have thus announced their purpose to break the 1,000,000-member auto union, the largest in the world and the most progressive and most militant in this country.
Their union-busting purpose explains all the moves of the corporations. That is why Ford refused to negotiate for wage increases but instead issued to the union a thirty-one point ultimatum, each one of which points is designed to cripple the union or to deprive it of some hard-won achievement. That is why GM most hypocritically offered the union a token ten per cent increase with a forty-five to forty-eight hour work week, thus making no pretense of its intention to abolish the 40-hour week. That is why Chrysler sits by, with bull-headed arrogance proclaiming that the thirty per cent increase demanded by the union to restore its members’ take-home pay is “out of the question.”
These war-enriched corporations absolutely refuse to join in bona fide collective bargaining. They want to force the issue to the picket line.
The union on its part fully understands what is at stake. President R.J. Thomas has alerted the membership to be ready for “a costly and terrible strike” which the corporations are forcing upon the workers. He has declared that should there be a strike, it will be “with full confidence that the du Pont family cannot successfully flout the just demands of the automobile workers.”
As we go to press the two-day meeting of the 200 delegates from the 100 locals in the GM system is not over. The men are conferring with the six-man strategy committee of the union on calling a strike in the GM plants. At the close of the. first day of the meeting, November 19, Walter P. Reuther proposed that the thirty per cent demand of the union be submitted to arbitration, asking General Motors for a written reply by 4:00 p.m. on Tuesday, November 20. Arbitration has inevitably proved disadvantageous to the workers. This move was probably made by the union leaders in order to put the responsibility for an auto strike squarely on the shoulders of the corporations.
The corporations are pushing toward a showdown strike. Take, for instance, GM’s ten per cent offer.
The offer, rejected by the union, was to raise by ten per cent the hourly wages of all workers whose hourly ‘rate’ has not been increased “to match the thirty per cent rise in prices” since 1941. Need any worker be told that the cost of living has gone up pearly forty-five per cent since 1941?
The insulting ten per cent offer goes hand in hand with a forty-five hour week. The union stands firm for three full shifts of forty hours. The largest, richest and biggest money-making concern in the world is planning “to lead the country back to a long work week.” Naturally the union must fight tooth and nail both to protect the bitterly won forty-hour week and to prevent more ravaging unemployment due to longer hours. And GM knows this.
The unrestrained gall of the industrial overlords is again manifested in the Ford thirty-one-point demand on the union. Ford attacks the right of workers to have their union representatives handle their grievances. This union-busting outfit also wants practically to abolish seniority rights. It would extend temporary layoffs from thirty to ninety days. It would stop call-in pay. It would make vacations depend on work done instead of simply on time worked. It would make the union pay damages for work stoppages and strikes. Most of the thirty-one points are along these lines – and the Ford company knows the union will fight this vicious attack.
The UAW hurled back the accusation that Ford had issued “a union-busting, irresponsible and strife-provoking document.” Answering the company’s blather about more production, the union asks: “Does the company think that workers whose morale has been wrecked by low wages and high cost of living will have any chance to achieve peak production?” The union reminded the company that the workers’ production in wartime was no fairy-tale and that when the company got the Army-Navy “E” award it wasn’t “pixies that did the work.” On the question of work stoppages the union replied: “There is a very simple way to avoid work stoppages. That is to stop provoking them.”
 
Ford’s Ultimatum
To the cry of the poor billion-dollar Ford company for “company security,” the union very aptly answered: “Since the company keeps its financial affairs largely a secret it’s hard to tell how much ‘security’ the company has. We do know that the company’s assets are now well over a billion dollars, having increased during wartime by more than $300,000,000.”
Furthermore, the union pointed out that the “tough policy” of the companies is connected with the provisions of the tax law which are so favorable to capital. Since the government guarantees these companies – so pathetically crying for security – tax refunds in case their profits fall below the 1936–39 levels, any strike losses will be repaid them out of ‘the federal treasury. There are other conditions favorable to the companies. They have the very comfortable reserves of piled-up war profits. Again, the market for cars is such that it has to wait for production as and when it comes.
Another thing that must be understood is that there is a virtual strike on the part of business to defer full reconversion and production till next year. Why? Because there will be no excess profits tax next year and profits will be juicier as a result. Business also hopes that by then the expiring OPA will yield to the blows of business and pass out entirely, thus allowing higher prices and higher profits to prevail.
If these corporations are profit-greedy lions, the United Auto Workers-CIO, on the other hand, is no lamb. It has won its position in the labor movement by hard slugging – and by winning. The sitdown strikes of a decade ago form a most brilliant and militant chapter in labor’s history in any country. The auto workers know how to fight – and so do their wives and children. For example, the wife of a die-maker employed in General Motors told a New York Times reporter: “I’ve got my man and four kids to feed. We can’t do it if we have a cut in pay ... It’s just as simple as that. I’m behind my man.”
The progressiveness of the UAW-CIO and the other CIO unions in the present wage fight must be understood and supported by all workers. Not only do the thirty per cent demands involve the very basic issue of maintaining take-home pay so that the standard of living does not collapse. The unions are also attacking the sacred profits of the companies, as well as their practice of passing wage increases on to the consumer. Furthermore, the unions’ insistence on real collective bargaining involves opening the corporations’ books to public observation. Such jabs as this are typical: “The union again expresses its regret that the corporation persists in keeping locked up in its vaults the arithmetic on which the dispute can be settled peacefully and fairly.”
In a word, the UAW-CIO is out in the front trenches on behalf of all of organized labor, and also on behalf of the unorganized workers, whose only chance of advancement lies in organization. The UAW-CIO now fights for the preservation of progressive unionism itself.
 




The unions, have backed up their demands for wage increases by their own unbeatable statistics. But that’s not all. The figures of the economists of the Office of Reconversion also support the unions – at least, to the extent of eighty per cent of their demands. These economists, have published figures which prove that industry can grant wage raises of TWENTY-FOUR PER CENT and still make $4,800,000,000 profits in 1946, which is more than twice as much as the pre-war average and almost as much as in the war year 1942.
At the same time these government economists show that average take-home pay has FALLEN TWENTY-EIGHT PER CENT below April of this year and that, after tax deductions for 1946, the worker’s average purchasing power will be TEN PER CENT LOWER than what his wages could buy in January 1941.
This actual lowered standard of living is bringing more and more workers into the fight for maintenance of take-home pay at wartime levels.
The vote of the UAW workers of General Motors, 6 to 1, for a strike in case their demand for a thirty per cent increase is not met has brought to a crux the war of wages-prices-profits between the Auto Workers and this colossus of industry. With each, encounter between the union and the company, on the air, in the press or in reported conferences, the strength and progressiveness of the union’s position is emphasized against the untenably reactionary and profit-bound position of the company, whose stockholders have in the last nine years received dividends of one hundred and forty-five per cent on investment.
The same is true of the bitter controversy between the giant United States Steel Corp. and the Steel . Workers who have made a demand for a $2.00-a-day wage raise – the same steel, workers who even during the war were going into the red each, week because wages did not meet a minimum budget.
Another large group of workers to join battle with their profit-bloated employers are the electrical workers, comprising 170,000 in General Electric, 100,000 in Westinghouse, 30,000 in General Motors electric divisions, etc. The demand of the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers is that of steel, for a $2.00-a-day boost in, wages to make up for cuts in take-home due to shorter hours, downgrading, etc.
 
Over-All Fight
Pushed by the determination of the CIO rank and file not to be left holding the postwar bag, union officials have placed the wage fight in its proper relationship to the whole postwar problem. In the first place, the workers are determined to break the vicious circle by which wage increases are passed off by corporations in higher prices, thus at least partly nullifying the wage increases. In the second place, the unions are treating their demands for higher wage levels to sustain worker purchasing power as an absolutely necessary measure toward full employment.
Union facts and figures leave the industrial barons without a leg to stand on. Indeed the unions have such great confidence in their position that in a nationwide radio broadcast, Walter P. Reuther, vice-president of the UAW, threw down the challenge to the corporation that if it can prove in public that the union’s demand for a thirty per cent wage boost is unsound, the union will retreat from its demand!
The reader will recall that the union’s statistics show that, allowing for the thirty per cent wage increase demanded as well as for a ten per cent advance in material costs, the corporation can not only net more profits but can actually, reduce the price of cars!
However, with typical capitalist arrogance, GM declares that prices and profits are none of the union’s business, nor anybody’s business except that of the industrial overlords who own GM. As the struggle becomes more intense, it is increasingly clear that GM has no interest in real collective bargaining op the issues, but is bent on forcing the workers out on strike. The union claims GM wants “a strike so they may turn it into a springboard for anti-labor legislation in, Congress.” This is undoubtedly the case.
Unwilling to yield to the workers on their irrefutable demands, the corporation is spending millions on propaganda. Pull-page advertisements are run to gain support for GM President Wilson’s plan to have Congress increase the work week to forty-five hours instead of the legal forty. According, to the ads, this plan “would be good for the working man, good for the employer, good for the farmer, good for the professional man, good for the housewife – good for America” – no less!
 
GM, Steel Profiteer
So shockingly reactionary is this proposition that even the writers for the capitalist press, despite receiving huge fees for GM advertisements, are constrained to condemn it. The financial page of the Washington Post points out the obvious, that GM’s plan would cut jobs; and the financial editor of the New York Times thinks GM’s idea “unsound.” Do the GM moguls really think they can get “public opinion” behind a scheme that will take bread out of the mouths of millions of returning soldiers and other workers wanting jobs?
Better beware, you lying auto and steel barons, lest workers ask: If it is true that the giants of industry cannot pay us a decent wage and cannot even keep themselves out of the red, why don’t we throw them out as a lot of reactionary bankrupts, and: take control of production ourselves?
The low-down is that corporations, fattening on steadily advancing war profits, don’t want any interruptions. “What is all this nonsense about wage rates to maintain take-home pay and the workers’ standard of living? And what is this unheard-of demand not to raise prices and pass wage increases on to the consumer? Aren’t we, the industrial masters, the ones to determine all that?”
The workers have answered an emphatic “No!” to that question.
 




The political situation in Argentina is by no means settled. The present lull following the stormy days of October augurs more trouble to come.
Even though Péron, after his phony arrest and hasty return to Buenos Aires, is not a member of the reconstituted government, he is undoubtedly the strong man behind every move. He is determined to become president of Argentina by “popular choice” in a so-called free election, which is supposed to take place some time in 1946.
Since all but a meagre ten percent of the Argentinians are opposed to Péron and his military-fascist government, he is making use of his military forces, his secret police, his stooges and goons, to “predispose” the population to cast its “free” vote in his favor when the elections are held. However, spokesmen for the Argentine people say that they are in no mood to tolerate an electoral fraud based on strong-arm and secret-police terror.
Against this background, we have recently been told in this country that the Argentine workers are supporters of Péron. When in August Péron bombastically declared: “I do not fear civil war because I am prepared for It ... I have at my disposal 300,000 soldiers and 4,000,000 workers armed with clubs,” all politically sane people raised an unbelieving eyebrow regarding those 4,000,000 workers. Now, however, we are asked by some of our legislators and columnists to believe that Péron has labor’s support and is – after all. is said and done – “the people’s choice.”
 
What Is the Truth
The first thing to do is to nail the lie that the military-fascist dictator Péron and his governing clique have Argentine labor’s support. There is a mass of evidence available from Latin American experts.
Harry B. Murkland, specialist on Latin American affairs, wrote in Current History, October 1945, that while Péron at first created some confusion in the ranks of labor by his terroristic methods after his false promises, his arrest of militant leaders, his appointment of his own stooges as leaders, the confusion was short-lived. “To the eternal credit of Argentine labor, he [Péronl was able neither to bribe nor frighten enough of it into his camp to give him the authentic character of ‘people’s choice’.”
This comes from the columns of the conservative Current History magazine. From the Latin American Affairs Committee of the CIO comes a strong statement denying that Péron has Argentine labor behind him, and blasting Senator Robert LaFollette for publicly spreading this falsehood. The CIO committee points out that “the few unions that Péron could really claim for himself were dominated by appointed henchmen and goons acting in connivance with the regime’s secret police.” About the so-called pro-Péron “labor” demonstrations, the CIO committee declares “they are usually staged in strategic areas of Buenos Aires by imported hoodlums, and sympathetic police concentration provides theatrical effects that cause them to be noticed by the population.”
Supporting the contentions of the CIO committee is the statement of Dr. Alejandro M. Berraondo, a Buenos Aires lawyer, general counsel for the major Argentine motor transport lines, in this country to get help for the anti-Péron forces. He limits Péron’s labor support to five or at most ten percent. He says that the major source of Péron’s small following is in his stooge-controlled National Federation of Argentine workers, with a membership of 125,000 – and many of whom are anti-Péron. The fact is that the great mass of workers are trying to maintain independent unions opposed to the state of military siege imposed by Péron, and are fighting for free unions and for full democratic rights.
 
What Labor Wants
As to the so-called pro-Péron labor demonstrations, Ray Josephs, in Latin America for five years as correspondent and author of Argentine Diary, says that aside from the army and military police, Péron’s supporters “come from the worst thugs in Avellaneda, an industrial suburb of Buenos Aires.” Mr. Josephs describes how on October 17, Péron began bringing in truckloads of these hoodlums, giving them weapons, money, free entrance to brothels, use of public buildings and theater as quarters. This criminal riff-raff staged the demonstration for Péron, forcing passers-by to shout for Péron. This element also attacked the Jewish district in the capital.
There is no need to labor the point further. Those 4,000,000 workers “armed with clubs” are not using them to keep their arch-enemy in power.
The question now to be answered is this: Why the sudden desire on the part of certain opinion-forming elements in this country, to make Péron appear to have labor and popular support?
 
Who Will Dominate S.A.
Is the State Department preparing the ground for initiating a more friendly attitude toward the Péron regime?
Arnaldo Cortesi, New York Times correspondent in Buenos Aires who has sent his paper very informative reports, wrote that “Robert LaFollette’s statement that Péron has support of the working class was taken to mean a more lenient attitude towards Péron.” Logical enough.
The withdrawal of Ambassador Spruille Braden – ostensibly to kick him upstairs to become Assistant Secretary of State – pan also be interpreted as a reign of leniency. Certainly Braden was doing all right in Argentina as far as getting the support of the “democratic” forces is concerned. His outspoken support of the latter won him and the United States great friendship in all anti-Péron circles. At anti-Péron demonstrations cries of “Viva Braden!” “Viva los Etados Unidos!” mingled with “Death to Péron!” But suddenly Braden was needed more in Washington than in Buenos Aires.
Is some deal being arranged behind the scenes?
The conflicting imperialist interests in Argentina are complicated. The United States is bent on displacing Great Britain from its first place in Argentine investment and trade. Argentina itself and the United States are competitors in the export of cattle and grain, and besides Argentina’s ruling class wants to challenge U.S. domination of South America. However, the Nazi defeat has made Péron more than willing to fry other fish; he got all he wanted from that source. Are our “democratic” imperialists afraid of the forces of true democracy in Argentina, as they are all over the world, and willing to talk business with the forces of “law and order?” Developments in the near future will give us more light on what is taking place.
It is a lie that Péron has the support of the people of Argentina. It is a lie that he has labor’s support. The Argentine masses want to get rid of the Péron regime. They want an end to the military siege under which they are living. The. workers want their full democratic rights.
 




The decision on whether or not this country is to have peacetime universal military training is too important to be left to the politicians, the generals and the admirals. If ever there was an issue that the people themselves must vote on, this is it.
This question concerns every youth and every family. It means the militarization of the society we live in. It threatens the continuance of political democracy as we know it, and the freedom of labor’s economic and political organizations. Peacetime military training also signifies a definite step in preparing for World War III.
All this is involved in peacetime military training. Will the people let themselves be railroaded into militarism?
 
Let the People Decide
The fifty million working people who slaved fifty-two and sixty hours a week to turn out the instruments of destruction should have their say. The soldiers returning with and without arms and legs, with and without their friends and pals, should vote on the question. The soldiers still abroad, rotting in social disillusionment and in personal demoralization, should have the chance to say what they think of permanent militarization of the country. The relatives of the more than million war casualties should decide. The parents of the country should choose the kind of society they want their children to grow up in.
Let us go a little deeper into the effects of peacetime military conscription or compulsory training – whichever it is called makes little difference.
Militarism will reach out its bloody hand into every family. It was to escape from this touch of death that many of the European people who built this country, came here. They wanted their lives to be their own, and suffered untold hardships to leave behind them the militarism of their native lands. Forced military training will sit like a ghost of doom at every family board.
And what will peacetime conscription mean to the youth of the land? Military training will hang over the heads of our boys and girls, filling them with doubt and uncertainty. No longer will they base their lives on the pursuit of peace. No longer will they choose their careers as before (within the restrictions of capitalist society).
That year of military training may well determine their future. There is no doubt that the advocates of military training have two purposes in mind. One is to militarize the whole civilian population by training the youth. But just as important,, indeed if not more so, is the plan to get trainees, after the required year, to “choose” careers in the army, navy and air force in the pursuits of war. And plenty of pressure will be exerted to accomplish this end.
 
We Are Not Pacifist
Precisely because peacetime military training is aimed for a third imperialist world war and because the militarization of the youth is aimed against labor, labor cannot be pacifist. Labor Action therefore stands for military training only if it is under workers’ control.
Therefore, we believe the people should exercise their right to express their “Nay!” on the question of compulsory military training in the bosses’ army, through a people’s referendum.
The advocates of peacetime conscription talk as if this were not a step toward militarism – as if it will have no effect on the institutions of the country. History has proved this idea wrong. It is used as a sop to the people who fear militarism. In every country where the military has gotten a footing in peacetime and in the lives of the civilian population, progressively greater military domination in politics and throughout society has followed. The Axis countries are good examples of this obnoxious development. So are the countries of South America, dominated by military dictatorships. Peacetime military training means militarization and is a threat to political organizations of the workers, the farmers, the little, people.
Socialists have predicted that the growth of militarism is proportionate to the decline of capitalism. With intensified international conflicts and with deepening rifts at home between capital and labor, capitalist society resorts to the “Big Stick” – to be used in its interests both at home and abroad.
Shall the people stand with folded hands and see this happen? Or should they demand to be heard on the question?
 
A New World War
But the matter goes even deeper than the kind of society we will be living in. It goes to THE fundamental: existence itself. The hearings before Congress and the arguments of the proponents of peacetime conscription, make no bones about its being in preparation for the next war. Without batting an eye, the makers of World War II are mixing the brew for World War III. And what kind of war will it be? Scientists assure us that any city in the world can be turned to rubble in fifteen minutes. Scientists tell us that forty million Americans – or Russians or any other people – can be annihilated almost before you can say Jack Robinson.
The outcome of the dispute whether an army will or will not be necessary or useful in an atomic-energy war, is not important. The point is that the kind of war for which the powers are preparing menaces existence itself and threatens the continued civilized existence of man on this earth. Peacetime military training is undoubtedly a step in this direction.
Shall we allow the “war specialists” to decide this all-embracing issue? Or shall we give our own clear answer?
The demand by the American people for a referendum on peacetime military training will act as a clarion call to the peoples of the world. It will be regarded by the war-weary masses as a genuine move toward international peace.
Labor can take the lead. Labor has to take the lead.
Labor must counter all plans for the militarization of youth. It must demand a referendum on the issue.
 




The war stories on the market are legion. Some are good, some bad. All, however, contribute to the record of the toil and trouble, of the sorrow and sacrifice, of the destruction and death that capitalism has visited upon humanity for the second time in a quarter of a fcentury.
The Ordeal, by Arkady Perventsev, is another such story. It relates how, under German bombardment, a whole aircraft factory was moved from a Ukrainian town to the safety of the Urals, there to continue the production of planes. Undoubtedly such feats of individual and collective achievement are unprecedented in history.
However, not only in Russia but in China, England, the United States, and also in Germany and Japan, are people doing superhuman things – unfortunately in the prosecution of annihilative imperialist war. So it is not from this point of view that The Ordeal merits special attention by Labor Action. And certainly not from the point of view of its being a literary masterpiece, for it is a rather mediocre piece of work.
Rather it merits our attention he-cause it is a story about Russia today and as such tells us something: about the kind of society that flourishes under Stalin. Labor Action has time and again produced proof that the Stalin regime has reduced the working people of Russia to a downtrodden mass exploited to maintain a new class of bureaucrats in a style to which they have never been accustomed. The Ordeal is another piece of evidence of the correctness of Labor Action’s conclusion.
In this tale THE people are the factory directors, engineers, heads of departments and the generals, lieutenants and such. The workers are vaguely indicated in the background – something like Negroes singing in Hollywood versions of “genteel” life in our own South.
The hero is Bogdan Dubenko, chief engineer of the factory. We know from the story exactly how he and his social layer live. He has a modern apartment, a car, a chauffeur; His wife has a maid and a fur coat. His table is supplied with plenty of food and drink, including wines and the national standby, vodka. We learn also that the heads of departments and the aristocracy of labor, the Stakhanovists, inhabit a little white colony of brand-new bungalows, bright with flower pots and gardens. And we learn also of their agonies when German bombs fall among them.
But not a word does Mr. Perventsev see fit to give his reader about the conditions under which the mass of factory workers live, except the hint that they may be living in “barracks of some sort.” No doubt the less said about that the better. The reader sees the common people mainly as an indiscriminate mass of refugees, clogging the roads and impeding the progress of “their betters,” who ride in cars with their own chauffeurs.
And in the factory itself, what is the position of the workers and what is the attitude of the bureaucrats toward them? When the Germans have attacked Kiev and Sevastopol, Factory Director Shevkoplyas and Chief, Engineer Dubenko hold a conference. They talk of calling meetings immediately in all the shops. “There’ll be increased working hours, OF COURSE,” says Shevkoplyas. So the factory boss and his first mate decide about working hours; OF COURSE. The meetings are simply a formality to ram decisions down the workers’ throats.
In contrast with this way of “explaining” the necessities of the war to the workers is the description of a meeting of the town intelligentsia – writers, painters, actors, scientists, doctors and teachers. Dubenko speaks to them. “He senses the perturbation of his, audience,” who “listen eagerly but understand nothing.” This causes Dubenko great chagrin and he therefore cannot enjoy the “long entertainment program” given for the benefit of the town intelligentsia – while the German guns roar in the distance. Long hours for the workers; long entertainment for “their betters.”
If there is one single socialist thought expressed in the book, this reviewer failed to see it. Dubenko’s father, an old man who has presumably been through the October Revolution, holds not a socialist but a fatalistic view of war. “There’ve always been wars,” he says. “And wars always mean tears ...” The “enlightened” factory director, Shevkoplyas, attributes the cause of war not to imperialist conflicts but to “The German! The scum!”
And what of the October Revolution and of Lenin, its leader? Oh, yes, Lenin. To be sure. Why, he has become one of Russia’s many national heroes, all of whose greatness is embodied in Superman Stalin, who “took over the burden of Alexander Nevsky, of Peter the Great, the responsibilities of Kutuzov, Dmitry Donskoi and Pozhsrsky” and “the cares of Suvarov, the achievements of Minin, the steadfastness of Bagration, and the great work of Lenin.”
To a thoughtful reader of this book only one conclusion can be drawn: Such a tale could not be written about a country where the workers are the dominant class with industrial and political freedom.
 




Not long ago women and children in Nice, Southern France, rioted when a huge plate of caviar and cold salmon appeared on the screen of a local theatre in a scene from Andy Hardy Goes to Town. Thereupon the authorities banned the movie; The Private Life of Henry VIII, because it shows great roasts of beef, fowl and other food. The danger of inciting the starving French people was too great.
From northern France came recent news of women trying to break into a sugar factory to get for their children some of the calories lodging in sugar. The sugar permitted only to those who can afford black market prices.
From Stockholm, Sweden, comes a report of hunger riots in the northern and eastern sections of Berlin. Said the reporter:
“On the eve of my departure hungry mothers of starving children stormed food shops in the Alexanderplatz and almost lynched a SA (storm troop) guard who tried to quiet them with the suggestion that they economize on their bread rations.”
Here are similar pictures from both a so-called friendly and so-called enemy country – pictures that transcend national boundaries and prove that imperialist World War II has inflicted unbearable suffering alike on victor and vanquished. And they show also that women, as the fulcrum of family life, bear the load. In the United States the barbaric devastation of war has not been felt in all its impact. A favored geographic location, the great natural resources of the country and the tremendous productivity of American workers and farmers have all contributed to saving us here from the horrors experienced by the common people in other parts of the world. However, even here the ravages of war have not exactly passed us by.
There is the struggle of the people to make ends meet with frozen wages and expanding prices. There are the empty places in the icebox and in the clothes closet due to the scarcity of commodities – found in plenty, however, on the black market. There is the shortage of decent housing, of doctor and hospital accommodations, of child care centers for working mothers. All these lacks mean discomfort for all, undermined health for many, sickness for many others, and even premature death for all too many. And again, the women, as the fulcrum of family life, feel the brunt of the situation.
A casualty of war, almost as tragic as that which happens to the best manhood of the nation, is what happens to its children. Due to the economic, social and moral upheaval, tens of thousands of adolescent boys and girls are caught in the treacherous current, and their lives are twisted or broken. Hundreds of thousands of children are induced to take jobs. Youngsters under fourteen work inhumanly long hours on unfamiliar jobs, at hazardous and unfamiliar machines. Accidents to child workers have risen directly with the violation by bosses of child labor laws.
In the State of New York the child accidents reported by inspectors – and they are only part of the story – were in 1944 seven time those in 1940. The near breakdown of the school system under war conditions is a factor increasing both child delinquency and harmful child labor.
The War has taken the full-grown, and stunts the growth of the growing. And what woman is not aware of this double tragedy!
Again, what women is not filled with consuming doubt as to the future? What shall she tell the baby when it grows up about the missing father? What kind of world will the baby grow up in? These doubts were well expressed by the widow of a pilot. On receiving a medal awarded her dead husband, she wrote to the army heads stating some of her thoughts about her baby and the future:
“I don’t want him to think of his father being killed while he was killing other people. We Americans weren’t brought up to do that. I wish I could tell him his father died to save him from being drawn into a third world war. I hope it is true, sincerely, but mothers twenty-five years ago wondered too.”
Does Bretton Woods give any assurance to the mothers of whom this pilot’s widow is typical? Do Dumbarton Oaks, Yalta and Sam Francisco give any assurance to the mothers of whom this pilot’s widow is typical? Hardly, for the conflicting interests of the great powers among themselves, and of the little powers as against the great powers, inevitably mean trouble. Even Roosevelt, in his speech to Congress after Yalta, betrayed an undercurrent of doubt while expressing hope.
And did not Wilson express hope a quarter of a century ago? But international capitalism runs true to form!
The first half of the message of Labor Action, on this May Day 1945, to working women is this:
Permanent peace under international capitalism is impossible. One or the other must go. For the sake of the dead for whom there is no longer any hope and for the children for whom there still is hope, we ask the women to dedicate themselves to the task of procuring peace in the only way possible – helping to establish International Socialism.
Another source of grave anxiety to every woman is the question of economic security. Will the mother and housewife, who is fortunate enough to have a breadwinner, be the recipient of a pay envelope each week sufficient to provide the good life for her family? And what of the almost 18,000,000 women workers now supporting themselves and dependents? Will there be jobs for them? And what kind of pay will they get?
 
Security and Socialism
In March 1944, the United Auto Workers made a survey and discovered that 85% of the women workers wanted to keep their jobs after the war. Of the widowed women working, 100% need their jobs. Of the single women, 98.5% must keep on working. Of the married women, 68.7% must continue to contribute to the family income.
However, already six months ago there were 20,000 women in the Detroit area unable to get jobs. Cutbacks have since increased and are steadily increasing. Women are being discriminated against in lay-offs, and especially union women whose standard is equal pay for equal work. It is the purpose of the capitalists to create a huge army of unemployed women to compete for jobs at lower wages and thus break down the whole wage structure!
This calamity to labor must be avoided. Women must insist on being unionized, on union contracts with equal pay and seniority rights for women, on lay-off pay, on protective legislation both federal and state. But just as’ capitalism runs true to form on the international field; it also has its basic form in domestic economy. There will be many more workers than jobs to go around. And this always spells economic insecurity and chaos.
The second half of the message of Labor Action, on this May Day 1945, to working women is this:
Economic security under capitalism is impossible. One or the other must go. We ask the working women who fear economic insecurity as well as war, to join us in fulfilling our program for an independent labor party, a Workers’ Government, workers’ control of industry, production for use and not’ for capitalist profit.
For economic security – a Workers’ Government and Socialism; for permanent peace – International Socialism.
 




W.L. White, journalist, author of several wartime books and a “roving editor” of the Reader’s Digest, was one of the party that recently went to Russia with Eric Johnston, president of the United States Chamber of Commerce. Mr. White went, saw and came home to write first a digest of his trip for Reader’s Digest and then a full account in a book entitled Report on the Russians.
Then the fireworks started. The Communist Party and fellow-travelers let loose their thunderbolts. The tender-hearted liberals, anxious to mollify the Russian bear, joined in the assault. Pro-capitalist writers, awed by Russian military successes and rubbing their hands in anticipation of $6,000,000,000 post-war Russian business, also went after White with hammer and tongs. If one were to take the word of these critics-with-an-axe-to-grind, White’s book is one-sided, reporting only the uncomplimentary things. Judging by the same critics, White is a liar. He is accused of planting the seeds of United Nations disunity, and – horror of horrors – of not letting the sacrosanct word “Yalta” shut his mouth. And those critics, who don’t find any real fault with the contents of White’s report, solemnly assure their readers that this is not the time to bring out Russia’s dirty linen for public observation.
Now this reviewer holds no brief for the opinions of Mr. White. Mr. White has a strong pro-capitalist bias and hates the sight or sound of socialism. Furthermore his idea of socialism is all askew for he identifies the dictatorial Stalinist regime with socialism. However, a reading of his book soon reveals that whatever else White may be, he is not a one-sided reporter.
As far as his reporting of what he saw and heard goes, he gives the good as well as the bad. If in one place he points out the inefficiency of a plant, waste of labor and neglect of workers’ comfort, in another place he praises factory tidiness and efficiency. If he describes the lowly conditions of the workers, he doesn’t neglect to report that at least women get the same pay as men. If he tells of certain technical deficiencies of the Russian army in earlier days, he also expresses appreciation of the Russian army as such. If he reveals that the bureaucrats have moved “into both the palaces and the privileges of the old aristocracy, and are drinking quite as much champagne,” he also admits that they are working hard for the state.
 
Capitalist Journalist’s Story
In fact, if one were to make a list of the good things White says about Russia, it might well be longer than the list of not so good things he says. He likes Russian agriculture. He compliments Russian surgery. He reports favorably on nurseries he saw. He approves Russia’s handling of minority peoples. He even thinks Stalin a great man, although he ridicules the imposed hero worship.
On the political side the reader of White’s book sees how complete is the dictatorship. The Communist Party not only puts up candidates and controls so-called elections, but its members act as spies on the community as a whole. Then there is the secret police – NKVD – whose representatives are everywhere: beside the mayor of a town answering questions for him; beside the director of a factory telling him when to stop asking questions of the visiting American capitalist; and also somehow on the heels of a Russian girl who may become too friendly with a foreign correspondent.
So tight a vise has the government clamped on the press that even the term “free press” is taboo. White relates how at a banquet he started his speech with the sentence: “I am here not as a representative of American business but rather as an American writer and representing her, free press.” This, to White’s indignation, the interpreter just didn’t translate because of those bad words “free press”! Such are the “democratic” conditions which prevail. All opinion is strictly government-made and government-conveyed, since the government owns all means of propaganda.
In the factories the sweatshop piecework system is typical. According to White, wages are the American equivalent of from $20 to $40 for a sixty-six hour week. While workers can get certain staple foods through their factories, everything else goes into the black market which, believe it or not, White says has been taken over by the government itself. In these government-run black-market stores, prices are prohibitive to all but the elite. The distinction between those in the slums and those on “the hill” is everywhere apparent. The social caste system was evidenced even in the dining rooms of a bomber motor plant where workers, foremen, engineers and directors all ate separately – their menus graded from grub to delicacies according to position.
And what of industrial democracy? Some light is cast on this subject by a bit of conversation had by White’s party with Kuznetsov, big chief of Russia’s so-called labor unions:
“‘If a worker is discontented and gets discharged for any reason, would it be difficult for him to get a job some place else?’ ‘Very, very difficult,’ said Kuznetsov. ‘Well, isn’t this what the workers in America call an employers’ blacklist?’ ‘No,’ said Kuznetsov. But he didn’t say why it wasn’t.”
White relates the prison-like methods used to eliminate absenteeism. He tells also of seeing women workers toiling under military guard. These women supposedly had in some way deviated from the straight and narrow political path, and had therefore become a “chain gang.”
 
Reason for Campaign
Yes, these are the things that “the friends” consider unmentionable and that White mentioned. They resent White’s mentioning the possibility that the Polish officers found slaugh- [line of text missing] forest, might have been victims of the Russians and not of the Nazis. Nor do “the friends” relish White’s story of how Russian secrecy about military equipment – in this case the lack of radar – led to the destruction of a whole fleet of allied fortresses based, on a Ukrainian field supposedly protected by Russian anti-aircraft.
So much for the reportorial side of White’s book. What he reveals bears the ear-marks of reliability to one who is fairly cognizant of the real situation in Russia, unadorned by whitewash from the brush of “the friends.” However, White’s opinions, as distinguished from the facts, are something else again.
As stated above, he is enthusiastically pro-capitalist and rabidly anti-socialist. Without rhyme or reason, he takes the Stalinist regime as a QED argument in favor of capitalism and against socialism. This approach is absolutely ridiculous.
In the first place, the Stalinist system is not socialism but a dictatorial system of bureaucratic collectivism which developed after Stalin’s successful counterrevolution against the great socialist revolution led by Lenin and Trotsky. Whether through ignorance or malice, White persists in referring to the present Russian dictatorship as socialism.
Therefore, the only alternative he can see to it is capitalism, so-called free enterprise. He has a panacea for every Russian deficiency – just a little bit of competition on the American plan, just a drop of business acumen, as the American industrialist practises it. White reduces his panacea to an absurdity. Thus, for example, when he sees factories with broken floors and poor lighting, he comments:
“But a hard-boiled American production man, trying to squeeze the last thin dime of value from his worker’s, would start, by making them comfortable with good light and tidy floors, to increase the man-hour production rate.”
As if the workers have to embrace the evils of capitalism in order to have good lighting and tidy floors!
Socialism would solve such problems quite differently since the comfort, health and well-being of the workers would be determined by themselves under factory democracy. And they themselves would enjoy the full fruits of their labor. In Russia today the keys to the kingdom are in the Kremlin and the fruits of labor go to a new exploiting class.
That White labeled this anti-socialist regime socialism, did not bother the fiery critics of his book! What they hollered about was the absence of whitewash in White’s report.
 




President Roosevelt’s recommendation to Congress to enact a national service law follows the pattern established throughout the war. The pattern is that labor is to bear the brunt – the workers are to carry all the war burdens.
So far the workers have done all the sacrificing. Of the President’s original seven-point program, the wage freeze against labor has been the only one really carried out. On the other hand, the capitalists have “self-sacrificed” themselves into huge balances of war profits and post-war reserves.
As if labor’s role of the underdog has not been bitter enough, the President now asks for this national service law, which means conscription of labor, the regimentation of labor, totalitarian style.
Toward this end there has been a very clever build-up. During the past month or so, we have been made suddenly aware of a terrible falling-off in war production. And who is to blame? Labor, of course.
 
Were War Plants Deserted?
Reading the capitalist press, one is supposed to believe that there has been a veritable stampede of workers out of war plants into civilian production.
So isn’t the conclusion obvious? Labor must have a ball and chain clamped on its ankles to stop the so-called stampede. There must be a national service law, says Mr. Roosevelt acclaimed the friend of labor by Sidney Hillman, Philip Murray et al.
One thought that occurs immediately is this. If great numbers of workers have quit, war work and gone into civilian jobs, then it means that business has gone in for civilian production to a considerable extent. That could not be done without War Production Board cooperation. So the fault would lie with the WPB helping business in its rush to the front lines of civilian production for post-war profits.
But the truth is that there has NOT been an exodus of labor out of war production. There are, furthermore, figures to prove this truth.
 
Reasons for Change
The WPB itself has made public that the reasons for such shortages in war production as may exist, are as follows: step-ups in war production schedules, 46 per cent; changes in design, 26 per cent; shortages of facilities, 12 per cent; and labor shortages, 22 per cent. Thus we see that any falling-off in war production is in relation to a stepped-up schedule involving changes in design and factory facilities. The 22 per cent attributable to labor shortages must also be related to the stepped-up schedules and not to the so-called exodus of labor from war plants.
Further proof that there has been no rush of war workers into civilian work is in figures of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which figures show that the quit-rate in all manufacturing for August, September and October 1944 was actually LOWER than in 1943. But more important to the point here discussed, the quit-rate in war industries was lower than that of manufacturing as a whole during the above mentioned months.
 
CIO Study
The CIO has also made a survey of quit-rate figures in twenty-eight war industries for the months of May, June, July, August, September and October 1944, as compared with the same months of 1943. Of the 328 sets of figures studied for comparison, in 201 instances fewer workers quit their jobs in 1944 than in 1943. In thirteen instances the number was the same. Of the other 114 instances, only twenty-five showed an appreciably higher quit-rate.
The Economic Outlook, a CIO publication, comments: “We do not question the fact that in some instances workers are leaving their war jobs for jobs with peacetime security. We do believe the seriousness of this problem has been greatly over-stressed.”
“Greatly over-stressed” is putting it mildly. The situation has been falsely distorted. Labor, by and large, stays on the job. Workers cannot afford to let go of the bird in the hand for the possible two in the bush. The reason is simple. Quitting a job means giving up the means of livelihood – for heaven knows how long. The implication that workers are foot-loose and free in quitting jobs is about as sound as the one that workers go on strike out of a lack of responsibility.
So the picture put before the public by the capitalist press and radio, of workers flocking from war plants to civilian plants, is a hodge-podge of colors all run together without any sense. The build-up for Mr. Roosevelt’s demand for a national service law is a house of cards.
 
FDR Attacks Labor
What does make sense, however, is that this is an anti-labor maneuver-by labor’s “friend” in the White House. And the reason why this is a propitious time for it is as plain as Jimmy Durante’s nose.
The bigwigs have proved themselves wrong in their estimates of the duration of the war. First it was to have been over by October-November; next, Christmas was the date set. Now the end lies in the dim and distant future. Obviously the fighting power of the Nazis has been grossly underestimated. Besides all of this, the specter of power politics among the Big Three shows its ugly face. What is more natural than for labor, at this time, to become alarmed at the state of affairs their rulers have placed them in?
So the master politician, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, makes a shrewd twist. He points the accusing finger at labor: “The fault is yours,” he says in effect. “You are responsible for everything. Everything will be fine if you are regimented under a national service law.”
The trick is indeed shrewd, but very transparent when put up to the light where labor can see it for what it is.
IT IS AN ANTI-LABOR MOVE FOLLOWING THE USUAL PATTERN.
Labor must fight the totalitarian regimentation that President Roosevelt asks Congress to direct against labor.
 





What has put enough dynamite under the WPB and OPA to make them promise certain measures to alleviate the unbearable crisis that has developed in consumer cotton goods ?
You know what has happened? Just this: The housewives and mothers of this country got into action.
Yes, the women raised their voices in protest. Some sixteen women’s organizations started a persistent bombardment. Petitions were sent to the WPB and to Congressmen. Delegations went to Washington. The women talked turkey. They showed that there is plenty of cotton for luxury goods, but not for clothing for a working class family. They proved, by government figures, that there has been a systematic increase in the manufacture of higher-priced cottons and a simultaneous decrease in production of apparel for the worker and his family. They pointed out that the policy of OPA has encouraged the profit-grubbing manufacturers in their practices.
The petition circulated by the Congress of Women’s Auxiliaries, CIO, read in part:
“We are housewives and mothers. Our families, and especially our children, need clothes. We cannot today buy the clothes we need at prices we can afford. Some things, especially durable children’s clothes, we cannot buy at any price. Many of us need to make part of our clothes. Today we cannot buy cloth good enough to justify the effort we put into sewing. We are desperate. Some of us cannot even send our children to school because they have no suitable clothes.”
Direct pressure of this kind has brought promises of relief. It will take even more effective pressure to get tangible results.
*

English Women Fight for Housing
From across the Atlantic come the sounds and signs of increased activity to give the bombed-out people of England a place to lay their heads. It seems that 130,000 workers have been brought from all parts of the United Kingdom to restore London’s houses and build huts for shelter. Even the Yanks are included in the plans, involving some 3,000 of them assigned by General Eisenhower, with an allotment of bulldozers, trucks and cement mixers for the job.
Why the vim and vigor? What has happened to divert a small fraction of Churchill’s attention from killing Greek people to providing a little housing for English people?
Can it be, a coincidence that recently some six hundred women, representing thousands of housewives and war workers from all parts of England, Scotland and Wales, converged on the House of Commons with certain housing demands?
While a demonstration was held by these women outside the House of Parliament, a delegation of them went to see the ministers of Reconstruction and Works, and another deputation presented their case to the members of Parliament. Among the demands of the demonstrators are that the government immediately buy land for building houses, that it speed up the repair of bomb damage, that it control rents at a level within the reach of the average working class family.
Housewives from the Clyde region told the august members of Parliament about their “luxurious” homes where the bread had to be hung on strings to keep it from the rats. Mothers told these politicians for the landlords and capitalists, of how they are bringing up as many as five children in one room – while their husbands are fighting for British imperialism.
*

Hunger “Riots” in Rome
In Rome – which now has “liberty” based on subservience to the “liberators” – for the first time in perhaps years some hundreds of poor people have tasted a bit of sugar, fruit, cheese, meat or bread made of real flour. These were not gifts from the “liberators” to the starved Roman poor. What happened was that women, workmen and children decided to eat from the stocks horded by the black marketeers for the exclusive use of the rich.
There is a dire scarcity of food in devastated Italy. What food there is, is played around with by profiteers on the black market. This condition prevailed under Mussolini and the Nazi, and now under the allied “liberators.” There are, of course, official prices but they are observed even less than official OPA prices here. For example, sugar officially is 15 lire a kilo; actually it is 700 lire. Officially olive oil is 39 lire a liter; actually the black market price is 650 lire. Butter should cost 40 lire a kilo; the black market price is 750 to 800 lire.
So on December 7th a thousand housewives, children and a sprinkling of men started to help the police enforce official prices. Those who had money forced the storekeepers to accept official prices for their merchandise. Then the inevitable occurred. Those who had no money helped themselves to food anyway. Soon many of the chiselers, frightened by the actions of the people, “voluntarily” offered their goods at official prices and even for nothing. The same thing happened on December 8th.
When the chief of police in Rome was asked the cause of this quest of hungry people for food – called a “riot” by those who have enough to eat – this official had the good grace to answer simply: “HUNGER!” So at least on December 7th and 8th some poor Roman citizens had a bite to eat.
 




Dr. Benes, head of the Czechoslovakian government in exile, has been stirred to action by a demand that Ruthenia – which is now Czechoslovakian territory – be annexed to Russian Ukraine. This “friendly” demand was conveyed to Benes by the leader of the Ruthenian Communist Party, acting unmistakably as stooge for his boss in the Kremlin.
Only a matter of weeks ago, Benes went to Moscow and a treaty .of “friendship” was signed by the lion and the mouse, by which treaty the mouse was supposed to have been assured the continued possession of the bit of cheese known as Ruthenia. But what can Stalin do about it when, the “people” of Ruthenia have by plebiscite – we know how free such plebiscites are – denoted their “overwhelming wish” to become the children of the Little Father in the Kremlin! Benes has sent a representative to Moscow to see if Stalin may be only fooling.
This is one of several news items of the past week shedding considerable light on the all-engrossing question of peace.
 
Trieste and Fiume Again
Another news report concerns one of the many worries of the Italian government, such as it is. The wobbly government in Italy is afraid of what Marshal Tito may do about Trieste and Fiume, two important seaports opposite Venice on the Adriatic Sea. The port of Trieste became part of Italy by treaty in 1919. Fiume is a city to which the Italian imperialists of post-World War I vintage just helped themselves.
Marshal Tito, taking example, from his mentor in Moscow, doesn’t see. why Trieste and Fiume wouldn’t, look at least as well on Jugoslavia as they do on Italy.
 
Imperialist Covetousness
A third news story is by David Anderson writing from Brussels, Belgium, in the New York Times. Mr. Anderson tells us, that there is something of a movement afoot to separate the French-speaking Walloons from Belgium. The main source of this propaganda is the newspaper Gaulois, published in Brussels. This paper goes so far as to say that “a strip of Belgium from the Ardennes to Ostend should bit lopped off and handed to France.”
The Walloons number about 3,500,000. The Flemish Belgians number abound 5,000,000. However, the Walloon minority has in no way indicated a desire to become annexed to France – not even by the mockery of a so-called plebiscite. Mr. Anderson says that the French government is not responsible for this annexationist campaign. Be that as it may, at any rate there ARE Frenchmen of power who are responsible.
These three items of news, as stated above, cast an illuminating light on the prospects for permanent peace. Of course, there are such outstanding events as the slicing up of Poland, the slaughter of Greeks, the Allied domination of “liberated” Italy, all showing how the gangrene of capitalist imperialism and power politics afflicts the poor old body of Europe.
These three smaller items, however, are important because they show so clearly how far and how deep the gangrene has spread. There isn’t a section of that unhappy continent free from the maneuverings of the powerful for more power. There isn’t a small nation safe from the fangs of the big ones. There isn’t a national minority anywhere not considered legitimate prey by the imperialist vultures.
Can any reasonable human being conceive a lasting peace founded on such a volcano – deadly competition among the larger powers and unbearable discontent among the powerless?
It is SO obvious that this is a correct picture of post-war Europe that President Roosevelt no longer believes that the fiction of the Atlantic Charter can survive the ominous reality.
 
Tottering Atlantic Charter
The first indication of Roosevelt’s wavering came at his recent press conference when he sought so cynically to wipe his hands of the Atlantic Charter. The reporters present couldn’t pin him down as to whether that much-discredited piece of diplomacy is or ain’t anybody’s baby.
But much stronger proof that Roosevelt is giving up the myth of permanent peace through the Atlantic Charter was contained in his message to congress; In this message he said he would try “as hard as is humanly possible” to get peace on the basis of the Atlantic Charter. But in the next breath he gave warning that we must expect “disappointments.”
David Lawrence, columnist for the New York Sun, was moved to admonish the President for his lack of faith. Lawrence wrote:
“It might have been better if the President had exhibited a deeper confidence in the correctness of the Atlantic Charter. The runner who enters a race with a feeling he is about to be beaten doesn’t usually win the race.”
 
Capitalism and Peace
Mr. Lawrence doesn’t have to worry about the President’s “faith.” The latter gentleman is a pretty slick article. He is not a runner bearing the banner of liberty and peace for all peoples. He is the wily captain of the ship of American capitalism and imperialism. Is it possible that he does not know that the Atlantic Charter is merely the idealistic phraseology forming the noble front behind which imperialist wars are fought?
Now that Churchill, Stalin and the others have frankly dropped the mask of nobility in the free-for-all of imperialist struggle for balance of power, Mr. Roosevelt senses that the false-face doesn’t sit so well on him, either.
Such events as the grab by Stalin for Ruthenia, the reaching by Tito for Trieste and Fiume, the lust for part of Belgium by some French imperialists – on top of such outrages as the Polish mutilation etc. – show that peace cannot come from the rotten body of capitalist Europe.
Peace can be built only on a new foundation. The imperialist rulers must go. In England, France, Germany, Russia, Italy, the people must become their own rulers by establishing workers’ governments. Such people’s governments will guarantee real self-determination to all nations and minorities. Such people’s, governments will unite in socialist brotherhood to attain liberty and plenty for all.
 




Once more S.L. Avery, has hit the headlines, and the government has taken over the Montgomery Ward outfit. But this action was not taken because the government is on the side of the men and women who slave for Avery and his bunch of exploiters. Nor was this official move primarily a proud defense of the prestige of the War Labor Board which Avery has consistently flaunted.
The hand of the government was forced by the strike of the Montgomery Ward workers followed by the overwhelming support to the strikers by Detroit labor as a whole.
When one says “Detroit labor” it is almost the same as saying the United Automobile Workers, CIO. This article deals with the connection between the Montgomery Ward
situation and the UAW-CIO balloting on the no-strike pledge now going on.
 
What the UAW Did
The mass of labor in the auto hub of the nation was not merely in theoretical agreement with the Montgomery Ward strikers. The rank and file was plenty aroused and ready to act in mass support of the strike. This placed the leaders of the UAW-CIO in a tight spot. Either they could stand by and see the rank and file engage in spontaneous sympathetic strike action, or themselves take the lead in the situation which was so full of dynamite.
So, the leadership of the UAW-CIO went to bat for the Montgomery Ward strikers. A committee was organized, strike money was raised, picket lines were organized, UAW-CIO leaders even joined the picket lines.
And these UAW-CIO leaders also did something else. They betook themselves to the speakers’ stands, the radio and their typewriters in a frenzied effort to convince the rank and file that support of the Montgomery Ward strike has nothing at all to do with the no-strike pledge. They beat their chests and reaffirmed this treacherous pledge. R.J. Thomas, UAW president, publicly declared that he would resign his office if the 1,000,000 members of his union should vote to break the no-strike pledge, that the rank and file never made to begin with.
Right here a big question-mark looms up.
Elementary common sense must lead the rank-and-file auto worker to wonder why it is right for the Montgomery Ward workers to strike and be supported by the UAW – AS IT CERTAINLY IS – but wrong for the auto workers themselves to strike. Why should striking auto workers be condemned by the leadership and be punished by expulsions and other autocratic measures!
 
Can Thomas Answer?
What’s the difference, Mr. Thomas?
Why, for instance, was it wrong for the workers of Continental Motors Corp. – Local 280, UAW-CIO – to stay out on strike after actually being locked out by the company? Why did the president of the local rule out of order a motion to turn the lockout into a strike against the anti-union practices of the company which was using incentive pay to pit department against department and disrupt the union?
Why did you, Mr. Thomas, and Reuther and Addes arbitrarily remove the leaders of Local 235 – Chevrolet – and suspend the local for sixty days when the local and its officers sustained the rank-and-file strike against the company’s speed-up and the firing of members, and officers of the local?
Why did the General Executive of Local 400 break up the strike at the Ford Highland Park plant and not permit the membership to exercise its democratic right to vote on the strike? The management violated the union agreement regarding seniority wages, transfers of employees, and refused to bargain with the workers.
And how about the recent strike at Chrysler – Local 490 – for the reinstatement of sixteen union members unjustly fired? Why did you, Mr. Thomas, deliver your famous “crisis” speech to coerce the workers to give up without redress of grievances – on the basis of the “sacredness” of the no-strike pledge?
So, Mr. Thomas, what’s the difference between the action of the Montgomery Ward workers – so eminently deserving of the support of all labor – and the various actions of your own rank and file to keep their union strong?
 
The Real Answer
Perhaps you believe that involved in the Montgomery Ward situation is the prestige of the War Labor Board whose orders Avery has haughtily disregarded. Perhaps you are so enamored of the WLB graveyard in which labor grievances are buried that you jump to its defense. If this is your objective in supporting the Montgomery Ward strike, you are certainly in a most ridiculous position. For the WLB rewards your devotion with a slap in the face in this very instance. Two weeks before the strike, union leaders informed the WLB in telegrams of the deadlock between the Montgomery Ward outfit and the union, but the WLB did not even deign to acknowledge these warning telegrams. Is it the function of union leaders to kiss the hand that slaps them?
The Montgomery Ward situation has put the UAW-CIO leaders out on a limb in connection with the no-strike pledge – and it’s a mighty weak limb at that.
The feeling of rank and file labor forced their leaders to take a correct position on the Montgomery Ward strike.
The question has been squarely posed. What’s the difference? The workers of Montgomery Ward are fighting for the life of the United Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Workers Union. The workers of Chevrolet, Ford and Chrysler who went out on strike were fighting for the militancy and effectiveness of the UAW-CIO.
In ALL these cases the no-strike pledge has given the bosses the assurance of impunity in making their attacks. There is no difference. The no-strike pledge must go. This is what the 1,000,000 UAW members must tell their leaders in the balloting now going on.
 




That the Congress of Industrial Organizations has its ear to the ground – in certain respects – and can take the lead in national affairs when it wants to, is underscored by its active interest in the fate of the millions of white collar workers of this country. What the CIO did was to call and sponsor the National White Collar Conference, which just met in the city of Washington.
There were represented at this conference thirty-five organizations of one kind and another, speaking for the forgotten office and professional workers. Of course, the CIO affiliates were represented. They are the United Retail, Wholesale & Department Store Employees of America; United Office and Professional Workers; State, County and Municipal Workers; United Federal Workers of America; American Newspaper Guild; International Federation of Architects, Engineers, Chemists and Technicians; Barbers & Beauty Culturists Union of America. These CIO unions of white collar workers claim a joint membership of somewhere around 300,000.
 
Something New Added
However, more significant on this occasion was that more non-union groups were represented than unions. Groups of employees and professional people who in former years would rather turn the other cheek to exploitation than acknowledge themselves on the same economic and social level as factory workers sent their delegations to this conference called by the CIO, whose foundation is the mass production workers of the country.
Sitting with the union representatives were those sent by groups like the National Association of Secondary School Principals, the American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Association of Scientific Workers, the National Education Association, the American Association of Schools of Social Work, the American Association of Social Workers and, yes, the American Medical Association. This gives an idea of the scope of the conference.
While the delegates had no power to bind their organizations, they came to find out what the CIO, has to offer to solve the problems confronting them. They did set up machinery for future functioning. Each of the thirty-five organizations will appoint one member to an advisory committee, under which a smaller committee, headed by James B. Carey, secretary-treasurer of the CIO, will carry on. It is to explore fully all programs which could benefit white collar workers, call conferences when desirable and exercise “maximum influence on business and government.”
Among the non-union speakers was Dr. Donald Dushane of the National Education Association. He highlighted the plight of teachers throughout the nation who have not received even the benefit of the inadequate Little Steel formula. He said the average teacher’s pay in Southern schools is less than $700.a year. The situation of social workers is similar. A spokesman for the Association of Scientific Workers emphasized the need for first-class training plus job security for the scientific workers in the nation’s laboratories.
Philip Murray, CIO president, properly designated last year’s congressional bleating about the “twenty million static incomes” of the white collar workers as only political maneuvering. He also blasted the traditional “bellyaching” of the white collar and professional workers themselves. He said the time is overripe for action.
CIO’s director of organization, Allan S. Haywood, promised that the CIO “is definitely going to map out a program to organize all the white collar workers who want to be organize.” James B. Carey, CIO secretary-treasurer, figured that there are 15,400,000 white collar and professional workers, of whom, according to government statistics, only 1,400,000 are organized in the CIO, in the AFL or in independent unions.
Mr. Carey stressed the social and political importance of organizing and raising the level of living of the white collar and professional workers. He pointed to the fact that in Germany the plight and hopelessness of the white collar worker made him meat for Hitler and a prey to the propaganda of Nazism. Speakers labored this point about the rise of Nazism in Germany on the backs of the despairing white collar workers.
The above about summarizes the recent National White Collar Conference fathered by the CIO. Its importance cannot be overemphasized.
The representation at this conference of so varied a list of white collar workers and professional people indicates that this group is serious about the question of protecting its interests against the intensified onslaughts of capitalism. These so-called “middle-class” workers, whose faces were once supposed to be turned toward the upper rungs of the social ladder, have stopped daydreaming. This conference shows that the so-called “middle-class” worker is willing to follow the leadership of the CIO – if what the CIO offers is good.
First of all, then, the CIO must plow away in this immense field of organization, and really get results for the millions of white collar and professional workers by way of increased incomes and increased social security. This will raise its prestige beyond measure.
In the second place, the political objectives of the CIO, for which it asked support at the conference, must be correct or it will succeed only in disillusioning the white collar and professional worker and making him susceptible to the fascist elements in this country.
On this score, it is all right to “influence business and government” for immediate gains. But it is all wrong, to base the political program of those whom capitalism exploits on the continuance of capitalist business and capitalist government.
An Independent Labor Party with the objective of a Workers’ government of, by and for all workers by hand and brain – this is the political objective that would enable the CIO to assume responsibility and leadership for a future free of the threat of fascism.
 

   The hearings going on before the Senate Banking and Currency Committee on the Wagner-Murray so-called full employment bill were summarized by Frederick R. Barkley in the New York Times as follows: “As developments go so far, almost everyone on Capitol Hill agrees that full employment in the post-war period is desirable, although there are indications to the effect that it is also desirable to have a few persons looking for work which they cannot get, because of the expected salutary effect on the output of others who have got their post-war jobs.” In other words, while most of the witnesses before the committee agreed “in principle” to the “desirability”of full employment, there are naturally those who would like an army of unemployed – not too big, of course – but big enough to knock down wages and weaken the labor movement. In the latter group is Senator Taft, Republican from Ohio, and the Republican New York Herald Tribune, which is convinced that the bill’s “potentialities for harm are decidedly greater than those for good.” So is the Democratic New York Times opposed to the bill because it “rests essentially upon a basic distrust of private enterprise.” And glowering their die-hard opposition stand the powerful aggregations of Republican and Democratic capitalists in the National Association of Manufacturers and the United States Chamber of Commerce.  Everybody’s for It Nevertheless, those in favor form quite a list. President Truman, who considers full employment legislation a “must, ” was upheld by cabinet members Vinson, Byrnes, Anderson and in this week’s hearings Wallace will add his voice. CIO President Phil Murray is in basic accord – and AFL President Green will undoubtedly express similar sentiments before the committee. James G. Patton, president of the National Farmers Union, is for passage. Churchmen and professors are on the list and so are representatives of the veteran organizations. There is Senator Tobey, Republican from New Hampshire, accepting what he termed the “leftward” tendency. And to climax the list of those in favor are the “liberal” merchants, manufacturers and bankers – all staunch believers in “free private enterprise.” Shall we say that the ayes have it, that full employment is in the bag, that 60,000,000 workers can toss their hats into the air and dance a jig because their main worry is over? The recommendation of Labor Action and the Workers Party is that the hat-tossing and jigging had better be deferred. The workers cannot rely on the capitalist system, the capitalist government or apiece of legislation projected by capitalist politicians to solve the basic evils of the private profit system, Let us have a look at this Wagner-Murray bill so optimistically called the full employment bill.  Provisions of Bill If passed, this bill would more or less establish as a government policy that workers are entitled to jobs. To this end the President would, at the beginning of each annual session of Congress, present a“national production and employment budget” giving estimates of the total labor force available for the next fiscal year and how much private and public investment would be necessary to keep it employed. Then the President would recommend to Congress certain measures to be taken to keep up full employment. This is, roughly, all that the bill provides – except, of course, that it supports the system of private enterprise. We will let two of the witnesses who support the bill, in principle, show up its obvious flimflam. Phil Murray, for instance, has his doubts. At the hearing he offered certain amendments. He wants the bill to express government“responsibility” rather than only government “policy.” He wants the definite word “insuring” to be substituted for the ambiguous words “promoting” and “encouraging”with which the bill is sprinkled. And he wants the right to work extended to all persons “able to work and seeking work” instead of, as the bill provides, to “all Americans who have finished their schooling and who do not have full-time housekeeping responsibilities.” obviously, this, so-called full employment bill discriminates against young people and women. Why the word “Americans” instead of “workers?” And how naive of Murray to think a few amendments will fix everything! Neither is James G. Patton of the Farmers Union satisfied with the bill as it stands. He wants it to go further and calls for a“guaranty” that Congress would authorize Federal expenditure on whatever projects the President declared necessary to make the national economy run at full employment. With Congress controlling the purse strings of the nation and the big business lobbies controlling Congress, certainly the fear is amply justified that the money needed for public projects will not be forthcoming. And with this set-up, what good would a “guaranty” be? While witnesses nearer labor than the “liberal” merchants, manufacturers and banks show some doubts and misgivings, from the latter came rather unqualified support. F.R. Von Windegger, St. Louis banker, expressed the opinion: “I think we are leaning over backward to help private enterprise in this bill.” Clarence Avildsen, president of Republic Drill & Ore Company, Chicago, admitted the bankruptcy of “free enterprise” instating: “Everyone, knows that the business man cannot guarantee continuous employment for his workers.” This businessman welcomes the responsibility of government for full employment – to bolster private enterprise. He fears that otherwise the American people would vote for a change “just as they did in England.” So the proponents of the bill are not unanimous. On closer view we see that, while the “liberal” merchants, manufacturers and bankers regard the Wagner-Murray bill as a means to thwart labor’s, rise to power to take over of its own. interests, Murray and Patton, while supporting it, still think the bill doesn’t go far enough to protect the interests of labor and by reflection the interests of the farmer.  Workers Party Program Labor Action and the Workers Party do not rely on the capitalist system, the capitalist government or a piece of legislation projected by capitalist politicians to solve the basic contradictions of the private profit system. (See Workers Party Program, page one.) Unlike Murray who shook his finger at the Senate Committee and warned that “the people will recognize the failure of private capitalism” if the bill is not passed, Labor Action and the Workers Party recognize how the failure of capitalism which has already proved itself unable to give the people either economic security or peace. Therefore, labor must project its own demands for full employment. It must furthermore be ready to enter the political arena with a class party of its own, to fight for its own program. The first protection against unemployment is a guaranteed annual wage for every worker. It should be a minimum of $2,500, which is indeed a mere pittance in this day and age. The principle that men, women and children have to live regardless of the profits of the capitalists, must be abolished once and for all time. The guaranteed annual wage is the way. Let profit be limited to five percent on invested capital – instead of up to five hundred percent and more. Let individual capitalists be limited, to $25,000 annual income – ten times as much as demanded for a worker’s guaranteed annual wage should be plenty for any man. At the hearing Murray hedged around another demand that labor must make. He said: “If the plants are not soon started up to make jobs and turn out goods, the average citizen is going to ask: ‘Well, why doesn’t the government hire engineers and managers to operate those factories the way it was done during the war?’” Is that the way for a leader of labor to talk?Why does he not now make the demand for the nationalization of big industry to make jobs and turn out goods?  Nationalize Big Business! Labor Action and the Workers Party make the demand NOW that no government-owned plants be turned over to private capital and also that big business be nationalized to be run for use instead of for profit. Furthermore, we want this done by a workers’ government and we want the industries put under workers’ control. We don’t want the same old skin game with a new pack of cards. Another demand made by Labor Action and the Workers Party stands out in contrast to the following. At the hearings before the Senate Committee T.J.S. Waxter, Chairman of the National Committee on Public Social Policies, said: “The war has taught me that if we spend $300,000,000,000 making war goods to be shot away, we can at least spend a small part of that sum to experiment on how to make a peacetime economy produce as fully as the wartime economy has.” Such a statement, while sounding good, is really an insult to the working men and women who are worrying about unemployment. Why should $300,000,000,000 be shot away for war and only “a small part” be spent for peace! Labor Action and the Workers Party don’t see why as much and more should not be spent for peace. Therefore, we demand a $20,000,000,000 public building and construction program for the next five years, to provide jobs for workers and more and better housing and public facilities for the whole people. Where will the money come from? A capital levy on accumulated wealth. Let the rich who were made richer by bloody war profits, disgorge. Let those who have appropriated the wealth of the land be made to give up for the public good. That Murray, Green and the other labor leaders do not come out:for all these sober and attainable demands, but instead stand shaking their fingers at Senate Committees warning the latter that the workers will make these demands if the capitalist government doesn’t throw them a bone – means that such false and timid leaders are behind the times. The rank and file of labor, in its inarch for a better life, must bypass its false and timid leaders. The program of Labor Actionand the Workers Party fit the needs of the day. It should be supported by all progressive workers.   
   Seven and a half million women joined the working force of this country during the war, raising the number of women workers from the pre-war 11,000,000 to 18,500,000. What is happening to these women workers now that they are no longer wanted to drive buses, make ammunition, fashion scientific instruments, build airplanes and other wartime goods? These women did not flock into war jobs as a patriotic gesture.  The fact is that eighty-five per cent of working women today support themselves and one or more dependents. Before the war the women who were the SOLE breadwinners of their families numbered nearly three million. The war with its long list of dead, maimed and crippled fathers, husbands and sons has put an economic burden on more women.  Women know, above all else, that when the pantry is bare and the icebox empty, the kitchen is not the place for them to be. The economic compulsion of women to stay in industry is reflected in surveys taken to ascertain the working woman’s own opinion.  In New York State, on the West Coast, in the Detroit area, working women have overwhelmingly expressed their need to continue on their jobs and, earn a living in the post-war period. In the United Auto Workers, CIO, eighty-five per cent of the women members, want, to stay at work.  Women and Unemployment How to get security against unemployment and how actually to get jobs for all who want to work is an issue of burning interest to working women, more especially so because they are the first laid off; or, if not laid off, their inexperience is exploited by the employers, who threaten to fire them unless they accept lower wages or worse conditions. The Workers Party has a program for working women. It is the reconversion and post-war program the Workers Party urges all workers to support. Here are its outstanding points: First and foremost the working people must assured food, clothing and shelter by a guaranteed annual wage. A guaranteed annual wage of$2,500 or around $50 a week for each worker, man or woman, is today a minimum. Does this sum look unattainable to women workers? Perhaps it does to women on slave wages of less than eighteen cents an hour,less than thirty cents an hour, less than fifty cents an hour, less than sixty cents an hour, less than sixty-five cents an hour. But women must not be bound by their degree of exploitation. A country rich enough to burn up three hundred billion dollars in three and a half years of bloody, devastating war is rich enough to pay its workers, men and women, a guaranteed annual wage of $2,500, so they can at all times buy the necessities of life. That much security every worker is entitled to and must have. But how about jobs? Workers want to work for their wages. They want to be able to earn more than the guaranteed minimum, at work they can do. Therefore, the demand of the Workers Party for a thirty-hour work week – at the same weekly wage – is fair beyond question. Let every working woman who is today getting her walking papers, consider the rank unfairness of keeping the forty-hour week whereby the employers are getting at least thirteen hours more productivity out of each worker employed, while other workers are hitting the pavements – out of jobs.  Government Operation of Plants Today thirteen billion dollars in government plants – paid for by taxpayers’ money, paid for by workers, including millions of women workers – are being turned over to big business for a song. This must be stopped. Government plants must be kept as public property to provide jobs for workers and goods for consumption. But that is not enough. All the war industries, all the great monopolies, the transportation systems, and all major industries on which the life of the nation depends, should be nationalized, should be made public property, and placed under the management of committees of workers,including women workers. This is the only way to insure that these industries will he kept running to provide jobs for workers and the things of life for the people. The terrible paradox of unemployed men and women and idle plants must not be allowed. Th standard of living of the working people must be raised. A minimum annual income of $5,000 for a working class family is as easy for American industry as rolling off a log. Before the war only eleven per cent of the population, were able to buy the products advertised in American magazines. In 1940 thirty-eight per cent of the nation’s city families were living below a bare maintenance level. Let the industries of the country run at full capacity to abolish poverty.  Public Works Aid Women The Workers Party demands a flat two hundred and fifty billion dollar program for the next five years. For destruction and death three hundred billion dollars was consumed in three and a half years.  Is it too much to ask that two hundred and fifty billion dollars be spent in five years for housing, public works, rural electrification and other crying public needs? Women would benefit especially by this program. It would mean not only a real tackling of the housing problem. It would mean also building day nurseries for the children of working mothers and after-school playgrounds for older children. It would mean all that and much more to every working class family and would provide jobs for workers, men and women alike. If the above points of the Workers Party program for security against unemployment and for jobs for all, have interested the women readers of Labor Action, we hope they will go further and learn how to get these things. They will want to know that the rich will have to be taxed to pay for this program – not the poor.   
   Soon after President Truman’s message was read in Congress on September 6th, two things happened. The liberal and so-called labor spokesmen as well as chronic New Deal haters immediately declared that the New Deal, officially buried by Roosevelt, had arisen from the dead. Yet one hour after the message was made public, prices on the Stock Exchange moved upward, attesting Wall Street’s confidence that private enterprise has nothing to fear from President Truman and, conversely, that the common people of the nation have not much to hope for from that source. To be sure, there are some high-sounding words,phrases and sentences in the message. There is the pretense of adopting the position known as “left of center.” But no politician in his right senses would (dare go before the Congress, after this war supposedly fought for the common man, and not make at least a gesture toward the solution of unemployment and toward social security. As President Truman himself put it: “The American people have set high goals for their own future. They have set their goals high because they have seen how great can be the productive capacity of the country.” By making big noise about their “good intentions,” the protectors of capitalism, like President Truman, hope to delay the disillusionment of the masses. Furthermore,these capitalist politicians see in the hungry, suffering, war-bled peoples of Europe a revolutionary threat to the whole capitalist system. They are also shaky over the mandate of the British people in the last election for a socialist solution of their problems. It is the part of wisdom for forward-looking capitalist politicians in this country to say to labor: “We’ll do it for you, boys.  Take it easy. Depend on our political parties; you don’t need your own.” Besides, why should not President Truman bait the hook of the Democratic Party for the labor vote by playing around with the unemployment problem?  Shabby Proposals The proposals contained in the Truman message are not only inadequate, they are positively shabby. His proposals for the immediate reconversion period are exceeded in their insufficiency only by the weakness of his proposals for long-term full employment.  None of them bears close examination. As a reconversion emergency measure, the President again asks that unemployment payments be raised to a $25 per week maximum for a twenty-six week maximum per year. Many workers, if not all, have the decidedly wrong impression that this means every unemployed worker will get that $25– which is little enough – for twenty-six weeks a year –which leaves twenty-six weeks in which to starve. Mr. Truman’s message assures Congress that “not everyone” will get $25 a week. In the first place, the worker must be “ready, willing and able to work” and that means he must take any distasteful job offered him at no matter what pay. In the second place, the worker “must have earned wages high enough so that the percentage rate will yield this maximum figure.” These are Mr.  Truman’s words, and they mean what they say – only SOME workers will be entitled to the maximum figure of $25 a week. To make up for the deep slashes in take-home pay, the President asks Congress to increase the minimum hourly wage provided by the Fair Labor Standards Act from forty cents an hour to – .Very delicately the President refrained from setting a figure,leaving the whole matter to Congress. It is believed that the President, in his private thoughts, favors a sixty-five cent minimum wage rate. Even if the sixty-five cents an hour were made minimum bylaw, this would legalize a minimum wage of about half the requirements of rock-bottom living. It will certainly not make up for the slashes in take-home pay.  Price Joker Other reconversion proposals made by the President are about as pitiful as those examined above. He asks that the price line be held on food, clothing and shelter as well as on washing machines and other new civilian goods. But how? The way prices were held during the war? Anent the prices of newly released civilian goods, he said not a word against fixing the 1942 high war level of costs as a basis for prices, which is the OPA rule. The long-range prospects for the American people, if confined to what the Truman message has to offer, would not be at all rosy. Truman came out again for what he calls full-employment legislation, which is the Wagner-Murray bill. In a prior issue Labor Action gave an analysis of the loopholes and evasions of the bill, which is designed to serve and bolster private enterprise,which makes no specific plan for public works and construction but leaves everything in the hands of the capitalist politicians –and big business behind them.  Housing Needs Also for the long run prospective, the message says much about building houses as the principal source of jobs and industrial activity. Indeed, an adequate building program is a crying need of this slum-ridden nation and would indeed provide jobs. But Truman’s proposals are for an investment of a mere six to seven billion dollars a year by private business, subsidized and aided by the federal government. He estimated there would be about three or four million people employed in construction under this plan. Is this what Truman has to offer to replace the hundred billion dollars a year spent for war materials? Is this the employment he can provide for ten million war workers and eleven million men and women in the armed forces? Of course, he offers grandiose paragraphs about more TVA’s, about harbors and flood control, about schools and hospitals; about sewers and streets, about roads and airports. But nary a word about how much in money should and must be appropriated for such public works except in the case of highways. However, the President made it amply clear that all this must be done “without competition with private industry’’ and without making any dents in private enterprise. A rosy prospect, indeed! Liberals who so gladly hailed Truman’s message are so afraid of the workers taking over the country to solve its social problems that they kiss the hand of any capitalist politician who makes the slightest gesture toward social solutions. Weak-kneed labor leaders like Murray, Green and their lieutenants also heave a sigh of relief because what they tremble at most is taking the responsibility to lead labor into independent political, action and a socialist solution to the social problems.  Labor at Crossroads The working class today stands at a crossroads of history. The workers cannot afford to be lulled into a false sense of security. The empty gesture of capitalism to save itself and to save its face before humanity must be repudiated – as must also befall those who support capitalism. The Truman message makes it clearer than ever that labor must take the lead to solve the social problems of the working class and all the disinherited people – through its independent labor program, through its independent class party, through a workers’ government, through the socialist solution for social problems.   
   For the present at least, the political sun has set on the Rt. Hon. Winston Churchill – that outstanding protagonist of British imperialism. He has been in public life for almost half a century, serving the interests of British capitalists and bankers. So well, indeed, has he served them that at the zenith of his career, he became the personification of John Bull’s imperialist pugnacity. Prior to his advent to parliament as a conservative member in 1900, young Churchill saw military service both in Egypt and in India, where the British army was employing their well-known persuasion upon colonial people. Churchill has, as correspondent and author, written about this saga of British Empire. British troops methodically destroying Indian houses, polluting wells, burning crops, wiping out village after village with all their inhabitants –these acts of official barbarism became for Churchill part of the glory of the British Empire. They also became his model for treating all people in revolt. In his own words, the Indian national movement “and all it stands for will have to be grappled with and finally crushed. It is no use trying to satisfy a tiger by feeding him with cat’s meat.” By “cat’s meat” Churchill meant the sops the British ruling class sees fit to throw to the Indian people. However, the tiger of Indian revolt to date, is uncrushed –only waiting to spring. Even the starvation tactics practiced by the Churchill government have not killed it. In the recent famine, the Indian people were dying by thousands – literally lying in the streets of Calcutta and other famine-stricken areas – but the Churchill government did nothing. Then it came across with too little and too late. But the freight cars, at the height of the famine, were carrying race horses so that the British officials could lay down the“white man’s burden” at the race tracks. Churchill served the British ruling class in diversified capacities. He has been Under Secretary and Secretary for Colonies, President of the Board of Trade, Home Secretary, First Lord of Admiralty, Minister of Munitions, Secretary for War and Air, Chancellor of the Exchequer. For some years he was a member of the Liberal Party, but his liberalism was always motivated, by the best interests of the British rulers. As Minister of Munitions in 1917 and as Secretary of War and Air in 1918–21, he used his influence to fight the Russian Revolution. Even the Encyclopedia Britannica, which chooses only the high points of a man’s career, finds necessary to note that under Churchill’s inspiration expensive campaigns were conducted against the Bolsheviks. Once more a conservative member of parliament in 1924, he was made Chancellor of the Exchequer. He was holding this office when the general strike of 1926, with its revolutionary implications, shook the land. His hatred of people’s movements and revolution went up several notches. He played an important role with the class-collaborating labor leadership, to stab the strikers in the back.  A Pro-Fascist As between Socialism and Fascism, Churchill does not hesitate in his choice. In a famous speech to a group of Italian fascists, he said: “If I had been an Italian, I am sure that I should have been wholeheartedly with you from the start to finish in your triumphant struggle against the bestial appetites and passions of Leninism.” The struggle of the Italian workers for a better life than post-World War I capitalism was giving them, was to Churchill “bestial appetites and passions.” The force, terror and refined castor oil-torture applied by Mussolini’s black shirts to the people, Churchill called a “triumphant struggle.” Because he succeeded the appeasing Chamberlain to the premiership– to protect the British Empire from the Nazi world order –the impression was created that Churchill was anti-Hitler and anti-Nazi in ideology. Nothing is farther from the truth, Churchill was one of Hitler’s most ardent admirers, Churchill’s own words prove this: “I have always said that if Great Britain were defeated in war I hope we would find a Hitler to lead us back to our rightful position among nations. I am sorry, however, that he has not mellowed by the great success that has attended him. The whole world would rejoice to see a Hitler of peace and tolerance; and nothing would adorn his name in world history so much as acts of magnanimity, mercy and pity to the forlorn, friendless, weak and poor.”  Upheld the Empire Throughout the war the Churchill government raised neither voice nor finger against the “neutral” Franco who was supplying Hitler with precious wolfram and other war material, providing U-boat bases, and maintaining the Blue Legion against the Russians. It may seem strange that in a war to protect the British Empire, Churchill should have done nothing to stop Spanish help to Hitler – but strange only on the surface. The interests of imperialism are ramified, not simple. Franco, the fascist, had in Spain conducted a“triumphant struggle” against the Spanish people. Churchill preferred, at the entrance to the Mediterranean lifeline of the British Empire, to have the bloody Franco regime rather than a people’s government. To weaken that regime from without, would be a signal to the chafing Spanish people to take power. Between the Spanish people and bloody fascism, Churchill quite naturally chose the latter, knowing that even with Franco’s help Hitler would be licked by the greater economic and military power of the Big Three. The United States government did not object. The bloody attack by the British army on the national liberation movement of Greece, will not soon be forgotten by the working people of the world. How Churchill opened up his oratorical batteries, to synchronize with the roar of the guns in Athens, calling the anti-Nazi fighters “gangs of bandits, ” “bands of gangsters, ” “murder gangs’ and “ruffians.”Why? Because he didn’t want the Greek people to establish their own government so near the Suez canal and the British Levantine sphere of influence. Both Stalin and Roosevelt concurred in this imperialist murder plot. This was the government that closed the gates of salvation to Jews who might have escaped Nazi extermination, if they could have entered Palestine. They were barred. This was the government that pitted Arab against Jew to prevent the peaceful development of Palestine. All was done for the almighty pound, for oil and trade, for colonial power, for British capitalists and bankers. The Rt. Hon. Winston Churchill and his right honorable Conservative Party have met their Nemesis in the British people. It was fitting and proper that in the election this man who so well personified the inhumanity and reactionary core of the British Empire, should have made something of a fool of himself. For while he was ranting against a “socialist dictatorship” and using“red scare” tactics, the people were quietly resolving to take a step towards realizing their social aims – even if it is as yet only a groping step in the direction of Socialism.   
   Civil Life in Wartime Germany by Max Seydewitz, a former leader of the Social Democrats in Germany, is recommended as an antidote to the dishonest propaganda rampant on the subject of the“guilt of the German people.” This reviewer especially recommends the book to Labor Action readers, and particularly to its good friend, W.S. of Detroit, who has taken issue with the stand of Labor Action on the question of the relationship of the German people to the Nazi regime. Mr. Seydewitz shows that after six years of concentrated terror and propaganda to prepare the German people for war, “The lethargy of the masses at the beginning of the war disproved the frequent and vociferous assertions that the German nation stood unitedly behind its Fuehrer.” Hitler never had the wholehearted support of the German people.“Even at the time of Hitler’s greatest successes, when he waged his blitzkrieg campaign, the major part of the people stood aloof from Hitler’s volksgemeinschaft, assuming either a passively waiting or indifferent attitude, or one that was downright hostile, ” writes Seydewitz, Before the Russian Campaign, another thorough purge of the population was made and terror was again stepped up. The torture and extermination of Communists, the imprisonment of all subjects, still did not stop all underground activities. When the blitz swept through western Russia, the high spirits of the bigwigs did not communicate themselves to the masses. “The masses did not seem greatly impressed by the grandiose victories, ” writes Seydewitz. “...experience had taught them that even the most striking victories seemed to be unable to restore peace ... What the masses wanted was peace ... the average German was thinking not so much of the victories as of his own troubles, of the son, the husband, or the fiancé at the front ... The public’s indifference to the favorable bulletins was so striking as to evoke censure in the Nazi press.” The situation on the home front was, of course, going from bad to worse. In 1941, with long wartime hours, wages averaged twenty-five percent less than in 1930. Prices were up 22.8 percent from 1933 to 1937, and continued upward during the war years. Assessments and taxes on workers’ wages amounted to tremendous cuts. For instance, an unmarried worker earning 160 marks a month was docked 55.32 marks; a married worker, doing heavy overtime, earned 206 marks but received only 148.17 a month. The black market, of course, flourished. Dividend payments, in contrast to the people’s misery, ran as high as thirty percent.  Organized Terror “The overwhelming majority of the working classes held the National Socialist regime responsible for their unhappy lot, ”writes Seydewitz. This was reflected in the actions taken by the regime. The third Winter of the 1941–42 saw the first crisis of the home front. The setback in their calculations of victory over the Russians brought need for increased production. Arrests of recalcitrant workers would not solve the manpower shortage. The Nazis tried persuasion and propaganda. Decorations were given for “outstanding achievements” and the workers were exhorted that “two must do the work that three did before.” But the workers countered with the slogan, “No increased production without more food.” , During this period there were strikes in Dortmund, Berlin and the Westphalia industrial regions. In Hamburg a spontaneous riot procured for the people delicacies unloaded for the moneyed classes. Sabotage increased. “The Gestapo expressed the belief that all railway accidents could be traced back to calculated sabotage, ” writes Seydewitz. Underground handbills and wall messages were plentiful, on bombed walls could be read: “Thanks to our Fuehrer.” It must be remembered, to get the full significance of this home front crisis, that it happened in 1941–42 when the German troops were holding lush Russian soil. The military tide had not yet turned definitely. Stalingrad was not freed till February 1943. By the summer of 1942 the authorities again got the upper hand. Great shifts of labor took place. Workers were sent to the front. There were transfers from civilian manufacture to war production. More women were drafted into responsible work, older men came under the labor draft. There was also the influx of foreign labor. But above all this, the most effective instrument was the new terror. Spies in factories were increased; the shop police force was improved; the Gestapo intensified its efforts with thirty-two varieties of “enemies of the State” to sort out and punish. At this time there also appeared the street fortresses in central localities, with machine gun emplacements, innocently called“air-raid shelters.”  Signs of Dissatisfaction The air raids produced in the people nothing but the desire to escape the war. Those not bombed out wanted nothing more than the end of the war before the horror came to them. The rage at Allied fliers who rained destruction was equalled by hatred for the government held responsible for the war and the inability to protect the homeland. Anti-Nazi propaganda made wide use of Air Minister Goering’s promise in ’39: “I’ll be hanged if the enemy succeeds in penetrating anti-air defense and drops bombs on Germany.” It was suggested that he be hanged in the Ruhr where the devastating bombing was going on. There was another epidemic of slow-downs n the factories. Sick leaves played a big part so that Himmler threatened to sterilize workers whose constitutions were too weak to allow them to work. Anew form of sabotage developed. The workers used the “leader principle” to cause much waste of labor and material. They followed orders blindly in spite of apparent mistakes made by new supervisors. To keep workers on the job during times when enemy planes appeared on reconnaissance flights or on way to targets, factory gates were locked and machine guns placed at entrances. The SS guards and factory police mounted guard in factories with revolvers drawn. “From the beginning of the fifth year of the war the only means of maintaining the Hitler régime remained – terror, ” writes Seydewitz. This review would not be complete without a few words oh the German youth and the German troops, as presented by Seydewitz. He divides the youth into three groups. There are the anti-Nazi youth mainly in the universities. The German universities had been breeding spots of Nazism in the early days. The second group represents the dyed-in-the-wool Nazi faithfuls. Seydewitz estimates that those are about ten percent of the youth. Their number seems larger because they have been more in evidence. They are always on display. Also this group seems more numerous because the main body of youth, the third group, which really has no convictions at all, still howls with the wolves of group two.  Army Discipline How about the troops? Why did they continue to fight? First we must understand how the Nazis built their army. In the Kaiser’s army there was one man of higher rank for each eight soldiers. In Hitler’s army each four soldiers had a petty boss. In the Kaiser’s army there were five ranks of non-commissioned officers; in Hitler's army there were nine. The Kaiser’s army was notorious for its iron discipline. In Hitler’s army the discipline was steel. Then there was the terror organization within the army. Besides the military police culled from the Nazi SS troops, there were outright SS formations, and on top of all, the numerous Gestapo spies. There were concentration camps for erring soldiers. And punishment was meted out to the families of soldiers who missed a goose step. “The Third Reich has hammered home the fact that for soldiers and their families, its regime of terror is a greater danger than the enemy, ” writes Seydewitz. Terror held the army together, and terror held the home front together. Any mass disaffection in the army would have to have been based on organized revolt at home, but the terror over the masses and their political decapitation made this impossible.   



If the plant and factory owners of the country had hoped that post-war insecurity would make of the workers lambs to be shorn without so much as a bleat, they were mistaken. They perhaps thought that the mounting millions of unemployed would paralyze the spirit and will of the employed workers. Yes, they wanted the workers to fold their arms and humbly mutter to the boss: “Thy will be done!”
The collaborating labor leaders had indicated to the White House that, as far as they were concerned, the no-strike pledge would still be the guiding principle – so that, forsooth, reconversion might be accomplished peacefully.
The hundreds of thousands of Workers on strike and about to take strike votes under the restrictive Smith-Connally law have blasted skyhigh the wishes of industrialists and of weak-kneed labor leaders.
The rank and file of labor has realized that for the employed, for the unemployed, for the whole working class, now is the time for action. The insecurity that stares the workers in the face has resulted in their determination to hold their own.
The end of war contracts terminated overtime and resulted in cuts in take-home wages.
 
“Fifty-Two for Forty”
This is the meaning of “Fifty-two for Forty” – the slogan of the striking oil workers. Their demand for a thirty per cent increase in basic hourly pay is necessary so that, returning to the forty-hour week, the workers will not be descending to a much lower standard of living. So sensible and indispensable do the oil workers consider this demand that the oil strike spread to fourteen states, even while protracted negotiations went on in Washington. There, Secretary of Labor Schwellenbach, trying to settle the dispute before the entire quarter of a million oil workers walked out, has ordered that the companies and the union submit to federal arbitration.
The terms of arbitration are the acceptance of the fifteen per cent wage increase the companies are willing to grant, the return to the forty-hour week as soon as possible, and the submission of the other union demands to an arbitrator to be appointed by Schwellenbach. The Oil Workers International Union, CIO, having made satisfactory contracts with one company in California and two in Detroit on the basis of the thirty per cent increase, were less eager to accept the arbitration “solution” than were the big oil companies.
The 15,000 building service workers who tied up 2,000 New York City buildings for five and a half days did not take kindly to the idea of arbitration. When the president of the local, David Sullivan, announced that he had capitulated to Governor Dewey’s suggestion for arbitration, groups of strikers stormed the union office, complaining, “Why don’t we have a meeting to decide if we want to go back? Let the members decide. We’re going to stay on the sidewalk. The union is going to sell us out as it did in 1936 and 1939 with a $1.06 raise.”
Significantly enough, as this rash of arbitration “solutions” is breaking out, report comes of the result of the arbitration of the seventeen-day strike of the Newspaper & Mail Deliverers Union in New York in July. The commission which arbitrated this dispute denied the major demands of the union, including the disputed wage increase. As always, arbitration benefited the bosses.
 
Auto Workers
The slogan “Fifty-two for Forty” is taking root among great masses of workers. This slogan, involving the thirty per cent wage increase also demanded by the United Auto Workers, CIO, is stirring to action 500,000 West Coast metal workers, who are reported about to request a strike vote. In Detroit, Ford workers have asked for a strike vote. The 350,000 General Motors workers are to vote on the strike issue on October 24th, and the 120,000 Chrysler workers Will do so a day later. In the meantime, negotiations are going on between the UAW and Chrysler for a new contract; the international officers finding time, however, to oust seventeen leaders of the Kelsey-Hayes strikers. Apparently, President Thomas refuses to see the handwriting on the wall, made so plain to him by the Kelsey-Hayes strikers’ boos on several occasions, namely: Workers arc getting tired of seeing their so-called leaders act as strikebreakers.
Another significant strike is spreading among the textile workers, whose wage demands are much lower than those implied in the “Fifty-two for-Forty” slogan. The strike got under way with some 50,000 workers out in the New Jersey area. The strike rapidly spreading into the New England states, the union is hastening to apply for a strike vote. Southern textile workers are also restive, with strikes looming on the horizon. The Textile Workers Union, CIO, is asking for the sixty-five cent hourly minimum, along with a ten-cent hourly increase. The union also aims to remove the discriminatory differential between North and South, as is also the purpose of all unions demanding industry-wide agreements.
 
Miners
Not all current strikes have started with wage demands. The growing miners’ strike involves the walkout of foremen and supervisors in the bituminous fields of Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Kentucky. The issue is the recognition of the Supervisory Union of District 50 of the United Mine Workers. The present status of the miners’ strike is that the national bituminous coal operators refuse to negotiate when “an illegal strike” is going on, while John L. Lewis designates the. operators’ attitude as “insolent” and “provocative” – and more miners keep going out on strike.
The workers have ripped the shackles of the no-strike pledge off their hands and feet. They are putting up excellent fights for their demands, foremost among them being the “Fifty-two for Forty” slogan involving a thirty per cent wage increase in order not to reduce the workers’ standard of living. The danger comes from the labor leaders, who have made it a habit during the war to take their orders from the White House and to appease the war profiteers.
 




Many weeks ago the Truman administration submitted to Congress a new farm bill named for Secretary of Agriculture Brannan. After some hearings and some publicity in the press and on the air, both for and against, the bill was tucked away in a cubbyhole. Administration leaders are now going to try to pry it out of hiding.
The starting point will be a Midwestern Democratic Conference to be held at Des Moines, June 12 and 13, at which four cabinet members and other moguls of the Democratic Party, including the Democratic governors of eight Midwestern states, will boost the Brannan bill. So it will be much in the news. Let us see what all the shouting is going to be about.
In the first place, this bill, like all other farm acts of recent vintage, starts from the premise that the whole agricultural sector of American economy has failed as private enterprise in a private-enterprise system. Of course, the politicians and lawmakers do not put it this way. They have gone ahead and provided government subsidies, government price support, government buying of surpluses, government plow-under programs, government regulation of planting, etc.
All of this is made necessary by the fact that the capitalist profit system does not allow the working people a share in the national income large enough to permit them to purchase the quantities of goods and foods that modern manufacture and agriculture can produce and must continue to produce.
The new Brannan bill is occasioned by the fact that the current parity-price-support farm law is causing the administration a very bad headache. The present law makes it incumbent upon the government to buy up farm surpluses or to take them up on loans, the price to the government or the extent of the loan being 90 per cent of what is called parity. Parity under the law is supposed to give a farm commodity the same exchange value, or purchasing power, in terms of things farmers have to buy, as that commodity had in the 1909–14 period.
During the war and in the post-war period this system worked out fairly well for the simple reason that prices were high and there were no distressing surpluses, except for potatoes and a few others of the less important farm products. But with the present sag in demand and with a deflationary pressure on prices, the situation has changed. Already the government is head-over-heels in farm surpluses and bids fair to be completely overwhelmed by them.
 
Surplus Headache
At the beginning of 1949 the stocks owned by the Commodity Credit Corporation (the government agency involved) or pledged to it under loan included 156 million bushels of corn; 284 bushels of wheat; 4,275.000 bales of cotton; 28 million pounds of eggs; 103 million pounds of wool – to name only a few items. The grand total, at the beginning of 1949, of stored commodities was valued at $2,186 million.
These huge quantities of farm products are kept from human consumption, but not because people are glutted with food and are overclothed. Indeed we all know about the millions who lack adequate food and clothing abroad and in this country too. But their need is not backed up by purchasing power.
So $50 million worth of eggs remain in government storage. Potatoes are bought by the government and plowed under. Wheat and corn are converted to pep up gasoline to burn in motors instead of in human stomachs, as Secretary Brannan pointed out.
 
To Maintain Farm Income
But this situation is mild compared to what is expected. With farming reviving in Europe and other parts of the world, and with unemployment steadily mounting in this country, the farm surpluses will grow and the threat to farm prices will be indeed serious. If the present farm support system remains in effect and the government must take up farm surpluses, it is expected that next year the government “investment” in this field will climb to $4 billion.
Obviously this is an unhealthy and an untenable situation. The problem of storage is the least of the problems, though it exists. Also no government wants voluntarily to throw so much good money after bad, as the saying goes; the government does worry about taxes – where its money comes from. And further, fundamentally it is impossible to maintain high farm-price levels with such surpluses on hand and with a general deflationary tendency. The Brannan bill embodies what the administration believes is a way out.
The basic change it seeks to make is this: Instead of parity (that is, the relation between farm prices and industrial prices) being the pivot of government support, farm income will be the determinant. The objective will be to prevent total farm income from dropping below a certain level. The average for the ten years 1939 to 1949 will be that level, or around $26 billion per year.
With the objective of keeping total farm income at this figure, the prices of some farm commodities will be supported and the prices of others will be allowed to seek their market level. In the former category will be more stable and storable products such as corn, wheat, cotton; in the latter category will be perishable products such as milk, eggs, meat, poultry. As an instance Secretary Brannan states that milk to the consumer might be allowed to go to fifteen cents a quart. The farmer would be entitled to a certain income on a stated amount of production, and the government would make up with a Treasury check the difference between that certain figure and his actual income at market and/or supported prices.
 
Big Farmers Against
To get this government subsidy, farmers would have to meet specified requirements as to soil conservation, possibly acreage allotments, marketing agreements and marketing quotas. While members of Congress and big corporation farms are objecting to government regulation as “socialistic,” most medium and small farmers do not oppose government controls in exchange for a guaranteed income. They fear the glutted markets and the decline of prices much more than government controls.
The Brannan bill ingratiates itself with the medium and small farmer because it attempts to remove the complaint against all former farm-support laws that they benefit the big corporation farm more than the family farm. Under the Brannan bill all farmers would get an assured amount of income on a fixed amount of their production, and this top amount of support production would be the same for both a big farm and a small farm.
This would work out so that all or most of the output of a family farm would have the benefit of income support. This is in line with some of the “Fair Deal” ideas of the administration for maintaining mass purchasing power, not very palatable to the big farm corporations and their representatives in Washington.
The supporters of the Brannan bill claim it will have some very definite advantages over the present parity-price-support system. They admit that that cost to the government will still be great, but promise it will not be as great as under the present method. They predict that by allowing many commodities to seek their market price level, the consumers will get a break, there will be higher consumption, less produce to store. This increased consumption of certain commodities due to decreased prices is expected to add up to more farm income, and therefore smaller checks from the Treasury will be called for to make up the guaranteed income.
 
Vote-Getting at Stake
The administration, worried over surpluses, claims that the Aiken farm law, which was passed by the 80th Congress and which goes into effect in January 1950, does not have the power to bring production down. Even though the Aiken law does provide for variations downward below 90 per cent of parity for government support of prices, farmers still consider this support more profitable than reducing production. This has been borne out in potato production where there are heavy surpluses in spite of the drop in price support from 90 per cent to 60 per cent of parity. The Brannan bill, on the other hand, provides for a guaranteed income on a definite amount of production and also for government regulations to check production. This, by the way, is scarcity production!
A final word about the motivation of the Brannan bill. Next year is an election year. If the Aiken law goes into effect, not only will the overall farm situation be bad, as pointed out above, and individual farmers will be insecure in the general insecurity, but they will also be dissatisfied with the fluctuations inherent in the Aiken law. Farmers would be likely to blame the administration for their troubles, in spite of the fact that the Aiken law was the creation of the 80th Congress. The Brannan bill, on the other hand, by guaranteeing income and purchasing power to the farming population, would reward the Democrats on election day.
Whatever the fate of the Brannan bill – it has powerful opponents – it is only another makeshift. As stated above, the government has to intervene permanently in that sector of the economy where the contradictions of the profit system have become an unrelieved problem. Will the government be able to maintain farm income, as provided by the Brannan bill; during a period of declining consumer income due to unemployment and declining national income due to minor or major crisis, without creating other baffling problems?
 




Undefined “inherent powers” are the resort of dictators. Such powers constitute “the-State-it-is-I” principle of government. Well, in the past week we were informed that the Truman administration believes it has such undefined “inherent powers” to break strikes.
Secretary of Labor Tobin declared himself to this effect testifying before the Senate Labor Committee. Attorney General Clark gave the committee a written statement to the same effect. President Truman told reporters lie has “constitutional and implied powers” sufficient to procure anti-labor injunctions. Such left-wing Democrats as Paul Douglas and Claude Pepper joined the chorus of “inherent powers” advocates.
All this came out in connection with the debate on the administration’s labor bill now before the Senate Labor Committee and pertains to the particular provision of the bill which calls for a thirty-day cooling- off period in strikes that involve the “national health and security” such as mine and railroad strikes. The Republicans, who favor continuance of the main features of the Taft-Hartley law, argued that while T-H calls for an eighty-day cooling-off period with the right of injunction by the government to enforce the provision, the new administration bill makes no provision for enforcing the cooling-off period. Whereupon the cat came out of the bag.
 
Legal Skullduggery
Secretary Tobin assured the committee that “No President of the United States ever is going to permit the economy of the nation to be brought to its knees in a great national emergency.” Then the opinion of Attorney General Clark on the subject was read. This authority on the laws of the land holds that even in the absence of specific injunctive relief in the bill, the President would have authority to seek an injunction in emergencies affecting national health and safety. The government always has that right, holds Clark, when not specifically deprived of it. To fortify his position he referred to the government’s injunction in the Lewis-miners case, upheld by the Supreme Court on the ground that the government has the right “to protect itself” in spite of the anti-injunction sections of the Norris-LaGuardia Act because the government is not specifically mentioned in that act.
The following day in his press conference President Truman stated that his Attorney General had told him that the “President’s powers were sufficient to meet such emergencies.” When asked by a reporter why. this power was not specifically included in the administration’s labor bill, Mr. Truman replied that it was not necessary since the Attorney General had advised him that the President has constitutional and implied powers. Mr. Truman feels that in time of emergency the President has “immense power to do what is right for the country.” He does not believe his powers have “to be spelled out in the proposed law.”
The implications of this position are far-reaching and sinister. It would mean that in important labor struggles the President could act as a virtual dictator to defeat labor. Once the principle of undefined “inherent powers” is accepted, there’s no telling where it will lead. Certainly the head of the capitalist government is not likely to declare that it is “right for the country” for, let us say, hundreds of thousands of miners or railroad workers, who may be on strike for better wages and conditions, to be granted their demands. It is a foregone conclusion that such strikes by workers for better health and greater security, will automatically be considered against the “national health and security.”
 
Republicans Crow
It should be recalled that some two years ago during the railroad strike, President Truman actually sent a special message to Congress that he wanted strikers drafted into the army. With the principle of undefined “inherent powers” accepted, a president might not even have to go to Congress to get strikers drafted into the army.
The anti-democratic position taken by the Democrats on this point has given the Republican senators a decided advantage in the debate. Senator Taft of T-H fame now makes more sense to those who believe in anti-labor injunctions, than the administration docs. He said, among other things: “I disagree with the attorney general and think he is certainly wrong. I don’t know of any inherent right of the President to get injunctions in a national emergency. If you want, to do that you ought to say so in so many words. You ought to say it in clear law” Republican Senator Morse made his contribution to the effect that “the administration is trying to work both sides of the street by telling labor it opposes the injunction feature and telling the public it has it anyway.”
Even a Republican can be right sometimes, and Morse has almost hit the nail on the head. In fact, Mr. Truman in his press conference referred to above, all but admitted that he first assured himself of his power to get injunctions against labor by getting his Attorney General’s opinion; then, as a grandiose gesture to labor, he did not put it into the bill – it was not necessary.
The clarification by the administration on the subject of “inherent powers” has placed the officialdom of the CIO and AFL in something of a fix. They have stated their approval of the administration bill. Now they find themselves in the company of the Republicans on this business of “inherent powers.” Logically and according to Attorney General Clark’s own opinion, labor leaders should demand that government, as industry, be “specifically deprived” of the right to seek court injunctions against labor. Although Arthur Goldberg, CIO general counsel, has stated that he would make “some constructive suggestions to clarify” certain provisions of the administration’s bill, it is not likely that he will ask for that much clarification.
The basic logic of the capitalist government has revealed itself in this debate on the right of injunction. It is clear that no matter what the law says or does not say, the government will find the loophole “to protect itself” against its mortal enemy – militant labor.
On the other hand, labor’s forte is the justice of its cause, the strength in its numbers and in its solidarity and its ability to convince “the public” that labor’s wellbeing is also public wellbeing. This is labor’s forte not only in strikes but in the field of politics also, where it must make strides toward the goal of a workers’ government which will not consider militant labor its mortal enemy.
 




In the months of November and December 1948 and January 1949 the army of unemployed grew by one million. Those 60,000,000 jobs boasted by the apologists of capitalism have gone a-gleaming. Official figures admit to 2,650,000 jobless at the end of January.
Expectations are for what is called “more levelling off” in 1949. While lay-offs are heaviest in textiles and clothing, the “readjustment process” is felt in food processing, in the shoe, furniture, fur and tobacco industries, in coal mining, in logging and lumbering. Workers in non-durable consumer goods have been hardest hit, but those in durable consumer goods have not entirely escaped. Even in steel and aluminum some lag is felt.
By the end of 1949 there may be as high as 4,500,000 shut-out workers for whom capitalism does not provide jobs in peacetime.
It may be said that the crazy, skyrocketing profit-price structure touched off the “levelling off” we are now experiencing. With the incomes of the working people falling foul of the cost of living, consumer buying decreased and factories received less orders. The cycle is completed as the very people who need more money to buy things are thrown out of work and deprived of all wages.
The textile workers led the parade out of the factories. Tens of thousands of them were fired, in largest numbers in the states of New York, Maine, New Hampshire, Connecticut and Vermont. But they were out on the pavements also in the southern states of Alabama, South Carolina, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, Virginia and Tennessee.
Shoe workers were laid off in St. Louis and New York, in Maine, New Hampshire and Virginia, “to decrease inventories” – the same old story of workers having produced so much that they cannot buy anything at all. Furniture workers were given the same treatment in Pennsylvania, Virginia, New York and Indiana. In New York City fur workers are generally unemployed. The mild weather winter here in the east had something to do with the shut-downs in the fur industry.
However, fantastic prices in the early season had a good deal to do with the decline in consumer buying. The mild winter in the east may account for the accumulation of unmoved stocks of coal and the lay-off of miners. Severe weather in the west is partially responsible for the unemployment there.
Perhaps the most significant curtailment is in food processing. The decline in buying of this most essential of all commodities registers the pinch the consumer feels. To illustrate how the chain of unemployment is forged, unemployment in food processing means, for example, unemployment in the tin can industry.
In the field of durable consumer goods the decline in orders for electrical appliances reflects the trend. Electrical appliances translate themselves into less work for the housewife and into more entertainment for the family, but consumers cannot afford to buy these gadgets. So workers in Ohio, Missouri, Indiana and Connecticut have been cordially invited to leave their work benches.
In some cases factories that closed down have reopened, but with a difference. The personnel has been cut down so that workers who hoped to ride out a short period of unemployment on unemployment compensation, cannot get their old jobs back. Again, part time work is more prevalent, quite a number of plants opening for only three or four days a week.
The over-all picture is not pleasant to behold. More and more workers are finding it hard to find new jobs. They are taking jobs below their skills and experience, and for less pay. Part time work has slashed take-home pay. Those most likely to become chronically unemployed are the older workers, women workers and the unskilled. Unemployment compensation is in general very low and covers too short a period. Relief is the next step down, relief which provides a very inadequate standard of living.
As unemployment becomes so much more sever, the issue of a guaranteed annual wage takes on real urgency. Also, the need for better unemployment insurance and for decent relief payments must be translated into fighting demands.
The most important section of the over-all picture today is that even this 1949 prosperity with 4,500,000 expected unemployed, rests on the continuance of the Marshall Plan, on the fifteen-billion military budget, on the prospect of arming the west European countries. A “prosperity” based on war!
 




In the past it has been accepted as axiomatic that the countries of Europe and the backward countries of Asia are economically interdependent. The European countries with their large populations, high degree of industrialization but limited natural resources, have been compelled to lean heavily on outlying regions to supply their lacks, and have done it largely through colonial exploitation. On the other hand, the backward countries with their teeming populations, their abysmal standard of living and abundant natural resources crying out for industrialization, have to have help from the industrialized world to make real progress. Nothing has happened in recent times to change this economic relationship between the industrially developed and the undeveloped parts of the world.
Revolutionary socialists have in the past envisaged that when the period of colonial revolutions arrived and the pillars of imperialism were shaken in their foundations, the workers of the imperialist countries would unite with the colonial peoples in revolt, together to forge an international relationship of mutual benefit, based on mutual dependence. The period of colonial revolutions is indeed here and imperialism has received a bad shaking up, but the proletariat of the imperialist countries, for reasons we perhaps understand, has not been active in the colonial situation up to now. That does not mean, however, that it cannot be.
Though the cloth woven by history is of a different pattern than what we had expected, still with the cloth at hand we must try to cut a suit to fit the existing situation. Do the positions taken by the Workers Party on the European question, as expressed in the proposed resolution for an independent union of European countries, and on Southeast Asia Union, as expressed in the editorial in Labor Action, February 7, fulfill the requirement in respect to the colonial developments?
 
Intertwined Economies
The resolution on Independent Western Union, sound in its main approach, however, shows a failure to grasp the opportunity offered today to cement a bond between the working people of Europe and of the Far East. The resolution speaks of the countries of Western Europe as almost self-dependent economically. This cannot be true. Although, to be sure, the union of these countries would increase their united resources, it is still a fact that Europe as a whole must have the products of the backward countries.
The only reference the resolution makes to the colonies is when listing the democratic planks on which Independent Western Union must be based. Among them is “the renunciation by all participants of any imperialist ‘rights’ to dominate colonies and possessions now under their rule.” While this democratic demand is undoubtedly correct, standing as the only statement on the colonial situation, it is unrealistic and purely negative.
To say this and nothing more ignores an economic fact known to all, namely, that the economies of several of the European countries are so intertwined with their colonies that severing the ties is like cutting an artery. Furthermore, there is the fear that “to free the colonies” will simply make it easier for other imperialist vultures, notably the United States and Russia, to swoop down on the prey. Therefore, there is an opportunity, while renouncing all imperialist rights, for an Independent Western Union to offer the backward countries a positive economic program, as between free and equals, for dealings mutually beneficial to the Western European Union and to the Southeast Asia Union. Of course, a resolution of the kind submitted by the Political Committee cannot and should not go into the details of such a program, but the broad PRINCIPLE involved should be recognized and stated.
 
Common Struggle
At the same time the editorial on Southeast Asia Union implies that such a combination would be self- sufficient. The billions of people, the tin of Malaya, the hemp and steel of India, the rice of Burma, the oil and rubber of Indonesia, the talents of all these countries combined, contain the possibilities of a regional international economy organized on a division of labor depending on local resources and skills which could raise the people’s lives to a modern standard – so says the editorial. But is this a realistic statement?
How fast and how far can industrial progress go “organized on a division of labor depending ON LOCAL RESOURCES AND SKILLS”? Of course, faster and farther than each Asiatic country could go by itself. But the crying need for machines, machine tools, railroads and rolling stock, all the products of the heavy industry of industrial countries cannot be excluded from a statement on the economic possibilities of Southeast Asia. In fact, on the ability to acquire these needs abundantly and quickly may depend whether or not a socialist union of Asian countries will survive or degenerate into bureaucracy and exploitation.
Speculating on what provisions an economic program for an independent Western European Union and a Southeast Asia Union would contain, these ideas come to mind. The European union would agree to pay world market prices for the raw materials produced by the Asian countries, and would guarantee the purchase of definite quantities. The European countries would pledge the shipment to the East of stated amounts of the products of their heavy industry, to insure steady and rapid development there. The Eastern countries might pledge themselves to pay their workers, certain wages and provide specified working conditions.
These ideas are perhaps very crude, but the principle is clear enough. If a real third force, independent of both the United States and Russia, and of a socialist tendency, is to be forged in the world, the economic interdependence of Europe and the East must be recognized. An Independent Western Union will have to make its appeal to the uniting Asiatic countries for a mutually beneficial relationship, as one group of peoples struggling for freedom from imperialist entanglements to another such group.
 




Unable to risk a rebellion by labor leaders smack at the beginning of his administration, President Truman got his Senate whip, Lucas, to put pressure on Senator Thomas, chairman of the Senate Labor Committee, to stop dilly-dallying on Taft-Hartley repeal. The result was that all eight Democrats on the committee voted for, and all five Republicans voted against, a resolution for the repeal of T-H, for the restoration of the Wagner Act and for committee hearings up till February 10 on amendments to the Wagner Act. Thus was the ground laid for the introduction to the committee of the administration’s proposed labor bill, which is now before it.
Before taking up the administration’s bill, it should be noted that this one-package proposition is not what the labor leaders wanted. Labor leaders wanted a two-package procedure: first and without delay, the repeal of T-H and the restoration of the Wagner Act as the law of the land; then at a more leisurely pace and with greater thoroughness of discussion, the legislation of amendments to the Wagner Act. Thus the Wagner Act, more favorable to labor, would be the law while the protracted discussion on amendments took place.
Under the one-package procedure the restrictive T-H Act remains the law until amendments to the Wagner Act are agreed upon. However, it is not likely that labor officials will press on this point.
 
Flies in the Ointment
The most publicized feature of the administration bill is that it would discontinue the right of court injunction in what is called “national paralysis strikes” such as mine, railroad, etc. Whereas T-H provides for an 80-day strike delay with power of the president to resort to court injunction – which power President Truman has used – the new administration bill would provide for a 30-day cooling-off period without specifying any court injunction powers.
There are several flies in this ointment. Labor leaders question the worth of the omission of court injunction powers from the administration bill, feeling that the government will resort to injunctions if it wants to, bolstered by court decisions of the past. Government lawyers, interviewed by newspaper men, interpret the administration bill as “implying” injunction. Democratic Senators who will be acting on the bill if it is voted out of committee, do not believe the President really wants to be stripped of the power of court injunction in the case of “national paralysis strikes.”
But Drew Pearson really let the cat out of the bag. He said that the President indeed wants the power of court injunction but hesitated at arousing the ire of labor officialdom and concluded he doesn’t need to because, forsooth, the Senate is sure to include the power of injunction in any bill. Certainly if the Republicans – spearheaded by Senator Taft with his fifteen amendments to the Wagner Act as a starter – and the Southern Democrats get together, they will be able to put “teeth” into the labor bill. In this case, the President will get what he wants without taking responsibility for it – a neat trick!
If the administration bill were to become law, there would be an end of some of the more obnoxious provisions of T-H. The administration bill would abolish the ban on the closed shop and the regulation of the union shop, non-Communist affidavits for union officers, restrictions on union welfare and retirement funds, the limitation on union political activities, the ban on unionization of foremen and the ban on strikes by government workers. Needless to say, there will be heated discussion around these points.
Retained in the administration bill is the ban on secondary boycotts, which would impair labor’s effectiveness, and also the ban on jurisdictional strikes. In both these instances the power of court injunction would remain in the National Labor Relations Board.
The Republicans will try to extend the hearings in the Senate Labor Committee beyond February 10. If the Democrats maintain their solid bloc, their opponents will not be able to hold up the bill. However, once the bill gets to the floor of the Senate, the sparks will fly and there will be plenty of delay.
*
Filibuster Fight
In the Senate Rules Committee, discussions proceed on changing the right of filibuster. This is preliminary to tackling the President’s civil rights program. The Republicans seem to have taken the lead, strange as this may seem. They approve cloture on a two-thirds vote. Some Republicans came out for a simple majority vote, but this idea didn’t get too far with the Republicans as a whole, who are evidently trying to ride two horses.
They are being very militant to change the rules, with an eye on the Negro vote for 1950. On the other hand, on some issues they will have to rely on a coalition with the Southern Democrats, as for instance on labor legislation. The Southerners consider the Republican resolution calling for cloture on a two-thirds vote as not too distasteful – a two-thirds vote is a big vote to get for closing debate.
To show how “reasonable” they are, the Southern Senators have expressed their willingness to go along with a change in rules to protect issues of national security and foreign relations from the filibuster, but they want the opportunity to kill civil rights legislation.
 
Housing and Rents
Action is under way on housing and rent control. A procedure has been agreed upon between Senate and House leaders. The House committee is to go ahead with the legislation to extend rent controls while the Senate committee will take up general housing legislation. This should expedite matters.
On the issue of general housing there are now three bills up for consideration: the administration bill calling for 1,050,000 new units in seven years; the Republican bill introduced in the Senate providing for 600,000 new units in six years; and another Republican bill introduced in the House fixing the number of new units at 800,000 in six years. Most people have a fuzzy idea of what a “unit” is. Is it an apartment house? Is it any house, apartment or private? A unit, be it known, is the living quarters for one family, namely one single apartment or one single private house.
With the population of the country at around 143,000,000 two years ago, and the number of families at around 35,000.000 in 1940, the generous administration provision for 1,050,000 new units in seven years won’t go very far to solve the housing shortage; 800,000 units in six years will make less difference; and 600,000 in six years will be indeed a tiny drop in the bucket. Thus government aid to housing doesn’t look too promising at its best – and private enterprise has very little to worry about on this score.
*
Legalized Tapping
A law that must be dragged from the small-item department of the news and given full publicity, is the one asked for by Attorney General Clark. He wishes to legalize wiretapping and to permit evidence so procured to be used in court hearings.
This attempt to rob an individual of his privacy will be fought by the labor, liberal and socialist movements. Labor leaders are slated to appear at the hearings to oppose Clark’s bill.
Ten years ago another attorney general, Cummings, recommended a bill authorizing wiretapping under certain circumstances – and supposedly with certain safeguards to personal rights. This bill failed to become a law only because Congress adjourned before the Senate could act on amendments desired by the House. Today, with the red spy rings, to justify every infringement of personal liberty, the opposition must speak up and speak loud to prevent, the Clark bill from becoming law.
 




To the Editor:
Starting from the point that the Independent Socialist League proclaims its greatest propaganda task at present is to counter the war preparations with the call for the socialist anti-war camp, with the slogan “Neither Washington nor Moscow,” I fail to see how the leading article in the issue of April 18 in any way furthers this task. I do not argue whether or not the policy of the United States is to “draw blood”; whether or not the Atlantic Pact means the “cold invasion” of Western Europe; whether or not the presence of American troops at the Iron Curtain means war. These points could perhaps be argued. But I do say that in making these points, comrade, you went so completely out of balance as to have written an article any fellow-traveling organ would be delighted to publish. I am absolutely sure that this was not the intention; of course not. It seems to me it was the result of writing on certain angles, without regard to the context of general events.
One of the general events to be borne in mind is that today the Stalinists are waging, all over the world, a so-called peace offensive, and of course they are the injured innocents while the United States is out to “draw blood.” In the anti-war propaganda of Labor Action and the Independent Socialist League we must separate ourselves from this Stalinist “peace offensive.” The only way in which we can do this is by not losing sight of the fact that, there is another general event, namely, that the Russian troops or Russian-controlled satellite troops have been on the other side of the Iron Curtain since the end of the war, and that there the invasion has bad a little more heat than to permit of the name “cold invasion.” So I say there is a deplorable lack of balance in an article that starts with a dismissal of Russian aggression, ends with a call for the withdrawal of American troops, and only in passing refers to the justified hatred of the Stalinist tyranny.
It is true, to be sure, that everything cannot be said in one article but enough must be said not to create undesired impressions, enough should be said to make clear our position “Neither Washington nor Moscow.” I know that every time we write against Stalinism and Moscow imperialism we do not in the same article give equal space to expose Washington imperialism, but I cannot think of one article we have written in the former category which did not also make clear that we were taking our position against Moscow on a socialist basis and therefore could not be mistaken as pro-American. On the other hand, I think the article I criticize could, today, very easily be mistaken for pro-Russian.
I believe with all my heart that if there is any chance of avoiding this Third World War it is by the masses of the people accepting the concept of “Neither Washington nor Moscow.” This cannot be just an incidental idea, but must be the hammer blow in every article on the war.
Susan Green
April 25, 1949
 




President Truman has set up another Fair Deal tenpin to be knocked down by Congress. This time it is a wide health insurance program. Senator Murray, committee head to whom It has been referred, “expressed the hope” that the bill could be taken up by the current session.
Perhaps Truman advocates his health insurance program as a war preparation measure on the theory that people must be healthy to stand the stress of modern war. Or perhaps is interested in public health as “one of the great challenges to our democracy” as he put it in his message to Congress, because of course American capitalism must show itself better than British “socialism” and above all better than Russian “communism.”
However, whatever the motives, the masses of Americans to whom modern medical knowledge and techniques are unavailable, pricked up their ears and listened. Here is something which concerns them vitally, sometimes as vitally as life itself.
What a commentary on the capitalist system that today, in President Truman’s words, “It is no longer just the poor who are unable to pay for all the medical care they need – such care is now beyond the means of all but the upper-income groups.” Again, in the words of one of the physicians who supports the President’s plan: “... the dollar barrier ... now blocks four out of five families from the full measure of medical care they need.”
 
Appalling Conditions
What a commentary on American capitalism, which budgets $16 billion a year for war preparation but does not provide any general hospitals at all, or only substandard ones, in 40 per cent of all the counties of the country! What a disgrace that in 1200 counties, with nearly one fourth of the whole population, there is no public health department at all or only part-time health officers performing the crudest services.
The lack of all kinds of facilities, of nurses, of doctors, is appalling. Yet schools for training doctors are so inadequate that there are ten to fifteen applicants for every opening in the medical schools.
To be sure the federal government and also some state governments have some kind of public-health programs, but they are merely tokens of good intentions. For example, in 1946 Congress passed the Hospital Construction Act, authorizing the payment to states and cities of one third the cost of new hospitals and improvements. But thus far only four per cent of the nation’s need for new hospital beds has been met.
 
Step in Right Direction
Apparently the president has been well advised about the inadequacy of past performances in the field of public health. His proposal is more far-reaching and comprehensive. It approximates the health-insurance plan of the British government.
Based on the payment of a payroll tax of 1½ per cent by both employers and workers, for no additional cost the plan would provide examinations, doctor’s visits, limited dental treatment, sixty days’ hospitalization, home nursing, laboratory service, X-ray service, ambulance service, expensive medicines, hearing aids, wheelchairs, eye-glasses, crutches and other special appliances.
Besides the health insurance aspect, the president’s bill would enact federal subsidies for medical schools, for students, for local health units, for hospital construction, for rural doctors. The cost of the plan to the government is variously estimated at from three to eighteen billion dollars a year. The lowest figure is given by the friends of the measure while the highest is the prediction of the bill’s most deadly enemy, namely, the American Medical Association.
The biggest concession the bill makes to reactionary pressure is in the way the money is to be raised. The assessment would be levied on the first 54,800 of individual income, so that the largest contribution by any person would be $72 a year. This is undoubtedly to meet the argument that the rich will be using their own doctors anyway – though the government services that they too would be able to make use of would be a bargain for them also. This feature means that the bankrolls with the biggest figures will be paying a comparatively small percentage of the cost – far, far less, at any rate, than they ought to bear.
The CIO and AFL leaders, who know too well that 325,000 persons a year die for lack of medical care, support the president’s bill. So does the NAACP, whose policy makers also know that in the state of Mississippi, for instance, there is only one Negro doctor for each 19,000 Negroes. Undoubtedly the passage of the president’s health insurance plan would be a step in the right direction – though one may ask: “Why so little for health and so much for bombs and bomb carriers?”
 
Won’t Be Passed
However, the president’s bill is not going to be passed by Congress. There is the Dixiecrat-Republican coalition to contend with. Two other public-health bills are now before Congress. No Congressman dares come out on all fours against federal aid to public health; so these bills are also called public health bills.
One is authored by Republican Senator Taft. He is opposed to the whole idea of public-health insurance. Instead he would have people who arc unable to pay for needed medical care go hat in hand and beg for it, the federal and state governments to split the cost of this charity.
The Taft bill would also provide federal subsidies for medical schools, for examinations of school children, for free treatment of needy children, for local hospital construction, etc. But this grandiose program of the Republican senator would cost the comparative pittance of $1,817,000,000 in five years.
The third bill is sponsored by Senator Hill from Alabama, member of the Democratic Party along with Mr. Truman – for whom labor voted when it voted for the Democratic Party. Senator Hill, being a dyed-in-the-wool private enterpriser, wants the government to subsidize the private health-insurance plans, and only for limited services.
His bill makes no provision for general medical care, office calls, home nursing, etc. The Hill bill has the distinction of being supported by many state medical associations, which, along with the American Medical Association, stand as an example of what the private-profit motive can do to the spirit of men. (Parenthetically it must be stated that not all members of AMA have been thus corrupted. There are some three thousand doctors, members of AMA, who favor public health insurance and have organized a separate group known as Physicians’ Forum with Dr. Ernst P. Boas as chairman.)
Considering the emaciated specimens offered by Senators Taft and Hill as substitutes for the Truman bill, one can foresee what kind of public-health act will emerge from the Congressional wringer, that is, whenever the representatives of the people get around to that issue.
It is being bruited about that CIO and AFL leaders have abandoned all hope of getting any measures they support passed by the 81st Congress, and are setting their sights for the 1950 elections. But will labor do better after the 1950 elections if it doesn’t create its own political party for that election?
 




In public President Truman beats his chest and reaffirms his support of Taft-Hartley repeal. In private he acts in such a way as to make repeal impossible or more difficult at this session of Congress, even if the administration Democrats could muster enough votes.
Quite a furor developed in Washington, among both Democrats and Republicans, when it became known this week that the president had quietly appointed Representative Augustine B. Kelley, Pennsylvania Democrat, for a five-week foreign assignment. Mr. Kelley is to go as United States delegate to the International Labor Organization conference in Geneva, to return in mid-July.
The point is that Kelley is the administration’s “strong man” on the closely divided House Labor Committee, from which further action must come. So close is the division in this committee that the Lesinski bill was originally reported out by a margin of one, 13–12. Plainly, Kelley’s presence is crucial for the administration Democrats, especially since there is real danger of the obnoxious Wood bill being voted out to the floor of the House once more.
 
“Responsibility Is Fixed”
When the news of Kelley’s appointment leaked out, it is reported that both Speaker Rayburn and House Democratic Leader McCormack were both embarrassed and angry; they had not been taken into Mr. Truman’s confidence.
House Republican Leader Martin was smart enough to say, for publication, “If there is no labor legislation, the responsibility is definitely fixed.” Other Republicans accused the president of not wanting labor legislation in this session of Congress, and of conniving to save the T-H issue for the 1950 election.
Mr. Kelley tried to pour oil on troubled waters by assuring fellow Democrats that he would fly back from Geneva on 24 hours’ notice “if my vote is needed either in committed or on the floor.” This assurance, however, didn’t go far with the editor of the New York Times, who wanted to know why someone less crucially placed could not have been sent to Geneva, and who concluded that Truman may be actively trying to prevent labor legislation!
Quite a contrast between what the so-called friend of labor in the White House says and what he does! Would AFL President William Green still say, as he did in Cleveland on May 17: “The president has not let us down in any way”?
 
What Will They Take?
There has been rumor a-plenty that labor leaders too are willing to delay labor legislation, make it an election issue for 1950, and hope for a more pro-labor Congress then. However, these rumors are not borne out by the statements of CIO and AFL leaders. Not only do labor leaders seem to seek positive action on labor legislation, but since the Wood bill was referred back to committee some three weeks ago, they have indicated the extent to which they are willing to yield on their original position.
In a letter by CIO General Counsel Goldberg to the congressional labor committees, he reaffirms the determination of the CIO to obtain repeal of T-H and to get the administration Thomas-Lesinski bill passed. However, the determination weakens in the course of the letter, as evidenced in the following paragraph:
“In stating our position on the Thomas-Lesinski bill, which we continue to support, the CIO is not maintaining an unrealistic attitude of utopian perfectionism. We are mindful that in the legislative process there is room for alteration in any bill – particularly one dealing with so complex a problem as labor relations. But we stand solidly against any changes which impinge on basic principles, such as the use of injunctions to break strikes.”
Throughout the letter emphasis is placed on opposition to any legislative provision for anti-labor injunctions. However, nothing specific is said about what alteration the CIO will stand for.
 
Strikebreaking Green Light
The AFL, on the other hand, has been more outspoken and probably also voices the extent of the compromise that CIO leaders are willing to make. AFL President Green, interviewed in Cleveland, where top AFL leaders and the administrative committee of Labor’s League for Political Action have recently been in conference, openly stated that the AFL leaders would go along with the proposal to permit government seizure of struck plants.
Green would agree “to authorize the government to cope with national emergency walkouts by taking possession of strikebound plants for a thirty-day period” – so A.H. Raskin reports in the New York Times of May 18. But the AFL, like the CIO, is opposed to injunction provisions in labor legislation.
Here, then, is the major compromise labor leaders are willing to make – indeed so major a compromise that it is hard to believe even the traditionally compromising AFL leadership is willing to make it: For when has it happened that the seizure of struck plants has not been a strike-breaking device? It has been and will be a ruse to get strikers back to work on the old conditions, ostensibly for the government, which proceeds to make profits for the plant owners – all, of course, in an absolutely unbiased way.
Does the rank and file of organized labor know that its leadership is willing to approve such a strikebreaking provision, and what does the rank and file have to say about it?
 




MAY 4 – In spite of fundamental concessions already made by the Democratic leadership of Congress, a slim majority of the House passed the Wood labor bill yesterday. This is the bill which is Taff-Hartley under another name – almost literally.
The day before, the Democratic speaker of the House, Rayburn, had already announced that his party was ready to accept that feature of T-H which is among its most reactionary: the injunction strikebreaking process. Most illuminating was his next comment: “This is what I thought should have been in it in the first place.”
This acceptance of Taft-Hartleyism, said Rayburn, was no reluctant concession for him! No wonder these masked Democratic Taft-Hartleyites would have no burning desire to stop the more extreme version represented by the. Wood bill!
The Dem-Republican coalition In the House has won out again. While it is still uncertain whether something as monstrous as the Wood bill can get through Congress as a whole, there is no doubt that labor once again has its back to the wall, in spite of Its election “success.” When will the labor leadership decide that they cannot depend on this party of capitalism which they enthusiastically voted into power last November? Isn’t it time for every union militant to raise his voice loudly and confidently and demand the building of a LABOR PARTY?
*
The House of Representatives, before which labor legislation is now being debated, is treating the country to a spectacle which would be most amusing if it were not so serious for the working people.
The two bills before the House are the Wood bill supported by the Dixiecrats and Republicans, designated as the hard labor bill, and the Lesinski bill sponsored by the administration Democrats and approved by labor leaders. What is happening is that the advocates of the Wood Bbll are softening it down, while those for the Lesinski bill are busy hardening that up.
The result is that the difference between the two bills narrows. Whichever bill is passed, there will still be on the books many of the provisions of the Taft-Hartley Law under a new name. And workers will again have been shown that there isn’t too much difference between what the Democratic Party and the Republican Party hand out to labor.
 
Denatured Wood Bill
The process of softening up the Wood bill was effected by the passage of three amendments to it. This was done in an effort to gain the support of the fifteen or twenty members of the House who waver between the two bills and whose vote will determine the issue.
The first of the amendments, all of which are supposed to make the bill more favorable to labor, preserves the voting rights of striking employees in elections on union endorsement for six months, even though the strikers have been permanently replaced in their jobs. The original Wood bill provides only ninety days’ grace, while the Taft-Hartley Act gives none at all.
The second amendment would liberalize the provision of the Wood bill which limits sympathetic strike action to members of the same local union.
The third amendment provides for four conditions before the NLRB can ask for strike injunctions, namely, an investigation, issuance of a complaint, the threat of irreparable injury, and so-called public interest. Any babe in the woods can see that these conditions do not much alter the anti-labor injunction weapon.
These amendments to the Wood bill were passed by the House, which means that some of the Democratic opponents of the Wood bill voted for these amendments. Democratic leaders of course want to defeat the Wood bill, not amend it. However, so little faith and fight is there in the Democratic Party as a whole that Democrats who will not vote for the Wood bill, did support amendments on the theory that it has a good chance to pass and might as well be as soft as possible.
 
Hardening Lesinski
The amending strategy of the Dixiegops was countered in kind by the administration Democrats. A conference was rapidly held by Secretary of Labor Tobin, AFL President Green, AFL Railway Clerks President Harrison, CIO Counsel Goldberg, Assistant Secretary of Labor Gibson, and the solicitor of Department of Labor, Tyson.
It was reported by Joseph A. Loftus, New York Times Washington correspondent, that when the House takes up the labor-legislation issue again on Tuesday, Democratic leaders will offer five amendments to the Lesinski bill. These are all anti-labor amendments and run counter to what labor leaders have wanted.
They are as follows: (1) would permit the government to seize struck plants in what is called national emergency strikes while an emergency board studies the dispute – a well-known strike-breaking technique; (2) would require loyalty oaths of employers and union officers – of course the inclusion of employers is a farce; (3) would compel unions to give financial reports if they want the services of the NLRB – unions protest against this compulsion to make public their financial strength; (4) would give the poor, gagged employers more explicit free- speech guarantees; (5) would require unions to bargain in good faith – a general provision which could be put to many anti-labor uses.
 
Paying the Price
While CIO President Murray denied that the “CIO has altered its stand on the type of legislation that should be enacted to repeal the T-H Act,” it is very improbable that CIO Counsel Goldberg would agree to such amendments to the Lesinski bill on his own responsibility. So the labor leaders are paying the price of relying on capitalist politicians – namely, they are submitting to the squeeze.
Three other developments on labor legislation in the past week are worthy of note.
Without batting an eyelash, Mr. Truman, in his inimitable bull-in- the-China-closet way, declared that he wouldn’t hand out any political melons to those who do not “support the Democratic platform.” He added that he would regard representatives’ votes on the labor bill as a test of “party loyalty.” As a result the Dixiecrats led off in the House with a virtuous protest against “any patronage bribe,” proclaiming that “their votes could not be bought.”
Another high spot of the week was when Representative Anthony Cavalcante, Democrat of Pennsylvania, introduced an amendment to the Wood bill making it an unfair labor practice for an employer to refuse employment because of race, color or religion, or for a union to refuse membership for any of these reasons. Absolute silence greeted this progressive amendment when the “ayes” were called for. Then jeers wept up from the Republican side of the House; probably the Republicans took the amendment as a try at splitting Dixiecrat support for the Wood bill.
The last noteworthy incident of the week was when Representative Arthur K. Klein, Democrat of New York, came out with “a hair-raising idea.” He suggested that organized labor engage in a country-wide one- day work stoppage to demonstrate its united opposition to the T-H Law. Quite an idea, coming from a Democrat! Needless to say, both sides of the House “repudiated” the idea in no uncertain terms. Labor leaders gave the idea silent repudiation. However, the rank and file of labor could give the matter thought. Tim way things are going, labor’s Remand to repeal the T-H Law and reinstate the Wagner Act will be badly defeated.
 




The working people are going to get as resounding a slap in the face from Congress on labor legislation as they took on rent control.
The coalition between reactionary Republicans and Southern Democrats rules the Congressional roost. President Truman is reported to have abandoned his “get tough” policy towards Congress and to have adopted a mood of “compromise.” The result is not hard to guess. There will be enacted what is known as a “strong” labor bill – in plain English, an anti-labor bill.
Though the Thomas-Lesinski measure calling for the repeal of the Taft-Hartley Law and for the restoration of the Wagner Act – of course with a few labor-restricting amendments – was approved by both the Senate and House Labor Committees, the predictions are that this bill, more favorable to labor, will not be passed by either house.
The strategy of the reactionary coalition in the House of Representatives will be to control procedure. When the Lesinski bill is put before the House, its opponents will move to substitute the Wood bill.
 
Democratic Taft-Hartley
The Wood bill is the child of a Southern Democrat, John S. Wood of Georgia – anti-labor though he is, still a member of the House Labor Committee. The Wood bill contains virtually all the provisions of the T-H Law, and in some respects is even more offensive than that most offensive anti-labor legislation.
If the Wood bill is the one to be considered by the House, the representatives who feel beholden to labor to some extent would have the exhausting and time-consuming task of taking up each of the more than twenty-five sections of the bill, bit by bit, to try to amend them in order to tone down its anti-labor content.
The Washington reporter for the New York Times had this to say: “If the coalition plans are successful, the House’s product will be a bill strongly resembling the T-H Law but carrying a Democrat’s name.”
In the Senate the strategy of the ruling coalition, when the Thomas bill reaches the floor, will be to offer so many modifying amendments as to add up to another T-H Law. Officials of the AFL meeting in Washington expressed gloom over the outcome. Their one hope is in the dozen (or less) still doubtful senators.
According to the AFL, out of the 96 senators, 38 to 43 favor repeal of the T-H Law while 42 to 46 oppose it. The AFL will concentrate on these doubtful senators, who will be visited by spokesmen of the unions on a national, state and local level, though they are not at all optimistic about the result of their efforts.
 
Pollsters Here Again
In the meantime the capitalist class is also doing its bit to influence congressmen. As if polls have not been sufficiently discredited by the votes of the electorate last November – votes giving an overwhelming mandate for the repeal of the T-H Law – such powerful outfits as General Electric, Revere Copper & Brass Co., and Look magazine are busy “polling public sentiment” on labor legislation – for the benefit of congressmen.
Such Simple-Simon, biased and leading questions as these are asked: “Should labor law protect employees against unfair practices by union and management?” or “Should the union shop, under which a person is forced to join a union a short time after his employment, be unlawful?”
The citizen not knowing that it is a distortion to put union and management on the same basis in relation to employees, will naturally tend to give the answer the poll-takers want. Similarly, a question like the one above about the union shop will lead persons who don’t understand that a union shop is voted for by the majority of workers, to say he opposes any kind of “force.” In this way is “public sentiment” evaluated.
On the other hand, the manipulators of “public sentiment” have made it their business not to give publicity to a juicy bit of information about the origin of the T-H Law. A Washington attorney, name of Morgan, recently stated that he was the author of the T-H Law – he, and not Senator Taft and Representative Hartley, who were elected by the people to make the laws.
Mr. Morgan stated that he was employed by the Republican National Committee, which as we all know, is not the law-making body of the land, and that after the bill became law Mr. Morgan was paid $7,500 by the same Republican National Committee. Thus are the laws made under the system of capitalist democracy.
 
Democrats Stalling
The obvious purpose in both houses is to delay consideration of labor legislation as long as possible. Though the House was ready for the Lesinski bill, the matter of procedure was referred to the Rules Committee, where the wordy representatives killed considerable time. Now, it is reported, the issue will be delayed until after the Easter vacation.
In the Senate no predictions at all are made as to when labor legislation will be taken up. The upshot of this planful delay is that the T-H Law continues in operation, militating against labor in its day-by-day struggle. But more especially will this disadvantage be felt when new contract negotiations between labor and management start this spring.
It is explained by Washington correspondents that the debacle of the Truman program is due to the fact that the Southern Democrats hold the balance of power in Congress. This die-hard, anti-labor, anti-Negro clique of reactionaries do number more than one fourth of the senators and almost one fourth of the representatives; they have had long seniority in many instances, and are therefore on leading committees.
However, President Truman knew the situation in his party when he made the promises he did to the electorate. Before the people he took responsibility for the Democratic Party as a whole. Now he capitulates to the most reactionary wing in his party. Whatever his political reasons may be for his sellout, they have no meaning to the mass of people who need a better life and more security in life, and who voted for Truman to give them these things.
 
Settle the Score
The most fruitful question to be asked at this point is whether organized labor is doing what it can to make the people’s mandate for the repeal of T-H felt. Is it sufficient for the CIO and AFL to have had witnesses to testify before the congressional Labor Committees and to have submitted briefs? Is it sufficient now for union officials to “work on” doubtful congressmen, quietly and in private?
It seems that what is required is a clear-cut reminder to the Democratic Party of its election promises – a reminder coming from the rank and file of the unions and from all working people. Mass demonstrations and protest meetings should carry more weight in the White House and in Congress than do labor leaders quietly calling, hat in hand.
The rank and file of the unions also have a score to settle directly with their leaders. Why do these leaders continue to tie the political fortunes of the working people to the kite of the Democratic Party? Why do not these leaders start now to form an independent labor party which will be able to function in the 1950 election? This is a score that the rank and file will have to settle with its leadership.
 

Green: ‘Swing a Vote for a Steak Dinner’ (25 April 1949)



Susan Green Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Susan Green
State Senator Says Lobbyists Can –
‘Swing a Vote for a Steak Dinner’
(25 April 1949)

From Labor Action, Vol. 13 No. 17, 25 April 1949, p.&nbsp5.

Recently the newspapers and magazines became quite excited about the announcement of Labor’s League for Political Education of the AFL that it plans to raise a fund to augment the pay of labor-endorsed candidates elected to state legislatures. Comment has ranged from approval in the liberal press to a gentle warning from the Daily Mirror editor as follows: “Hey, wait a minute, fellows; that’s bribery.”
Because of the unbelievably low average pay of state legislators, powerful interests like insurance companies, railroads, public utilities and. other corporations have a lush field on this local level to exert the influence of ready cash. The result of this situation, plus rural conservatism, has been a whole crop of anti-labor laws on the state statute books, so that even if the Taft-Hartley Act should be repealed in Washington, these state laws would still operate against labor.
Since state legislation is made, at least nominally, by state legislators, let us learn something about them. A most illuminating article about this species of politician recently appeared in the magazine section of the New York Herald Tribune, entitled I Am a $5-a-Day Senator and written by Richard L. Neuberger, Oregon state senator. He tells of his own hardship? Living away from his home in the state capital on $5 a day for the duration of the session: keeping house in a motor court; sharing a car and groceries with fellow legislators; worrying about getting back home quickly to get hold of some real money. These are the honest ones whose main infringement of what is called the moral code may be to sell their sets of the state’s legal code to a bookseller or legal library.
 
For Eggs and Bacon
But this is, not all. The picture of general corruption painted by Mr. Neuberger is shocking, even to the presumably shockproof. Direct quotations from Mr. Neuberger must be given to get the real essence:
“It may all sound slightly comic, but there is an aspect to it which rubs away the humor. There are 90 members in our legislature, and for every senator and representative a half dozen lobbyists crowd the capitol cloakrooms and hotel corridors. Armed with liberal expense accounts, they like nothing better than to pick up a legislator’s dinner check, provide him with a bottle of liquor or a baked ham, or furnish him with a car and driver. It’s gotten to the point where if you’re a good lobbyist you can sometimes swing a vote for a steak dinner ...
“I know a man who lobbies at state capitals all along the Pacific Coast. He admits frankly that it is ‘easier and cheaper’ to bring his influence to bear in Oregon than in California, where members are paid $1,200 a year plus expenses. ‘The Oregon legislators are just as honest but less independent,’ confides this lobbyist. ‘Their measly pay makes them susceptible to what I call dime-store lobbying. You can get a key committee member indebted to you for the price of eggs and bacon.’ ...
“In some states reports frequently hint of some senator or representative allowing his hotel bill to be paid by the local utility company. How much, independence can be expected of a lawmaker under such circumstances?”
 
Indecent Wages
So it is not only of Oregon that Mr. Neuberger writes; no, indeed! The national average pay for state legislators is $900 per year. Not many states, however, pay an annual salary. Those that do are: New York $5,000; New Jersey and Illinois $3,000; Massachusetts $2,750; Michigan $2,400; Ohio $2,600; Pennsylvania and Maryland $1,200. Legislators in these states are aristocrats compared with others. For instance, Connecticut pays $600 for a two-year term; Vermont $750 for a term; New Hampshire $200 for a two-year term; West Virginia $500 a year; Utah $300 a year.
Of course, legislative sessions do not last for a full two-year term nor even for a full year. But it must be remembered that legislators have to leave their own homes to live in the capital for the duration of the session. Only a few states have small maintenance allowances. In states where legislators are permitted a secretary, to get extra money they often employ their wives who, as likely as not, know neither stenography nor typewriting.
This low standard of pay for state legislators results not only in the bribery so well described by Mr. Neuberger. Another effect is that the well-to-do, who can afford the luxury, become state lawmakers. Businessmen sit in the state legislatures and make laws in their own private interest. Another outcome has been the growth of a retainer system, which is legal in many states. At any rate, legislators are not required to make their connections known.
The United States News & World Report, in an article on the subject of state legislators, says that the retainer system is practised by many insurance firms, railroads, public utilities, various other corporations. About one quarter of the legislators in most states are retained lawyers.
 
Political Cesspool
Another factor in the case is that most state legislators are apportioned to favor the rural districts. Some estimates are that the metropolitan areas are underrepresented by 25 per cent. For example, in New York State legislative apportionment was made in 1894 by a group of upstate politicians whose aim was to keep New York City from getting a majority. Labor is, of course, mostly in the cities.
Into this milieu of bribery and corruption, of domination by corporations, retained lawyers and rural conservatism, organized labor is entering with intent to increase its influence. In the past labor union have here and there also followed the retainer system. Now, however, the AFL is elevating the scattered practice to general policy. This ties in with the purpose of the CIO and AFL to elect candidates they endorse.
In order to get capable and reliable people to accept nomination for the state legislatures, they must be assured a decent livelihood. So there
is undoubtedly a logic in the plan of the AFL to raise a fund to subsidize its elected candidates. The gentle warning from the Daily Mirror – “Hey, wait a minute, fellows; that’s bribery” – is laughable in view of conditions that seem as near a political cesspool as can be imagined.
 
What Is Revealed
From this corner, the corner of the socialist who wants to see labor as strong as possible, the question comes: Why not enter this field with labor’s own political instrument, an independent labor party? Send men and women from the ranks of labor to be lawmakers. Send them through a party which is labor’s own, free from all Democratic and Republican entanglements, free from the parties to which these bribing lobbyists belong, these corrupting corporations, these retained lawyers, these rural conservatives. Let organized labor indeed see to it that its lawmakers are paid a decent wage, but let it also see to it that these are labors own people, guided by and loyal to the platform of an independent labor party. Such a party would also be able to win over the rural people nearest labor in their economic and political interests.
There is something even more fundamental. On the scale of the state rather than the nation as a whole, one can see in greater detail the operation of the capitalist system. The unequal distribution of wealth; the power of those who have it over those who haven’t; the use of any means for private profit – all is revealed in the operation of our state legislatures.
What kind of democracy is this anyway? Isn’t there something to the socialist contention that real democracy is not possible under the profit system?
 




Last week the Senate, 70 to 7, approved President Truman’s European Recovery Program bill, authorizing the extension of the Marshall Plan for fifteen months – cost, $5,580,000,000. The House is expected to meet in special session and to pass virtually the same measure, easily overcoming a flurry of proposed amendments.
There is a sharp contrast to be noted. What has happened to the coalition of Southern Democrats and Republicans which enacted an anti-tenant rent bill; which stalls, delays and opposes repeal of the Taft-Hartley Law; which refused to kill the obstructionist practice of filibuster; which serves the Truman Administration in its own fashion as the avowed reason why Democratic election promises arc not fulfilled? Why now this overwhelming Truman support?
What has become of that coalition? It suspends itself for what is called the bipartisan foreign policy. That may sound like something good. Actually it means that while both parties are united on what American capitalism must do abroad as the top imperialist power, there is no such concern with questions of raising the living, security and democratic standards at home.
 
Amendments Beaten
And so it was so easy to prevent the passage of such amendments as came from Senators Malone, Republican from Nevada, and Kem, Republican from Missouri. The former wished to substitute three-year loans to the ERP countries in place of the Marshall Plan; the latter, fearful of the spread of “socialism,” wanted to withhold funds from nations which “would use the money for nationalization of basic industries.” But the senators were not going to let such notions upset the apple cart. As they see it, the industry of Western Europe, nationalized or unnationalized, is being neatly tied to the war plants of America – and that’s good enough for Congress.
So bent is Congress on not upsetting the apple cart that the Senate toned down to a whisper the amendment of Senator Brewster to the effect that ERP aid be stopped to any nation which fails to comply with United Nations directives. The target of this amendment was, of course, the Netherlands for defying the United Nations on Indonesia.
The Senate compromised by agreeing to cut off ERP aid ONLY IF the Security Council invokes sanctions against a defiant nation. Of course, the Senate bleeds for the Indonesians, but priming Western Europe for war production comes first.
No wonder Paul G. Hoffman, ERP administrator, was so pleased. He told the Senate:
“We are delighted with the result, particularly that the vote was 70 to 7. We think when the news strikes Europe it will mean a great deal to the morale of the people of those countries.”
What “people” do men like Hoffman have in mind? Whose morale is being fortified? Governments, as governments and as owners of industry, are strengthened by ERP, as are private capitalists, both willingly tying their interests to the war plans of the colossus of the West. But there is proof that the workers and peasants of the ERP countries arc not the direct beneficiaries of ERP aid.
Many people think of the Marshall Plan as a great charity to alleviate the sufferings of the gaunt, starved, sick, unclothed and unhoused millions almost buried in post-war ruins. It is true that the edge has been taken off this extreme suffering. But the misery of the masses is still overwhelming. Low wages, high prices, black markets, lack of consumer goods and housing combine to make a miserable standard of living. Today the Marshall Plan is not directed toward raising that standard of living, but toward strengthening heavy industry of Western Europe for war production and toward increasing production for an export market.
 
Consumption Low
In line with this objective, while for most Western European countries the end of 1947 saw industrial output exceeding that of pre-war levels, agriculture was still 11 per cent below pre-war levels. Production of food in general lags behind in ERP countries.
Sharply contrasted with the rise in industrial production to well above pre-war levels is the status of per-capita consumption. To illustrate, consumption of bread grains was 159 kilograms per capita in 1947–48, against a pre-war average of 192; consumption of fats and oils was 17, against a pre-war level of 24. These figures apply to ERP countries as a whole.
In Great Britain, we find, the percentage of national income spent on personal consumption was 78 in 1938, in 1947 it was 70, and under ERP planning for 1948 it was reduced to 69. The latest “austerity budget” for Great Britain takes away 45 per cent of a worker’s pay in income tax, imposes sales taxes amounting to 33⅓ per cent on clothing and 100 per cent on what are designated as luxuries. At the same time this austerity budget increases military expenditures 10 per cent over the preceding year.
Not one of the senators of the great American democracy rose to offer an amendment to the ERP renewal bill requiring a reallocation of funds to increase personal consumption and raise the standard of living of the European people. Less personal consumption and more military expenditures is okay with Congress.
 
How ERP Works
Let us develop further the picture of how ERP works. A New York Times report from Norway, an ERP country, reads: “[Norway] has reduced her living standards to the point of diminishing returns ... The actuality is that the combination of high taxes and low consumption is depriving workers of the incentive to produce. The workers are losing interest in overtime pay since there is very little on which to spend extra money.”
Further, we read in the Winter issue of the magazine Politics that for the first six months of 1948 the net increase in productive plant in France was four times greater than it was during the whole of 1938. In contrast, here’s an example of workers’ wages: Paris street railway workers earn 20 to 28 cents an hour; in other cities the rate is 5 to 25 per cent less.
Martin French relates in Politics the visit of American and French journalists to a factory at Epinal, France, where ERP-aid cotton was going into production. The owners served champagne for the occasion. But working at the machines were young girls – minimum legal age: is fourteen – who slave 48 hours a week for not quite $4.00 pay. Mr. French points out that in this ERP transaction, the American cotton grower gains, the French government gains and the French capitalist gains through having a sure supply of raw material of better quality at reasonable (not black market) prices. But certainly the young girls earning not quite $4.00 a week can’t buy the products they help produce.
 
Recovery For War
No American senator rose to amend the ERP renewal bill to require a decent minimum wage for the workers of Western Europe, and perhaps a better child-labor law. Of course, one does not expect capitalist politicians to make such amendments. This is just a way of pointing up the fact that the Marshall Plan is not operating as a people’s recovery program but primarily as a war preparations plan.
If one expects the Congress of the capitalist government to accept this plan of American imperialism without criticism, one has a right to look for something else from organized labor. However, neither the CIO nor the AFL has a word to say against the war-production orientation of the Marshall Plan. The Economic Outlook, CIO’s monthly, excuses the low personal consumption in the ERP countries as follows:
“European consumption is still below the pre-war level, because the European economy suffers from the loss of its foreign investments during the war, from the stoppage of raw materials from east of the Iron Curtain, from the loss of raw materials from the Far East.”
Undoubtedly all these factors have their influence. But does it serve any purpose, except that of American imperialism, to omit that ERP is not operating as a people’s recovery program but as a war-production recovery program? Perhaps the eaders of organized labor assuage their conscience for their silence on this angle of ERP, by telling themselves that the workers are worse off behind the Iron Curtain. But since when is this the standard of measurement?
 




On March 29 a Senate-House committee ironed out the differences between the Senate and House so-called rent control bills, and brought up as foul and flagrant an example of favoritism for a section of the propertied class as is possible to imagine.
On the same day, as if to give a living testimonial to the rank unfairness of the compromise bill, 30,500 people applied for 1,357 apartments in Woodside Houses, a New York City project in Queens. Applicants came at the rate of 6,000 an hour, or 100 a minute, to the thirty City Housing Authority offices. Ninety per cent of the eager applicants were war veterans, still without homes – and, shall it be added, still without the permanent peace that the last imperialist war they fought was supposed to bring.
This was only the first day that applicants were accepted. How many more thousands will apply for these 1,357 apartments? How many more will there be like one of the applicants, a veteran of the Philippine campaign, living with his two small children and a sick wife in a cold-water flat, five flights to walk up?
“I should get in.” he said. “After all, I have two children. We have to climb five, flights upstairs and the doctor said my wife shouldn’t climb stairs because she is sickly and underweight.”
 
“Home Rule” Decontrol
Here is the picture of the housing situation still existing today. Here is the living argument for ap adequate housing program and for honest rent control by the government. Here is the background against which must be considered the iniquitous bill that the Democratic Congress is about to pass and the Democratic President is about to sign.
The two aspects of the bill most important to the many millions of anxious tenants are first that it is really a decontrol bill, although it purports to extend control for fifteen months, and second that while it does not say it is removing all rent ceilings. actually it does by the privileges it extends to the landlords.
On the first count, the fifteen- month official extension is vitiated by the so-called “home rule” provision also contained in the bill. States, cities, towns and villages will have the right, under the bill, to decontrol rent, if the Governors approve. This “home rule” provision was placed in the bill in spite of the testimony before Congress of the Conference of Mayors that “States and municipal governments are ill-equipped to administer rent controls in a form which would give adequate protection to the people of our cities.”
This “home rule” provision was inserted in the bill in spite of the fact that – as practically every man, woman and child knows – THE local interests are more often than not REAL ESTATE interests, who actually control political machines and, sad to say, also local governments. These interests want decontrol.
Therefore, it is a deception to call what Congress is going to pass a rent control bill. It is in reality a DECONTROL bill. This should be noted along with the fact that the fifteen- month period of control make-believe is nine months less than what the Democratic Party promised – and the promise was for real control, not make-believe.
 
“Reasonable” Robbery
On the point of rent ceilings, the senators on the joint committee agreed to drop the provision of the Senate bill for a boost for everybody of ten per cent in two installments. Presumably this didn’t give the real estate interests enough elbow room. The bone of contention then became whether to adopt the provision of the House bill allowing the landlords “a reasonable return on reasonable value” or to adopt the substitution offered by the senators to permit the landlords “a fair net operating income.” All that the tenants of the country can make out of these two phrases is that they both mean rent increases – and substantial ones.
Senator Paul Douglas, one of the most liberal of the liberal Democrats and an the joint Senate-House committee, voted for the “fair net operating income” provision as the “lesser of two evils.” It should not be forgotten that Paul Douglas and the whole Democratic Party were supported by the majority of the people not because the latter wanted an evil, either a lesser or a greater one. The people ashed for some positive good in their behalf on the problems of housing, rent control and many others. The people have, as usual, been sold out. The joint committee, after much bickering, finally adopted the provision for “a fair net operating income” as the measure for rent increases.
Although the provision specifies what will be considered in determining “a fair net operating income” when the landlord comes before the local housing expediter for rent increases, it is pointless here to enumerate these specifications. It is not what a law specifies that makes the law, but rather the number of loopholes left in it. This provision has plenty. The real estate interests with their lobbies and lawyers and skill where self-aggrandizement is involved, will lose no fair or foul opportunity to put the squeeze on their tenants. Above all, every local housing expediter and every clerk in every area rent office will understand that this is a law to RAISE rents, a law for the landlords.
 
Action Indicated
Perhaps the only other time in recent history when the profit-grabbing capitalist system showed itself so openly and so shamelessly as now in this rent decontrol bill, was during the war when the soldiers were giving their lives on the battlefields and the workers were expending their strength in the factories at frozen wages, while the profits of the capitalists exceeded anything in history.
Today, when the lack of adequate housing – an elementary human need that capitalism has not provided – puts the many-million tenants of the country at’ the mercy of the landlords. except as checked by adequate rent control, Congress refuses to enact this needed control.
Though at this writing the Senate and House have not yet passed the compromise bill, and though some disagreement is expected in the Senate from the Republicans who think the bill still does not give the landlords enough freedom to squeeze the tenants, probabilities are that the bill discussed here will become the law, with the President’s signature and all. Then, certainly, the tenants will have to gird their loins to fight in their own interests – or else.
Tenant organizations will have to be strengthened where they exist and formed where they do not exist. Only by determined united action on the part of tenants will landlords be curbed in their demands. Here the unions will undoubtedly do their part, especially if the rank and file members call upon their unions to help them as tenants.
Other action also is called for. If’ this rent decontrol law is to be repealed, the unions, tenant groups and other people’s organizations will have to engage in an effective agitational campaign. The Democratic Party promised, before election, rent ceilings at the 1947 levels, a two-year extension of real control, criminal penalties for landlord violations, strong anti-eviction provisions. The Democratic Party is the majority in Congress. Let if give the people the rent control law it promised.
Lastly, as Labor Action keeps pointing out, such demonstrations of the profit motive not merely guiding but dominating the politicians of both capitalist parties, must make clearer the need for the formation of a working class party motivated by people’s needs.
 




While the center of the Washington stage was occupied by President Truman this week, noteworthy developments were taking place in the wings. Labor is most interested in what has been going on with respect to the Taft-Hartley law, which the Democrats, it is still remembered, have pledged to repeal at this session. What has been happening in the closed sessions of the Senate Labor Committee to date worries the labor leaders who have pinned their hopes to Democratic campaign promises.
The division of forces in the committee is about as follows: there are the left-wing Democrats, headed by Senator Pepper of Florida, who want T-H repealed immediately with the simultaneous restoration of the Wagner Act. This, by the way, is the position of the CIO and AFL. Then there are the “other Democrats,” with Senator Elbert D. Thomas, chairman of the committee, as their spokesman, whose attitude is, “What’s the hurry?” Finally, among those vociferously heard from, are the pro-Taft-Hartley Republicans, most important of whom is Senator Taft himself.
On January 19, Senator Pepper gave notice that at the next session of the committee to be held on January 21, he would compel a showdown on procedure. He holds to the view that no hearings are necessary in the committee because the electorate unequivocally voted to repeal T-H. He wants the committee to report out to the floor of the Senate at once a measure repealing T-H and simultaneously restoring the Wagner Act. Senator Thomas, stalling for time, feels that action on T-H should be held over until other legislation of a less controversial nature is moved along. Thomas points to such legislation as the bill for federal aid to education as an example of what should be tackled before the very hot T-H issue. Pepper retorts that even the federal aid to education bill has produced divergence of opinion, instanced by the fight over whether or not federal aid should go to private and parochial schools as well as to public schools.
 
Delaying Tactics
At the January 21 meeting of the Senate Labor Committee, Senator Pepper was absent and his showdown did not materialize. Instead of a showdown on the Pepper proposal for immediate action, the Democratic procrastinators gained ground. Most of the Democratic members of the committee, while of course in favor of “speedy action” – because didn’t they promise that in the campaign speeches? – felt they should not attempt a revision of T-H without “at least limited hearings.” On Friday Senator Thomas seemed more optimistic about delaying decisive action on T-H by giving priority to federal aid to library service, to establishing a national foundation for scientific research, to federal aid to education – all of which more or less worthy causes were not the main issues of the campaign.
In the meantime, Senator Taft has defined the strategy that the Republicans will pursue. He will offer in committee amendments “one by one.” “If necessary,” he says, “I will offer all the main provisions of the Taft- Hartley law as amendments.” While he expects to be defeated by the Democratic majority, each amendment will require discussion and entail interminable delay.
Senator Pepper retorts angrily: “It’s a filibuster. This is the first time Senator Taft has appeared as the champion of filibuster ...” Whereupon Senator Taft hotly denies the charge: “It’s no filibuster. It is rather an attempt by Senator Pepper to impose a gag rule on the Labor Committee.”
When the Senate Labor Committee meets again on January 24, this edifying battle of words will continue. In the meantime there have been various predictions as to the earliest date the T-H issue may be expected to reach the floor of the Senate, April 1 being a pretty optimistic prediction under the circumstances. And Drew Pearson learns from his “confidential sources” that the labor leaders who staked their all – rather labor’s all -- on the promises of the Democratic Party, have hit the ceiling. What did they expect? Perhaps the view up there will be conducive to sober reflections.
*
Among the many hundreds of bills introduced in the Senate and House in these first three weeks since Congress convened, is a proposal for a guaranteed annual wage. This is a bi-partisan affair sponsored by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Republican from Massachusetts, and by Senator McMahon, Democrat from Connecticut.
Both Senators have said some very fine things in support of their measure. Lodge thinks it imperative to take up the problem of the worker who is “constantly haunted by the worry as to where he’ll be or how he’ll be living by the end of the year. Man wants to make his plans by the year. The education of children, the acquiring of a real home, the planning of recreation and vacations – all the things which give life meaning and make for permanence and dependability – involve the ability to plan by the year.”
Senator McMahon sponsors the bill on the theory that “The time to repair a leaking roof is when the sun still shines. The time to make plans for avoiding unemployment is when our people are working.”
The provisions of their bill do not, however, exactly tally with the fine words spoken. For instance, their bill, if enacted into law, would affect only businesses contracting to supply the federal government with material or supplies in any amount exceeding $10,000 a year.
Why limit the scope of the law only to businesses having contracts with the government? Even though the government is the biggest buyer from industry, there are many concerns with which it does not deal directly. Besides the government’s role as a buying contractor is a changing one, depending on world and domestic affairs. Why not cover all industry in a law guaranteeing an annual wage?
Another serious criticism of the proposal is that it would call for a guarantee of thirty hours of wages for each of forty calendar weeks in the twelve months. A thirty-hour work week is fine but only if the pay is as if for a forty-hour week. Otherwise, what becomes of the standard of living of the worker and his family? Furthermore, there are fifty-two calendar weeks in the year, not forty. It is unfortunate but true that the average worker cannot afford a vacation without pay of twelve weeks in twelve months.
Whether or not this Lodge-McMahon bill will get to the floor of the Senate at this session is not known. It is clear that labor unions must stir up interest in the question of a guaranteed annual wage, press for debate on the measure and also concretely propagandize for amendments to the Lodge-McMahon bill to eliminate its bad features.
*
Health Bill
Another bill of some importance to millions of Americans is the bipartisan federal health aid bill introduced by Senator Hill, Democrat from Alabama, and sponsored by four other Democrats and five Republicans. It is a bill designed to correct the “shocking deficiencies in health protection which result each year in 200,000 needless deaths, in sickness, poor health and tremendous economic loss.”
Here are some revelations Senator Hill makes about this deplorable situation: “Most Americans take for granted their local health departments. They do not know that less than 10,000,000 of our 146,000,000 people have professional, full-time health departments to guard their water, milk and meat supplies from contamination, to supervise disposal of sewage and garbage, and control of communicable diseases.”
Yes, it is hard to believe that these elementary health guards are not enjoyed by the great majority of our people – hard to believe when the government spends 42 billions a year, 32 billions for war and its aftermath. It is hard to believe that in this field of the people’s health “sweat shop salaries” are paid to the personnel so that in the last six years the turnover among state health officers has been 75 per cent.
The Hill bill, with its bipartisan sponsorship, has a good chance of being passed. Undoubtedly federal aid to localities will bring commensurate improvement. The danger in the Hill bill for federal aid to public health is that it may direct attention, perhaps even with design, away from the issue of individual health insurance from cradle to grave, which is an altogether different matter.
*
Minimum Wage
In the House the question of the minimum wage is coming to the fore. Representative John W. McCormack, Democratic floor leader, hopes that the House and Labor Committee will quickly bring out a bill to raise the minimum wage to seventy-five cents. Republican floor leader Martin of Massachusetts opposes quick action. He believes that “a bill of this magnitude” should be carefully considered in the committee. Mr. McCormack reminds his opponent that the issue has been “heard and re-heard many times.” Indeed, who but the rankest exploiter of labor needs more arguments on the need to raise the floor on wages!
 




The lack of hospitality and downright inhumanity of the American government toward the displaced persons languishing in the camps of Europe make a grim story. Here, where simple humanity is involved, there has been no program worthy of the name – and no money to speak of. However, for the Marshall Plan, for the Truman Plan, for the politics of foreign policy, there have been both plan and money.
From the end of the war till last year, when the 80th Congress passed a law which intensified rather than solved the DP problem, only a trickle of unhappy people was able to find refuge here. Since the passage of the law, the disappointment of the DPs has broadened into a river, but the immigration is still a trickle.
Although the law provides for the entrance into this country of 205,000 war victims – a small enough number – in two years, in the first six months of the operation of the law only 2,500 persons were “screened” for entrance. That means that in 25 per cent of the time, only one per cent of the quota has been covered. This masterful result was accomplished by the 80th Congress in two ways. First, it enacted so many requirements and restrictions that it is as hard for a DP to get into the United States as it is for that proverbial rich man into heaven. Second, it provided so little money and so inadequate a staff, that the extensive “screening” process is as slow as molasses. This is the set-up of the present DP law.
 
Unreasonable Requirements
The requirements and restrictions themselves are flagrantly unreasonable and discriminatory.
Arbitrarily, and without rhyme or reason, the law sets December 1945 as the date when DPs must have arrived in the camps in order to be eligible, for entrance into this country. Critics point out that many camps did not even keep records until after that date. Furthermore, whole blocks of people are automatically excluded by this restriction, as for example the 15,000 Jews who fled from the anti-Semitic pogroms in Kielce, Poland, after the 1945 deadline.
The provision that at least 30 per cent of DPs admitted must be farmers and that at least 40 per cent must come from the Baltic states is frankly discriminatory against both Jews and Catholics. The Jews of Europe may be noted for many things, but certainly not for being farmers – they haven’t been permitted to be. While in the Baltic states the Catholics are a mere handful. Critics of the law have contended that it favors persons of “German ethnic origin.”
Another abominable restriction is that requiring that a DP must have a definite job and a definite home waiting for him here before he is permitted to enter. Three thousand miles removed from the scene, a DP must have well-nigh magic powers to fulfill this requirement. The regular immigration laws of the country make no such outrageous demand.
To add to the complexity, the law provides that its own preferences and priorities must be reconciled with the preferences and priorities established by American organizations which concern themselves with DP immigration.
 
New Bill Proposed
The most scathing condemnation of the present system was made by Ugo Carusi, chairman of the DP Commission which the law established. Returning from a trip to Europe to find out what was holding up the entrance of DPs, he termed the law “absolutely unworkable.”
There is already in the hopper of the new 81st Congress a DP bill to replace the present monstrosity. Senators McGrath and Neely, both Democrats, are sponsoring the new bill. It would extend eligibility to persons who entered DP camps as late as April 1947. It would eliminate the provision requiring 30 per cent of the DPs to be farmers and at least 40 per cent to come from the Baltic states. The new law would strike out the requirement of a job and a home before a DP may come to America, and demand instead that each United States sponsor guarantee that his DP will not be a public charge.
The McGrath-Neely bill also seeks to double the number of war victims to be admitted, bringing it up to 400,000, but in double the time. It would extend eligibility to refugees from Russia, make special provision for 3,000 war orphans, and insure transportation of DPs to their destination in the United States.
Although the McGrath-Neely bill is not the perfect answer to the DP problem, its passage is urgent to replace the inhuman, discriminatory law on the books – and quickly!
 




The legislative machinery of the country is in place, is oiled up, and is ready for production. The messages from the White House have been delivered. All Congressional committees have been constituted. The wheels of legislative production are turning.
Already a number of bills have been introduced. Public hearings are being arranged. Witnesses have been summoned or have asked to appear.
All this is the visible equipment used in making the laws by which we live. This 81st Congress will be legislating on matters of war or peace, of housing, of social security, of health, of civil rights, of unemployment or employment for the workers.
 
Under the Surface
This visible equipment that we have seen going into action in these first weeks of January is, however, only part of the mechanics of legislating. It is only the part that shows. Government is very like an iceberg – there is more, much more under the surface than above.
Under the surface is, for example, general ideology of the men and women who will be making the laws for us. Both Democrats and Republicans, liberals and conservatives, are men and women limited in their conceptions and in their actions by the boundaries set by capitalism. In legislating on domestic issues they will be basically loyal to private enterprise and the profit system. In legislating on foreign issues they will be subtly motivated by the ingrained desire to further the interests and power of American capitalism. This is the fundamental ideological coloration of the Congress.
The “liberalism” that was voted into office last November may change the shade slightly but hardly the color of the Congress. It is a “liberalism” stemming primarily from the desire of politicians to save capitalism from communism by making the former more acceptable to the people. No small consideration is the growing conviction of politicians that these days “liberalism” pays off in votes. The “liberalism” in the 81st Congress cannot be identified with the will of the people to struggle for a better and freer life.
Concretely, the Congress is made up of lawyers, businessmen, brokers, college professors, local politicians risen to higher estate. Some are definitely pledged to private interests whom they will represent on the floors of Congress.
How many true representatives of the people are there? How many steel, auto, textile workers sit in Congress? How many housewives?
So this is some of the sub-surface substance of the Congress that will be legislating for the people. But this is not all. Congress will be beset by the swarm of lobbyists that have already descended upon Washington for their sub-surface participation in the making of the laws. The lobbyists have another function too – they influence the distribution of government contracts. Today Washington is the biggest business center on earth.
 
Lobbies at Work
Lobbyists’ methods are devious. There is the social touch; cocktail parties, dinners, dances, to which the right people are invited. Sometimes they are given by women in the social register who seemingly have nothing to do with the dirty business of politics. Robert Allen, broadcasting from Washington on January 9, told of the massing of this army of lobbyists, and he reported on one of the first social functions of the season attended by some 200 incorruptible legislators. The cost of such shindigs should not be mentioned to housewives waiting at the meat counters, or they might get mad.
Lobbyists also generously supply technical information to legislators drafting laws – information guaranteed to be strictly untainted! They get themselves to testify before legislative committees, presenting the views they sponsor. Mainly and above all, they try to win over key congressmen.
Expert lobbyists “earn” as much as $25,000 a year plus elaborate expense accounts. In 1947 a real estate lobbyist received a fee of $250 a day plus an expense account. Back of the important lobbyists are larger staffs of researchers. While the law requires lobbyists to register, many conceal the identity of their clients by registering as employed by law firms, and up to date the registration requirement has meant nothing at all.
In 1947, out of 676 registered lobbyists, 317 represented business. The number of lobbyists does not by any means determine their strength. It is the money behind them that counts; needless to say, business supplies its lobbyists with the wherewithal.
There is, of course, the powerful NAM lobby representing all business. At its recent convention NAM pledged itself and its money to fight to retain the Taft-Hartley law or to preserve the main provisions in other legislation. Under the surface, NAM is going to have a lot to do with what happens to the Taft-Hartley law.
Another powerful lobby that will be working overtime ON Congress is the real estate fraternity. If they can’t prevent a rent control law, they want at least to tone it down to suit real estate interests. Another thing this lobby is out to do is to kill public housing. The building business does not find a housing shortage bad for profits, and objects to government interference. Under the surface, the landlords and the real estate interests will also be legislators.
 
Labor’s Intervention
With this fuller view of the mechanics of producing legislation, one must fear for the future.
But, we are told, labor also maintains a powerful lobby in Washington. True, and an illuminating comment it is on the labor bureaucrats who find the methods of business most compatible with their own outlook. True, but the labor lobby was not powerful enough to prevent the passage of the Taft-Hartley law! However, when the CIO and AFL organized the voting power of the working people in the election, the pro-Taft-Hartley candidates of the NAM were thoroughly beaten.
At the sub-surface game of lobbying, business will always have the edge on labor because labor’s strength does not lie in such “business methods.” Labor must stand on its open, avowed, recognized power of overwhelming numbers, of indispensability in production, of its common interest with all the struggling and discontented.
In spite of the optimism expressed by Phil Murray and Bill Green – along with constant reminders to the Democratic Party that it owes its victory to labor – the fact remains that this 81st Congress is not too different from others. And the fact also remains that to date Phil Murray and Bill Green have done nothing to give political expression to labor’s power in an independent labor party. They refuse to break through the capitalist- imposed limits which make the future so uncertain and so insecure.
 




Those who read the press more or less carefully must have noted that the 53d annual convention of the National Association of Manufacturers, held December 1 through December 3, as usual at the swank Waldorf- Astoria Hotel in New York, didn’t get the front-page coverage it normally gets. Perhaps this was because the NAM convention came too soon after the election won by “the little champion of the people against Wall Street and big business.” But probably the NAM convention was relegated to the inside pages because it really didn’t make news.
Certainly it was known before these businessmen convened that they would not admit that record-breaking profits have something to do with inflationary prices; that they are opposed to higher taxes on profits and in fact want existing taxes reduced; that they are dead against planning and government controls, even though they see the handwriting on the wall; that they will put up a fight for the labor-restricting principles of the Taft-Hartley law, even though here too the handwriting is on the wall.
One thing that newsgatherers were looking forward to in the NAM convention was to see how “the little champion of the people against Wall Street and big business’ would allay the fears that his election had aroused in the business community. Around the time that NAM met, newsmen asked President Truman whether business has anything to fear from his “new New Deal” so-called. Truman replied with another question: Did business have anything to fear in the last three and a half years? This gives an idea of the kind of deal Truman has in mind.
Still, Commerce Secretary Sawyer, speaking at the convention with Truman’s blessing and okay on his speech, was not as reassuring as the captains of industry would prefer. He said, for instance, that government controls might have to be imposed if the military budget for next fiscal year exceeds current expenditures. To sugar-coat this pill, he referred to the voluntary business-government program in effect the past year regarding allocation of certain materials in short supply, and said that “This program has given us valuable experience which will make easier the setting up of an expanded program of material controls if this should be necessary.”
 
Reflects Dilemma
Mr. Sawyer didn’t bring cheers either when he asked the body of businessmen to consider “the inflationary effect of large profits and high prices.” Calling for cooperative efforts to end inflation on this note and on this note saying that “business has nothing to fear from such a program,” were not too pleasing to the assembled delegates. Nor did Mr. Sawyer give business too much encouragement on the tax question, admonishing that “in an inflationary period we must build up a surplus in the federal budget, to be used to help retire our high national debt.” And again, “The result of recent tax reductions, made at a time when the federal government was assuming new and extensive responsibilities for foreign aid and national defense, has been a drastic decrease in the federal cash surplus.”
Undoubtedly, Mr. Sawyer would have liked to be more reassuring and undoubtedly his frankness was not based on any bias against private enterprise and private profit. Mr. Sawyer reflected the dilemma of the American government today, pressed on the one side by the self-interest of traditional private enterprise and on the other by the staggering demands of America as a world power preparing for atomic warfare. At the same time the government has to remember that labor has a loud voice and a big vote.
So, while Mr. Truman’s answer to business fears shows the basic trend, still business had to be shown in Mr. Sawyer’s speech that it can’t have it ALL its own way – for its own good.
 
Controls and Regulations
Business itself also reflects the dilemma of American capitalism, torn between rugged individualism and the steady intrusion of government controls. This was illustrated in the speech of Ira Mosher, former president of NAM and now chairman of its finance committee. The problem of government controls cannot be solved, he said, by “a recitation of the old platitudes about it’s being business’s business to produce and the government’s business to keep the hell out of it.” The government, he said, has been in business a long time and is going to be in business for a long time; and “what’s more, the public wants the government in business – if you can believe the election, returns (and some folks still do).” And how would Mr. Mosher solve the problem unplatitudinously?
One must make the distinction between government regulation and government control. Control is the forerunner of the socialist state, warned Mr. Mosher, but regulations could be approved. What regulations? Anti-trust laws, fair trade practices, conservation of natural resources, safe working conditions, pure food and drug laws, minimum banking requirements. Price control? No, absolutely, no; in that direction lies the socialist state. But even as to the regulations business has become enlightened enough to approve in theory, it is irked by the measures taken to carry them out. For Mr. Mosher wanted it understood that the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, Security and Exchange Commission “have transgressed more and more the boundaries in which they were intended to operate.”
The outcome of the discussion on government controls was a resolution opposing all peacetime controls – as distinguished from regulations, but if the new Congress adopts any compulsory economic controls to strengthen “national security against possible aggression,” NAM wants the law to contain these restrictions: limiting controls to those absolutely necessary for national defense; administration in close cooperation with industry; provision for review by Congress from time to time to determine whether their continuation is warranted; their removal as soon as possible to meet civilian needs. Thus private enterprise tries to erase the handwriting on the wall.
 
Differ on Inflation
On the important subject of inflation, which all speakers agreed, is bad and is something about which something should be done, considerable difference of opinion developed. B.E. Hutchinson, chairman of Chrysler and an irreconcilable foe of the Wagner Act, was one of the main speakers on the subject. His remedies for inflation are: “hard money,” which means tightening up the issuance of paper; new methods of government financing; tax reductions – for workers too? – to encourage saving and capital formation; reduction of government spending. Not a word about the $33,000,000,000 of 1948 profits-before-taxes having to do with high prices – not a word!
But the payoff was that while Mr. Hutchinson and others wanted a resolution on inflation brought to the floor and passed upon, other NAM leaders felt that a definite stand should not be taken at this time. What should they wait for? The disclosures of the position taken by the Truman administration, by labor unions and by farmer organizations. So the captains of industry had nothing to offer on the question of inflation. Where, captains, is your “captaincy”?
No NAM convention would be complete without the normal amount of hokum about “capital and labor being lost without each other.” AFL Vice-President Matthew Woll was on hand to ladle out the syrup of class collaboration too. He assured business that now that the Taft-Hartley law is up for revision – though he didn’t mention the law by name – labor “will want to enlarge upon the freedom of both management and labor to the end that a cooperative relationship may be fostered and encouraged.” So now the lions and the lambs can lie down together.
 




Mrs. Sara B. Ellis, twenty years old, mother of three tots of two, three and four, wife of the superintendent of 1469 St. Nicholas Avenue where the family lives, has had a unique profession for a year and a half. It was cut short by District Attorney Frank S. Hogan a couple of weeks ago.
Mrs. Ellis worked with a divorce ring consisting of lawyers, law clerks and detectives, specializing in trumped-up adultery evidence to comply with the barbaric divorce law of the State of New York. Twenty times during the eighteen months she hired herself out as the “unknown woman” to do what is called a “set-up job” with a husband “cooperating” with a wife seeking a divorce. Fifteen times during that period Mrs. Ellis also did what is known as a “testimony job,” meaning that she acted as a phony witness to give manufactured evidence against a husband.
For these jobs Mrs. Ellis got $8 or $10 per case. Thus she pieced out the income of an apartment house superintendent with a family of three children. Often Mr. Ellis accompanied his wife and waited downstairs while she and the “client” went together into a hotel, room, awaiting the arrival of the “raiding party” who was to give evidence of seeing a disrobed woman with the “cooperating” husband. Mrs. Ellis, however, swore that she only took off her coat and shoes, climbed into bed and pulled the covers up to her chin. She also swore that she instructed the client husband to take off only his jacket, tie and shirt. She stated that husbands never molested her and seemed only too eager to get the whole thing over with. She also revealed that at times the “raiding” wife and the “cooperating” husband would celebrate the completion of the trumped-up evidence by meeting afterward to have a drink together.
All this was not thought up by the nimble brain of a Hollywood writer specializing in the horrible and the nightmarish. It is the real McCoy. What need will drive people to do to get that coveted dollar! What a barbaric law will drive unhappy married people to do to get that coveted divorce!
 
Society at Fault
Benjamin Schmier, a lawyer of the Legal Aid Society to whom Mrs. Ellis turned for legal help, said that, aside from the money Mrs. Ellis earned, “She may have been a public benefactor. Society is at fault for the stringent divorce law in this state. It should be modified. Of course I cannot condone what allegedly went on here.” Mrs. Ellis herself said she felt she was performing in each case an act of mercy on behalf of a woman who found it difficult to get a divorce in this state where there is only one lawful ground. Be that as it may.
About this law out of the middle ages, it is often said: “The rich go to Reno; the poor are forced to commit perjury.” However, that is not exactly true. The very poor cannot even commit perjury – that too costs money. Lawyers’ fees for trumped-up adultery evidence run from $250 up. Those unhappy married people who can’t cough up $250 and more must somehow do without legal divorce. Either they separate while still legally married, or live together in mutual hatred that poisons all family life and plays even more havoc with the normal development of the children than does divorce.
So now the District Attorney and his office have moved in to break up the divorce racket which is the natural result of the atrocious law. A number of lawyers and their associates in the “divorce mill racket” have been arrested. Sure-fire evidence was procured by wiretapping. One of the key men in the ring was broken down by letting him hear his own voice, recorded, giving instructions to the principals in one of the trumped-up cases. The Grand Jury will be sitting on the case through February. In the meantime the District Attorney’s office has, by judicial order, access to matrimonial records in New York County for the past five years. During that time there were in Manhattan alone 22,000 cases of divorce with decrees granted by the court; most of the cases were uncontested and the implication is many if not most of these were of the trumped-up variety. In the meantime action has been stopped on 77 cases of uncontested divorce now pending in Manhattan.
 
Backward Laws
So what? The law remains on the books. It will continue to be circumvented in the indecent way described above, probably with improvements, even after the District Attorney has “cleaned up” the racket. Of course, it will be more difficult for the lawyers, who will therefore charge higher fees, which in turn will make legal divorce available to still fewer couples seeking it.
Few New York residents realize that New York State is the most backward – all but one – of all the states in its divorce law. Throughout the nation divorces may be had for the following reasons: adultery, cruelty, desertion, alcoholism, impotence, felony conviction, neglect to provide, insanity, pregnancy at marriage, bigamy, imprisonment, fraudulent contract, felony before marriage, violence, venereal disease. The divorce laws throughout the nation are not, to be sure, the most enlightened legislation; however, all the states, except New York and South Carolina, grant divorces on several of the grounds listed above. Seemingly South Carolina grants divorces on no grounds at all, and the great State of New York recognizes only adultery as reason for divorce.
The Bar Association of the City of New York has attempted to have legislation passed to add as grounds for divorce: extreme cruelty, willful conduct rendering it unsafe and improper for defendant to cohabit with the plaintiff, abandonment, neglect or refusal to provide where the plaintiff is the wife, conviction of a felony and actual imprisonment for two years, habitual drunkenness. But nothing has come of the effort.
 
Who Opposes Change
The strongest opponents of changing the New York divorce law are found in the various churches. Officially, they state as the reason that marriages are made by God and should not be unmade by man. But since these godly ones do not ask for repeal of the present law which recognizes adultery as the unmaker of marriages, do they believe then that adultery is made by God? However, this talk about God is a cover for that traditional ultra-conservatism of the church based on lack of confidence in people – fearful that a little freedom must mean licentiousness.
On a national scale Bar Associations are also making an effort to stem the tide of divorce by imposing a period of compulsory “thinking it over” on couples seeking divorce. The method must be something as follows: It would be up to special judges to decide whether or not there were enough healthy elements and reasonable possibilities in a marriage to warrant its continuance. Such judges would work with staffs of social workers, psychiatrists and doctors, who would study each application for divorce. Their findings would be given to the judge within three to six months, and the judge would then take up and decide the case. In the meantime, the couple would have time “to think it over.” The sponsors of such an arrangement are deeply concerned about the children of divorced parents and their purpose is to save as many marriages as have real elements of healthy recovery in them.
Certainly progressive measures to bring more happiness into the marital relationship and to the children, are worthy of support. Also, without delay, the medieval divorce law of New York State should be wiped from the books. However, the family is so deeply rooted in the social milieu that the lifting of family life to a higher level depends on lifting society itself to a higher level.
One look at the above listing of the grounds allowed throughout the nation for divorce, concretizes this point. Nearly all these grounds stem from a low level of economic, educational and cultural existence. This level must be raised and the new high level must embrace everyone – an objective attainable only when the good things for the body and for the mind and spirit can flow freely to all. Neither medieval divorce laws, nor disgusting “divorce mill rackets,” nor pathetic people like Mr. and Mrs. Ellis, could possibly be produced by a socialist society.
 




The bills in both houses of Congress designed to murder rent control, sharply underline the need for an independent labor party in this country, a party through which the working people can send men and women of their own kind, of their own class, to govern for them. Nobody who experiences in his own life and in his own pocket the effects of the housing shortage and the dire need for rent control, could possibly do to the millions of tenants of this country what Congress is doing. The lawyers, businessman and hardened politicians legislating to raise rents all along the line and to give the landlords a free hand as soon as possible, are of the same social layer as the landlords and they act that way.
Last week the Senate Banking and Currency Committee – why this committee should have jurisdiction on rent control has still to be explained – completed a bill to take the place of the law expiring on March 31, and submitted it to the Senate with recommendation for passage.
The wording of this recommendation is unbelievable when checked against the provisions of the bill.
“... any increases in rents today would be at the expense of diets, medical care, clothing and other necessities of life of millions of American citizens ...”
From this you would suppose that the bill wipes out all rent increases and carries out the campaign promises of the Democratic Party, as well as of some campaigning Republicans, to do away with the obnoxious fifteen-percent “voluntary” increase in the existing law. This is what you would suppose, but this is not the case. The, proposed bill before the Senate, upon which it will act this week, proposes a down-the-line ten-percent increase and nothing voluntary about it. And those tenants who have already “volunteered” increases of five, seven or ten percent will be penalized by having to pay up to the fifteen percent permitted by the expiring law.
 
Nothing ... to Them
There is only one interpretation of the committee’s words taken with the provisions of the bill. These politicians do not consider a ten-percent boost an “increase in rents today.” To these “servants of the people” with their fancy salaries and their additional expense accounts, four, five or six dollars more or less a month is negligible – to them merely the price of one dinner. When they talk about diet, medical care, clothing and other necessities of life, they are mouthing words without the content of life in them. To the working class family four, five or six dollars a month mean eggs, milk, a pair of shoes, a trip to the dentist.
Here’s some more from these capitalist politicians who bleed for the people. “Already we are concerned about the increase in unemployment, the decrease in savings, the unhealthy growth of installment purchases and small loans, the decline and leveling off in trade and industrial production.” So reports the Senate Banking and Currency Committee to the Senate.
Again, if words mean anything, one must conclude that this committee is dead against any rent increases. Sure, sure, it is against “any” rent increase, but a mere ten-percent, a mere ten-percent, is no increase at all. Many workers arc out of work, many are on part time, families formerly with several workers now have only one, family take-home pay is in too many cases greatly reduced. But the Senate Banking and Currency Committee, perhaps because it is used to dealing with large figures unknown to working people, considers a ten-percent boost not “any increase” at all.
This Senate committee wants credit for taking better care of the tenants than the House did. The House passed a bill, a couple of weeks ago, eliminating the fifteen-percent “voluntary” boosts but allowing landlords “a reasonable return on reasonable property values.” This provision in the House bill would undoubtedly put tenants in the landlords’ frying pan. However, to be put definitely into the fire by the Senate bill’s ten- percent rent raise is no remedy.
 
Time to Act
It is up to the people who cast their votes for the Democratic Party because it promised a two-year rent control extension, the elimination of the fifteen-percent “voluntary” increase, stronger eviction control and criminal penalties for landlords violating the controls, it is up to these people to demand now – without loss of time because there is no time to lose – that the politicians make good their promises. The Senate as a body this week acts on the bill submitted to it. Then Senate and House joint committee will meet to compromise their differences. Right now is when the unions, tenant and consumer groups, still have a chance to influence the outcome by mass demonstrations and protest.
Up to this point the three-million-dollar real estate and landlord lobby has, in effect, been writing the bills. Senator Sparkman, Democrat of Alabama, chairman of the subcommittee that worked on the bill, without batting an eyelash, stated that the committee adopted the ten-percent increase clause because “of a general feeling that landlords were entitled to a greater return to meet the increasing costs of living and operation.” His committee claimed that it had been unable to obtain accurate information on landlords’ “net operating position” – although it called this information the key to whether raises were justified. But “owing to the many complaints of real hardship on the part of landlords,” the ten-percent boosts are to be imposed on tenants.
Why didn’t the committee get information on the “net operating position” of landlords, another way of saying profits? At the end of 1946 it was known that the gross operating income of large and small apartment house owners averaged over thirty- five percent over 1939. It is also known that while costs rose for landlords as for everyone else, they cut down their expenses drastically by giving less service of every kind, less heat, less elevator service, less porter service, less painting and repairing. So that, as Senator Paul Douglas who opposed the Senate committee bill pointed out: “The net income position of landlords has been improved to a much greater degree than you would think from the figures on gross rents.”
 
Decontrol, Too
Today, the landlords as a group benefit from the price recession much more than do the tenants as a group. For example, fuel oil, a big item, is down considerably in price, and other items can be mentioned. The trumped- up “hardships” of the landlords weigh heavier in the scale of values of the capitalist politicians than do the real battle of the working people to maintain a decent standard of living.
While the clauses in the proposed laws to raise rent arouse the greatest indignation, these are not the only features that must be defeated. While the House bill provides for a fifteen-month extension of so-called rent control and the bill before the Senate calls for twelve months with a three-month period of grace to prepare for de-control, there are other sections in both bills that spell the earlier end of federal control.
The House bill, which would immediately take one hundred rental areas out of control, also would permit any city, county or state to take itself out of federal control. The bill before the Senate would empower any State legislature to do likewise. If either of these bills is permitted to become law, the landlords would have a field day. Their local lobbies would get busy; local governments would begin to see good reasons for getting out from under federal rent control.
Drew Pearson reported over the air that he attempted to find out from mayors and governors throughout the country their opinion on the need of federal control. Unanimously, from California, Michigan, Massachusetts, Maryland and elsewhere, word came back to him that chaos would follow the lifting of federal control, that the housing and rent situation is almost as bad as three years ago, that it is a matter for federal, not local handling.
This same Senate Banking Committee which wrote a clause for the chaotic end of federal control by local action, though you may not believe it, said that the removal of rent controls now would increase rents twenty-five to one hundred per cent and “perhaps touch off strikes and a new wage-price spiral.” Apparently, the committee was addressing itself to those staunchest supporters of the real estate lobby in the Senate, who want rent control to end immediately without any camouflage. Does the committee really think that the workers will take everything less than a twenty-five percent rent increase lying down? Does the committee think that the workers will accept a ten-percent boost in this major item of living expenses – and turn the other cheek?
 
All-Time Lesson
Another thing the people should know is that the bill before the Senate retains the clauses of the existing law which permit landlords to claim “hardship” and “comparability” increases. How many tenants have been victims of these landlord-loving provisions! The CIO reports that by virtue of the “comparability” clause rents in company houses in localities in Massachusetts have been boosted up to one hundred forty percent, and in Alabama up to three hundred twenty percent. It also reports that often in collective bargaining, companies owning their workers’ homes have, at the bargaining table, threatened to raise rents.
These are the things the workers thought would be ended if they voted for Truman, the Democratic Party and its vaunted program. There is still time for the workers to remind the majority party of its campaign promises, by intervening to prevent the passage of these tenant-squeezing laws.
And for an all-time lesson, let the working people learn from what the Democratic and Republican politicians are doing that the formation of an independent class party, a class party of their own, can no longer be deferred.
 




The unholy coalition between the Dixiecrat filibusterers and the “Old Guard” Republicans in the Senate is not only a voting-coalition but a coalition in action as well. In the second week of the filibuster, which began on February 28, the yapping Southerners took a breather and yielded to Republican Senator Cain from Washington who was prepared to gas for sixteen hours, not on the civil rights program, not on Senate rules, but on another subject altogether, namely, a presidential appointment of which Senator Cain disapproved.
Senator Cain came with a supply of milk, with which he refreshed himself, with a supply of candy, with which he pepped himself up, and with an extra pair of shoes into which he changed to relieve his feet.
With all his preparations, Cain lasted only six hours and forty-five minutes. The spectacle he presented, with the Dixiecrats standing by to take up the yapping where he left off, is the measure of the irresponsibility of this Democratic-Republican coalition. While they yapped, all legislation was tied up, not only the civil rights program, but matters of such immediate urgency as the renewal of rent control.
 
Defeat Barkley Ruling
In the showdown vote on Friday the coalition defeated Vice-President Barkley’s ruling that cloture can be enforced on a motion as well as on a measure. The filibuster now going on is on the motion to bring before the Senate the measure to change the Senate rule so as to put an end to the vicious obstructionist tactic known as a filibuster.
Twenty-three Democrats voted against the Democrat Barkley and the same number of Republicans did likewise, making a total of forty-six against. Twenty-five Democrats and sixteen Republicans supported Barkley. All but three of the Southern senators opposed Barkley. The majority of the Republicans opposing him are of the “Old Guard” from the Midwest, where there are not so many large cities and where the racial minorities are small, so that these senators do not worry about the Negro vote and can concentrate upon defeating the Democratic administration program.
In the debate on Friday, the chief contestants were the Democrat Barkley and the Republican Vandenberg. Barkley contended that there must be the right to close debate on a motion to bring a measure before the Senate as well as on a measure, otherwise all possibility of legislating could be cut off. Indeed, this is exactly what the nation sees today; all legislation is blocked. Vandenberg, who holds that cloture applies only to a measure and not to a motion, expressed the view that the Senate rule must be rewritten and that reliance must not be placed on the interpretation of the presiding officer. However, Vandenberg, who is supposed to be not in sympathy with the Dixiecrats, failed to show how to get by their filibustering to rewrite the rule, without first allowing cloture on a motion to present the rewritten rule to the Senate.
Over the weekend there have been rumors of a compromise. Senator McGrath, chairman of the Democratic Party, has been in communication with the President, vacationing in Florida, who reportedly favors a compromise to get some legislative business done. On the other hand, Senator Russell, who with Senators Connally, George and Long, led the filibuster, hastened to inform the press that “We’re not ready to go into any horse and rabbit trade where we swap a good strong horse for a mangy little rabbit.” And Senator Lucas, administration leader in the Senate, dolefully but realistically states that even if some compromise is arrived at, it will not be such as to permit the Senate to go on to debate and vote on changing the Senate rules so as to allow the civil rights program to get to the floor of the Senate.
 
May Drop Issue
The Administration Democrats are not in an enviable position. They are up against the coalition between the Dixiecrats and the “Old Guard” Republicans, which they don’t know how to crack. Senator Lucas, administration floor leader, has been accused of very easy-going tactics against the filibuster, of making no real attempt to wear out the windbags. Now he is reported to have promised that if no compromise is reached, he will launch a round-the-clock session designed to exhaust the yapping filibusterers and get on to the amendment of the rules to bar future filibusters.
It is supposed that once the amendment gets on the floor, the Republican Vandenberg and other Republicans will vote for it. But the unknown factor is how long it will take to exhaust the coalition – and there is, for example, such important business as the rent control law which expires on March 31. On the other hand, the expiring rent control law can well be used as the excuse for abandoning the fight against the filibuster at this time. In fact, Senator McGrath, in a press conference, indicated that that fight might be dropped for the present.
There is miscellaneous talk around the whole question. Speculation is rife on the possibility of the coalition between the Dixiecrats and the “Old Guard” Republicans jelling into a new party with old ideas, with the more liberal Republicans and the Truman Democrats also coalescing into a party. More moderate commentators express the hope that in the 1950 election the reactionaries in the present parties will be turned out of office, and only then will the Senate rules be changed and a civil rights program be acted upon.
In the meantime the nation looks on while all legislation is blocked by the tricky obstructionism of the Southerners. There is involved in the abolition of the filibuster no question of freedom of speech, of debate, of the rights of legislative minorities. What is involved is whether a reactionary minority shall be permitted to use an outdated technicality to obstruct the legislative machinery, such as it is.
Even though the working masses and the oppressed minorities cannot expect too much from even the most liberal elements in the capitalist parties, it is definitely in the interests of the people to have abolished the filibuster which serves as a tool for the most reactionary politicians. Accordingly, it is to be hoped that the union movement will apply the pressure of its strength on the administration to force its uncompromising action to break the filibusterers once and for all.
 




President Truman took the Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner – to which naturally all rank-and-file Democrats were invited at $110-a-plate admission – as the occasion once more to strut his stuff. In his best campaign manner he upbraided the “special interests” and shook his finger at the Republicans and pledged himself to his dear, dear people. Only one thing was sadly askew.
When the President was campaigning for his re-election, there was at least some reason for his blaming the Republicans for the failure of his program – the 80th Congress was a Republican Congress. Today when he points his finger at the Republicans for the breakdown of his “Fair Deal” he doesn’t have even that reason – the 81st Congress is a Democratic Congress.
The “mandate of the people” given the Democratic Party and its leader and its platform in the November election, is being swept under the carpet by the Democratic Congress. This fact the Democratic President chose to ignore. Today, two months after the 81st Congress went into session, all the most important measures are still tied up in committees of both houses.
 
Stalled in Committee
Every one of these committees has a Democratic majority – and what’s the result? No law has come out of the Senate Labor Committee; the Taft-Hartley law is still the law of the land. It is likely to remain the law when the unions make their bids for new contracts this spring, thus militating against labor in the negotiations. The Labor Committee has a Democratic majority!
The housing bill which the Senate committee is reporting out is a much abridged edition of the President’s proposition, which means that reactionary Democrats have gone along with the reactionary Republicans. Again, though rent control is such a burning issue, no bill is yet ready for submission to either house. Why hasn’t the Democratic majority done something about this?
Everybody – absolutely everybody – agrees that there should be a more adequate minimum wage law, but the issue is batted about in committee. Most of the Democrats are as reactionary as the Republicans when it comes to raising wages and thus trespassing on the domain of profits.
With unemployment rising, better social security provisions become urgent and many Democrats are probably thanking their lucky stars that there are the reactionary Republicans to take the lead in the fight for the former’s own reactionary views.
As to the filibuster amendment and the civil rights program, not even the President can contend that the Republicans are responsible for the deadlock. His own Democratic comrades from the South are the Gibraltar of reaction they have always been.
Again, when President Truman in his speech referred with contempt to the lobbyists, he must of course have known that the Democrats are not impervious to lobbyists’ pressures just as the Republicans are not.
Neither is the President less astute than the editors of the U.S. News & World Report in seeing that “Senator George, of Georgia, is becoming the real majority leader of the Senate, not only on tax policy but on spending policy, foreign policy and some other policies as well – the Georgia senator inclines to a conservative viewpoint on most issues of policy.” A very conservative evaluation of Senator George’s conservative viewpoint!
 
Fooled Nobody
The President’s tirade against the special interests, the lobbyists and the reactionary Republicans, carefully omitting the Democrats who are in control of Congress, fooled nobody who knows the score. His threat to get on his choo-choo train once more and make another whistle-stop campaign for his program is an admission that his leadership of his party is something less than effectual. The Democrats in Congress are not with the Democratic President.
In passing, it must be noted that the President is not nearly as liberal and progressive as his tirades against the special interests, the lobbyists and the reactionary Republicans, carefully omitting the reactionary Democrats, would imply. A few weeks ago, in the Senate Labor Committee discussion on the question of anti-labor injunctions, the proof of this pudding was made in the eating, so to speak. It was amply clear that the President consented to leave the provision for anti-labor injunctions out of the new administration labor bill only on assurance from his Attorney General that the right to obtain anti-labor injunctions is implicit in the “inherent powers” of the President.
But this point of the dubious liberalism of the President is made in passing. The conflict between Congress and the President, and the failure of the Democratic majority to implement the program of their party, is something for the people who gave their mandate on election day, to think about. It is not that this kind of reneging on campaign promises has not happened before. On the contrary, this is standard conduct on the part of the capitalist parties of both names. But in the 1948 election labor put more effort into a Democratic victory than heretofore, and the people as a whole seemed to place more hope in the Truman promises. A little thinking is therefore called for.
 
Same Old Party
How did the “Fair Deal” program of the Democratic Party in the 1948 election come into being? We might say: “Well, it’s only fly paper for catching votes.” True, but why this particular fly paper? Why the planks for more democracy through a civil rights program, why the planks for more social security, for housing, health, etc. Why the promise to repeal the Taft-Hartley law?
Why? Simply because these are now issues in the minds of the people, not deep in their subconscious, but consciously, actively and fightingly in their minds. There are enough top shelf men in the Democratic Party who know this, and who feel that a little something will have to be done in these directions.
Another factor that helped produce this particular campaign platform is the current fight against Stalinist “communism.” Fear has made some capitalist politicians believe that unless some of the peoples’ demands are granted and conditions are made more satisfying, capitalism will be vulnerable from within to the communist ideology.
So the pressure of the people – not the good of the people – and fear for the capitalist system combined in making the 1948 Democratic Party platform what it is. These are the reasons why the “progressives” won against the conservatives in the 1948 Democratic Party convention.
 
What Is Needed
However, the Democratic Party remains the same old party. It still shelters in the folds of its bedraggled skirts every grade of degraded reactionary! It is still held together by the same boss politics and by the spoils system. Its campaign chest is filled by the same methods. It is beholden to sections of the special interests Mr. Truman so vehemently lambastes. The candidates the party puts up are still lawyers, businessmen, professional politicians hardened in the game, in no way directly accountable to the people. So after the votes are counted and the winner is declared, the same old machine begins to function in the same old way.
The party platform is not expected to be a plan for united action. A capitalist party does not demand loyalty to the platform adopted by the majority in convention. Any Democrat can get by with a little lip service, if he wants to be a “progressive.” Actions are again something else. His actions are guided not by the party platform but by the interests he wishes to serve. No one is ever expelled from a capitalist party for disloyalty to a platform adopted by the majority. Far from it. The practice is to make deals all along the line, way down into the camp of the bourbon Dixiecrats. The party platform is remembered by the majority of the “people’s chosen representatives” to see how little they can adhere to it and still be able to come before the people for re-election.
From all this it is clear that another train ride by the President into the hinterland is nothing for the people to pin their hopes to. What is needed to fill the void is a new kind of political party: A party organized by the unions and other people’s bodies; a party whose leaders are made directly responsible to the rank and file; a party whose platform is the embodiment of the majority opinion of the party on what American productivity can do for the masses; a party whose candidates are held to loyalty to such a platform; a party which will be as different from the Capitalist parties as the working people are from the capitalist class.
This kind of party Labor Action calls an Independent Labor Party.
 




“If you destroy rent control in March you’ll have strikes in May,” warned Representative Wright Patman, Democrat of Texas, in the House debate on renewal of rent control.
Representative Abraham J. Multer, Democrat of New York, spoke along similar lines: “This country will be plunged into chaos the like of which has never been seen if controls are lifted.”
Chester Bowles, now governor of Connecticut and formerly OPA chief, was alarmed at the sentiment he found in Washington to let rent controls lapse, a sentiment largely created by the three- million-dollar real estate and landlord lobby. “Should this come to pass,” said Bowles, “we would have riots all over the United States in a very short time. I don’t think you can possibly exaggerate what might happen.”
These politicians are not overstating the feeling of the people for the continuance of rent control in a form which will really protect them. There are maybe 14,000,000 families who will be affected if the rent control bill is allowed to lapse on March 31 or soon thereafter, or if such a measure as may be passed will not give them actual protection. It would be well for tenants to be prepared to defend their right to have a home at a rent which is not highway robbery. Housing Expeditor Tighe Woods predicts that rents would rise fifty to sixty per cent were control ended. The choice would be to pay or to be evicted.
Judging by the way things are going, with the filibuster in the Senate holding up all legislation and with the House whittling down the Administration bill till it looks like a toothpick, the people ought to be on their toes, ready to make themselves heard on rent control, in effective and organized action.
Last week the Administration Democrats in the House, by the skin of their teeth, prevented the passage of the Republican measure to drop all rent control within ninety days from March 31. This Republican bill also had plenty of Democratic support. For example, E.E. Cox, Democrat from Georgia, was all for continuing controls for ninety days “and then have the whole thing thrown out the window.”
The final decision comes in the House this week. With the close vote of 178 to 163 defeating the Republican measure, the Administration Democrats are very shaky against the strength of the opposing coalition. The latter is expected to make a final try to defeat the Administration bill, even though, in its present form, it represents a number of crippling compromises.
Yielding to the pressure of the real estate and landlord lobby and of such “enlightened” legislators as Representative Jackson, Republican from Calfornia – who, amid outbursts of applause from the floor and from the lobby-crowded gallery, declared that rent control is the “high road of State Socialism” – the Administration Democrats in the House are cheating the tenants of the nation.
In the first place, instead of the original provision to extend control for two years, the bill now contains a time-limit of only fifteen months. Besides this major concession, the Administration Democrats agreed to abandon altogether the ceilings on rents in one hundred rural and small city areas. This won over some Democrats who didn’t want rent control in their own districts but had no objection to controls in other places. But the concession that is the cream of the crop is to include a clause assuring landlords “a reasonable RETURN ON THE REASONABLE VALUE OF THEIR PROPERTY.”
One report said that “Both Democrats and Republicans agreed that was one provision that undermined some of the opposition to the bill.” And why not? While the Administration bill provides for the end of the fifteen per cent so-called voluntary rent Increases that have been forced upon so many tenants, the compromise provision for “a reasonable return on the reasonable value of their property” could well result in MORE than fifteen per cent rent increases. Landlords are clever that way.
In all respects the bill falls far short of what the President led tenants to expect. While there is a provision against mass evictions and one by which the government can sue landlords for “triple damages” for rent overcharges, this involved process is no substitute for a direct provision requiring fines and jail sentences for ceiling violators. These latter powers the bill does not have. Also, there is no clause in the bill to overcome the shameful, thriving black market in rentals, where a tenant must pay a large bonus to the landlord or buy a lot of useless sticks of furniture at unheard of prices.
Therefore, even if the compromised Administration bill passes in the House and in the Senate, it has so many loopholes that the unions, tenant and consumer organizations, and all such groups, will have to be ready for defensive action against the landlords. But because of the filibuster in the Senate, no rent control bill at all may be passed. The mass of tenants affected should be in a position to take organized offensive action to get a protective law on the books.
 




In the drawn-out dispute over President Truman’s appointment of David Lilienthal to head the Atomic Energy Commission, the working people are really outside looking in. As far as our well-being is concerned, it doesn’t make too much difference whether Lilienthal or someone else favored by the Republicans chairmans the powerful AEC, with its control of the big projects at Oak Ridge and Hanford, of the supply of atom bombs, of all deposits of uranium and other fissionable matter, of government laboratories, of atomic research by universities and private concerns.
If Lilienthal is confirmed, he will try to run the commission to serve the overall interests of American imperialism and to slap down the greedy hands of certain capitalist groups eager to have AEC cater to them. If a capitalist politician of narrower outlook gets the job, these private interest groups will be happier. But actually, because atomic energy means so much for the survival of and for world dominance by the capitalist system of this country, the overall ruling class interests will have to prevail; thus there will have to be pretty tight government control no matter who heads AEC.
What concerns the working people is that neither the Lilienthal type of politician nor one approved by his opponents will prevent the use of atomic energy to annihilate whole cities and peoples; nor will either give up imperialist and profit considerations, to release this marvelous force so that the whole people may work less and enjoy more.
Still there is much of interest and enlightenment in the petty maneuvers of the capitalist politicians in choosing a chief for AEC. We get a good picture of those whom the working people unfortunately still vote into office to represent “their interests.”
 
Economic Interests
When President Truman announced his choice of Lilienthal, head of the Tennessee Valley Authority, for top post on the Atomic Energy Commission, there was almost universal approval in the capitalist press of all shades of political opinion. Then Senator McKellar of Tennessee, a Democrat from Mr. Truman’s own party, began gunning for Lilienthal to prevent his approval by Congress. What is biting Senator McKellar, old-fashioned politician, is that Mr. Lilienthal curbed the Senator’s pork-barrel designs on TVA. McKellar is the type of “intelligent” politician who sees “red” in anyone who opposes his ideas or interests. So he must, forsooth, prove that Lilienthal is a communist and will, as head of AEC, do no less than surrender the secret of the atom bomb to Stalin. Consuming days of the Senate committee’s time and producing in evidence letters that their alleged senders deny sending as well, as similar spurious material, the gentleman from Tennessee accused Lilienthal of nursing a communist fifth column in the TVA.
One must conclude from McKellar’s tirades that President Truman, who named Lilienthal; Secretary of War Patterson, who heartily approved him before the Senate committee; and the other top-shelf men in the government who support Lilienthal, are conspiring – quite openly, to be sure – to sell out to Stalin, through Lilienthal.
While McKellar was making a fool of himself, the Republicans were biding their time and making plans of their own. Under the leadership of Senators Bridges of New Hampshire and Wherry of Nebraska, the attack against the former head of TVA took on more force and more realistic tactics. Seeing how ludicrous was McKellar’s charge of communist beliefs and connections, the Republican opposition played up Lilienthal’s record as a New Dealer and as “a menace to private enterprise.” Remembering that they got a “mandate from the people” to “restore” private enterprise and take “government out of business,” the Republicans ai;e harping on Lilienthal’s record as a staunch supporter of government projects such as TVA.
Two sets of economic interests are behind the political fight against Lilienthal. There are those who see atomic energy as inevitable for industrial use, want to get their hands on it, and don’t want their knuckles rapped by Lilienthal, who is a pretty strict teacher. It is claimed that another group, power magnates, present suppliers of gas, electricity and coal, are not anxious for the industrial development of atomic power to compete with their own products. They don’t want Lilienthal because, believing as he does in abundant and cheap power, he will, as head of AEC, encourage wide use of atomic power in production.
There is still another group of opponents to Lilienthal – the opponents on general principle. Though they see eye to eye with the New York Times that “the work of the Atomic Energy Commission is also to be a government monopoly, and a very tight one,” these die-hards would still rather not have men in high offices who believe in TVAs. They want solid supporters of private enterprise.
 
Press Takes Sides
The hearings before the Senate committee continue. The committee is being pressured by telegrams and letters, one such missive coming from the president of the Timken Roller Bearing Company of Canton, Ohio, who sees Lilienthal in a decidedly red light. Senator Taft, leader of the Republican Policy Committee, is reported to be, opposed to Lilienthal though not openly. How the influential Vandenberg stands is not yet known. It is thought that he could swing the votes for Lilienthal if he so chooses. Secretary of State Marshall may issue a public statement supporting the. former TVA head, which would, of course, carry great weight.
The press has not remained unmoved by the political fireworks. The Daily Mirror, tabloid of cheap, reactionary propaganda, editorially proclaimed that whether or not Lilienthal is a communist, there is enough “to justify lack of confidence.” George E. Sokolsky, equally reactionary, but writing in the more “intellectual” New York Sun, goes further and pins the “Marxian dialectic” on Lilienthal, explaining that “Republicans and many Democrats feel that in a pinch, Lilienthal will not be found on the right side.”
The so-called liberal press has been almost pathetic in its inadequacy. PM has, of course, come out with its usual “don’t hurt Russia’s feelings” line. The New York Post, always leaning heavily on the “good” capitalist politicians and exaggerating their importance, declaims: “A defeat for Lilienthal would be a step toward the defeat of the policy of American cooperation in establishing security against atomic energy” – as if there can be any security as long as imperialist powers rule us. Jonathan Stout, writing in the social-democratic New Leader, solemnly poses the question “whether liberals should go to the defense of Lilienthal or let him fend for himself” – poor Lilienthal with such no-accounts as Truman and Patterson fending for him.
Considering that what is at stake is the very survival of peoples, including ourselves, the interplay of petty interests is revolting. To turn atomic power from a threat to human existence to a boon for mankind, we must have workers’ control of everything relating to the production of atomic power – under a workers’ government with a complete domestic program for nationalization of all industry under workers’ control, and with a foreign policy of solidarity of the people of the world to end all imperialist rule and all wars.
Because the interests of the masses can be served only by such radical measures, the workers really stand on the sidelines watching the political capers around Mr. Lilienthal. It would be well if they, the workers, were thinking: “A plague on both your houses. It is high time to declare our political independence and form a class party of our own.”
 




Major General Philip Fleming, director of the Office of Temporary Controls, has issued an order for easing rent ceilings in cases of landlords who “suffer economic hardship.” At the same time, his own Office of Temporary Controls has completed a survey of landlord income for 1946 on a national scale, showing that the net take soared above 1945, to a record peak.
General Fleming is possibly haunted by the remark attributed to a philosopher of some note that “a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds.” However, let us assume that he was not completely aware of the findings of his own office, and examine the “economic hardships” suffered by the real estate business:
In 1944 the now extinct OPA, investigating New York landlords, found that their net income had more than doubled since 1938 – just a little wartime bonus for graciously renting at murderous rates every hole and hovel that the housing shortage made so precious. A “sample group” of landlords whose net income in 1939 had totaled $900,000, reaped a $2,000,000 wartime harvest in 1944. The 1945 income topped that of 1944.
Now General Fleming’s own department gives the lie to his concern over the “economic hardships” of the landlords by revealing still mounting profits for 1946 throughout the nation. Though there is no philosophical consistency here, there is a definite class consistency. The more profits the capitalists pocket, the more they want, the greater their pressure on the government and the greater the willingness of capitalist politicians to play along.
 
“Reasonable Doubt”
General Fleming assured reporters that his ruling is meant to benefit “small property owners.” This is supposed to arouse the sympathy of the tenant whose wages in 1946 lost about 25 per cent of purchasing power, so he will take a rent squeeze of 15 or 20 per cent. And, offhand; we would take a bet that our definition of “small property owner” and his disagree.
Fleming also swears that his ruling does not break the line of rent control. At the same time reporters are told that any cases of “reasonable doubt” will be settled in favor of the landlords. Since there are about a dozen grounds on which landlords can apply for a rent boost, there is plenty of room for at least one “reasonable doubt.” Even before Major Fleming’s latest gratuity to the profit-mad realtors, 20,000 to 30,000 cases of rent boosts were already being allowed each month.
While the Democratic administration is taking an official stand in favor of rent controls but at the same time underhandedly breaking rent ceilings, the Republicans in Congress are for an open rent, boost of 15 or 20 per cent and for the end of all rent control by the end of 1947 or the first quarter of 1948. Republican Senators Hawkes (N.J.), Cain (Wash.), Malone (Nev.) and McCarthy (Wis.) are to introduce a bill to this effect any day now. Senator Taft (Ohio), chairman of the Republican Policy Committee, favors rent increases, and his influence is great.
Senator Malone – the cautious man – is not sure he wants his name attached to the bill he will help draw, but he’s sure he wants to set a date for ending rent control so that investors and real estate interests can be aided in their planning. Mr. Malone also thinks that by the end of the year rents will probably be “back on competitive controls.” Does Mr. Malone know the real extent of the housing crisis? The 1940 Housing Census reported almost seven million houses in need of major repairs; 4,300,000 without central heating or stoves; over 30,000,000 people living in houses below minimum standards of health, safety, decency or convenience. The war years deepened the crisis. The trickle of building since V-J Day will not restore “competitive controls” so soon. The shortage is still too tremendous. But Mr. Malone worries little about 30,000,000 people; he has the investors and real estate interests on his mind.
 
New Wrinkle
The landlord lobby in Congress has a new wrinkle in its tissue of lies. It points to the fact that in the middle income brackets only 16.4 per cent of the consumer’s dollar goes for rent, whereas in 1939 the percentage was 19.6. This is supposed to prove that the landlords are being robbed. What it actually shows is that the cost of other items in the consumer’s budget has skyrocketed. At this point the landlords wring their hands and protest that for them too the cost of everything has gone up – even those services which they no longer give their tenants. The tenants are supposed to forget that in spite of percentages and costs and what-have-you, landlord profits are today over twice pre-war levels.
Drew Pearson predicted in his broadcast on Sunday that President Truman will veto the. rent boosting bill being prepared by the Republican senators. Whether or not Congress can pass such a bill over the presidential veto is problematic. This does not mean that the prospects for the continuation of present rent ceilings are good or sufficient.
On the contrary, just as OPA collapsed under the pressure of big business and the black market, long before its official expiration, so rent controls will be broken all along the line – while officially they will still be on the books. Major Fleming’s ruling opens the door to just such an unofficial collapse.
The situation cries out for direct action by the tenants. Tenant resistance to rent boosts must be organized house by house, block by block and neighborhood by neighborhood. The profits of landlords are not the only figure on the rise. According to the January 31 issue of United States News, “living costs are still rising slowly.” Wage demands to make up for the tremendous drop in the purchasing power of the dollar are the next order of business, along with unyielding resistance to a rent squeeze. Unions and tenant organizations together have a job to do.
 




During the war seven million women left their place in the home to join the working force of the country. The all-time peak of woman employment was eighteen and a half million. By the end of 1945, however, the total decreased by about a million, and by the end of 1946 another million women disappeared from the labor force. What happened to these two million working women lopped off the country’s working force when war orders ceased?
Right after V-J Day there was an army of hundreds of thousands of job-hunting women. By the end of 1946 many had given up the hunt.
The reason? Well-paid jobs open to women dwindled. The industries in which women are still wanted are neither the most attractive and most skilled nor best paid; quite the contrary. They are: cereal preparation, woolen, worsted and cotton textiles, garment and apparel, electrical appliances, tobacco, radio, shoes, paper, and so on. Not attracted to these fields and despairing of finding work for which they are suited and adequately paid, many of those two million jobless women simply dropped out of the race for jobs and are no longer even listed as unemployed. Many, of course, didn’t intend to work after the war anyway.
When woman employment was at wartime peak, surveys showed that at least three-fourths of the women in jobs were compelled by economic necessity to earn a living. The present figure of about sixteen and a half million women in jobs, would indicate that – at least by percentages – those women who must work are at work. High employment among women reflects, of course, the over-all rosy employment condition which we now precariously enjoy.
What the present income of women, is, compared to their wartime wages, is another question. The riveters, spray painters, drill press operators in slacks and sweaters have all but disappeared. The well-paid jobs in heavy industry now are, by and large, closed to women workers. Here the lay-offs of women have been greatest. In production of durable goods as a whole, the employment of women fell from 232 per 1,000 workers in June 1945 to 130 in June 1946. The shift has been to the lower paid jobs in consumer goods manufacture and in the service industries.
Considering their lower wages against the constantly rising living costs, the lot of working women is not a happy one. Current statistics tell us that eighty-four per cent of working women support at least themselves and in many cases dependents. We also learn that over half of the working women who live with their families, contribute more than half of their earnings to the family group. Thus the size of the pay envelope is indeed important; and it has shrunk.
The number of women employed and their wages are bound to be affected by worsening economic conditions. However, the war has brought certain permanent changes in the status of women workers. The labor movement must take these changes into account in relating the woman question to the general labor situation.
First of all is the matter of numbers. In 1939 there were some eleven million working women in the country. In 1947 there are over sixteen and a half million women holding jobs, after the post-war lop-off. The working force has been increased by over five million women needing and desiring to be breadwinners.
 
Women Have Broken Through Some Barriers
In the second place all women workers have by no means been forced back into light manufacturing and service industries. That women have permanently, broken through certain barriers is shown in several ways. For example, in spite of the extensive lay-offs of women in durable goods manufacture, in June 1946 women still formed thirteen per cent of all production workers, while in October 1939 the figure was only 8.6 per cent. Again, while there has been a shift back to traditional women’s work in light industry such as textile, apparel, food and leather, the employment of women in these fields is now something more than one-half of the total, whereas in prewar days women constituted two-thirds of the employed. Again, in April 1946 out of every 100 factory workers 27 were still women, while in April 1941 the proportion of women factory workers was only 23 per 100. Definitely, the horizon of jobs for women has widened.
At the same time flagrant discriminations against the woman worker are all too prevalent. The time-honored injustices of starting women at lower rates than men, of slower upgrading, of preventing them from advancing to the maximum rates paid to men, of lower rates for the same jobs  – these all flourish.
The destructive competitive possibilities latent in a force of underprivileged women workers when depression strikes, constitute a threat to labor standards as a whole. Economists now predict possibly five million unemployed by the end of this year. With the jobs available narrowing, with women accustomed to take less than men, employers can well make hay for themselves out of the situation. The injustices to a section of labor becomes a threat to all labor.
Greater than ever is the need for women workers to be drawn into and integrated in the unions. This can be done if the unions undertake an unrelenting struggle for women’s equality as workers. The CIO has accepted the principle of equal pay for equal work. A few union agreements contain an equal pay clause, which, however, does not insure enforcement. Only the surface of the problem has been scratched.
There are other facets to the problems of the working woman. The Federal Fair Labor Standards Act, setting a minimum wage and a forty-hour week with time and a half for overtime, applies only to enterprises operating in interstate commerce. Thus there are excluded from the scope of the federal law all local service industries such as laundries, beauty shops, hotels, etc., where women are employed in large numbers. Only twenty-six of the forty-eight states of the union have some kind of protective legislation; the rest have none. A thoroughgoing unionization drive based on the struggle for the economic and personal elevation of these forgotten workers, is overdue. Also long overdue is the same kind of fight for household workers, the full-time maids and the hour and day workers in homes.
Old and unsolved problems like these are once more posed for solution by the organized labor movement. The something new that has been added, as pointed out in this article, is the five million additional women workers in more diversified jobs, including heavy industry, whose economic and human status must be raised for the good of themselves and of all of us.
 




By a hair’s breadth the sixty million tenants under rent control escaped a ten per cent rent increase Wednesday, January 29. The mimeograph machine was turning out the announcements for local OPA offices, reporters were assembled in the Office of Temporary Controls for the rent boost to be made public, there were only a few minutes to go – when the President “turned a somersault in full public view,” as the Washington Memo of the New York Post put if.
Since then there has developed a whodunit mystery much better than the Hollywood or radio concoctions. For here we have a double-edged mystery. Who was responsible for the order that would have boosted rents across the board? Who pushed President Truman to the wail to rescind the order?
The suspects for the original crime are President Truman and his two close advisers, John R. Steelman and Clark Clifford; Major General Philip Fleming, director of OTC, and his deputy, James Fullin; AND the real estate lobby. Suspected of responsibility for the President’s somersault are Philip Murray, the labor movement, the veterans, and the tenants, sixty million strong. Let us assemble the evidence.
 
On Whose Orders?
James Fullin, deputy director of the Office of Temporary Controls, to which OPA is now subordinated, was in charge; Director Fleming was away attending his mother’s funeral. Fullin is notorious as a real estate lobbyist, first working in the usual way from without and then getting himself a place for effective boring from within the government. Fullin bored for an across-the-board raise and for the end of all rent control. However, it is fantastic to suppose for a moment that Fullin took advantage of his chief’s absence to raise rents on his own hook. That would have been political suicide. The order came from higher up.
Director Fleming appeared before the Senate Banking and Commerce Committee, on his return to Washington, and took upon himself full responsibility for the hot order. He testified that before he left Washington for his mother’s funeral he instructed Fullin about the ten per cent boost. Asked by the committee why he decided to lift ceilings against the President’s known opposition to a general rent increase, Fleming lamely answered that he didn’t know the President had expressed himself. Fleming’s remarks were extremely contradictory. While he took the rap for the proposed ten per cent rent boost, he kept arguing for continuation of rent control “substantially in its present form” to June 30, 1948. Chairman Tobey of the committee slyly commented: “He who submits against his will is of the same opinion still.”
The fact that Truman hastened to inform reporters that he will not “penalize” Fleming and praised Fleming as one of the ablest men in the government, indicates that Fleming did not act on his own. Reports from Washington tell of a cabinet meeting on January 31, resulting in a huddle among Fleming, Steelman, Clifford and Fullin, where it was decided that Fleming is the logical one to stick his neck out, to take responsibility. Fleming stands accused of duplicity on the rent issue for, while advocating continuation of rent control in its present form, he actually is for breaking rent ceilings by allowing rent boosts to landlords on any one of twelve counts. However, he alone is not the author of the crime under investigation.
Man-behind-the-scene Clark Clifford, presidential adviser about whom not much has been said in this mix-up, was at first honored by some Washington reports with authorship of the rent decision. It was said that he prevailed on the President to retreat from his so-called hold-the-line rent policy for reasons of “political expediency.” Did he think perhaps that because the Republicans had introduced a bill for a fifteen per cent rent hike, a ten per cent increase from the White House would be interpreted by sixty million tenants as a present of five per cent? At any rate, Clifford was supposed to have influenced both Truman and Steelman, but then Clifford’s name was dropped from the newspapers and Steelman’s took the headlines.
 
Steelman’s Word
So far we have only Steelman’s own word for it that he did not issue the order. Press Secretary Ross of the White House told reporters that Dr. Steelman informed him that the statement that he, Steelman, ordered the ten per cent rent increase and was overruled by the President, is “both untrue and absurd.” However, a spokesman for a national real estate lobby, George M. Englar, revealed before the Senate committee that he had conferred with “individuals in high places” and “felt we had made an impression.” Pressed to be more specific, Mr. Englar named Dr. Steelman.
Earlier in his testimony he had said that his conversations with top-ranking officials had led him to believe that an across-the-board hike was in the cards. Steelman has some explaining to do. Against him is also the fact that Philip Murray was given the brush-off on that eventful Wednesday afternoon when he tried to speak to Steelman on the phone to get the score on the thickening rumors running the Washington rounds. Isn’t Steelman supposed to be one of those “friends of labor”?
Whether or not Steelman made commitments to the realtors, one thing is certain: No step of such political importance would have been taken without the President’s approval. It must be remembered that only ten days before that Wednesday the President had made public his rent policy, which he said was to hold the line – brushing aside the small item that 25,000 individual rent increases were being granted each month and the other negligible fact that Director Fleming had the presidential okay to extend the policy of individual rent boosts. At any rate, the President did not then favor an across-the-board hike. It is also known that the President had been in constant conference with Fleming and Steelman on the rent issue. Hard as it is for the President to admit to another major fumble, the Truman style of political faux pas is too much in evidence to be overlooked.
 
Truman and the Lobby
What made Truman consent to the ten per cent rent boost? Perhaps he was persuaded to believe that it would be too cumbersome to carry out the government policy of allowing rent boosts to landlords claiming “hardship” on twelve counts, and that a ten per cent across-the-board boost would be more practical. Or maybe the underlying argument used by those influencing the President was that the public: “expects” a rent boost and that since the Republicans were out for a fifteen per cent rise, the administration’s ten per cent would be considered “moderate.” Whatever arguments and whatever arguers prevailed on the President, the powerful real estate lobby pressuring against rent ceilings and rent controls is the power behind them all.
So arrogant has this lobby become that the same Englar mentioned above, president of the National Apartment Owners Association, very bluntly told the Senate committee that landlords are withholding thousands of apartments to protest against rent controls. “Thousands of units throughout the country are now on strike,” he testified. So closely identified with government officials is this lobby that not only is the deputy director of the Office of Temporary Controls its unofficial representative, but prominent legislators, namely, Senator Hawkes, Republican of New Jersey, and Senator Brucker, Republican of Ohio, have joined the National House and Property Owners Association, one of the major lobbies. Like the “brain” in the whodunits, the real estate business is the big boss.
Once having been convinced by the supporters of a ten per cent boost, why did the President stop the mimeograph machines at the eleventh hour – or was it fifty-ninth minute? The Washington Memo in the New York Post of January 30 had this to say:
“The real story is that Harry S. Truman sadly and suddenly sensed the impact of the approaching announcement. The advance news stories heightened Mr. Truman’s perceptions. He changed his mind only a few minutes after OPA had sent the grim word to its regional offices. He stopped the mimeograph machine, while reporters crowded the OTC press room. He turned a somersault in full public view. He left Clifford and Company perched on a limb overlooking the White House.”
Mr. Truman’s “perceptions” were ’heightened not only by advance news stories, for some of which leaks the CIO is credited, but also it seems by a letter that Philip Murray dispatched to the White House at 3:10 that Wednesday afternoon after getting the brush-off by Steelman.
It is reported that Murray wrote to the President from the CIO Washington office, warning Truman that a general rent rise would menace the “prospect for industrial peace.” Then it seems Mr. Truman peeped around the corpulent bellies of the realtors and saw enraged labor squeezed by high prices and low wages, homeless veterans demanding a better break, sixty million protesting tenants – and an election in 1948!
Thus far the above is all that can be reported about the rent mix-up. One unidentified government official let drop the comment that “when the whole story finally comes out it will look terrible.” When that story breaks, Labor Action will advise its readers.
In the meantime a few things need comment:

First, Murray revealed that the CIO is again relying on the same ineffectual tactics to keep rent controls as it did in the case of price controls. Trusting “friends of labor” in the government and pressuring Truman has led to defeat on price control and will have the same results on the rent issue.
 
Second, the AVC has officially called on Truman to assume “active, aggressive leadership” to preserve rent ceilings. Coming right after this last instance of his inability to decide whether he should serve the interests of the realtors or his own 1948 vote-catching interests, that appeal to the President is a bit funny.
 
Third, though the incident of last Wednesday shows how near we all are to rent increases if we leave things to the government, to date there has been no general protest from tenants and no strengthened organization by tenants for action in their own behalf. Only when workers, veterans, tenants take the rent issue into their own hands will it be settled in their favor.

 




Amid the welter of unthrilling whodunits, nauseatingly noisy and elaborate musicals, the saccharine romances, the film story of Sister Kenny, Australian bush nurse and discoverer of a revolutionary treatment for infantile paralysis, seems out of another movie world.
For many years this reviewer happens to have followed Sister Kenny’s progress. My reaction to the film was that the production under review is basically true and not overdramatized. Director Nichols deserves praise for presenting Kenny’s self-sacrifice, simply and acceptably. The love affair between Sister Kenny and her army captain whom she wants to marry but does not, is without maudlin overtones.
It is certainly not the usual run of things in capitalist society for an individual to give up personal happiness and success for something bigger than the individual. Drafted soldiers may rationalize their plight by believing they are sacrificing themselves for something bigger, or a few individuals, deluded into an idealistic response to the propaganda of the ruling class, may volunteer their lives in war. It is entirely different for a lone woman, a nurse in the Australian bush, who has by her own wits, restored a paralyzed child to health after being assured by the most eminent orthopedist in Australia that there was no cure for polio, to devote her life to the inch-by-inch struggle for recognition of her method.
The film’s presentation of Kenny’s battle against orthodox orthopedia, especially in the person of Dr. Brack, provides some dramatic scenes. One is where Dr. Bracks’ “recovered” patient appears all trussed up in braces, while Kenny’s patient, a little girl who had been paralyzed in both legs and in the back, appears wearing no braces and able to turn cartwheels. Another good scene is where Kenny confronts Dr. Brack as he is demonstrating a polio case before a group of doctors, with ensuing fireworks.
It is not only because what Kenny discovered is not written in the books that the Dr. Bracks have fought her so savagely. Imagine a mere nurse, a bush nurse, being successful with simple methods, when they, with their complicated trusses and braces, have failed. Again and again Dr. Brack is shown reminding Kenny that she is a nurse, that she has taken an oath to help doctors and not to teach hem.
Philip Merivale, cast in the role of Dr. Brack, gives an excellent performance of a sincere-enough stuffed shirt, the victim of his orthodoxy and self-importance. Rosalind Russell as Sister Kenny succeeds in portraying a real personality. She is said to have spent a great deal of time with Sister Kenny before making the picture. Alexander Knox, cast as the Australian doctor between whom and Kenny there is a deep friendship, does an understanding job and wins the sympathy of the audience as representing the type of doctor whose investigating mind helps to establish new methods of treating disease.
 
Of Contemporary Interest
Such films as Pasteur and Madame Curie are of the past, so to speak, while Sister Kenny is of the present. The plague of polio has still to be fought. An audience realizes this while watching the film and is impelled to take sides for or against Sister Kenny. A reasonable reaction to the film is that Sister Kenny’s ideas should have been received with scientific objectivity instead of a prior opposition. True scientific inquiry would have called for a thorough investigation of all the patients Kenny had cured in the epidemic that struck her community in the Australian hinterland. Instead, every obstacle was placed in her way and she was barred from treating new cases, where her methods are most effective. Still she cured and improved many children given up by the orthopedists as incurable. These are really facts, not Hollywood fiction.
While there is still much to be learned about polio in order to control and prevent its ravages, today more and more general practitioners and pediatricians employ the Kenny treatment, having given up the orthodox methods as unsuccessful. The same is true of hospitals. The “Kenny packs” and Kenny ideas are used, even though Kenny is not given the recognition she has earned. In deference to orthodox orthopedia and to the big-business power of conservative medicine, Kenny’s horn is not tooted too loudly by the profession. As one whose family has benefited by Kenny’s revolutionary though simple treatment, this reviewer welcomed the film version of her life.
 




When the price of butter fell a few cents, a couple of weeks ago, newspapers and radio commentators trumpeted the glad tidings as If all our price troubles were over. But at the same time the A & P stores were charging, here in New York City, twelve cents for a bunch of carrots, eight cents for a pound of green cabbage, thirty-three cents for a ten-cent box of raisins, twenty-one cents for a quart of homogenized milk, and about fifty-nine cents per pound for a decent cut of meat.
Since then there have been a few shifts both up and down, with butter again up, milk a cent down, carrots down but tomatoes up to thirty-three cents a pound, and so on. So where are we?
On January 28 the Bureau of Labor Statistics, whose findings notoriously favor the capitalists, stated that food prices declined an average of one per cent during the prior month. A one per cent decline – when the price of food is, according to the businessmen’s weekly, the United States News, “almost two and one-half times pre-war!” In percentages that’s two hundred fifty per cent above pre-war food prices.
Again, when Ford Motor Company announced a $15 to $50 cut in price on its passenger cars, Mr. Ford was hailed by the capitalist contingent as a self-sacrificing hero. However, his grandiose claim that the cut was “shock treatment to halt the insane spiral of mounting costs and rising prices,” is a fraud. The cut is simply a competitive move to bring Ford prices nearer those of Chevrolet.
As Richard T. Leonard, UAW-CIO vice-president in charge of the Ford division, pointed out, the new Ford prices are still fifty-one per cent above 1941 levels – the much ballyhooed reduction being a mere one per cent. Mr. Leonard further stated: “Needless to say, this reduction in Ford prices does not in any way reduce the disparity between the high cost of living for Ford workers and their earnings.” So where are we?
 
False Propaganda on Prices
We are in a situation where the capitalist class is using every means of propaganda to create the false impression that prices are substantially down. The reason for this campaign is to produce a hostile atmosphere for the wage increases already demanded by many unions and to be demanded by more unions in the near future.
How flimsy is the actual foundation for the claim of a drop in the cost of living, is demonstrated in a recent front page article in the New York Sun. The headline read: “Food Buyer Is Having His Day at Long Last.” And how was this claim substantiated in the body of the article? The A & P stores were selling five-cent candy bars at two for nine, and another chain was offering with every pound of hamburger – made out of heaven knows what – at thirty-nine cents, an extra pound at one cent. Such freak instances certainly do not support the claim of the headline.
Not talking about what may happen a year from now, but about what the score is right now, and again quoting the United States News – that weekly published for businessmen – we have a “living-cost trend still rising slowly.” This is the overall fact even though the retail price of food has dropped by that picayune one per cent. The wholesale prices of a few commodities have also declined a couple of points, but this decline has not been passed on to the consumer. However, wholesale prices in general are, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, on a new high level.
 
Prices of Durable Goods
The still upward trend may have been obscured by the after-Christmas sales to clear off overstocked merchandise, especially furs and luxury items. The rising prices in many raw materials, semi-finished and finished articles cannot be wished away. Spring clothing, furniture, building materials, nearly all durable goods are higher in spite of larger supplies. So where are we?
We were left far behind in purchasing power by the wartime wage freeze as the cost of living went merrily upward. The wage increases labor fought for and won at the end of 1945 were not high enough entirely to remove the disparity. The skyrocketing cost of living during 1946 has still further reduced the purchasing power of wages. The workers were the sacrificial lambs on the altar of wartime profits and continue to be fleeced for record-breaking peacetime profits.
 
Out Of The Horses’ Mouths
We read that the president of the United States Chamber of Commerce struts his stuff that ‘‘the American way of sharing the wealth is by reducing prices.” But are American businessmen acting that way? Fortune magazine took a poll to find out what these pillars of industry expect prices to do in 1947 and what they expect to do about prices in 1947. Here is the result of the poll.
Two per cent had no opinion to express. Twenty per cent of the businessmen polled see no change in prices in general, and fifty per cent of this group declare there will be no change in the prices of their own commodities. Thirty-four per cent, over one-third, of the businessmen polled expect further price increases in 1947, and nearly all of this group predict price increases in their own commodifies. The largest section, forty-four per cent, of the country’s businessmen said they anticipate prices will go down in 1947, but only one-third of these optimistic gentlemen plan to lower their own prices. The motto is: Let George do it!
In the meantime, still quoting from the United States News:
“A new house today costs nearly one hundred per cent more than in 1939 to build. A new car costs at least fifty per cent more than it cost in pre-war. Food costs are almost two and one-half times pre-war. Clothing costs often are double pre-war, or even higher than that. Commodity prices, in general, are nearly ninety per cent above pre-war.”
Nor has the peak been reached, for the “living-cost trend still rises slowly,” to say nothing of the break in rent ceilings in spite of official rent control.
Ballyhoo about falling prices will not buy more food, clothing and other needs. The standard of living of the people will continue to decline unless there are adequate wage increases in each industry WITHOUT any further price increases.
 




The number of employees of the War and Navy Departments give a measure of the growth of peacetime militarism in this country. Army and Navy desk workers in Washington number 850,000, as against a mere 43,000 – one-twentieth – federal employees for all national housing and federal works agencies.
We might say that the appointment of General Marshall as Secretary of State strengthens the fusion between American imperialism and its indispensable mate, militarism, though this latest appointment only highlights similar unions between imperialism and militarism. For generals fill ambassadorships and other government posts.
So we see in the United States, where such things just couldn’t happen, the colossus of militarism spreading its vicious tentacles. Against the background of the living menace of militarism in the last stronghold of capitalist democracy, a reading of Karl Liebknecht’s little book entitled Militarism is instructive. This book is based on a revised lecture delivered by Liebknecht at a conference of young people in Germany way back in 1906 – for which lecture, by the way, the author was found guilty of treason and thrown into prison. Though four decades old and directed primarily against German militarism which Liebknecht fought tooth and nail all his life, the lecture has that historic sweep and penetration which puts it down as a classic for study in understanding capitalist militarism, of any time and any country.
“Militarism,” said Liebknecht, “is not specifically a capitalistic institution. It is, on the contrary, an institution peculiar and essential to all societies divided in classes, of which capitalist society is the last. It is true that capitalism develops, like every other society divided in classes, a kind of militarism peculiar to itself ...”
Liebknecht pointed out that especially suited to the capitalist stage of development, is the army based on universal military service. Of this Mr. Truman and others seem well aware today. The most dangerous plan of the ruling class is to indoctrinate the youth in the spirit of militarism. When President Truman asked Congress for a universal military training law, he revealed its true purpose in his usual blundering, but blunt way. “I don’t like to think of it as a universal military training program. I want it to be a universal training program, giving our young people a background in disciplinary approach ...”
So youth, at the impressionable age of eighteen, is to be put under the tutelage of army officers to be trained “in the disciplinary approach” – and Liebknecht knew what such an army is. Such an army, he said, “constituted by the people, is not an army of the people but an army against the people, or becomes increasingly converted into such a one.”
Stressing further the anti-people’s character of the so-called people’s army, is this forceful passage:
“This is modern militarism, which attempts nothing less than squaring the circle, which arms the people against the people itself; which, by trying with all means to force upon social division an artificial division according to ages, makes bold to turn the workman into an oppressor and an enemy, into a murderer of members of his own class and his friends, of his parents, sisters, brothers and children, into a murderer of his own past and future; which pretends to be democratic and despotic, enlightened and mechanical, popular and anti-popular at the same time.”
In another section of the book, Liebknecht’s use of the phrase “Militarism for Abroad” strikes a most familiar chord today. Who says that American militarism today is to be turned against the American people? Doesn’t everyone understand that it is strictly for “abroad,” to “defend the nation,” and, above all, to prevent another war? This lying argument of the ruling classes is as old as Methuselah and was used by the German junkers no less than by all other imperialists.
The chapter on Means and Effects describing how Prusso-German bureaucratic, feudal and capitalist militarism built and maintained itself, reveals parallel methods employed right now in this country. The appeals to ambition and vanity, the glorification of soldiering, so-called special privileges, enticements for re-enlistment, the military disciplinary system, substitution of jingoism for thinking, loud opposition to any progressive idea – “Thus they attempt to tame men as they tame animals. Thus the recruits are drugged, confused, flattered, bribed, oppressed, imprisoned, polished and beaten; thus one grain is added to the other and mixed and kneaded to furnish the mortar for the immense edifice of the army; thus one stone is laid upon the other in a well calculated fashion to form a bulwark against the forces of subversion.”
However, modern militarism – with its two-fold function of preparing for foreign war and also for suppressing labor – is in a quandary. Liebknecht posed the contradiction, more true today with the complicated instruments of war, than in his day. “The two tasks of militarism, as will be seen, do not at all harmonise always in the department of military education, but are often at cross-purposes. That is not only true of training, but also in regard to equipment. War training demands ever more imperatively a continuously growing measure of initiative on the part of the soldier.” However, on the home front, “As a ‘watch-dog of capital’ the soldier does not require any initiative, he is not even allowed to possess it ... In short, war against the foreign foe requires men; war against the foe at home, slaves, machines.”
Aside from the indoctrination directly for the army, militarism influences the entire civilian population in many ways, subtle and obvious. For instance, a large military establishment entails huge orders from which private enterprise, in many fields, derives boom business. Around the military forms a specialinterest group whose pockets are lined by it. These elements defend the military regime and spread propaganda for it. Among the facts that can be cited to underscore the spread of militarism throughout American life, is that more and more schools of higher learning depend for research, in whole or in part, on Army or Navy funds. Thus is cemented the tie between militarism and education, science, and so-called culture.
Still, militarism is by no means an unmitigated boon to capitalists, though capitalism cannot function without it. The expense of maintaining the colossus worries the monarchs of money. The military budgets of 1906 were as mole hills compared to the almost fifteen billions proposed by Mr. Truman – a proposal that forty per cent of peacetime government expenditures be used for war preparation. At the same time, the capitalist politicians are under pressure to reduce the taxes paid by capitalists. Quite a dilemma. Liebknecht pointed out that much of the financial burden is shifted to those least able to carry it, as witness the twenty per cent pay-as-you-go tax on wages taken out of every American worker’s pay envelope today.
In the everyday life of the, workers militarism spells unfair competition to their labor. In Liebknecht’s day the junkers used “soldiers to help with the harvest” just as they were used in “free” America during the war. The military in the shameful role of scabs and strikebreakers has gone with capitalist militarism from its inception. As militarism takes stronger hold of civilian life, the custom will be more common in this country. Furthermore, the military spirit and methods will be turned against militant workers in a revolutionary party who engage in revolutionary action. In Liebknecht’s words “To do away with militarism or to weaken it as much as possible is thus a question of vital importance in waging the struggle for political emancipation ...”
The struggle against capitalist militarism is the working class struggle against capitalism itself.
 




Plenty of dishonest verbiage is being expended by the capitalist government on the need of housing for the people. Hard cash, however, of which hundreds of billions were spent for imperialist war and of which there is still plenty for everything but basic human needs – hard cash is not allocated to build houses. The federal government, as well as the state and municipal governments, are all giving lip-service to the problem – and nothing else.
Take a look at President Truman’s proposed 1947 budget.
In high-sounding phrases he pledged governmental financial support to push home construction “to a high level of activity.” He proposed laws to rebuild “blighted areas of our cities.” Presidents always say such things. But how much cash does Mr. Truman’s budget provide?
Out of a budgetary total of over $37.5 billions, Mr. Truman allocates the unbelievably picayune sum of $544,000,000 for “housing and community facilities.” A sum which hardly amounted to a day’s expenditures in World War II is shamelessly proposed as a stop-gap to one of the most crying peacetime problems. Nor is this sum to be used for building houses, small as it is. A large part of it will go for the purchase by the government of guaranteed home loans to veterans. Why? So that private industry, which is charging veterans. many times more for homes than they are worth, shall not run the risk of making bad loans to veterans who may not be able to stand the gouging they are submitted to.
But Mr. Truman is not a complete dope. He recognizes that
“Our social security program and our education and housing programs can hardly be considered adequate. Improvements in these fields are seriously needed. Although this budget does not contemplate major extensions in the next fiscal year, I recommend that the Congress lay the legislative ground now for the needed improvement, including general health, insurance and a long-range housing program.”
The dear, good President! And what are the homeless people to do while the “legislative groundwork” is being laid? Sleep on the ground, perhaps? Or did the veterans on the West Coast get the idea when they asked cynically for “a tree by ’53”?
Be it noted that the President does not see the need for “legislative groundwork” when it comes to military expenditures. In no uncertain terms and impatient of any delay, he calls for a peacetime military budget of $14,726,000,000, which is nearly 40 per cent of the total peacetime budget.
 
In New York State
The above indictment of the President is, of course, not meant as applying to the Democrats alone. The Republicans, now dominating Congress, are likely to provide even less than the President for a housing program, because they are more opposed to “government interference” in sacred private enterprise. But a better example of what the Republicans pretend to be doing to house the homeless millions is Governor Thomas E. Dewey’s munificent $25,000,000 appropriation for housing for the whole Empire State. Here we also see that the housing programs of the state governments are as great a sham as that of the federal government.
Like the Democratic President of the United States, the Republican Governor of New York State was unsparing of words. In his message to the State Legislature, Dewey said that housing “merits the most intense thought and effort of us all.” Oh, yes, and “combined with study” and more “effort.” Neither is Dewey a complete dope. He sees that “a stop-gap program” is “no substitute for the building of permanent houses. Moreover, all manpower and material used in temporary housing are diverted from permanent housing.” Well said, well said. But –
Not one dollar was recommended by Dewey for any permanent housing for the Empire State. The only concrete recommendation he made was for that $25,000,000, passed by the Legislature and approved by him, for exactly that temporary housing which he spoke against. For the $25,000,000 is to be spent in converting military camps and abandoned schoolhouses for veteran housing.
The abysmal inadequacy of this so-called housing program of the State of New York is proved by this. Last year the state building program was $35,000,000 for the same kind of temporary housing. This put roofs over the heads of about 3,500 veterans in the whole state, while in the City of New York alone there were 85,000 veteran applications for such housing. Well, the veterans can still look forward to that tree in ’53.
This contempt for human needs shows up even more strikingly against the background of the $467,000,000 post-war reconstruction fund that lies in the treasury of the State of New York. Reconstructing the homes of veterans and civilians after the harrowing war must not interfere with the circumspect spending of this huge fund so as to bring the best political gains to the Republican politicians. It is rumored that paying out $600,000,000 for up-state highways in the next few years may mean more to Dewey in 1948 than providing housing in the overcrowded city – which is Democratic, anyway.
That brings us around to New York City, where it is reported a quarter of a million families are actually looking for a place to lay down their heads and call their home. The Housing Authority of New York City, by whose grace some 16,780 families live in projects, is going to “solve” the housing crisis by a unique method of robbing Peter to pay Paul.
Mr. Butler, housing genius and head of the Housing Authority, is trying to get OPA’s consent to evict from the housing projects all families whose incomes are over $3,000 a year. When the projects were put up, $2,355 was set as the maximum income to make a family eligible to live in the houses. When the war came and the cost of living and wages rose, the Housing Authority increased the maximum income for tenants to $3,000. This was a reasonable thing to do, but now all reason is thrown to the winds.
 
Housing Impasse
Mr. Butler says that “in view of increased private residential construction” tenants with more than $3,000 income should be turned out to hunt for apartments on their own. The fact that the cost of living has gone up over 50 per cent since 1939 and families with more than $3,000 income may be poorer in actual purchasing power, that fact doesn’t impress Mr. Butler. Nor does he consider that “private residential construction” is a mere trickle, nor that the costs of new houses and rentals of new apartments are beyond his $3,000-a-year tenants. Nor does the fact that a quarter of a million families are already looking for homes stay the evictioner’s hand.
At present 11,623 families or about 68 per cent of the 16,780 in the projects are subject to eviction under the new plan. Of course, this will make room for 11,623 families whose incomes are less than $3,000. It will certainly not increase the number of available apartments nor decrease the number of families looking for them.
A bright development on the rent front in New York City is the demand of the Tenants Protective Association of the apartment houses at 50 Manhattan Avenue for rent reductions. Yes, rent reductions when the landlords are clamoring for rent raises! Claiming that the thefts and robberies in the houses are due to the absence of a doorman, a service included in their rent, the tenants want a rent cut to enable them to pay for their own guards. OPA has the matter under advisement.
With rent ceilings due to expire June 30 and the real estate lobby in Congress hell-bent to kill them, it is good strategy for tenants to demand rent cuts for the absence of services for which they are paying, such as doormen, regular standard redecorating, regular upkeep of halls and lobbies, adequate heat and other things that are now lacking. The prime essential is organization by the tenants for action, both offensive and defensive.
As to an adequate program for providing houses for the people, the demand of the Workers Party and of Labor Action for a $250,000,000,000 expenditure in the next five years is modest and reasonable in the critical situation. But neither the Democrats nor the Republicans, and no capitalist government, will spend that much money on the people who produce all the wealth. It will take an independent Labor Party, fighting for a workers’ government, to bring such a realistic housing program within sight.
 




Dear Comrades:
Permit me space for a few comments on R. Fahan’s The Politics of Incineration appearing in the March–April issue.
It seems to me that the existence and effects of the Russian totalitarian empire are not really integrated in Fahan’s thinking. This totalitarian empire makes it impossible to project any plan against the A and H bombs or against war on a worldwide basis – unless it be the false products emanating from Russia, i.e., the “peace” petition. People know this – no, they feel it in their bones. Thus they ask, for instance, what good it would do if western scientists took a principled position against giving their talents to the production of A and H bombs when they cannot get the cooperation of the scientists behind the iron curtain; when such Russian scientists who made the slightest move to respond would soon be dispatched to meet their ancestors. People do not act from motives of moral rectitude when there is a military problem involving physical existence itself. To defy the powers that they conceive may give them some protection – and they hope for some protection even in an atom war – defiance must have a chance to arise also in the enemy country. Fahan’s purely moral approach is inadequate.
In effect Fahan writes off “the people” when he retires into the charmed circle of those he considers politically and humanly qualified to align themselves as absolutely and at all times opposed to the use of the H-bomb. True, he has widened the circle to include not only independent Socialists, but also pacifists and radicals “who have not become Social-Democrats.” But this is still to be isolated from the people.
In his attitude on the H-bomb Fahan poses a point not easy of solution. He asserts his conviction that Socialists must say that a Socialist society “even if locked in struggle with a capitalist or Stalinist enemy” would not use the H- bomb. Suppose that a counter-revolutionary state thus armed were attacking a Socialist state. Should the Socialist state submit to annihilation of itself and its people by the H-bombs of the counter-revolutionary state? Or would the Socialist state, after making every human and even super-human effort to appeal to the peoples of the counter-revolutionary state and to the peoples of the world to stop the attack, have to do this basically immoral thing, namely, use mass-annihilating weapons in a desperate effort at self-defense? At any rate, it would be for the people of the Socialist state to decide what they would want to do – not for us a priori.
In offering his slogans, Fahan again comes up against the lack of internationalism in the world, though he does not recognize his problem. He says: “The major criterion for such proposals is simply this: do they direct the masses of people against the TWO power blocs that threaten human incineration? If they do, then they are desirable, regardless of their limitations, their ‘impracticability’ or their departure from ‘traditional’ Socialist slogans.”
But when Fahan gets down to cases he talks ONLY about demands on the U.S. government. He includes also Europe and the European masses. However, the sixty-four dollar question is how to take into account Russia and its masses, Russia’s satellites and their masses? Any proposals or slogans against war presuppose the kind of civil liberties which do not exist in the second of “the two power blocs.” Therefore, the proposals and slogans could have only unilateral application, thus freezing the hopes of the peoples of the first of “the two power blocs.”
Without meaning any offense to Fahan, it strikes me that there is too much of moral heroics, let me say, in the main tenor of his remarks – “let it be said that there are some men who, in the sea of blood, did not acquiesce.” Perhaps there is something still to be done other than preserve our moral rectitude, important as this is.
There being no potent Socialist revolutionary forces in the world today, where can be found other elements to bestir themselves in anti-war action? The answer of course is in the trade union movements and also in the Social-Democratic masses of Europe. But these elements will not accept any plan which, because of the nature of the Russian dictatorship and of the iron curtain, would have to be unilateral.
The pivotal problem is to reach the people behind the iron curtain. Should not organized labor and the Social Democracy of the western world exert themselves to solve this problem?
While criticising, I do not think Socialists oppose the propaganda programs of the west against the Russian government, since there is here a political potential beyond the purposes of the western governments. However, organized labor and the Social-Democratic masses may independently be able to perform a really great historic task in reaching out to the Russian people. This could only be done completely on their own, using their own resources in money, human talents and ideas, to build that necessary bridge between the working peoples of the two opposing camps. Appeals could be made for joint actions in the interest of peace. Assurances of solidarity and support from the people of the west could be given. The technical means for communicating such ideas can be evolved. The working people of the west, acting independently of their governments, would be an example to the Russian people, encouraging them to act against their own government. This, it seems to me, is the great need, namely, the bridge between the working people on both sides of the iron curtain.
To be sure such an effort may fail, especially since time is running out. Yet it is unthinkable that the powerful labor organizations of the west should be stricken with palsy and remain paralyzed while humanity-destroying World War III creeps up on us. Will organized labor do something? This is the question – not, I regret, simply our immortal souls, though these should undoubtedly be kept intact.
Susan Green
New York City, July 6, 1950
 

   Perhaps the Taft-Hartley anti-labor law is sufficient indictment against the Republican-controlled Congress which has just adjourned, to make any other charges against it almost unimportant. However, this Congress was elected because “the people wanted a change.” But by flipping the political coin from the Democratic to the Republican side the people have not bettered themselves. The record of the Congress which adjourned so that the Republican politicians could hasten to Philadelphia demonstrates the futility for the working people of the two-capitalist-party system. On the domestic scene what has caused the people most anxiety is the cost of living, with meat (for example) now at an all-time high. Congress re-established the policy of laissez faire, and profits and prices have climbed accordingly. The only control still partially in effect is over rent, and here too changes have been made that favor the landlords. The next pressing domestic problem is undoubtedly housing. The Taft-Ellender-Wagner housing bill which, if enacted into law, might make a beginning, though inadequate, toward supplying homes for the millions who need them – that bill has been kicked from pillar to post and back again. It had been watered down and cleansed of its “socialistic” features and stripped of essential provisions by substitutes, but not even a substitute bill was passed by Congress.  Billions for War On the other hand, without too much argument, Congress agreed to the building up of the air force from the present fifty-five groups to seventy – even more than the brass hats had actually demanded. The billions required for war preparation were voted as a matter of course, as was the contracting authority to start building planes – while on the stock market the shares of airplane companies started upward in anticipation of better profits. Such big affairs of American imperialism the Congress took in stride; but when it come to such a little thing as lifting the tax on oleo so that people who can’t afford to buy precious butter may at least afford the substitute, the Congress could not bring itself to do anything. There was, of course, the dairy lobby to consider. There are at least 750,000 wage earners and their families who will not need too much convincing about the character of the Congress. They are the salesmen, taxi drivers, piece-workers and others who Congressmen think are not entitled to social-security coverage. The Supreme Court ruled last year that such workers are covered by social security; Congress passed a bill to exclude them. An entirely different opinion of Congress is undoubtedly held by the railroads, for the legislative body obligingly passed a law allowing the roads to fix rates without fear of anti-trust prosecution, provided only that their rate-fixing agreements have the sanction of the Interstate Commerce Commission, an agency traditionally sensitive to the wishes of the railroads.  Health Is “Socialistic” Congress took no action toward a federally supported health program, though the inability of the majority of the people to pay for adequate doctor’s services and for hospitalization results in many unnecessary deaths and in much chronic ill health. A health program is, forsooth, “socialistic.” However, it is not “socialistic” for the long arm of the military to reach into homes and schools to yank from their normal pursuits young men nineteen to twenty-five for a twenty-one-month period of military service. Whatever the Congress left undone,it saw to it that the peacetime draft was passed and the militarization of the country furthered so alarmingly. Inductions are to begin within ninety days. To stimulate “volunteers” the law allows 161,000 eighteen-year-olds to enlist for one year of service with the regular forces. Thus, incidentally, the meaning of the word “volunteer” is changed. A youth of eighteen faces the dubious choice of taking his medicine for twelve months, or waiting till he is nineteen and then being forced to take it for twenty-one months. Some may credit the Eightieth Congress with the passage of a DP law admitting 205,000 to this country within the next two years. The humanitarian aspect of this law is subject to question. Joseph M. Proskauer, president of the American Jewish Committee, commented: “Through ignorance or design, this legislation in effect aims at deliberate exclusion of Jews and to a lesser extent at Catholics now languishing in displaced-persons camps in Europe.” The New York Times editorially commented that the bill is “a shameful victory for the school of bigotry.” And the extremely cynical predict that Congress will never grant the necessary appropriations to make the extensive investigations of DPs that the law calls for. The foregoing is not an altogether complete record of the omissions and commissions of the Eightieth Congress, but it suffices. The rest is in the same groove. Perhaps one more point should be added to the above enumeration. Congress voted to separate the United States Employment Service, such as it is, from the Department of Labor, such as it is – placing the employment office under the Federal Security Agency. This so slashes the functions of the Department of Labor that the next logical step may well be to abolish the Department of Labor altogether. Of course the Department of Labor of the capitalist government is no agency of working men, but the desire of the Congress to emasculate it is symbolic of the Congress’s whole attitude to labor. The bad record of Congress has given President Truman an opportunity to make political hay, especially since some of the worst bills were passed over his veto. However,short memories play havoc with the interests of working people. They must not forget that two years ago they were fed up with the inadequacies of the Democratic Congress and the Democratic administration, and for very, very good reasons. Whether they turn up the Democratic side of the coin or the Republican side, it’s the same coin. As far as the working people are concerned, the coin itself is counterfeit. As never before, conditions call for the formation of an independent labor party projected by organized labor to further the true interests of the working people as a whole. An independent labor party, independent of the capitalist class and the capitalist parties, independent of the Kremlin and its political offshoots, is the answer to the anti-people record of the Eightieth Congress.   
   The packinghouse workers are back on the job. Some of them still nurse their wounds, received on the picket line. Some families grieve for their dead, killed on the picket line. After sixty-five days of brave struggle, the strikers returned to work with the nine-cent-an-hour increase the companies had originally offered, which is twenty cents less than the workers were asking to enable them to come abreast of the cost of living. This unsuccessful strike must not be pushed in-to oblivion as rapidly as possible and forgotten. The determination of the big packing companies to break the strike was indeed an eye-opener. Who that has the labor movement at heart was not alerted by the frank and unashamed reversion to “good old-fashioned” strikebreaking methods re-sorted to by the companies unwilling to grant an adequate wage increase out of profits that had risen 430 per cent in 1947 over 1939? It is an open secret that long before the end of the war the capitalist class was sharpening the swords with which to slash at the labor movement as soon as the war was decently over and it was no longer necessary to kid labor along. The anti-labor drive seemed, however, to be mainly to get anti-labor legislation on the books, to attack labor through “legitimate” channels. Thus, before long, thirty-six states had passed anti-union laws,climaxed by the passage of the federal Taft-Hartley law. The varied court action against the unions based on this hostile legislation was expected. The injunctions, the fines, even the seizing of the railroads by the federal government, all were in line with the legislative advantage gained by the capitalist class. However, it was a jolt to see the raw, physical violence employed by the barons of meat to break the strike, methods that harked back to the most bloody struggles in labor’s history.  Violence Against the Strikers The companies used scabs and armed them. Company trucks and cars recklessly crashed into picket lines. Strikers were provoked to so-called violence as a pretext for calling in guardsmen to protect the scabs. Police beat strikers, destroyed union property, and terrorized a whole community. The paraphernalia of modern war stood as a threat against the strikers. In South St. Paul, Minnesota, the national guard was called in after armed scabs had shot and killed three pickets. But the guardsmen did not direct their attention to disarming the scabs. They “roughed up” the strikers, then stood with fixed bayonets ushering scabs in and out of the Swift and Armour plants. The soldiers were also under orders to suspend the strikers’ right of free assembly and prevented four or more people from gathering in public. At Waterloo, Iowa, William Farrell, a striker, was shot from an auto that was entering through the plant gates of Rath Packing Company. The bullet also pierced the shoulder of a woman striker. Whereupon a state of “violence” was perceived by Governor Robert Blue who called out the State Guardsmen for anti-strike duty. At the East St. Louis, Illinois, plant of Armour, Ed Hucks was shot and killed while picketing. In Atlanta, Mrs. Marie Browder was run down and badly injured by a truck attempting to enter the Armour plant. At the Armour plant in Chicago, the company attempted to run trucks through the picket lines. As reported by the CIO News, on order from Police Captain George Barnes to “step on it,” a ten-ton truck hit picket Santo Cicardo, crushing him to almost immediate death. Cicardo was attempting to talk to the driver of the truck to dissuade him from driving through the picket lines. Barnes is reported to have said he would get trucks through “regardless of consequences.” The pogrom against strikers by the police of Kansas City, Kansas, received wider publicity than the other acts of strikebreaking violence instigated by the companies. Without provocation seventy police descended upon ten pickets, entered restaurants where workers ate, broke into the union hall. Skulls were broken, and bodies battered and bruised. An estimated one hundred union people were injured; ten had to be hospitalized; a woman needed five stitches in her head. In addition, the police smashed the door of the union hall, destroyed the loud speaking apparatus, broke dishes in the soup kitchen, shattered windows and chairs, carried away union records. How did all this happen in Kansas City, Kansas? It is reported that the Chamber of Commerce had called upon the Mayor, protesting that the police were too “easy” on strikers. The police raid was “ordered” by the Chamber of Commerce from its servant, His Honor. The Police Captain, Eli Dahlin, is said to have told his men to “crack skulls.” They did. The climax of the story is that the Mayor of Kansas City, Kansas, a Republican,was endorsed, by the ... CIO-PAC!  Time to Make a Change Such reckless strike-breaking tactics testify to the deep-seated determination of the capitalist class to beat down labor to where it will “give no trouble.” The atrocities of the packing companies also reveal, how shallow and hypocritical is the so-called respect of the capitalist class for the workers’ right to strike and to picket. Yes, who that has the labor movement at heart was not alerted by these actions of the powerful meat companies against their striking workers? The CIO has instituted legal actions wherever possible to bring the culprits to justice. But what is capitalist justice in such a case? Will the real culprits, the meat companies and their politicians in the places of government, be punished. Far better is it for labor to have its own people in the places of government. Far better is it for labor to organize its own class political party and cease supporting capitalist class politicians. There must be an end of electing governors and mayors, presidents and congressmen, who are servants of the capitalist class, to pass their laws and carry out their deeds of violence against the workers. Furthermore, labor must advance in its ideas of solidarity and team work in economic struggle. One section of labor must not be permitted to get out on a limb, all by itself, to be battered as were the packinghouse workers. Financial support of some sort they did get from other CIO unions. But as for the actual fight, they stood alone, without even sympathy strikes to give them courage and to give the companies pause in their brutal tactics. The conduct and outcome of the packinghouse strike, therefore, seem to say; It is time for labor to change its political and economic ways.   



The kleig lights glaring in the convention hall in Philadelphia
 illuminated the hypocrisy of big-party conventions. The nominating
 convention is supposed to be the democratic way for the whole party
 to choose its candidates. Nothing was clearer at Philadelphia than
 that the goings-on in the hall were window-dressing, the real
 business being conducted well to the back of the store or, we might
 say, under the counter.
The facts that the reception given Dewey was cool, that Taft
 aroused no more enthusiasm though a bit more noise, that Stassen’s
 streamlined stunt brought out more real feeling, these facts meant
 nothing at all. Once it was established that Dewey and his aides had
 in the past few years succeeded in getting their hands on the
 switches that control the Republican machine, there was nothing left
 to do but to trade with the man at the controls. His stock in trade
 is jobs, jobs in the Republican campaign that he can hand out as
 nominee and the juicier jobs he can bestow if elected president.
Already Representative Scott of Philadelphia was rewarded with the
 chairmanship of the Republican National Committee, in recognition of
 the Pennsylvania delegation going over to Dewey. Newspapermen and
 radio commentators are bristling with predictions of other pay-offs.
 Senator Martin, who was the first to relinquish his candidacy in
 favor of Dewey may be placed as Secretary of Defense, if Dewey wins;
 Senator Taft has been promised a seat on the United States Supreme
 Court; and the president of the Chase National Bank is slated for
 Secretary of the Treasury, just to assure Wall Street that it made a
 good investment in Dewey.
But what am I saying? Didn’t Dewey himself deny, in his
 acceptance speech, that he made any deals!
*
One of the most maddening aspects of the convention speeches was
 the assumption that a Republican victory in November is in the cards.
 Some of this was, of course, for psychological effect, but not all.
 Unfortunately the political history of the country gives the
 Republicans good ground for assuming the victory will be theirs. It
 is the custom for the mass of the voters, when they want a change, to
 flip the coin of capitalist politics from one side to the other. The
 statisticians also point out that in the past century or so, six out
 of the seven times that congressional control has been voted to the
 other party, the next presidential election also turned the old party
 out of the administration.
The people in this country who have the responsibility to change
 this deadening routine, have done nothing about it. They have left it
 to the Stalinists to offer their stooge, the Wallace third party, as
 the treacherous alternative. The labor movement has itself to thank
 for Republican cocksureness.
*
What of the fact that the Republican-controlled eightieth Congress
 elected in 1946 made a record of attacks on labor’s position,
 of serious infringements on democratic rights, of irresponsibility
 toward the urgent needs for price control, housing, health insurance,
 civil liberties?
Well now, Dewey was not in the Congress, was he? Neither was
 Warren, was he? So these good men and true are not responsible, are
 they? On the other hand, what really can be expected of a Republican
 Congress hampered by a Democratic administration? So will run the
 campaign bunk of the Republican Party.
While Truman has capitalized on the Republican record in
 Congress and the Democratic campaigners will squeeze it dry for their
 own purposes, the person who follows political events remembers that
 after the end of the war the Democratic seventy-ninth Congress made
 no haste to put into law the “new democracy” for which
 the war was naturally fought. Also, President Truman was careful to
 wait until a Republican Congress was in before pressing his much
 advertised social measures, for not passing which he now upbraids the
 Republicans.
The political finagling of both major parties and their failure to
 solve vital problems for the people because of loyalty to capitalist
 profits and interests, have left a mark on the people. With strong,
 independent working class leadership in the form of an independent
 labor party, the working people can be broken of their tweedledee and
 tweedledum political habit.
*
If the mood of the convention speeches was emphatically
 optimistic, the theme of most of them was anti- New Deal. This was
 beating a dead horse merely for the sake of venting anger. For many
 Republican politicians and their big business backers nurture such a
 blind hatred for anything favoring labor or advocating government
 intervention in pressing social problems that they cannot see that
 the New Deal has been dealt and that the Democratic Party is no
 longer a New Deal party.
The tragic thing is that the leaders of organized labor had
 hitched their wagon to the New Deal, though it was apparent from the
 start that it was simply a political technique for pulling American
 capitalism out of a severe crisis by making pacifying gestures toward
 the working people who were restless under the depression. The
 Democratic Party has made it amply clear that the Now Deal was no
 star, only an empty balloon.
The Republicans, in jumping on the poor, deflated thing, are
 actually showing their sentiments toward labor and the working people
 who had mistakenly looked to the New Deal for permanent progress.
*
All politicians are very mindful of the fact that women cast a
 great percentage of all the votes. The efficient Mr. Dewey and his
 aides are all out to create good will among the fair sex.
One of the most disgusting spectacles at the convention, as
 reported in the press, was the bargain counter set up by the Dewey
 managers to win friends among the women gathered in Philadelphia. The
 get-something-for-nothing craze created by business advertising in
 radio quiz and other programs had a field day at the Dewey
 headquarters.
Great baskets of articles contributed by business supporters of
 Dewey were carried about by ushers, and women delved into them to
 grab something to take home. Then, every thousandth woman to enter
 the headquarters was hailed as a queen and presented with something
 really big from the bargain counter. The bedlam was worse than a sale
 of nylons in Klein’s on New York’s Union Square.
 Everybody came in and went out several times not only to make a
 second and third grab into a basket, but to try to be a thousandth
 woman to enter the headquarters.
On this high level did Dewey appeal for support.
*
However, Mr. Dewey is a man who leaves no stone unturned. He also
 appeals to the better nature in womankind by promising to include a
 woman in his cabinet.
Perhaps this appeal to the better nature is more insulting even
 than the other, because at the bargain counter the woman did carry
 away some material thing. But putting a Republican machine woman in
 the Republican cabinet will be as important to working women and
 women in general as putting a machine man in the same place, no more
 and no less.
Mr. Dewey expects that women will not know or will not take to
 heart that the Republican platform sidetracks the issue of the cost
 of living, has pebbles in its mouth on the housing question, spouts
 only generalities on women’s rights, civil rights and so on.
 What a compliment to the women of America!
 




Join any group of housewives and chances are you’ll find
 them talking about prices. Next to the worry as to whether the Berlin
 situation will explode into war, they worry about prices. And they
 talk in a rather hopeless and fatalistic way, expecting to dig into
 savings if they have any, and to cut down their buying. They know
 from experience what such people as write for the financial page of
 the New York Herald Tribune learn from statistics, that the
 housewife “will find the going tough and, consequently, the
 borrowings from banks, insurance companies and other institutions
 will increase. Funds will be withdrawn from savings and savings bonds
 will be cashed in order to make both ends meet.”
Prices are now the highest in all history and arc scheduled to
 rise in the months to come. But the Republican Party platform adopted
 a few weeks ago, absolutely sidetracked the question of stopping
 inflation. Women are buying much less meat because it costs twice
 what it did in 1946 when OPA ended. They can’t even buy sufficient
 quantities of fruits and green vegetables because, even with very
 ample summer supplies, prices are marked up unreasonably. Mothers
 wonder why the monopolistic Borden and Sheffield companies were
 permitted to boost milk prices again. But the Republican politicians
 are quite complacent about these worries of every family.
Their approach to the question, if they can be said to have one,
 is that an economical administration, such as Mr. Dewey promises to
 give, will do wonders toward reducing taxes; this in turn will enable
 corporations to lower prices (oh, yeah!) and it will also give people
 (what people?) more money to spend; presto, the whole difficulty
 disappears. Who said price control is necessary? 
More Rises Coming
While politicians evade the issue, it becomes more intense. The
 United States News & World Report of July 9 predicts that
 things are going to cost more as the year wears on. The rise will be
 slow but sure.
The cost of living is expected to increase six or seven per
 cent more in the year ahead. Meat will be even more expensive, so
 will milk and butter. Household equipment is being upped. Gas,
 electricity and telephone may cost more because “utility costs
 cannot always resist the trend upward.” The cost of building
 inches upward, and rents are going higher. Such is the dire outlook
 presented in the latest issue of the United States News.
In Philadelphia this week, but not in time for Labor Action
 to report on it in this issue, the Democratic Party will also adopt
 its campaign platform. President Truman had demanded of the
 Republican Congress that it pass a law giving him power to institute
 price control, rationing, allocations and priorities, as and when the
 president should see fit. It is easy to see how inadequate such a law
 would be even if passed, for it would create no immediate price
 controls. And it would not be the plight of the housewife that would
 determine whether controls are necessary or not, but those having the
 inside track to the president would make up his mind. Whether the
 Democratic convention will go farther than Truman or as far remains
 to be seen. Anyway, who any longer takes seriously a campaign
 platform plank of the capitalist parties? 
Fear Lurks Behind Boom
Commentators sought to bring a ray of hope into the picture when
 the Department of Agriculture reported expectation of a bumper crop
 of grains in the 1948 harvest. The corn crop will be fifteen per cent
 over the average of the last ten years, the wheat harvest will be the
 second highest in all history, oats will be 18 per cent more
 plentiful than the average of the 1936–45 period. In Europe
 also the harvest of wheat and rye is expected to yield 25 per cent
 more than last year. This should mean more and cheaper bread and
 grain products, as well as cheaper meat, dairy products, eggs and
 poultry because of abundant fodder. However, after the first
 optimistic comments, the consensus seems to be that the factors
 making for increased costs outweigh those that might tend to reduce
 prices, with the conclusion, as stated above, that the overall cost
 of living is going up some more.
Those comparatively few workers who have escalator clauses in
 their contracts, including the recent General Motors contract, will
 get a little more toward meeting the higher prices. However, the
 great body of working people will feel the squeeze in full force. The
 so-called third round of wage increases was not sufficient to put the
 workers abreast of price increases already in effect, to say nothing
 of those still to come.
And right behind the workers’ worry over meeting living
 costs, lurks the fear of what will happen to them when the inflation
 bubble bursts and the bust comes. What will happen to them without a
 guaranteed annual wage?
These working class problems can be taken up honestly,
 forthrightly and adequately only by a working class party. As time
 goes on it becomes ever clearer that the working people must organize
 their own independent labor party – not a Wallace-Stalinist
 party – to contest for power against the capitalist parties.
 This is what housewives should be talking about in connection with
 the runaway cost of living and the insecurity of life in general.
 




When Thomas E. Dewey was campaigning for the Republican primaries
 in Oregon, considered decisive as between him and Stassen, there
 wasn’t any cheap politician’s trick he wouldn’t
 resort to. Time Magazine reported:
“Tom Dewey was
 running like an alderman who wanted to meet all of Oregon’s
 630,000 voters personally,” He had a hectic time “pumping
 hands, signing autographs, ripping off ten speeches a day. He peered
 at cows in Corvallis, at logging operations along the Umpoqua River.
 He accepted a salmon at Oregon City, signed his name in blood for the
 local booster club at Coos Bay, paraded with an organization called
 the Cavemen at Grants Pass and, at their bidding, munched on a large
 bone.”
How distasteful these ridiculous activities must have been to the
 precise soul of the aspirant to the presidency of the United States
 can only be guessed at. For, as reports have it, he is addicted to
 deliberateness, has a passion for neatness so that his desk never has
 disorderly papers on it; he craves well-sharpened pencils of the same
 length. He dislikes the telephone and keeps it in a drawer of his
 desk. He favors conservative clothes, thinks it undignified to be
 photographed in his shirt sleeves or with his mouth open because of
 poorly spaced front teeth. In private life he relaxes on his farm at
 Pawling, New York, plays golf and with his sons soft ball, and sings
 duets with his wife.
This is the personality of the man, but only part of it. He seems
 also to have a consuming ambition overriding all else. So while the
 repulsive antics of campaigning placed a ghastly, frozen smile on his
 face, he was fulfilling an inner urge to become “a great man.”
Dewey was not born rich. His father was the local postmaster in
 Owosso, Mich., where son Thomas was born in 1902. The son sang in
 choirs, managed a magazine route, worked in his father’s print
 shop when the latter took over the local paper. From the University
 of Michigan he came to New York to study music, impelled by having
 won a singing contest. On good advice, however, he abandoned singing
 for law – and politics, apparently with the conviction that
 anybody, but anybody, can become president of the United States,
 provided he makes the right connections. That he did make the right
 connections is evidenced by the fact that for each of his important
 campaigns he had as his campaign treasurer none other than Winthrop
 W. Aldrich, brother-in-law of John D. Rockefeller and chairman of the
 powerful Chase National Bank. 
Big and Little People Not Quite the Same
Dewey got his break into big-time politics when another one of his
 good connections, George Z. Medalie, recommended him for the job of
 special prosecutor to clean out the gangsters of New York. With his
 calculating shrewdness, he must have realized that this was his big
 chance, for he worked with such efficiency and relentlessness that he
 piled up an imposing list of convictions.
Among those who fell under his axe were Waxey Gordon for income
 tax evasions, Lucky Luciano for the prostitution racket, and bigger
 fry like Jimmy Hines for Tammany graft and stock-exchange president
 Richard Whitney for grand larceny. Thus Dewey became a hero of a
 kind, with the reputation of doing a job against the little and the
 big racketeer alike.
That the little and the big people in society do not, however,
 occupy the same place in Thomas E. Dewey’s scheme of things –
 to say nothing of the little people taking precedence over the big –
 is apparent in what he says and does. For instance, in a speech he
 made on foreign affairs early this year he said: “Last November
 I urged that a plan be formulated in straightforward fashion to be
 run by a government authority under bi-partisan directors and with
 the ablest businessmen in the country in charge. I know of only one
 way to do a job well, either public or private, and that is to get
 the ablest people we have to run it, give them full authority and
 hold them strictly accountable for results.” Nary a word about
 labor! To Dewey the intertwining of government and business is what
 makes the world go round. He does not even give the lip service to
 labor that other politicians give. His advisers may have Candidate
 Dewey correct this omission of lip service, but the true man has
 revealed himself.
Not only in words, though, has he revealed his bias toward the
 big people. His record as governor shows it plainly. He is praised by
 his friends and has impressed many by his efficiency, his economy,
 his administrative ability, and much is made of the fact that he has
 piled up many hundred million dollars in the New York State treasury.
 The question is for whom has he piled it up? Teachers and parents’
 organizations were agitating for a $103,000,000 appropriation for
 state education. It will be recalled that there were several “Marches
 on Albany” and one group took over the Senate Chamber for a
 while. Dewey is reported to have decided: “I think I’ll
 let ’em sit this one out” – implying that “
 ‘em” were only Communists anyway. When it came down to
 brass lacks, he refused to allow more than $30,000,000 for state
 education.
However, while battling against adequate aid to the public
 schools, he allowed industry credit rebates from the unemployment
 insurance fund reserve which are expected to amount to $165,000,000
 this year and which a year ago amounted to $152,000,000. The CIO was
 indignant, called these rebates a colossal grab, and contrasted them
 with the shabby allotments made for people’s needs.
We must give more attention to Dewey’s record as governor.
 His supporters promise: “What the United States would get with
 Dewey in Washington would be a projection on
 a national scale of what the State of New York has been getting
 with Dewey in Albany.” Dewey in Albany has been the scheming
 politician with his heart set on Washington. Is he a liberal? Is he a
 conservative? He is neither or both, as his cautious mind tells him
 will net him the best political capital. For example, he is given
 credit for a State FEPC law. Having put his wetted finger out in the
 wind, he found it dried in the heat of Negro resentment; therefore
 the FEPC, for Negro votes. However, in practise, has he, for
 instance, raised his voice against the Metropolitan Life Insurance
 Company’s policy of discrimination in its housing projects?
 Again, what kind of a liberal is it who would father a law making
 striking by government employees illegal, with drastic penalties for
 violations?
On the housing issue, Charles Abrams, New York Post
 writer on the question, says:
“What prompted the usually shrewd Mr. Dewey to
 abandon housing this year was his feeling that he could pick up the
 support of the anti-housing forces while also wooing the vet and the
 pro-housing groups on the basis of his past housing record. But this
 record will look sadly blighted in the light of 1948.”
What is Dewey’s past housing record? He has been cagey
 enough to take credit for the state rent control bill which, however,
 is absolutely ineffective as long as there is any kind of federal
 rent control law at all. Again, his provision for homeless GIs has
 been described as “a handful of huts.”
Dewey’s great achievement as governor is his tax cutting
 record. He has reduced income taxes 40 per cent and business taxes 25
 per cent. Together, business and businessmen derive the greatest
 benefit. He stubbornly refused to raise taxes and lose his prestige
 among business people. This year, to meet the state budget, he
 ordered an across-the-board slash in expenditures of nine per cent
 by all his department heads. How many state employees became jobless
 is not advertised – but taxes were not increased. 
Expediency, Caginess Plus Calculation
Now let us look at Dewey as he rushed about the country
 campaigning for delegates to vote for him in the convention. John
 Gunther in Inside U.S.A. said of Dewey’s preconvention
 behavior back in 1944 that it was marked by “canniness born in
 him, plus an overlay of caginess born of experience ... He avoided
 going out on a limb and taking positions on issues unnecessarily.
 Every step was carefully calculated and prepared.” In 1948
 Dewey had to give the appearance of being a little more definite.
Perhaps what is best known about Dewey, because of the
 publicity given to his controversy with Stassen on the issue, is what
 to do with Communists. Dewey is against the Mundt bill, he said:
“I am unalterably, wholeheartedly and
 unswervingly against any scheme to write laws outlawing people
 because of their religious, political or social or economic ideas.”
But, says Dewey:
“The Congressional Committee on Un-American
 Activities has been widely criticized in our country because it has
 been called a red-baiting committee. As a matter of fact, it has been
 doing a fine, solid, good American job for a great many months. It
 has done a fine job of exposing Communists and bringing them out in
 the open, where they belong.”
That’s just what Mundt bill advocates say that bill will
 do. Mr. Dewey doesn’t speak from conviction but from
 expediency, so he cannot be consistent.
Commentators have hailed the nomination of Dewey as the growth, of
 the Republican Party from isolationism to internationalism. Dewey’s
 internationalism is of recent vintage. He was opposed to lend-lease,
 direly predicting that it “would bring an end to free
 government in the United States and would abolish the Congress for
 all practical purposes.” He did not declare himself on the
 Marshall Plan until months of debate and discussion showed him which
 way the wind was blowing.
But as far as the working people arc concerned, the
 internationalism of the capitalist class today means only a more
 enlightened approach toward American imperialist interests than
 isolationism. In the final count, capitalist internationalism is
 preparing the groupings for World War III.
A humorous touch must be added here on Dewey’s
 internationalism. Robert G. Spivack, writing in The Nation of
 May 8, 1948, describes some of Dewey’s posturing thus:
“When visitors came to his hotel suite in New York
 or the executive mansion in Albany, Dewey would light a cigarette,
 sit back, appear to relax, and casually reminisce about his
 ‘memorable’ nine-hour conversation with Winston
 Churchill, or his delightful ‘chat’ with Premier de Gasperi, or the ‘insight into conditions’ he got from the
 Austrian Consul General. The idea he wished to convey was that these
 men and other foreign dignitaries already regarded him as the next
 President. Naturally, he implied they were keeping him abreast of
 affairs so that when he took over he could quickly establish liaison
 with the heads of other powers.”
Such are Dewey’s qualifications in foreign affairs –
 of course, there are his advisers who know more about machinations
 abroad. 
Stands for Nothing but His Ambition
What is Dewey’s stand on questions disturbing labor? But why
 should he commit himself at this point? In 1944, halfway through the
 campaign, Dewey became aware that it was unwise to attack the New
 Deal because of popular sentiment for it. Quite unabashed he suddenly
 switched and came out for nearly everything that Roosevelt was
 identified with. So there is plenty of time for Dewey to take “a
 stand” on labor in the 1948 campaign.
However, Time Magazine, issue of April 5, 1948, lists
 among Dewey’s recent switches his change on labor legislation
 from being pro-Wagner Act to becoming pro-Taft-Hartley Act. As for
 other vital problems, entirely muffed in the Republican platform,
 Dewey has given himself some leeway, for he approved the platform “as
 I interpret it.”
So here is the measure of this man who would be President of this
 nation of some 150,000,000 people in an era of chaos and crisis.
 Roosevelt had a political cult to offer the capitalist class at a
 time of lesser crisis. The man could be identified with his beliefs,
 both of course serving the capitalist class. Dewey stands for nothing
 but his own ambition. He appears to have no convictions at all. But
 he has certain talents for administration in the narrowest sense of
 the word, and above all the talent of having convinced certain
 interests, notably the Rockefeller interests, that he can serve them
 well.
 




When, twenty-nine months ago, the CIO announced its “Operation Dixie” the event was hailed by all labor elements as one of the most important in labor’s history. And it was.
At this year’s CIO convention in Portland, Ore., provision was made to build up an operating fund to continue this organization work in the South and elsewhere. The idea was to raise the per capita tax by three cents a month, two cents of which (expected to total two million dollars a year) is to be earmarked for this essential task. Judging by the accomplishments of “Operation Dixie” thus far and by the herculean job still to be done in the South, two million dollars a year – and more – could not be turned to better use. Here is the story to date.
When “Operation Dixie” got on its way in the summer of 1946, the CIO staff of organizers, under Van A. Bittner, literally started from scratch. Using improvised offices and sometimes packing boxes for desks, the CIO workers, consisting largely of men and women inexperienced in the arduous tasks ahead of them, dug eleven Southern states from Virginia to Texas. It was months before they could obtain offices, and more months before they gained know-how and the support of hundreds of local volunteers as organizers assisting the regular staff.
 
Fierce Opposition
The anti-union opposition the CIO battles in the South is versatile and brutal. William Weiss, an organizer in “Operation Dixie,” in the November 15 CIO News tells with eloquence and feeling about the obstacles encountered in organizing the South.
There are the attacks by the bosses in the form of wholesale firings and blacklists against workers showing union interest. Operating against the CIO are the segregation laws and police brutality against Negroes, with threats: “Stay off the streets after dark, N......, or else!” Citizens’ Committees, seeing red, organize themselves, and “loyal employee associations” mushroom overnight.
Some preachers, working for the bosses, use the name of God in the ungodly pursuit of planing unreasoning hate against “those outsiders.” William Weiss talks about the “maddening complacency” of textile workers trained from childhood to believe that mill-owners are all-wise and know that “outsiders” can bring only harm. And there is the deep hesitancy of those interested in unionism, drawling “I think I’ll wait a while before joining up.” The most frustrating of all is when a favorable situation is turned upside-down as when an employer closes his mill the day before the NLRB election and has that “heart to heart” talk with his employees.
Nor does the foregoing exhaust the versatility of the anti-union tribe. It is a fairly simple matter to plant dynamite in the vital parts of an organizer's car to blow it to smithereens. It is easy for an employer to use his influence locally to prevent the NLRB from hiring a place for a union election so that the election has to be held out of doors in makeshift booths. Neither is it too inhuman for boss-minded doctors to refuse medical service to the wife of a striker, which happened in Rockingham, N.C., and a doctor had to be rushed from miles away to be present at a birth.
All these nuances are in addition to the many local and state ordinances against free speech, free assembly and the distribution of literature. And, of course, there is the union-crippling Taft-Hartley law.
 
900 Locals Built
The organizational work that the CIO has carried on, against these obstacles, has been signally successful. In the 29 months, 900 locals the CIO have been established. New members joining CIO unions number 450,000, more than doubling the total membership in these states. The NLRB has on file 158 CIO petitions for certification, and in 127 mills and plants active organization drives are afoot.
To concretize these accomplishments, let us present the facts about “Operation Dixie” in the backward state of Mississippi. According to Robert W. Starnes, the state CIO director, before the drive only two small units of the CIO existed in the whole of Mississippi, namely, at Natchez and at Hattiesburg. Now there are CIO locals in a dozen cities. Out of 71 NLRB elections the CIO won 56, and the other 15 are by no means final losses. Union membership in the state increased more than ten times. In the industrial community of Laurel, with a population of 35,000, the biggest gains have been made. There are now 6,000 CIOers. Through CIO contracts wages have been increased by more than $5,000,000 a year. The standard of living has gone up, as has the popularity of the CIO.
In his report to the 1948 convention on “Operation Dixie” Philip Murray said:
“CIO has exerted an influence in the South far out of proportion to the number of new unions that have been granted recognition as bargaining agencies ... One of the important by-products of the campaign has been in the field of civil liberties ... The CIO Organization Committee has gone into court on many occasions to battle against local ordinances which abrogated freedom of speech and freedom of assembly. In not a single case has it lost a court decision.”
 
Wide Influence
A case in point was the situation in ill-famed Gastonia, N.C. There organizer William Weiss was arrested seven times for distributing union leaflets. The CIO went to court to have the ordinance declared unconstitutional. The legal victory went to the CIO.
In the field of wage rates, too, the influence of union organization, both CIO and AFL, has gone beyond the unions themselves. CIO organizers claim that the North-South pay rate differential has been eliminated in some industries and narrowed in greater or less degree in others. Such an accomplishment has a profound effect, on all workers in the South and exerts pressure on all employers to raise wage rates.
Philip Murray, in his report, further points out that “The campaign also has done much to foster improved race relations and to eliminate abusive treatment of South Negro workers.” And William Weiss writes that the CIO has made more progress in the field of race relations than “any other group that has operated in the South.”
Many elements outside of the CIO agree that it has done much in the field of race relations and can do a great deal more. Indeed, the approach of the CIO on the race question and its militancy on other regional problems have won sympathy and support among many Southerners who are worried about their situation and look for constructive leadership. There is no doubt that in some parts of the South the CIO is becoming a liberalizing political force. Southern reaction would, if it were honest, undoubtedly agree with this. Boss Crump, for example, found out something about the effect of CIO on politics in the primaries before the election and in the election itself. The fact of CIO political influence is generally admitted.
All this adds up to a very good report for “Operation Dixie” for the 29 months of its existence. However, as Van Bittner himself said, “the greater part of the job remains to be done.” There are in the eleven Southern states in which the CIO Organizing Committee has dug in, 6,000,000 industrial workers, just industrial workers. With the further industrialization of the South, the number grows. Only 950,000 in all belong to the CIO. Taking into account also the union members in the AFL, the organizing task ahead is tremendous.
The job of racial education is also only begun. Furthermore, the potency of the political influence of the CIO will increase in the South as elsewhere when it begins to follow the same class principles in politics as it does in its organization drive.
 




On February 16, outside his home in New York City, Ferdinand C. Smith, national secretary of the National Maritime Union, was arrested on a deportation warrant and escorted to Ellis Island by agents of both the Immigration and Naturalization Service and of the FBI. There he will await a hearing on charges of being illegally in the United States and of being a member of an organization advocating the overthrow of the United States government, namely, the Communist Party.
While waiting for his hearing, Smith may have the company of John Williamson, labor secretary of the Communist Party, consigned to Ellis Island six days previously, also on deportation charges. The Department of Justice has made it known that the arrests of Stalinists thus far are only the prelude to what is known as the department’s plan to “clean” out the Communists in the labor movement.”
This purpose of the FBI is the product of the hostile relations between the United States and Russia. It is called “a national security measure” – in preparation for World War III. The United States government is not going to have agents of the prospective enemy in key positions in important unions. The Department of Justice intends to show in the case of Williamson that he is a native of Scotland and, though he has posed as an American citizen, never became one. (Williamson claims he was born in San Francisco.) Thus, since he is an alien and a member of the Communist Party, which the department contends stands for the overthrow of the United Stales government, Williamson is banned from this country.
Then – and Now
The case of Ferdinand C. Smith is even more technical. While Smith is a native of Jamaica, British West of the United States, the charges against him are merely that he returned to this country in 1945, after a visit to Mexico, without a visa. This makes him an alien illegally in this country, and of course he is also a member, of the Communist Party.
It is reported that the government has known about Smith’s alien status at least since 1944. But then the Communist Party line was different and Smith was touring nine states in behalf of the fourth term campaign of the late Franklin D. Roosevelt. During the Stalin-Hitler pact, we remember, Roosevelt was the “imperialist warmonger.” In 1944, however, FDR had become the great democrat fighting with the democracy-loving Stalin against Hitler. In 1948 the line has turned back on itself and Roosevelt’s presidential successor is the “imperialist warmonger.”
In the halcyon days of the Stalin-Roosevelt “friendship,” Ferdinand C. Smith – the alien advocating the overthrow of the United States government – was given a testimonial dinner at which Democratic Party leaders praised him for lining up the Negro people behind Roosevelt. The capitalist government and politicians are as unprincipled in following their own interests as are the Stalinists in following the party line.
 
A Despicable Measure
The despicable anti-working class role that the Stalinists in the unions are playing as agents of the Russian bureaucratic dictatorship should not blind the workers to the ominous game the government has started. The workers themselves must by their own union methods clean the treacherous Stalinists out of key positions in the unions because they are dangerous to the unions.
The fight in the National Maritime Union, where President Curran headed the anti-Stalinist forces against National Secretary Smith, heading the Stalinist crew, is a legitimate union struggle to cleanse the union. However, when the government, under cover of a “national security unions those whom it selects for this purpose, it is time to raise load protest. This constitutes a threat to labor’s right of self-determination within its unions.
Labor wants no deportations. Deportations are as despicable a device as any employed by the rulers of society. It will settle its own score with the enemies within its ranks. Neither will outlawing the Communist Party serve labor’s interests. That will simply set a precedent for outlawing a minority party whose program IS based on labor’s interests – though the CP line is not. Any “outlawing” that is to be done, labor can do by withholding its votes and its support. No deportations and no outlawing!
 




Every once in a while William Green, President of the AFL, comes up out of obscurity to express himself. The other day he rated frontpage billing when testifying before the Senate Banking Committee in hearings on various bills presumably to check inflation. Mr. Green also has ideas on inflation, not necessarily his own. Certainly the one featured in the news stories is most reminiscent. The president of the AFL, an organization of over seven million workers whom he is supposed to serve, came out with the proposition that the work-week be lengthened to forty-five or forty-eight hours. Of what is this anti-labor scheme reminiscent?
Why, it is the very thunder from the speeches of the industrialists at the recent convention of NAM held in New York. NAM, whose members hate to part with one penny of their fabulous profits derived from high prices, have their own pet “cure for inflation,” namely, more production by lengthening the work-week. Since the NAM convention, Mr. C.E. Wilson of General Motors has been the loudest exponent of a longer work-week – of course, in the interest of curbing inflation. And now – William Green, president of the AFL, takes his cue from the manufacturers.
Mr. Green contributes his own wrinkle to the proposition. He wants the workers to be paid at existing overtime rates for the additional five or eight hours worked a week. The NAM speakers said nothing about overtime.
Does Mr. Green want Congress to pass a law abrogating the forty-hour week and legalizing a forty-five or forty-eight-hour week? No, nothing as crude as all that. He merely wants Congress to make it known that it favors or recommends that new industrial contracts be negotiated between capital and labor including a forty-five or forty-eight-hour week. Only that.
It took labor decades of painful, bloody struggle to establish the forty-hour week. Now this so-called leader of over seven million workers wants them to throw that hard-won gain overboard by signing on the dotted line. The mere fact of overtime pay does not wipe out the terrible precedent such contracts would establish.
What a weapon in the hands of the bosses when labor itself agrees to a longer work week! What a short step from Green’s idea to the forty-five or forty-eight-hour week at regular pay!
This not the only terrific faux pas in Green’s nit-wit scheme. He offers this sparkling solution as a substitute for wage increases. He implies his willingness to forego wage increases if his scheme is accepted. In so doing he goes over – lock, stock and barrel – to the side of the capitalists. They say that labor is not entitled to hourly pay raises. “If they want to earn more, let them work longer hours,” say the manufacturers – and Mr. Green is with them. But every statistic, fact and figure proves that because of the high cost of living and the 51-cent dollar, HOURLY wage rates must be boosted. At present rates workers give their labor power without getting in exchange adequate means to support themselves and their families. To extend this kind of robbery over forty-five or forty-eight hours instead of forty, is not to end UNDER-PAYMENT.
To get the full flavor of Mr. Green’s capitalist-guided thinking, it is necessary to savor the very words he used before the Senate Committee. Referring to his proposed labor-management agreements providing the longer work-week, Green said: “Such agreements would make possible a substantial increase in the rate of production of goods and services, without a proportionate increase in the unit cost. Addition of one hour per day with overtime pay would not be inflationary because by making an uninterrupted use of overhead and equipment the per unit cost of the goods produced in the extra hour would more than absorb the overtime compensation.” If it weren’t so serious for a labor leader to talk and act like the capitalists, this would be very funny.
In the first place, Mr. Green assumes that the capitalists really want increased production to curb inflation. Does he not know that industrialists are actually CURTAILING production, as for instance the outstanding example of steel which is basic to all other production? Again, the phrase “without a proportionate increase in unit cost” accepts, by implication, the crooked argument of the capitalists that wage increases would raise unit costs and thus, you see, make price increases inevitable. Green here agrees with the NAM that profits must not be touched, God forbid; whereas it has been proved, notably by the United Auto Workers, that wages can be substantially increased without price boosts, and if profits would not be at their present peak, they would still be twice pre-war levels and even more.
The gem, though, in the above quotation is Green’s trying to sell the manufacturers the idea oif an extended work-week. As if they don’t know that “an uninterrupted use of overhead and equipment” for a longer day shows up on the profit side of the ledger. However, workers also know that the uninterrupted use of their brains and brawn for a longer day, is not conducive to long life nor to health and happiness, nor even to freedom.
Mr. Green seems to have forgotten the facts of the workers’ life. To point up still further Green’s twisted mind, one more of his clever ideas to appease the capitalists must be cited. In his list of “remedies for inflation,” which are in essence Mr. Truman’s luke-warm program, Mr. Green includes the re-establishing of the excess profits tax on corporations – but let’s not be too harsh on the poor capitalists. Let them have tax credits, if they make substantial reductions in the prices of their commodities. Of course, such a plan is open to all sorts of capitalist finagling.
What’s important in all this is that the leader of over seven million organized workers has a head stuffed full of capitalist-induced ideas, that he thinks more about appeasing the economic masters than about strengthening the effectiveness of the workers in their legitimate demands, that he furthers schemes absolutely harmful to labor – and that these over seven million workers still accept this man as their leader!
 




Some time back a Congressional committee was curious to know how the other half lives or “what it costs a worker’s family to live.” The Bureau of Labor Statistics obliged and came up with “a necessary minimum” budget for a family of four. The prices used are as of June 1947. The CIO has brought the figures up to the higher prices of January 1948. Here is the result.

For a worker, his wife and two kids of eight and thirteen, it is necessary to have an income of about $3,500 a year. If the worker and his wife are blessed with more children, each kid would require about fourteen percent more of that figure; meaning that a family of five needs around $3,900 annual income; and so on.

With a pencil and a pad one discovers that on the basis of a forty-hour week, of fifty weeks a year (allowing a couple of weeks for one kind of “absenteeism” or another) or of 2,000 hours a year, the hourly rate of pay would have to be $1.75 for the worker with his family of four to get that $3,500 necessary minimum. If the worker has a family of five, his rate of pay would have to go to nearly $2 an hour to total the $3,900 required by the BLS.
 
Gap Is Big
Let us see how the workers stand in relation to this level set by BLS, which we will show later is a miserably low level of existence. How many workers get an hourly rate of $1.75, to say nothing of $2? The majority of even highly skilled workers earn less than those rates, and the larger number of semi-skilled and unskilled laborers work on much lower scale. This statement can be backed up by instances from specific industries.
In steel where jobs are divided into thirty categories with the lowest rate 94½ cents an hour, in some plants at least one third of the workers are receiving $1.13 and $1.21 hourly pay – a far cry from the $1.75 or $2 required by the BLS budget. A very few in the top layers earn around $2 an hour, rollers being listed at $2.13. Even such skilled men as hearth pourers and speed regulators in rolling mills have rates of only $1.61. In some cases regular wages are supplemented by a production bonus, entailing of course more intense labor.
In the auto industry average low-paid workers, such as stock chasers, in Detroit receive $1.25 an hour and in Cleveland $1.10, leaving a gap of 50 cents and 65 cents between what they get and what the BLS says they should get. The tool and die makers in the industry, the top classifications, receive in Detroit $1.87 and in Cleveland only $1.70; the former falling far short of the BLS level for a family of five and the latter for a family of four.
In shipbuilding, carpenters, electricians, boilermakers, that is, skilled men, rate a mere $1.50 on the east coast. The top crafts, namely, loftsmen and pattern makers, reach $1.65 and $1.75. However, heavy manual labor rates only 93 cents in Mobile and New Orleans, and $1.09 and $1.12 in Baltimore and northern yards.
So we could go on from industry to industry in this parade of shamefully inadequate wage scales. In textile, clothing, rubber, the picture is the same. What else can be expected since the overall average wage in all manufacturing is $1.18 an hour, 57 cents less than the BLS minimum for a family of four and 82 cents less than the minimum for a family of five!
One must also take into account that even today, when the capitalist system boasts of full employment, workers are laid off for one, two and even three months a year for one reason or another, be it because of material shortages, seasonal factors or something else. Five weeks without work means a corresponding ten per cent cut in the annual income. Unemployment benefits today by no means make up this loss. The utmost that can be expected under present unemployment insurance is from $80 to $100 for a five-week wage loss.
 
Insulting Standards
Is it any wonder that the workers are asking for what has come to be called “labor’s third round of wage increases?” Is it any wonder that they want also a guaranteed annual wage? The average worker lives on a level far below the BLS requirement. When he is laid off, his level sinks even lower. And that is not all.
The standard used by the BLS isan insult to the working people. In this age when the possibilities for good living are almost limitless, when profits go beyond the capitalists’ fondest hopes, when billions flow freely for war preparations, the BLS budget allowed for workers – and which they do not even get – is a skimping, worrying, gruelling and humiliating thing.
The wife is supposed to do all the housework – the marketing, the cooking, the cleaning, the washing and ironing – without any paid assistance. While the budgeteers conceded that a washing machine is necessary under these circumstances, actually out of one hundred families, in a twelve- month period, only seven can affordto buy a washing machine. This status assigned by the BLS budget to the working class housewife, is the measure of the whole shabby standard.
While the budget allows for a five-room living unit with bath, electricity and heat, and in not too bad a neighborhood, it makes no provision at all for repairs and redecorating that so many tenants must do themselves these days. The food allowance is 24 cents per meal per person, a figure below the average per capita consumption in the United States as a whole. The meat ration is a little more than one quarter of a pound per day per person, naturally of the lowest cost cuts, provision being made magnanimously for a turkey on Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Years.
The principle followed by the budgeteers is summarized in their words thus: “The budget level must be sets of goods and services regarded as so necessary that families would go into debt or reduce their level of savings to maintain consumption at that level when, for example, prices in general were increased ...” In a word, the irreducible minimum is good enough for the workers – and they don’t get even that.
The clothing allotment, for instance, includes one fifth of a skirt per year for the wife and one tenth of a suit for her. The house furnishings budget permits two pillow cases a year for a family of four. Of smaller items, one telephone call is permitted every three days, one half pack of cigarettes a day for husband and wife together, six tenths of a permanent wave per year for the wife. Against a rainy day, this worker is supposed to insure himself in an amount not exceeding $85 a year premium – which is absolutely laughable in its inadequacy. No other allowance for saving is made in this munificent budget.
 
Labor’s Needs
Recently Fortune magazine broke down the spending of a family in the $25,000 income level, and showed how difficult it is to make ends meet these days. The workers of this country do not reach even the miserable $3,500 allotted them by this government bureau!
Other budgets for working-class families, from non-government sources, have been higher than that of the BLS. For example, the Heller Committee of the Social Research of the University of California placed the needs of a family of four in the San Francisco region at $450 higher than the $3,500 of the BLS – another measure of the abyss between whatworkers need and what they have. Only recently the New York City Housing Authority has been obliged to raise the ceiling of incomes for tenants in city projects to $4,000 and $4,500. Again, this highlights the difference between the minimum needs of workers and their actual receipts.
Thus we see the insecurity that sits like a ghost at the worker’s meager board. Such figures as above en-able us to understand the compulsion behind labor’s drive for higher wages; the motive of the miners in their strike for pensions; the more urgent demands for health insurance and sick benefits, for unemployment insurance, for guaranteed pay. They also underscore the need for labor to form its own class party.
 




An isolationist in foreign affairs is today a rare phenomenon. Due to fear of another war, most people know that what goes on in Italy or Korea is of vital importance right here. Unfortunately, the people generally flounder about behind the foreign policy of American imperialism; while those who disapprove of it misguidedly follow Wallace on the Moscow-made road to Russian imperialism. Only a handful wish to apply the international socialist solution in foreign affairs. But it might be said there is, at least, some progress in that isolationism has been abandoned and in that it is increasingly recognized that foreign affairs are the affair of all people.
Can it be said that even that much progress away from “isolationism” has been made in domestic affairs? The “isolationist” sentiment in the present crucial wage struggle seems to flourish like a weed.
 
Prices and Wages
Next to the veterans, the workers have emerged from World War II as the forgotten men and women. Wartime wage freeze kept a wide gap between wages and the mounting cost of living. To close the gap union demands after the war were for around 30 cents an hour increase. It was then proved by the United Auto Workers that in that industry wages could be raised, the cost of cars could be reduced, and the companies would still net higher than pre-war profits. Government investigators, also, reported that the manufacturing industries as a whole could increase wages about 25 cents an hour, and without raising prices, could maintain better than pre-war profits. But the workers got nowhere near a 25 cents or 30 cents an hour boost. The most fortunate received around 18½ cents. Again labor was left behind in the race with prices. The next so-called round of wage increases, which again by no means reached all workers, was only 15 cents an hour – this to meet the terrific price rise that followed the end of OPA. Once more the workers lagged behind.
Now, in face of another 7.4 percent cost of living increase from June 1947 to January 1948, according to Consumers Price Index, the packinghouse companies, without batting an eyelash, offer their workers a 9 cents an hour raise, and Chrysler’s generosity results in an offer of 6 cents. The laborer to whom should flow the full benefit of his toil, holds the dirty end of the stick. The present wage struggles in many industries are the result – with the prearranged, concerted plan of the bosses to keep wages down and the determination of the workers to correct accrued injustices.
Workers, like stock exchange employees, who do not easily resort to striking, now do. Packinghouse workers carry on a bitter struggle for almost two months. Miners strike for an old-age pension and are penalized by the capitalist courts. The supposedly staid and conservative railroad workers are on the verge of walking out. On the other hand steel and electrical companies refuse even to negotiate a wage increase. And such offers as bosses do make are far short of the workers’ needs.
Yet many groups of working people feel all this is none of their business. The vital issue of workers fighting for a decent standard of living leaves them indifferent. They are more concerned about the inconveniences of strikes. There is indeed, in large measure, a vague sense of sympathy for the strikers, and that is all.
 
Everybody’s Business
This kind of “isolationism” is harmful to the very people who practise it. All sectors of the working population, including white collar workers, small business people, farmers and housewives – all are deeply involved in the wage battle now raging between capital and labor. The outcome of this struggle will determine the standard of living not only for the workers directly embattled, but for all of us. The success or failure of the workers who step out in front to challenge the corporations, sets the level of pay for all employees.
Primarily, of course, success or failure lies in how labor will carry on this fight. Will each union go to baton its own, or will the whole labor movement do the sane and sensible thing, namely, join in a well worked out, unified strategy against the industrialists, who definitely are acting on a pre-arranged, unified plan not to raise wages to any appreciable extent? But there are secondary factors that can play a great role in the outcome. The indirect pressures of other sections of the people can have a telling effect. Especially can housewives play an important part.
In the meat packers strike, almost two months old, women with babes in arms and carrying placards with slogans, picket struck plants. The police in Kansas City assault striking packinghouse workers and injure one hundred in what CIO president Murray called “one of the most outrageous examples of misuse of police power which this country has witnessed in a long time.” A picket before an Armour plant is killed in old-fashioned strike-breaking tactics. More thousands of packinghouse workers vote to join the strike to strengthen it. The arrogant companies offer that 9 cents against the strikers’ demand for 29 cents. When the union holds out the possibility of accepting this outlandish offer providing the companies cut meat prices,the companies indicate that prices are none of the union’s business.
All this happens, and the wives of other workingmen, and women who themselves work, and wives of hard-working small businessmen, continue to stand in line at meat counters as if nothing were happening – also they continue to pay prices that are almost at their all-time peak! In effect, by their indifference and by what I have called their isolationism, they endorse the unfair wage policy and the gouging price policy of Armour, Swift, Cudahy, Wilson, Morrel and Rath, and bless their profit-grabbing.
CIO president Murray is now urging his unions to enlist housewives in the present wage campaign. “It is important,” he said, “that the packing companies feel the whiplash of public opinion to move them from their arrogant position of refusing to pay any attention to the living needs of their workers.” This would come with better grace if Murray had also called for united union strategy in the primary fight for wage increases. However, the basic truth is there: Housewives and consumers must participate in the wage struggle by using their weapon of boycott; their standard of living is also at stake!
 
Neighborhood Action
Another industry involved in the wage issue, in which consumers can throw their weight on the side oft he workers, is the electrical industry. General Electric and Westinghouse both flatly refused to grant any wage increases, having first cut prices of a few items to make it appear that they were stopping inflation while those wicked workers were bent on continuing the inflationary spiral. Those cuts, however, were a mere token, induced by competitive necessities and drop in sales, not by the magnanimous desire to stop inflation. The companies put this hoax over on the consumer, who does absolutely nothing about it. The products of these companies should be boycotted. There are also other ways of showing them up in public.
For example, General Electric has elaborate quiz programs on the air, attended by thousands of women desiring to carry away for nothing some coveted electrical gadget they cannot afford to buy. Housewives should stay away from these shows to protest the wage and price policies of the company – making public the reason for their boycott. Or why, on any quiz show that offers a Westinghouse or General Electric product as a prize, should not a well-informed housewife quietly say into the microphone: “I cannot accept this General Electric (or Westinghouse) iron (or whatever it is) because I do not approve of the wage and price policies of this company!”
Such and similar intelligent action can come only out of organization. The present wage struggle which, in the final analysis, is for a decent standard of living for all of us, again calls attention to the need for neighborhood housewives’ committees to enlist the activity of this important section of the working population on the side of the workers, which is their own side. Such committees to act locally when called for and to combine for wider action when necessary, must become as permanent, as reliable, as active on the American scene as the unions themselves. Only so can harmful “isolationism” in domestic affairs be ended and all those whose interests are one act as one.
 




The capitalist class does not change its greed for profits any more than the leopard changes its spots. What better proof of this is needed than the present brutal determination of capitalists to beat down the wage demands of the workers? From the 1947 peak of $17,000,000,000 profits after taxes – more than three times the 1939 profits of $5,000,000,000 after taxes – the masters of industry look down their noses at the workers and snarl: “You can’t have the share of this that will help you live a little more decently.” The workers, remember, are the guys without whose labor there could be no profits at all for the capitalists.
It is essential for an understanding of the present wage struggle between capital and labor to have the complete profit picture in mind. Let us look at it from several angles.
 
Percentage Return Rises
One might say, trying to excuse the position of the capitalists: “Well,they have more bulk profits, but how about the percentage return on their investments?”
The percentage of return on investment is constantly rising. According to calculations of the National City Bank, the investment return for manufacturing industries as a whole climbed from 8.8 per cent in 1945 to 16.4 per cent in 1947, or little short of double. The little fellow with a few bucks in the bank gets from 1.5 to 2 per cent interest, or if he owns a few government bonds not yet redeemed for living expenses, his “return on investment” is around 3.3 per cent.
Also, let us not forget that much of the expanded production plant of the country is a wartime development, in the final count not paid for by capitalist investment. The paytriotic free enterprisers would not increase their plant capacities until the government gave them “adequate reassurance” by permitting them to write off the entire cost within five years. In effect, the government was mulcted for wartime expansion, now owned free and clear by the capitalists. Since the war the industrialists have held back on capital investment, by no means meeting the needs of the postwar situation. The steel bottleneck is an illustration. But why take greater risks – which the capitalists are supposed to take, you know – when returns are so good anyway.
We’ll shift the camera and get another slant at the profit set-up. Corporation revenue has been so great during and since the war that the undistributed surplus remaining in the treasuries of businesses has mounted from $46,000,000,000 in 1939 to exactly double in 1947, or $92,000,000,000. This means that the financial situation of business is even better than excellent. The actual benefit to corporations from being in such a position is that they do not have to make loans and pay interest. Business Week of February 7, 1948, pointed out that 84 percent of new plant and equipment of manufacturing companies is being financed internally, only 16 per cent coming from loans. The CIO’s Economic Outlook concludes from the above: “This, in effect, means that the consumer, by paying exorbitant prices, is largely financing the tremendous post-war expansions in corporate plants and equipment.”
With this backlog of surplus, the corporations still refuse to grant workers a decent living wage. Compare the financial situation of corporations with that of their workers. The Bureau of Labor Statistics budget for the worker allows a pitiful $85 a year for payment of premium on life insurance, and that is all this niggardly budget permits by way of saving – some family surplus that! Again such wartime savings as workers had are rapidly being depleted. By June 1947 over half of the total Series E savings bonds sold in the lower denominations, were already redeemed. In these lower denominations redemptions run far above sales. The very poor financial situation of the working people is also shown by a Federal Reserve Bank survey of withdrawals from savings banks by low-income groups. Such withdrawals, the survey reveals, are made to maintain purchases of basic necessities – not for that house, car, trip or other “luxury” that savings are supposed to go for.
Working people are also being driven into debt, paying interest rates far in excess of 10 per cent, mortgaging their future, running the chance of losing the merchandise they buy on credit when they cannot make payments. Consumer credit has increased from $6,600,000,000 in 1945 to $13,300,000,000 in 1947, more than double. Contrast the workers’ lack of money with the huge surpluses of corporations which make borrowing unnecessary for them.
 
Compare the Two
Here, furthermore, are some Department of Commerce figures that illuminate the ever increasing pile of profits. After deducting from the national salary and wage bill of $82,100,000,000 for 1945 the neat sum of $22,100,000,000 paid to corporation officials, the department found that corporations profited $1 on every $7 they paid out in wages. However, in 1947 so rapidly had profits climbed that $1 was made on every $4 of wages paid.
Still using Department of Commerce figures, comparing the way profits are rising with the income of other social categories, we find that corporate profits increased 89.9 percent in 1947 above 1945, while farm income went up 35.6 per cent in that time, and wages and salaries only 27.9 per cent. But when from the total wages and salaries paid is deducted the compensation of corporation officials, workers’ wages are seen to have risen only 13.3 per cent in 1947 above 1945. A 89.9 per cent increase in profits – a 13.3 per cent increase in wages!
Perhaps these figures seem dry and uninteresting. Indeed they are not. Making this statement concrete, letu s suppose that corporate profits for 1947 were reduced to $10,000,000,000 and that the other $7,000,000,000 had been distributed in increased wages. That $10,000,000,000 of profits would still be double the $5,000,000,000 profits of 1939. Now what would those additional $7,000,000,000 in wages have meant? One way to realize the difference to working people is this. The Bureau of Labor Statistics, in its meagre budget for workers, allows $500 a year for the maintenance of a child, but the great majority of workers’ wages are far from even that low level for child maintenance. Those $7,000,000,000 more distributed in wages could mean $500 a year for 14,000,000 children. However, the capitalists are adamant against shelling out even a small fraction of this amount.
As a parting shot at the profit picture, we’ll take in the pictogram of profits in the latest issue of U.S. News & World Report. It shows the 1947 profits after taxes not at $17,000,000,000 – the basis of the above calculations – but at $18,500,000,000. And profits for this year, 1948, estimated on first quarter returns, will reach the high of $21,000,000,000.
With the above picture of profits from several angles, one can gauge the rottenness of the capitalist position in the present struggle of workers for a decent living wage.
 




Cry, the Beloved Country
a novel by Alan Paton
published by Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1948; 278 pp.
One could read magazine articles galore and still not get the feeling of the tragedy of South Africa as one does from this deeply stirring novel by Alan Paton – deeply stirring in spite of some outstanding faults. Into the story of a native Christian parson on a quest for his sister and son in the bewildering city of Johannesburg, Mr. Paton has skillfully and with passionate protest woven an expose of the economic, social and emotional chaos that European imperialism has brought to the South African natives.
Briefly, the story is this. Rev. Stephen Kumalo, in his small, poverty-stricken town of Ndorsheni, Natal, receives a letter from “his brother in Christ,” Theophilus Msimangu of Johannesburg, that the sister of the former is sick, and should be taken care of. Not only has this sister Gertrude disappeared into the all-engulfing Johannesburg, but son Absalom, sent to find Gertrude, never returned. So the elder Kumalo and his wife decide that now the old man himself must make the journey to Johannesburg. Arrived there,, with the help of Msimangu, he easily finds his sister, who is sick, only in the sense of having sunk into crime and prostitution.
Tracing his son is harder. He follows the trail from place to place, through miserable slums and a flimsy shanty town, into a reform school from which the son has been released, to a young girl pregnant with the son’s baby and finally into jail and the courtroom where Absalom, betrayed by his more hardened accomplices, is tried and convicted of the murder of a white man.
 
“White Man’s Burden”
Briefly, the economic, social and emotional picture portrayed is this. The white man has come and acquired some of the best farm land. The natives have been crowded into land difficult to cultivate, without irrigation, without help of scientific farming. As the native land has to be divided with the rising generations, the holdings become smaller, more difficult to farm economically and stark poverty results. The lure of the city is then irresistible. There the gold mines that are the main industry and that have enriched the Europeans, provide jobs to the natives, who come without their families. Since the natives do all the work, Johannesburg provides many jobs – but not enough pay, miserable housing, no social status, no family life, no moral norms to guide the black people come from the land, their own tribal customs and moral guides irretrievably shattered by European “civilization.”
In a city like Johannesburg, the underscored contrast between the status of the native exploited and the European exploiters acts as a goad to crime. And fear stalks the land. There is the fear of the white person for his safety. There is the fear of the white people of what will happen to their “civilization” if the natives rise against them as an organized mass – rumblings of which can be heard in strikes at the mines, on buses – rumblings already tainted with Stalinism.
Mr. Paton also merges into his panoramic whole the picture of the urgent, variegated and confused activities of all kinds of people to do something about their problems. On the lowest level are the whites trembling for their safety, position and wealth, demanding more police protection, more laws and severer punishment for “native lawbreakers.” The missionaries, priests and religious reformers work along different lines. The white man, Jarvis, killed by young Kumalo, is presented as a militant liberal, pulling the robes of hypocrisy off Christian “civilization” and championing the rights of the natives.
Mr. Paton also has a word of condemnation for native politicians – represented by Pastor Kumalo’s younger brother – who arouse the natives to the point where action is called for, but lead them nowhere. Finally, in the course of the story, we see the natives themselves, engaged in a bus strike, backed solidly by bus users, all natives, women and old men trudging miles and miles from work and to work.
The weakness of the book is that Mr. Paton, in spite of this great, confused, unresolved milieu that he has so beautifully portrayed for the readers, seem to find his own pat and pretty solution. In the end the poor father of Kumalo, the young murderer, and the rich father of Jarvis, the murdered liberal, out of the depths of their grief and their understanding of the country’s misfortunes, develop a friendship. The elder Jarvis, influenced by his son’s ideas, becomes the patron saint of Kumalo’s poverty-stricken community. He provides milk so babies can live, hires an agricultural expert to teach and organize the farmers to cultivate their land better, influences the authorities to construct an irrigation system. Old Jarvis even sends his charming little grandson to give additional happiness to the old native. So the book closes on this happy personal note and presents also the unrealistic “happy solution” for the social problems.
In further criticism of Mr. Paton’s work one might say that his characters are not people but types: the native parson, his Christian brethren who help him, the woman Gertrude lured to prostitution, the bewildered young Kumalo so obviously the victim of circumstances, the rich white farmer Jarvis, his liberal son, and so on. They are indeed types used for the story Mr. Paton has to tell. However, something in Mr. Paton and in his style saves his characters from being wooden images. He seems to feel and convey the essence of the type as something special, and in his style there is a poetry and a passion that embellish his people. In fact, Cry, the Beloved Country is something of an epic prose poem.
 




Polls have been so thoroughly discredited that one hesitates to refer to them in any way, shape or manner. Yet a pre-election survey taken by the magazine Fortune (quoted by pollster Elmo Roper in his column What People Are Thinking) is worth attention. This survey which dealt with the American people’s reaction to the New Deal, showed before the election that, in the moderate words of Mr. Roper, “the people of this country are not opposed to the liberal objectives and nature of the New Deal legislation.”
One question included in the survey was: “Thinking back to the last depression, would you say that the New Deal measures under Roosevelt on the whole did more good than harm or more harm than good?” Of the people asked this question over 61 percent thought the New Deal did more good than harm; over 23 percent felt the opposite to be true; the remaining 15 percent expressed no opinion.
Following the same theme, namely, the New Deal and the depression, the next question was: “Would you say that the New Deal measures under Roosevelt shortened the depression considerably, shortened it a little, or did not shorten it at all?” The answers indicated an even more favorable reaction to the New Deal. Almost 66 per cent of the respondents were of the opinion, rightly or wrongly, that the measures credited to Roosevelt shortened the depression, with 38 percent of that number believing that these measures shortened the depression CONSIDERABLY. Only 13 percent expressed no opinion and 20 percent replied that the New Deal did not shorten the crisis at all.
The final question along the same line was: “Would you say that the New Deal measures under Roosevelt lessened the severity of the depression on the people considerably, lessened it a little, or didn’t lessen it at all?" More respondents were sure that the Roosevelt legislation lessened the severity of the depression on the people than were sure that the legislation shortened the crisis. Nearly 75 percent of the participants in the survey thought that the New Deal helped the people during the depression, with more than 41 percent believing the help was CONSIDERABLE. Accordingly, the number of those having the opposite opinion dropped to a mere 12.8 percent and the number with no opinion was only 11.8 percent.
 
People Want More
Putting some flesh on these bare figures, what do we have? There was the intervening war period when the New Deal was exchanged for the Raw Deal – when Roosevelt discharged Dr. New Deal and hired Dr. Win-the-War who prescribed the no-strike pledge and the wage-freeze for labor but fat, juicy profits for capital. Still the people remember that the government, under the compulsion of a crisis, did something for them. The people do not figure that the Roosevelt administration was following an enlightened capitalist policy to pull the capitalist system out of a crisis that threatened to engulf it. Neither do the people now complain of the extent of the help then given. They remember merely that it was help. They approve of legislation that is “for the people.” Indeed by their vote on election day they clearly said they want more of the same.
Still another question included in the Fortune survey was even more concrete on the function of government: “Do you think the government should provide for all people who have no other means of obtaining a living?” Though stilted and limited in wording, the implications of this question are plain. It implies a certain responsibility of the government to the people, a responsibility to see that they get the wherewithal to live. The staunch individualists answering this question, which is one of principle, numbered 18.9 percent of the total, less than one fifth. Those with no opinion were fewer on this question than on any other, a mere 8.1 percent. Those wishing to place responsibility on the government were 73 percent of the total, almost three fourths.
Just why the pollsters, having this information, did not change their prophesies as the Truman campaign got under way using the slogans, promises and phraseology of the New Deal, is one for the books. To serious political thinkers the information gathered in this Fortune survey can mean only one thing. During the last twenty years a profound revolution has taken place in what used to be the definitely individualistic thinking of the people of this country.
Moreover, the idea that the function of government is to take care of the people, is considered by the great majority of those polled by Fortune as quite American. In a test on word associations, 13.6 percent connected the word “Radical” with the New Deal; only 12 percent linked “Regimentation” with it; and at the bottom of the list 8.2 percent associated “Communistic” with New Deal. Thus, government “for the people” seems to dovetail into the democratic conceptions of the country. Of course, the question is whether capitalist government which is not of and by the working masses can be for them in a lasting and basic sense.
That there is criticism of the methods of the New Deal, though not of its avowed purpose, was indicated in that 32.4 percent of the respondents associated the words “red tape” with the New Deal and 30.6 connected the word "Wasteful” with it. But the pay-off is that Dewey whose strong points were exactly the elimination of red tape and waste, was defeated in favor of Truman’s positive promises for liberal legislation wanted by farmers, workers and consumers.
 




Time was when the supporters of capitalism had to resort to the bogy- man to scare people away from the idea of socialism and communism. Socialism would break up the family, socialize the women and any number of other hair-raising catastrophes would come about.
Today the technique is different. These capitalist supporters claim that socialism exists in England and that communism is full-fledged in Russia; so they proceed to compare the standard of living for the workers in capitalist America with that in England and Russia. What can be a simpler way of “proving” that socialism and communism are abysmal failures!
Following this method U.S. News & World Report of October 29 hits its readers in the eye with an expensive pictograph on the cover, proclaiming that under capitalism the American worker makes $10 in eight hours, that under socialism the British worker spends 19 hours making that same $10 in terms of values, and that under communism the Russian worker toils 81 hours for the same reward.
 
Comparison of Productivity
On page 20 appears an article elaborating this striking pictograph. The American workers, it says, can buy a loaf of bread, a dozen eggs and a quart of milk for an hour’s work. If in England the worker can buy his food with about the same labor time, this is possible only because of government subsidy and American aid. Whereas in Russia, if these things were available to the worker, it would take him half a day’s work to buy them. In the line of clothing, the article points out, the U.S. worker can earn a good quality shirt in half a day, while the British worker will labor two days for the same shirt, and the Russian worker four days. The article makes such comparisons in the standard of living in the three countries, declaring that under capitalism there is room in the budget of the worker and farmer for other things besides food and clothing, for things like cars, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, washing machines and other devices and gadgets. The case is, of course, different in England, very, very different in Russia, in which two countries we are told socialism and communism are “in practice.”
The basic reason for this difference, it is pointed out, is to be found in the productivity of capitalism as against that of socialism and communism “in practice.” In the U.S. an auto and a steel worker turn out four times as much as his British fellow worker; an American coal miner produces two and a half times what the British miner digs; the capacity of the American textile worker is one and a half times that of his British brother. As to Russia, exact statistics are not available, but it is estimated that the worker in this country produces ten times as much as the worker in Stalinland.
“On any basis,” concludes the article, “the private capitalism of the U.S. is shining in this period. Socialism and communism, by comparison, are producing a record that is not quite in the same class, whether in terms of effort required of workers or in volume of goods available to workers.”
So, therefore, what is there for a revolutionary socialist to do but fold his tent and quietly steal away!
By and large the comparisons made are correct. Yet, from beginning to end, the article is a lie because its implications and its conclusions are as false as the oldtime bogyman scares about socialism and communism.
First it must be pointed out that there is no socialism “in practice” in England or anywhere else. A few nationalized industries which pay profits to the recent private owners in the form of interest on government bonds – profits at the same rate as under private ownership – can hardly be called socialism. A few nationalized industries directed and controlled by the late private managers now given fancy positions on government boards, while worker participation in industry control is only an empty gesture, is not socialism. Production for the market, with emphasis on export trade, as is the case in England, is not socialist production. Nor is a foreign policy of traditional imperialist machinations backed by military might, what socialists conceive as leading to international socialism and the brotherhood of man.
 
Stalinism versus Communism
Coming to Russia, the bureaucratic police-state monstrosity that exists there is not communism by any stretch of the imagination. Even a simple dictionary definition of communism, without the trimmings of scientific Marxism, indicates that Stalinism is as far from communism as the north from the south pole.
Funk & Wagnalls say communism is “A theory of government and social order according to which property and the instruments of production are held as a common trust and the profits arising from all labor devoted to the general good.” Russia’s nationalized industries, run like prisons by the bureaucrats, with the secret police as the final arbiter, are not “a common trust.”
The wide gap between the well-being of the ruling bureaucrats on the one side and the poverty of the ordinary worker and the animal existence of the slave worker on the other side, attests amply to the fact that “the profits arising from all labor” are not “devoted to the general good.” Or perhaps the intellectual and spiritual enslavement in which Stalinism holds the populace can be considered for the good of anyone but the ruling bureaucrats. Maybe the Stalinist foreign policy of aggressive and brutal imperialism, crushing independent peoples under its iron heel, is the road to a world alliance of free and independent peoples.
When the writers in the U.S. News & World Report state :“Merely to buy food for an ordinary family will take most of the working time of an average man laboring under a system of communism,” they lie, because nobody knows what the working time of an average man laboring under a system of communism will net him. There is nowhere in the world a system of communism.
Misrepresentations about capitalism are made in the article as well. The American system is passed off as synonymous with capitalism, whereas American capitalism is really the only segment of world capitalism that still has virility left in it. The older capitalisms of Europe, in a weakened state before the war, have been entirely unable to pull out of the collapse wrought by the war. Why do not the writers reporting from London, Moscow and Washington report also from Paris and Rome? How about the standard of living in those unhappy capitalist countries – France and Italy? How about the productivity of labor there? And why, in reporting from London, do not these “factualists” state that in England, too, the collapse of the capitalist system was the reason for trying the kind of nationalization that they falsely call socialism?
 
Picture of Capitalism
Furthermore, the picture presented of American capitalism is not an honest one, though the comparison of AVERAGES with England and Russia may be correct. The shine and sparkle of American capitalism is not seen by the millions of substandard
American families with incomes below three, two and even one thousand dollars a year. That shine and sparkle does not reflect itself from refrigerators and washing machines in their homes because they have neither adequate homes nor these devices in them. Again, such a resplendent painting of American capitalism leaves out important vistas like the crises that have punctuated its development, fear of a recurrence of which is in the conscious mind of every worker.
The conclusion that comparisons in the standard of living and the productivity of workers in Russia, England and America is the death knell of communism and socialism, is definitely a bit hasty. Communism does not exist in Russia and is not on trial. Socialism is not being established by the British Labor Party and cannot be judged by what is happening there. American capitalism is not representative of world capitalism and is not an honest basis for comparing world systems of production – to say nothing of the obvious injustices of “shining” American capitalism itself.
However, the pivotal point in this business of comparisons must still be made. Suppose there were bona fide workers’ governments in England and Russia, striving with all their might to lay the foundations for socialism and communism. And suppose even under such revolutionary workers’ governments the standard of living of the workers and their productivity would compare as unfavorably with America as now. This fact in itself would not be a condemnation of socialism and communism. The reason is simple.
 
Potential of Workers’ Government
A workers’ government cannot pull a highly mechanized and technologically perfect productive system out of the sky as a magician pulls a rabbit out of a hat. The workers, under their revolutionary government, take over what there is. What there is in Russia, what there is in England, are productive systems far inferior to the American system, an inferiority for which not the workers but the ruling classes are responsible. The test, then, is not a comparison with America, but each country with its own past.
A revolutionary workers’ government would relentlessly proceed to eliminate profits as a drain on the national income and as a bar to economic improvement. This would have to result in a higher standard of living and increased productivity, and not only from the technological point of view. The workers would feel the honesty of the new system, would consider it their own, would have the right to exercise control of the means of production, and a new inspiration would fire this most precious asset of any nation, namely, its workers.
A socialist people would understand, to begin with, that “socialist” and “nation” are mutually antagonistic words. Socialism is international, and to the extent that more and more nations wipe out the national divisions and unite their economies for socialist production, to that extent would the benefits flow more lavishly to the people.
Suppose there were really workers’ governments in England and Russia today, guiding their own economies toward socialism and giving help and leadership to the distraught peoples of Europe held under the debris of collapsed European capitalism. The glib supporters of “shining” American capitalism would have to do a good deal more lying in a futile effort to make out a case for that same capitalism, whose contradictions are, in spite of the surface sparkle, becoming more and more untenable.
 




To make progress, the labor movement must constantly examine itself, criticize itself, face its mistakes unflinchingly, benefit by them – a very good thing to do on May Day.
During World War II leaders of the CIO and AFL, but especially of the CIO, rubbed their hands with glee and triumph, thinking they had at last found the way, if not for labor to control its own destiny, at least for labor leaders to have full participation in shaping the policies of the government – the capitalist government, that is. The formula for this modest millennium was government-management-labor participation on more and more boards, committees, functions of government. Labor’s voice was to be heard and to carry weight as a third partner equal with the other two.
The new role of labor leaders during the war as one of the Big Three, turned the heads of many of them. For a while quite a few of them made public spectacles of themselves by speaking of their doings in Washington – especially of their confabs with Roosevelt – in the same manner as a young and ignorant office boy might boast when the boss, in a “democratic” mood, invites the boy out to lunch. Sydney Hillman was more guilty than most of this kind of silly effusion.
Later, top labor leaders took the wartime three-cornered arrangement more seriously. They considered that they had a permanent “in.” They concluded that a trend had been established for this new form of class collaboration. Labor would no more have to beg hat in hand, but would have its reserved seat at more and more conference tables where policy was made. The needs and point of view of labor were to be component parts of every national decision.
Turning back to past issues of the CIO News, one reads editorials and articles expounding this goal for the labor movement. A war having been fought for democracy a second time, what would be more democratic than for labor to be allowed to participate, along with government and management, in shaping the post-war world?Not only labor leaders and the union press but so-called labor columnists like Victor Riesel of the New York Post, envisaged a class-collaborationist paradise in which the strike weapon would be antiquated and any direct action by the workers would be horse-and-buggy stuff, because labor’s needs would be amply taken care of by a wise, understanding, co-operating triumvirate – government-management-labor.
Labor, therefore was permanently to throw its lot in with the capitalist class and the capitalist government – with labor having that reserved seat. So there was naturally no need for any new political perspectives. Labor was going to make the Democratic Party more democratic. The idea of a labor party was definitely outdated by that seat at the conference table. And, of course, the goal of a working people’s government as opposed to the capitalist government, just had no place at all when labor was sitting in with its good partners, management and government.
Not that labor leaders were completely satisfied with their role on the three-cornered boards and committees of wartime. They knew well enough that management didn’t like them around all the time, giving their unasked for advice. But the labor leaders were confident that time would heal the class sensitivity of the industrialists, that the ideal of national interest would finally prevail, that a more equitable division of national income between profits and wages would be accepted as for the general good, and so on. Hope springs eternal, and so does the folly of lbor leaders willing to believe in any-thing except the power, ability and historic necessity of the working people to work out their own destiny.
 
Totaling the Score
It didn’t take too much political astuteness to understand what the wartime government-management-labor so-called partnership amounted to President Roosevelt, suave and shrewd politician and manipulator that he was, used the device to get labor to swallow the bitter pills of war without too much coughing and spitting. When he had the labor leaders eating the bitter pills out of his hand, he often used that hand to slap them in the face. When he officially ditched the New Deal, it was a safe bet that he was also looking with a jaundiced eye on the government-management-labor episode.
Management – the inoffensive name for the capitalist class – was, of course, chafing at the bit. They could hardly wait for the end of the war to start their campaign to get rid of the labor “impostors.” The National Association of Manufacturers and its watchdog press knew they were going to do a job on labor to put it back “where it belongs.” Anti-labor propaganda began long before the bombs stopped falling. The miners’ strike was only the handy pretext for the Taft-Hartley anti-labor law. Its real motivation was the determination of capital to stop labor from throwing its weight around, to end the “nonsense” of a government-management-labor partnership, to put labor within bounds.
Totaling the score, now that the government-management-labor game is over, the capitalists and their government came out way in front. They succeeded in putting over on the workers, with the help of the labor leaders sitting in that reserved seat at the conference table, an outrageous wage-freezing while wartime profits kept soaring. To prevent the workers from doing anything about it, the labor leaders obligingly made the infamous no-strike pledge.
Next to the veterans, the workers emerged from the war as the worst-off section of the population. The wage-freeze on the one side and the skyrocketing cost of living on the other Caught the working people in an awful squeeze, where they are still caught. That’s the score on the workers’ side.
Having lost their seats at the long, mahogany tables, reserved only for the duration, the labor leaders now again stand hat in hand. James B. Carey, Secretary-Treasurer of the CIO, spends weeks in Europe trying to popularize the Marshall Plan with the European trade unions, and when the State Department hampers his efforts to help it, he gently complains. The AFL and CIO begged for representation at the Latin-American conference in Bogota, and the State Department lied that there are not enough rooms in Bogota and that anyway the State Department hasn’t the money to finance a labor representation. Jacob Potofsky, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers and head of the CIO Latin American Affairs Committee, notes this as a regression from past inter-American conferences and sadly warns the State Department that it’ll be sorry. This is what has happened to the dream of the labor leaders that by being good class collaborators they would gain full participation in shaping the post-war world!
Have the CIO and AFL leaders, the editors and article writers, who were so voluble in their enthusiasm for the government-management-labor arrangement and in their hopes for its continuing after the war, found a word, a single word, for a public admission of their ghastly mistake? No! Neither have they moved an inch away from their basic policy of class collaboration, towards independent working-class policy and action.
This is something for the rank and file to think about this May Day.
 




Would President Truman have come out with his $40 cost-of-living tax adjustment recommendation if Henry Wallace had not organized his third, party? Would the President have made this recommendation if his own party dominated Congress instead of the Republicans, whom he wants to put on the spot before November? Politics being what they are, everybody knows the answers.
At any rate, this tax adjustment was one of the few concrete recommendations in the President’s State of the Union message which, because of its avowed intention to fix everything and its vagueness as to how, has been properly described as the 1948 election platform of the Democratic Party. The Truman tax plan is simple enough. Each taxpayer, no matter of what income level, is to take $40 off his tax for himself and $40 for each of his dependents. Thus a family of four would get a cut of $160. This, the President avers, will be a cost-of-living bonus for the low income groups.
But Mr. Truman has a twofold problem. Not only does he want to make a bid for the votes of the working people. As chief executive of the capitalist-imperialist government, he is reluctant about cutting the federal revenue by the $3.2 billion his $40 bonus would entail. So, with another grandiose gesture toward the working people, he proposed to pass on the $3.2 billion to the corporations whose yearly profits make new highs. Thus Mr. Truman seemingly sponsors the “revolutionary” idea of “soaking the rich” to “benefit the poor.”
What excellent electioneering this is becomes clear when we contrast Mr. Truman’s proposal with the tax ideas of the Republicans. Last spring the Republicans tried to pass the Knutson bill but could not muster the strength to override the presidential veto. That bill was obviously written to benefit income groups of $10,000 to $100,000, not only by reducing income taxes by 10 to 30 per cent but also by allowing separate returns by husband and wife. The Republicans still support the Knutson bill, with some amendments. That bill makes a bow to the low income groups by raising personal exemptions from $500 to $600, simply re-reducing taxable income by that $100 – a mere nothing. As to federal revenue, the Knutson bill would slash it by $5.6 billion, which the Republicans would seek to balance off with cuts in the budget – not in corporation profits.
Aside from Republican Representative Halleck’s wisecrack: “What, no mule?” – referring .to the bid of the carpet-baggers of “forty acres and a mule” to get slaves back to the South after the Civil War – the Republicans have countered the President’s “revolutionary” proposal with two stock-in-trade reactionary arguments. First, prices would go up and inflation would increase if $3.2 billion more purchasing power were put into the hands of the people. As always, money in the hands of the people is dangerous, but in the hands of the corporations and the rich it is benign. The New York Times expressed this point of view best: “... the President’s plan would call for the transfer of $3.2 billion from retaining corporate earnings, the area in which it is furthest removed from the consumer goods spending stream, to an area where it would make its optimum contribution to mounting prices and living costs.” Which does not solve the working people’s problem of how to get along without more money.
The other argument was voiced by by Senator Taft and Knutson. Said the Republican Taft, referring to the President’s remark that industry should invest about $50 billion in the next few years: “How does the President expect business to make this great investment if taxes take away the profits and make it unprofitable for new money to go into business?” Mr. Taft knows, of course, that 1948 profits after taxes at present rates will skyrocket to above $18 billion; that even if $3.2 billion more should be deducted in taxes that still leaves a profit package of $15 billion that would be well above the $12.5 billion of 1946 and mountains above pre-war profits. However, that is not sufficient incentive for private enterprise, or in the words of Representative Knutson, the Truman plan would fail to “INCREASE the incentive to save, invest and assume managerial responsibilities.” In a word, the Republicans have made an open rededication to a higher standard of profits and a lower standard of living.
The absolutely detestable position of the Republicans from the working people’s point of view, does not in the least make the position of the President and the Democratic Party more acceptable. In passing, it is well to make clear that the Truman tax plan is not necessarily that of his party. When he delivered his message before Congress there was no applause for his plan from Democratic benches. Of course, we all know where the Southern Democrats stand. However, even Democrats close to the President don’t go along. A case in point is John W. Snyder, Secretary of the Treasury, whose job it will be to put up the Congressional fight for the Truman proposal even though Mr. Snyder is definitely opposed to the $40 bonus. The Truman tax plan is a false front for the Democrats.
The plan in itself, moreover, is full of holes and is nothing but campaign material. In essence, Mr. Truman has come up with a “solution” for the high cost of living”. Yet how much actual help would the $40 bonus give the working class family? The rise in the cost of living has been put to us in many different ways. Perhaps the concrete figure of the economists of the Electrical Workers Union is the best. They simply state that the inflation has meant a loss of $13.03 a week in purchasing power since 1945. Even should Mr. Truman’s plan go into effect, which it won’t, a family of four would benefit by about $3.00 a week. Stated differently, the President’s $160 reduction in taxes must be posited against a $677.56 loss in purchasing power. This is tossing a meatless bone to a hungry dog.
Neither is the “soak the rich” angle of the President’s recommendation sincere. Should an additional $3.2 billion tax levy be passed on to the corporations, conditions being what they are, the corporations would lose no time in making the consumer pay that bill. This is traditional capitalist conduct, certified to by the New York Times as follows: “First, Mr. Truman’s reasoning rests upon the naive assumption that corporations as a whole are incapable of shifting the incidence of taxes from their own shoulders to those of the consumer.”
What is necessary for relief for the working people is actually anathema to Truman. If Truman were concerned about declining real wages compared with unprecedented profits, he would have to call for the end of the withholding tax on wages, and for the shifting of taxes to the rich by way of stiffer corporation taxes, increased income taxes and also capital levies. And to prevent the transference of the tax burden back to the working people by the corporations’ boosting prices, there would have to be complete price control, not the timid, tenderfoot and inadequate points made by the President in his message. A comprehensive price-control program must include price rollbacks to a reasonable level, price fixing, rationing of scarce commodities – and above all the administering of such a program by people’s committees to prevent black market racketeering and other evasions.
 




“And they lived happily for ever after” is an ending realistic people don’t expect in life but only in fairy tales of the Grimm and Hollywood variety. Realistic people especially will now have to revise this idea somewhat. For the investigation of Maj. Gen. Bennett E. Meyers has not only pointed up the grafting and crookedness in a business way among the military gentry, but has also cast a beam of revealing light on the retirement racket. Thousands of top ranking officers of the army and navy, thousands of whom never saw combat duty and have no more combat or service injuries than a civilian, have been retired on tax-free “disability” pay. As far as economic security and comparative good health can bring happiness, these spongers are in the process of living happily forever after.
First, here is the over-all picture. World War II army and navy officers on the retired list number 36,798. Of these a mere 2,531 or only 7 per cent have been retired for old age or length of service. The other 31,267 or 93 per cent have been retired for so-called disabilities. How many of these “disabled heroes” were actually injured in combat? Of the 34,247, less than one-fourth or 7,781, have injuries caused by combat. But there are injuries and injuries.
The army and navy have a way of cataloguing injuries by percentage of total disability. Of the 7,631 retired officers injured in combat less than, one-third, less than 2,560, are 50 per cent or more disabled.
According to the United States News, from which businessmen’s magazine the information in this article has been taken, the rest of the retired officers “disabled in combat” are so little disabled that they can take and are taking all kinds of civilian jobs, for which of course they get payment on top of the retirement pensions.
Now we’ve accounted for 7,681 ranking officers on the retired-disabled list. How about the other 25,586 “disabled heroes”? The United States News tells us “most of such disabilities have been civilian-type ulcers or nervous disorders.” There are rumors that “the army and navy at war’s end were inclined to give ranking officers the benefit of any doubt in applying for tax-exempt retirement through some sort of physical disability.” A nice racket – and it certainly pays off!
 
Impose on the People
Generals and admirals, few of whom have been close to combat, receive tax-free disability checks each month, in most cases amounting to $550. The United States News figures this tax-free income entailing no effort or expense for the recipient, as equal to a taxable salary of $8,500 a year. Officers of lower rank, army colonels and navy captains get from $275 to $412.50 monthly, the higher pay being equivalent to about $6,000 taxable income yearly. These World War II army and navy officers “retired for disability” collect a total annual stipend of $128,501,000, and “they live happily forever after.”
In informed circles in Washington it is expected that Congress will next investigate this retirement racket. What must be borne in mind is that the same facts mean different things to different political groups and social classes. For instance, Republicans see an opportunity to show up the favoritism and loose financial morality of the Democrats. Again, capitalists feeling that accelerated militarism is the order of the day and that they can’t get away from it, want to reduce the cost as much as possible so as to ease the tax burden on business. No doubt that is why the United States News has emphasized the taxpayers’ angle in this retirement racket. To the working people the situation adds up to something else again.
It is unjust that these do-nothing retired officers, the disabilities of most of whom cannot be compared with the wear and tear on the miners, the steelworkers, the farmers and other toilers, live off the fat of the land on taxes taken in such large measure out of wages. Militarism in all its facets, made necessary by the conflicts of capitalism, is an unfair imposition on the working people who pay for it. The retirement racket, we might say, is part and parcel of the whole crooked, profiteering, criminally wasteful, anti-social business of militarism and war. What else can be expected?
However, at this stage, the exposure of the officers’ retirement racket emphasizes a very special point for working people. The extension of militarism in this country can no longer be doubted. The pressure for universal military training, a pressure which goes on behind the scenes until Congress is ready to take the matter up, will probably succeed unless the people prepare to fight to defeat the plan. The exposure of the officers’ retirement racket has brought to view one of the outstanding dangers of militarism, namely, that it creates a rigid caste system, with privileges at the top and suppression at the bottom, a caste system that would penetrate the whole of society if universal military training should become a fact.
 
Not So for GI’s
How is this iron-bound caste system revealed in this very retirement racket? As stated above, army colonels and navy captains, generals and admirals get “disability pay” ranging from $275 to $550 a month according to rank. What do enlisted men collect for disability? In the first place, the extent of physical disabilities are more carefully checked in the men at the bottom of the military caste system. Partial disabilities are carefully evaluated. For total disability an enlisted man rates $138 a month, against the general’s $550 for ulcers or nervous disorders. But that $133 for total disability is not handed out so freely. Better find a 10 per cent disability, which rates only
$13.80 a month pension, and so on along the line. Loss of an arm or a foot involving total disability will, to be sure, add $38 to the $138, and the loss of both legs by an enlisted man could bring his monthly pension up to $200, still a far cry from the general’s $500 – for no injuries!
In a word, arms and feet and legs, stomachs and nerves, are worth more when they belong to generals and admirals who never go into combat, than when they belong to the officers of lower rank and to the enlisted men who face combat and are injured in combat.
Of course this differential between the upper and lower military castes is only a reflection of the differential between the capitalist class and the working class in society as a whole. The flesh of the capitalist and his family who live off the labor of the workers, is assumed by capitalist tradition to require more careful nourishment and tender treatment than that of the worker and his family. But the caste system of the military concentrates in itself the very worst features of capitalist society. It bases itself also on unsavory military traditions of the ages. The military places itself above society and beyond democratic processes. The stratification is made concrete by uniforms and titles, both of which are exploited even in retirement.
 




Most readers of Labor Action know of the great contributions of Karl Marx in the field of political economy, his special field. We attribute to him that conception of history and analysis of capitalist society which gave scientific ground and realistic form to the movement of mankind toward economic and political freedom that is, to the revolutionary socialist movement.
How many of us, though, know of the traits of mind and character that enabled Marx to do his penetrating scientific work and to be also a great revolutionary leader? And, if we do know of these characteristics, how many of us give them a thought, to allow ourselves to be influenced by them?
On this hundredth anniversary of the Communist Manifesto I want to write a few paragraphs not on the works of Marx but on the man himself, on those of his intellectual and spiritual features, at least a family resemblance to which all revolutionists should have.
 
Worked as Scientist
It is stylish these days among certain intellectuals, who think they have evolved beyond Marxism, to say that Marx wasn’t a scientist at all but a “religionist” seeking only corroboration for his beliefs. I think the best refutation of this smug view is Marx’s great work, Capital – the work itself. A man bent on the narrow objective of proving himself right could never have conceived such a detailed, fact-buttressed, brilliant analysis of commodity production. How Marx dug through to find the commodity at the center of capitalist wealth! How he delved into the secret heart of the commodity to discover the laws of its life and of its relation to other commodities! Only the scientific mind on the scent for discovery could have worked like that. His analysis of commodity production and of the historic system based on it could only be the result of a mind that has a key with which to open doors, regardless of what might be found on the other side.
That Marx started his scientific work with deep sympathy for the working people in his heart is undoubtedly a fact. But this is an earnest that he worked with scientific rigidity, knowing that the cause at his heart could not prosper except on solid factual ground. His labor, therefore, was indefatigable. Twenty pages of Capital, about British labor legislation, was the result of Marx’s reading a whole library of reports of investigating commissions and factory inspectors of England and Scotland. A man with nothing more than preconceived ideas has no need for this kind of research.
It is well known that Marx would not rely on anything but the original sources for facts and figures. With the ethics of a true scientist, he gave credit to all from whom he took facts, figures or ideas, bringing forth obscure names never heard of before. Thinking today would be infinitely better and the results more fruitful and reliable if Marx’s investigating, analytical, venturesome method were taken more to heart.
 
Man of Action
Nor did Marx arrogate to himself any privileges as an “intellectual.” He was a militant, an active revolutionist, as well as a scientist. He worked for the developing revolutionary movement as a writer, lecturer, organizer and leader.
Driven from his native Germany, hunted and hounded as a “dangerous revolutionary,” wherever he went he was at the hub of the revolutionary movement. In France, in Belgium and finally in England where he settled, his militant activities continued through the formation of the First International in 1864 and until his death in 1883. Here was a man in whom preoccupation in the field of thought was not an excuse for withdrawing from action, but a reason for active participation. His life concretized the interrelation between, the unity of thought and action.
So you see that the picture of Karl Marx with his nose in a book at the British Museum, the world passing him by outside, is false. Equally false is the conception of Marx as a one-track specialist, as a man rutted in his particular field, the field of political economy. On the contrary, he was .a man of wide knowledge, deep interests and many ambitions for intellectual accomplishment.
For instance, this political economist loved poetry, knew the great poetry of all Europe, admired Dante, Burns, the Greek poet Aeschylus and especially Shakespeare. He was a reader of great novels, those of Paul De Koch, Charles Lever, Alexandre Dumas, Walter Scott, Cervantes and Balzac headed his list of favorites. It is known that Marx had hoped to write a critique of Balzac’s La Comedie Humaine.
 
Zest for Life
Among his ambitions outside the field of political, economy was to write a drama based on the Gracchi of ancient Rome, a dissertation on logic, a history of philosophy. His penchant for mathematics was well known; he did produce a work on infinitesimals. His masterly knowledge of history and philosophy was admitted even by his worst opponents. To him language was no barrier; he read all the European languages and wrote in three, German, French and English. At one time he learned the formidable Russian language in order to be able to read reports of official investigations which the Russian government had suppressed but which some friends had procured for him.
Paul Lafargue, Marx’s son-in-law, copyist, helper and friend, said of Marx: “He stood high above his own works.” John Swinton, an American journalist who interviewed Marx and reported the interview in the New York Sun of September 6, 1880, wrote among other things: “His dialogue reminded me of that of Socrates – so free, so sweeping, so creative, so incisive, so genuine – with its sardonic touches, its gleam of humor and merriment.” I quote the above to indicate to the reader how Marx appeared to the objective observer. He was no habit-bound “specialist” trudging along from an inner compulsion or from blank inertia. He was a man of passion, a passion for his chosen work, for all learning, for all of life.
This is a good place to stop. I did not write the above because of hero worship, I can look at Marx as objectively as at any other human being – possibly just because I’m a Marxist. Neither do I endorse the un-Marxian platitude “Lives of great men all remind us we can make our lives sublime.” Only a few of us can be “sublime.” I emphasize the above traits of Marx because many of us have a tendency to remember only the ideological contributions of our revolutionary great men, abstracting the contributions from the personalities involved and forgetting all about the character traits making possible the unique work. It’s good for us to be reminded of these traits. It’s good for our own characters to have a feeling-appreciation of Marx’s scientific passion, of the unity of thought and action in his being, and of his diversified accomplishments and zest for life as a whole.
 




Everybody and his uncle is today a “liberal.” There are Democratic “liberals” and Republican “liberals” and of course Wallace “liberals” of the Stalinoid variety. But the purest strain – to be written without quotation marks – supposedly congregate in the Liberal Party of New York State. The state chairman of the Liberal Party, A.A. Berle, Jr., calls himself “a lifelong New Dealer.” Though Franklin D. Roosevelt, hirer of the New Deal, fired it in favor of Dr. Win-the-War, Mr. Berle continues to pay homage to FDR – an inconsistency you are not supposed to notice.
In the special election in the 24th Congressional District of the Bronx (see page 1 for story on election – Ed.) Mr. Berle is campaigning for the candidate of the Liberal Party on the basis of his independence, of his “strong, clean American liberalism,” as opposed to the Democratic Flynn machine, the Republican big interests, the Stalinist American Labor Party. But down in Washington, Mr. Berle, no longer so independent, pays court to the White House and in the November election, as in the past, he and his party will undoubtedly line up behind the Democratic ticket – a lack of political independence we are also not supposed to notice.
 
Mr. Berle’s Credo
These are some identification marks of the “strong, clean, independent liberal” and “lifelong New Dealer.” For a better understanding of Mr. Berle and liberals in general, nothing is more helpful than to examine Mr. Berle’s own credo. In his party’s paper, The Liberal, issue of November 25, 1947, there appeared (we are told in abridged form) his credo “for modern progressives,” There, black on white, we see that the ground the liberal stands on is quicksand.
“A liberal program thinks of people,” says Mr. Berle – and what politician doesn’t declaim his love for the people! Ah, but liberals “start from the demonstrated fact that the United States has adequate resources and capacity to provide not only for the present consumption but for an increase of production and of consumption capable of giving an adequate standard of living and opportunity for every man, woman and child in the country.” Revolutionary socialists have long ago demonstrated the fact that there can be plenty for all, including not merely “an adequate standard of living” but the luxuries and beauties of life for all. However, the question always is, HOW? How do we get this?
The weakness of all liberalism is that it does not answer this question. Mr. Berle’s variety is no exception. Though Mr. Berle’s specific aims and demands may be very worthy (to this we will come later), he does not provide the fundamental HOW? His whole program, therefore, is a snare and a delusion.
Mr. Berle, of course, understands “the evils of private enterprise.” On the other hand, to him “it is equally clear that a wholly statist economy can unloose abuses as great or greater.” So having nothing to offer as a third alternative, in the final showdown some liberals – like Mr. Berle and Mrs. Roosevelt – go over kit and caboodle to private enterprise with all its evils, and other liberals – like the Wallace crew – go over to Stalinism with all its abuses.
The revolutionary socialist says that the evils of private enterprise cannot be overcome WITHOUT ENDING THE SYSTEM OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISE. The revolutionary socialist also says the horrors of Stalinism must be avoided – and can be by the socialization of industry under a truly representative workers’ government, truly representative of the workers, the farmers, the small fry, the great masses, as opposed to a totalitarian system; and by basic workers’ control of industry as opposed to bureaucratic control. But liberals act as if this third alternative to private enterprise and to what they call statism, has never even been mentioned.
 
Peculiar Notions
They have other peculiar notions. For instance, Mr. Berle in his credo says he wants to abolish “the concept” of the proletariat. Is the proletariat then only a concept, only a figment of the imagination, or is it the expression of the real relationship between the capitalists who own the means of production and the workers who do not? One can understand why Mr. Berle prefers to consider the proletariat merely as “a concept.” “A concept” can be abolished by wrinkling the brow and thinking real hard about it. But the actual relationship between the capitalists and the workers, between the possessors and the dispossessed, can only be changed by revolutionary action against the capitalist class. A liberal will not go near such a struggle with a tea-foot pole. He likes to believe that the evils of capitalism can somehow be wished away without disturbing the capitalists too much.
In character with this wishy-washy-ness are all of Mr. Berle’s general tenets. He makes the point that “the job of meeting economic and social misery can be done whenever the United States wants to do it. The technicians have the knowledge on demand.” The rock bottom fact is that a CAPITALIST United States, with the profit motive predominant, will not want to do “the job of meeting economic and social misery” as the people need this job done. And the technicians who have the know-how for this job, are not at the service of humanity while they are beholden to and in the employ of the profit-motivated capitalist class. Therefore, lip-service to the “abolishment” of economic and social misery far exceeds accomplishment.
Mr. Berle’s specific points to meet the pressing social problems fare no better on examination than his general principles. To avoid depressions recurring with such infallibility, Mr. Berle believes that “continued expenditures of capital is the first line of attack.” Along this line, “the first, and least controversial, is for the government to provide capital to private enterprise.” What do we have here? The liberals want public money to go to private enterprise at a time when private enterprise proves itself a failure. This is the measure of the neurotic dependence of liberalism on private enterprise. They want it maintained at all costs, even at the cost of public funds which should be used for the people’s living needs rather than to pump oxygen into the corpse of capitalism.
The second line for the flow of capital, according to Mr. Berle, is the well-known one of government projects to provide employment. Mr. Berle gives a list of them, including more TVA developments, urban construction, soil conservation, and so on. To the question, “What are you going to do for money?” Mr. Berle answers that money can be obtained “whenever there is need for it.” He doubtless has in mind the oodles of money spent for war. But here are things of different categories.
Waging war is a necessary task of capitalism for its international life and survival and for this the capitalist politicians are obliged to make appropriations. Note, however, that right after the war the campaign started to reduce taxes, to cut government expenditures, to slice the Marshall Plan even though it also is designed for capitalism’s survival. The many, many billions needed for a program such as Mr. Berle outlines for public construction and developments, and for public health and education, will never be appropriated by a private enterprise system out for private profit.
Only a planned socialist economy, democratically governed and worker-controlled, will set aside from the public wealth the required amounts of developing national resources, for public construction for housing, for health, for education. Mr. Berle’s program in this respect is as inept as Mr. Truman’s pre-election “liberalism.” Mr. Truman says he wants many of the things Mr. Berle says he wants, and both have not the slightest intention to disturb private enterprise to get these things. There is indeed little choice between Mr. Berle’s “strong, clean American liberalism” and Mr. Truman’s pre-election brand. It is easy to understand why liberals finally cast their votes for Mr. Truman on Election Day.
The instrument for workers’ independent political action is an independent Labor Party, in all respects free from capitalist ties. With such a party a real fight can be made for the needs of the masses, and great strides can be taken toward that workers’ government, that democratic socialization, that workers’ control of industry, without which no permanent progress can be made.
 




Houseowners with empty oil tanks and tenants in ice-cold apartments in one of the coldest winters on record must have wondered: how come this country, which was the arsenal for a mechanized World War II run almost entirely on oil, could not supply the winter needs of its own population? Another cause for wonderment – or indignation – was the overflowing tanks of the armed forces, contrasted with the empty tanks of civilian consumers. The Navy, which stores oil for all the armed forces, had so much that it could afford to play Santa Claus. On the East Coast it distributed nearly one and a half million barrels of oil during the crisis, under pressure from local government officials.
Of the two questions, how come the oil shortage and how come the firmed forces had enough and to spare, the latter question can be answered more quickly. Everyone knows that the armed forces have been soaking up and storing oil. But no one is permitted to know how much or whether what they have is necessary. Oliver Filat, writing in the New York Post, said: “No civilian body in or out of Congress can say what the United States military storage of oil amounts to, or whether it is justified. Furthermore there is no comparable government storage of oil to meet civilian shortages.” It is roughly estimated that military consumption is ten times that of 1938.
This alone does not account for the Navy’s generosity in releasing some of its oil for civilian use. There is a more specific reason. It seems that in April 1947 the Navy asked for bids by the oil industry for 125,000,000 barrels of oil that military officials wanted for 1948. Seeking to sell when prices might be higher and profits better, the oil corporations made no bids. From the military came a cry of “holdup” and “blackmail” and the threat to retaliate. It can be noted, by the way, that “retaliation” was long overdue, since it was this same industry which overcharged the Navy $38,500,000 on $31,000,000 worth of oil as a patriotic sacrifice during the war – not to mention other wartime steals. However, the oil industry, to forestall retaliation, offered the Navy a cagey compromise. The industry suggested a pool for supplying the Navy’s needs, if the anti-trust laws were lifted for this purpose.
Obviously, this was a plan to evade competitive bidding and to fix the price of oil for the armed forces. The Navy would not go along, even though on past occasions it must have winked an eye to make possible the gross finagling of the oil industry. This time the armed forces threatened legislation for government control of the oil industry. This brought the industry to terms. Oil began to pour into the storage tanks of the Navy. By October of 1947, 90 per cent of the total requirements for the first half of 1948 had already been delivered. Under the circumstances. the Navy could afford to be generous.
Besides bringing out once more the unscrupulous profit maneuverings of private industry, this story of the Navy largesse points up the nature of militarism. It is an institution of special privileges, not only setting itself above the needs of the population, but surrounding itself with a sacrosanct air that what it does is beyond question or reproach.
 
Was There a Shortage?
To get to the main theme of this piece: the oil shortage that brought such great discomfort and even sickness to so many people this winter. In the first place, not everyone agrees that there was a real oil shortage – if by shortage is meant not something artificially produced but something unavoidable. Some claim that the shortage of fuel oil this winter was definitely not necessary. Let us see what there is to this claim.
Among the reasons given by the oil industry and its apologists for the scarcity of fuel oil is that the demand was unprecedented. True, but this demand could well have been estimated. It was known to the oil industry that in 1947 a total of 820,000 new oil burners were installed in homes in this country. Buyers of these burners did so on the understanding that there would be fuel oil for them to burn. The oil industry was aware that there are many more cars and trucks on the roads. And, of course, it knew of the increased demand of the armed forces, which, by the way, uses heavy fuel oil that normally is converted into lighter fuel. So these and other demands for oil were foreseen.
Could this increased demand have been met with available facilities? First, oil was definitely not being produced to capacity. Checks along these lines showed that in East Texas thousands of wells were limited to fourteen barrels of crude a day. Many of these wells can produce 5,000 barrels each a day. How about refineries? Were they working to capacity? Information received by the Senate Small Business Committee was to the effect that independent refineries were running at only 69 per cent of capacity. Out of 108 independents, 76 claimed that they were unable to get crude oil from big producers. Here also belongs the fact that recently the War Assets Corporation disposed of several large refineries to big companies which agreed to operate at ONLY 25 TO 40 PER CENT of wartime capacity! Why the underproduction?
Oliver Pilat, whom we quote above, has referred to an unpublished memorandum made for Congressmen and government officials by Paul E. Hadlick, counsel for the Senate Small Business Committee on oil matters. The contents of the memo are really hair-raising. According to Mr. Hadlick, the oil industry has utilized interlocking state and national laws, as well as agencies in the Department of the Interior in Washington, to launch the present price gouge in fuel oil by keeping production down. The purpose of the industry is to keep production just under demand. Mr. Hadlick says that “if done by private industry alone,” this would be “the most gigantic conspiracy in modern history.”
Mr. Hadlick claims that the Bureau of Mines of the Department of Interior, which is required to estimate coming demand in fuel oil, last spring gave far too low an estimate. Who makes these estimates? One man – Alfred G. White. Where does he get his information? From the oil industry! Another official involved is Max Ball, head of the oil and gas division of the Department of the Interior, of whom the oil industry says in publication, National Petroleum News: “... an old man of the highest standing who can well be trusted at all times to see that the industry gets absolutely fair play.”
 
Keeping Prices Up
Such are the contradictions of capitalist society that while one government official may be busy helping the oil industry double its prices and multiply its profits, another official from the same department seems to be exposing the industry. Thus we find Secretary of Interior Krug testifying before the Senate Banking Committee that oil prices have skyrocketed beyond those of any comparable commodity. Between June 1946 and November 1947 crude oil rose 56 per cent while coal went up 30 per cent and coke 36 per cent. Since that 56 per cent estimate, crude oil again jumped from $2.15 a barrel to $2.65. The balance sheets of 16 representative oil companies for the first nine months of 1947 showed 83 per cent more profits than for the same period of 1946. Too bad the two thousand people who daily put in urgent calls for fuel during the crisis this winter in New York City couldn’t warm themselves on corporation profits.
Confronted with its policy of underproduction for higher prices and profits, the oil industry resorts to the plea of conservation of resources. One thing is certain. If the oil resources of the country are giving out, the saving of some millions of barrels will make no significant difference and will certainly not overcome the need to derive oil from other sources. However, underproduction by some millions of barrels does affect price levels.
To what extent the scarcity of tankers and the insufficiency of pipelines for transporting fuel oil contributed to the crisis this winter has not been established statistically. Be it noted that the same policy, namely, underproduction to keep up prices, in the steel industry, can in some measure at least explain the lack of adequate transportation for fuel oil. This lack was, however, also known before the winter and with proper planning, emergency measures could have been taken to avoid widespread suffering.
In a word, the oil crisis of 1948 is another chapter of the same old story: the story of production for profit against the public interest. If the people who shivered in icy homes and flats will learn this, their suffering will not have been in vain.
 




The first national convention of Americans for Democratic Action, held in Philadelphia, February 21 and 22, was a public exhibition of top labor leaders desperately clutching the skirts of New Dealers, with the letter hanging on for dear life to the apron strings of the Democratic Party.
Present were nearly 600 delegates from forty states, representing some 25,000 dues-paying members of ADA. Besides the noted anti-Wallace liberals such as Mrs. Roosevelt, Paul Porter, Leon Henderson, Wilson Wyatt, Adolph Berle and others, there was an imposing array of national and local labor leaders from nearly all the non-Stalinist unions, AFL, CIO and independent. AFL President Green, Reuther of Auto, Dubinsky of ILGWU, Whitney of the Trainmen, Wolchok of Retail and Wholesale Workers, Emil Rieve, Allen Haywood, James Carey, Green of UMSWA and many more labor leaders were at the convention in Philadelphia.
Nothing new came out of the convention to better the political position of the workers. The clearly expressed. anti-Wallace stand was not exactly new. Before the delegates convened it was well known throughout the nation that this was to be a convention of anti-Wallace and anti-Stalinist liberals and labor leaders.
The convention and its speakers correctly condemned the Stalinist coloration of the Wallace movement. In the statement of policy adopted, the organizers of the Wallace movement are upbraided for “proclaiming devotion to civil rights at home” and for being “the first to condone judicial lynching, slave labor and the police state abroad. The rest of the anti-Wallace position af ADA is, however, absolutely incorrect from the point of view of working class interests. ADA is opposed to the Wallace party because it will “split the liberal vote.” This is simply another way of proclaiming adherence to the two-party system. “The liberal vote” is supposed to go to “the liberals of both parties” – both capitalist, on the other hand, the interests of the people urgently demand the coupling of opposition to Stalin-Wallace with advocacy of an independent Labor Party free from Republican, Democratic and Stalinist ties.
That the powerful labor contingent at the convention did not come out for a real party of labor marked the measure of their weakness, inadequacy and pathetic political dependence on the New Deal remnant. Constant exhortations to “organized labor to defeat the reactionary forces in Congress and in state legislatures” – quoting from William Green’s convention speech – are nothing more than the old, bewhiskered, ineffective policy of “rewarding our friends and punishing our enemies.” Again, the statement of policy adopted by the conventions states, among other things: “ADA considers it essential that the Democratic Party recognize that liberal achievement is essential to its continuance as a significant force, just as liberal and independent votes are essential to its re-election.” This is easily recognizable as the old system of bartering with the capitalist parties; “What election promises will you give us for our votes?” To date this kind of political trading has simply dissipated the inherent political strength of the masses.
Walter Reuther, who voiced no opposition to this discredited policy, himself implied its futility. Here are some graphic phrases from his speech, as reported in the press: It will take “more punch in liberalism’s good right arm” to end “the double threat of the commissar and the storm trooper” ... “the outlook is bleak” ... “the middle, which is our proper ground, is being blasted out ... in the bitter crossfire of totalitarian extremes.”
Does Reuther think labor is helpless between the capitalist reactionaries and the Stalinist tyranny, and the middle ground of “liberal capitalism” even though it is “being blasted out”? It is not true that there is no other alternative but to remain to be blasted out. Actually a single step would take the labor movement, and with it the mass of discontented people, onto firm new ground. The step is into an independent Labor Party, aiming at workers’ government to end capitalist domination, and at the democratic socialist reorganization of society – the exact opposite of Stalinist statism.
 
Will Back Truman
No such step was taken by the labor leaders at Philadelphia. Instead, one may predict, the “Lib-Labs” of ADA are going to support the Democratic Party, in spite of playing hard to get. The convention closed without endorsing Truman, and in fact his supporters at the convention got a cool reception. The delegates adopted the statement: “It is the sense of this convention that ADA should take no action with respect to a Presidential choice until both major parties have held their nominating conventions, and that the organization’s position then be established on the basis of the respective nominees, the vice-presidential nominees, their records and their party platforms.”
This may well be a bid for a vice-presidential nominee on the Democratic ticket to suit ADA’s taste. Also, actually, ADA is not so far from endorsing Truman, its support of a candidate, it has been stated, depends on his stand on the Marshall Plan, on civil rights, on anti-inflation measures and on Palestine partition. At least Mr. Truman’s recommendations and speech-making record can be said to meet the first three points. IF something is also patched up for Palestine, supposedly Mr. Truman will meet the minimum requirements set by ADA for its support. Indicative of the way the wind is blowing is that the CIO News has already started the Truman build-up.
It will take forceful and unrelenting pushing from the rank and file of organized labor and the masses nearest to it to move their politically weak-kneed leaders off the middle ground onto firm new ground – or out of their positions of leadership.
 




Court reports appearing in the press give some slight indication of the abuses practiced under present rent control laws.
For instance, there was the case in Brooklyn where a landlord raised a tenant’s rent $6 a month because of the addition of a baby to the family. Moreover, the landlord was not acting on his own. The Office of Rent Control, which yon may have supposed looks after the interests of tenants, actually okayed the boost. The tenant, a Navy veteran, had just paid an increase of $2.75 a month allowed the landlord as a “hardship” increase. When it came to being penalized for having a baby, the tenant balked and took the case to court. The Municipal Court Judge was moved to comment: “Shall we have birth control in New York because the expediter puts a penalty on babies?”
One wonders how many similar abuses are absorbed by tenants throughout the country who haven’t the information or the means to protect themselves – to protect themselves not only against landlords but also against the Office of Rent Control.
Though it is expected that existing federal rent control will be continued for another year, no improvement in the law for the protection of tenants can be hoped for. The stop-gap bill passed by both House and Senate and signed by the President extended present controls till the end of March. Some time in March Congress will again take the matter up. Substantially the same law will be passed to run to 1949. As a matter of fact, the Senate already voted to extend controls till April 30, 1949, but because there wasn’t time to resubmit the matter to the House before the February 29 deadline the stop-gap law was also passed. The Senate’s renewal bill permits the same 15 per cent increase by “mutual agreement;” And the Senate took the teeth out of the bill by eliminating punishment for violators of rent regulations.
Certainly this law will give no relief to tenants such, for instance, as those occupying a squalid two-story frame house in the Bronx at 660 East 175th Street. The case of these victims of rent gouging became public when the landlord attempted an eviction of one of the tenants. Court testimony revealed that the tenant was paying $125 a month for four rooms which could not be called an apartment, because they are four rooms in a one-family house. The tenant, his wife and four children have to use a basement toilet and share the second-floor bath with the seven adults and a child living in the four second-floor rooms – rental $160. Two attic rooms were shared by four adults paying $100 a month. The Municipal Court judge before whom the case came personally investigated the house and found cracked and plasterless walls, just one kitchen for the second and attic floors, and no fire escapes for these nineteen human beings occupying ten rooms; the furnace was cold and there was no oil. Said the judge: “I was shocked at conditions in that house. Human rights are being trampled upon.” Not only there, judge!
The underlying housing shortage which makes such robbery possible is being handled by the politicians with a ten-foot pole. They don’t go near it. The Taft-Ellender-Wagner bill, which has some good features, slumbers on in the Congressional hopper. There’s another bill introduced by Senator McCarthy (Rep., Wis.) which places more emphasis on “encouraging” private enterprise and less on public projects – but no action. The last politician to grasp the ten-foot pole and make some gestures with it is President Truman.
 
Truman’s Recommendations
From his blissful vacation in the sunny Caribbean – just to show the poor suckers shivering in crowded rooms at home that he hasn’t forgotten them – he sent a message to Congress on housing. He said things about the desperate housing situation that many of us already know. Two and a half million married couples are forced to live with other families. Five million houses are no longer habitable. Of the new houses being built only a small percentage are apartment dwellings and the great majority are private homes built for sale at prices far above the means of those most in need of housing. Where existing law has decontrolled living quarters, rents have risen more than 60 per cent So the President makes some recommendations. He thinks one million new houses and apartments should be erected annually for the next ten years in urban areas. He covered in his message everything from increased production methods, wages, legislation authorizing federal funds for local housing authorities and for slum clearance, to giving aid to capital and insurance of investment returns. Nobody is to be offended, everybody is to be pleased, and houses are to be built. Such messages read well in an election year. Actually there’s still that ten-foot pole.
Incidentally, the President is very much off on his facts where it is important to be right – either he is off or the National Housing Committee is. The President said that 15 per cent of the new housing built in 1947 was rental housing. Henry M. Propper of the National Housing Committee, testifying before a Congressional committee on housing, reported that only eight per cent of the new houses started in 1947 were multi-family apartments for rent. That’s quite a difference. Again, the President spoke of one million units added in 1947. while Mr. Propper’s figure was only 850,000 units started in 1947. That also is quite a difference, when you think of people having or not having a decent place to live in.
The housing problem was reported the number one worry of the mayors of 250 cities who recently met in New York for their seventeenth annual conference. In cities in Michigan and in Kentucky, in the East and in the West, the crying need is for housing. However, the mayors’ worry did not materialize into anything tangible. They too have that ten-foot pole.
 
Job for Labor Party
People like the steamfitter who was up for eviction from his four-room substandard home for which he was paying S125 a month until liis plant struck and he could no longer pay that extortion, will have to come forth and press for a solution of the housing crisis. The working people will’ have to raise their voices and demand an adequate building proram – and rent control that really protects the tenants! But to whom can such demands be made?
Certainly not to the capitalist politicians schooled in the art of evading the people’s most vital needs. On the contrary, labor must write its demands into the platform of its own party, an independent Labor Party, opposed to the capitalist Democratic and Republican Parties and also to the Stalinoid Wallace party.
 




Perhaps it’s a bit out of season to write about wool in the middle of the summer. However, the stores are beginning to show fall clothes, and even in the heat of early August one shudders at the prices. But this article is not about wool alone. It is about price control, about Joseph C. O’Mahoney, Democratic Senator from Wyoming, and especially – about labor politics.
Senator O’Mahoney has built up, at least for public consumption, a record of progressivism. In the press he appears as a crusader against monopoly. He hits the front page on inflation; he is “against.” In April 1947 he warned manufacturers to reduce prices or “they will find they have priced themselves out of customers.”
Recently, when the steel industry again boosted prices, O’Mahoney thundered that that monopoly was “surrendering to inflation” and he threatened:
“I shall introduce legislation at the special session to require producers of basic commodities ... to submit all proposed price increases to public scrutiny by an appropriate public agency ...”
Furthermore, and more important, Joseph C. O’Mahoney, Democratic Senator from Wyoming, is one of the darlings of the CIO.
 
Wool over the Eyes
In the July 16 issue of the CIO News there is published a guide to voters. Here are listed and explained sixteen legislative actions in which the CIO was vitally interested. The voting record of each member of the Senate and of the House is given. On thirteen of the sixteen issues Senator O’Mahoney voted “right” from the CIO point of view; on the other three he did not vote “wrong” but merely abstained. Therefore, according to this method of recommending capitalist politicians to labor voters, O’Mahoney stands very high and is one of the CIO chosen ones.
This is the face – or shall I say the mask? – that Senator O’Mahoney shows to the public and particularly to the labor public. In the secret places of his heart, O’Mahoney harbors a deep interest, which can hardly be called for the general good. Like a shepherd worrying over his flock, O’Mahoney guards the interests of the sheep industry producing sheep’s meat and wool – wool that goes into blankets and winter clothes that we all soon will be needing.
It is well known that the wool industry has long been so well protected by tariff legislation that it is a virtual monopoly for domestic producers. According to reports, notably that of Edward H. Collins in the financial columns of the New York Times, Senator O’Mahoney “has long regarded it as an essential part of his duty to help perpetuate one of the most notorious and unnatural monopolies ever created by American tariff legislation.” Thus Senator O’Mahoney, crusader against inflation, has championed the wool monopoly and the artificially inflated prices of wool for many years before this post-war inflation began to victimize us on all fronts. Nor has O’Mahoney corrected this “inconsistency” in recent years.
On April 7, 1947, three days before the Senator solemnly warned manufacturers to reduce prices, as noted above, the Senate – convinced by the eloquence or more probably by the give-and-take attitude of O’Mahoney and others – agreed that the price of wool should be supported by the government at “not less than the 1946 level.” It was, of course, just an accident that the 1946 price of wool – 42.3 cents a pound – was perhaps the highest in all times. The pre-war price was 22.3 cents a pound.
Again in June 1948 the Aiken bill for permanent support of farm prices was up in the Senate. Once more, by back-scratching arrangements among the Senators, the bill provided support for wool at around 46 cents a pound for 1948 and at around 48 cents for 1949. Mr. O’Mahoney’s labors on behalf of the wool industry are quietly rewarded and wool prices are pegged at more than twice pre-war levels. On the front pages of the press O’Mahoney thunders against inflation.
 
His Politics a Trap
Now if two-faced O’Mahoney were to introduce, as he threatened, legislation to require “producers of basic commodities” to submit all proposed price increases to public scrutiny, you can bet every last of your hard-earned dollars that wool, now double pre-war prices, and sheep’s meat, now triple pre-war prices, would not be listed in his bill as “basic commodities.” After all, they are needed only for clothing and for food – and how basic is that!
This story of wool, price control. Senator O’Mahoney and CIO politics is of course told to show what a snare and what a delusion is so-called labor politics as practised by certain labor leaders. What kind of price control can the people get from capitalist, special-interest politicians such as the Republicans and Democrats by nature are? What kind of progress can accrue to the masses from such progressivism?
While the labor movement indulges in the folly and futility of recommending capitalist politicians, people disgusted with the old parties are attracted to the Wallaceites pursuing other special interests, the special interests of the Stalinists and of the Kremlin.
Isn’t it time for the labor movement to crystallize its political power in its own labor party? Isn’t it time to recognize the O’Mahoneys for what they are?
 




While the big-party politicians kick the inflation problem about and do nothing but hope that somehow they can get credit for doing something, housewives have definitely expressed their lack of confidence. Throughout the nation housewives have gotten together to try to prick the inflation balloon by boycotting meat.
It is indeed a hopeful sign that the people who suffer most from ruinous prices are doing something about it.
In one month New York City housewives saw the price of meat rise eight per cent. Porterhouse steak was marked at $1.10 a pound and loin lamb chops at $1.20. That seems to have been the straw that broke the camel’s back. A campaign was started In New York for a Boycott Meat Week from August 9 to 16. To gain support for the idea 500,000 leaflets were prepared, 200 outdoor rallies were planned, the women were aroused by the chain telephone method, baby carriage parades were staged. In front of butcher shops and markets, picket lines could be seen. For instance, in front of the city supervised market at First Avenue and Tenth Street, housewives and children in a baby carriage parade, marched and chanted: “Roll back prices! Don’t buy meat!”
 
Spontaneous Prices
But even in places where there are no organized consumer councils as in New York City, Chicago and other large cities, housewives spontaneously banded together to make a meat boycott effective. As an example, in Dallas, Texas, an old lady of seventy-one, Mrs. R.D. Vaughn, started a boycott that spread to eighteen other Texas cities. In Camden, N.J., thirty-three women organized a “Petticoat Brigade” with the purpose of gaining support for a meat boycott. They circulated pledges among housewives to undertake a ten-day stoppage of meat purchases. In the town of Lakeland, Fla., women picketed butcher shops with placards bearing the slogan: “Leave the pigs in clover while we put this over.”
An example of a wider and better organized effort is what happened in Memphis, Tenn. There 20,000 members of the Shelby County Civic Club were mobilized to fight meat and milk prices, and they proceeded in getting support and action from the 30,000 members of the Memphis Trade and Labor Council.
In upper New York State the “Budget Brigade,” consisting of 3,000 Utica women, pledged themselves not to buy beef for two weeks. And in Syracuse by chain telephone calls and chain letters women were rallied to a one-week meat boycott and a pledge to buy meat only three times a week after the boycott.
How effective has this nationwide boycott been?
Almost immediately upon the commencement of the boycott the Grand Union Company announced cuts in prices of two to four cents a pound on various meats. Just a drop in the bucket, to be sure, but still the result of the boycott. Some retail butchers have given the boycott support. In Los Angeles twenty-five retail butchers planned to close down until wholesale prices ease. A Camden, N.J., butcher in expressing his sympathy for the boycott, said: “I’m tired of feeling like a thief every time prices take a jump.” Further, the New York City market commissioner reported that purchases by butchers for weekend sales to housewives dropped markedly because of the boycott.
 
Must Be Widened
However, this is not the whole story. Most butchers pooh-pooh the whole idea and declare the boycott is just a rash of dissatisfaction that will pass. More serious than this is the fact that the New York Department of Markets weekly food survey showed pork prices at brand new highs, climbing two to four cents a pound on different cuts, in spite of the boycott.
That seems to be the situation seven days after the beginning of the movement by housewives not to buy meat until the prices come down.
The movement should be continued. It should be continued and it should be widened in scope. While many women all over the country participated, the vast majority did not. More housewives must be induced to take action. There can be no doubt at all that if the meat boycott is widespread and persistent, it must result in a drop in prices. Once this happens to meat prices, the profit-laden manufacturers of other foods will see the handwriting on the wall.
Unless action is taken on what we might call the home front, there will be no relief for the working people. Predictions are for further spiraling of prices. A Professor Rasmussen, professor of marketing at Cornell University, speaking before the convention of International Apple Associations – yes, there is such a group – sadly told the delegates that because meat, eggs and dairy products will continue to be so high-priced, the people will be unable to buy apples, other fruits, vegetables and similar foods essential for a healthy, balanced diet. It was not reported that the professor said anything about the unreasonable prices of apples.
It is noteworthy that the New York Tribune, which is inclined to go along with the do-nothing policy of the Republican Party on the inflation question, shows definite wrinkles of worry. In a recent editorial, it fretted: “The only question is whether something more drastic may not be necessary ... people are going into debt at an alarming rate ... mortgage debt, installment debt, personal debt are all rapidly rising. ”
Undoubtedly it is true that people are going into debt just to enable them to live – not to buy durable goods, not to buy luxuries, just to live. But nothing drastic will be done now that the Democratic president has gone through the campaign stunt of calling a special session of Congress and the Republican Congress has unashamedly met and done nothing. Only the people themselves can take drastic action.
Such actions as the meat boycott, but involving great masses of people, participated in by unions and all peoples organizations, will proclaim that the people will not docilely allow their pockets to be picked by inflationary prices only to swell corporation profits.
 

   It is incorrect to have one opinion presumably as a socialist and a member of the Workers Party, and another one as a private citizen so to speak. The whole case of the Marshall Plan has to be presented in accordance with the socialist ethic that a revolutionary socialist movement – not a Stalinist movement – cannot be built behind the backs of the workers but by taking them into fullest confidence. It is hypocritical to mutter under one’s breath “thank God for the Marshall Plan” and in public merely to flay it as the imperialist scheme that it assuredly is. Much has been made of the question: “What would you do if you were in Congress during the discussion of the Marshall Plan?” If a member of the Workers Party were in Congress, the political situation in America would be very different from what it is today and this difference would have to be taken into consideration in arriving at a position on any issue. But taking the question flatly, the course of action of a member of the WP in Congress would have to be something like this: First, to try to get on the floor a counter plan embodying real international cooperation and sound workers’ control. Failing here, as no doubt would be the case, an attempt to submit certain amendments to the Marshall Plan bill to eliminate its most obnoxious imperialist features, would have to be made. Failing this, a vote could be cast for the Marshall Plan, stating fully and openly that this was limited and critical support, necessitated by the fact that history has offered no other way to give Europe the aid urgent for humanitarian and socialist reasons. We have before had to clarify to the workers complicated political positions as, for instance, our advocacy – ourselves a party – of another party, an independent labor party.  Lines Were Defined It has been more or less assumed in this discussion, unwarrantedly so, that those who take a position of limited and critical support of the Marshall Plan, will ipso facto support American imperialism in the war with Russia. This does not help clarify the issues involved in the Marshall Plan, in spite of involvement of the Marshall Plan in war preparation. The condition of the world, on both sides of the iron curtain, will have to be known and taken into consideration, if and when World War III comes. A year ago the Marshall Plan should have been considered as such. A word now about the timing of the discussion of the Marshall Plan within the party and in Labor Action. It comes just about a year too late. As soon as the Marshall Plan was projected, its nature could have been foretold, namely, that it was to be the plan of American imperialism to repair the war damage, both human and material, for three reasons: (1) to prevent western European countries from slipping under the heel of Russia; (2) to rebuild and groom them as allies in the coming war; and (3) also to restore these countries as customers for American products. It could have been foreseen that all the conditions, strings and compulsions necessary to accomplish these ends for American imperialism, would be imposed. Imperialism is what it is. We could also then have seen that the by-products of the American imperialist plan – namely, aid to the European people as consumers and a lift to disintegrated European industry so that, some measure of economic stability might possibly be patched up – were not only desirable but absolutely urgent from a humanitarian point of view and from the point of view of historic progress. For without some degree of economic revival in Europe, without the release of workers from the degradation of primitive grubbing for a crust of bread, there was little hope of a socialist revolutionary rebirth. So the lines were defined even before the hearings began in Congress. It was important to have a discussion then and a position established then because we must try to intervene wherever possible in the great issues of the day. Of course, we can intervene only in the sense of trying to influence the working class through our connection with the small section thereof that reads our press and keeps contact with our ideas. Because we did not have a well-thought-out position, our contribution to the national and international discussion carried on in Congress and indeed all over the world, was rather routine and dogmatic. We did not go far beyond showing up the imperialist nature of the plan, the strings attached, the power the United States would have over western Europe, etc. Our contribution to the worldwide discussion was epitomized in the cartoon in Labor Action showing a prostrated Europe between the grasping beast, Russia, and the identical, grasping beast, America. This oversimplification must have struck more than one of our readers as unrealistic.  Lag in Discussion Our line of propaganda and education would, of course, have depended upon what position we had taken. Perhaps we would have formulated an alternative plan containing the elements of real international cooperation and of sound workers control. But realities would have had to be the guide. For instance, on the question of workers control, logically one would have to answer the point: “Would you give the European Stalinist-dominated unions control over American aid?” The necessity for timely discussion in a political group cannot be overemphasized, not only in order to intervene in the best possible way at the right time. It is also important not to lag behind events which, constantly changing, make a different impression on the mind with time and blur the original issue. For example, contributors to this discussion in Labor Action have already forgotten that the Marshall Plan did influence the outcome of the crucial Italian election. Some, now that the Marshall Plan moneys have begun to pump new blood into old veins, talk about the tendency to “overemphasize” the industrial and social collapse of Europe. This is not written to blame anyone for the delay in discussing the issue. In our party, with opportunity for all to initiate a discussion, responsibility rests on the whole party. But the fact remains that while now the discussion is about what a correct socialist position should be, a year ago the discussion would have included also the consideration of how best to intervene in this biggest (at that time) national and international issue.   



A few weeks ago some Republican enthusiasts thought they had found the answer to President Truman’s electioneering claim that the Republicans are responsible for skyrocketing prices because they opposed price control – also, by the way, opposed by many Democrats. These Deweyites said that the Democrats brought about inflation because it was they who started the program of government support of farm prices. This gave the Democrats a welcome weapon. They accused the Dewey camp of planning to end the government support program and thus to betray the farmer. It didn’t take the Republicans long to see that they had let go a boomerang. Dewey had to make it clear that he loved the farmers as much as Truman does, and that he wouldn’t think of ending government price support.
So the subject has been dropped as a campaign issue. Everyone is for the farmer during the campaign, as everyone is for everyone else during the campaign; and, of course, no one opposes the government support program. The reasons for this unanimity are obvious. Everyone wants the farmers’ votes; and no one wants to be responsible for making a change in policy and later be blamed by political opponents for deflation when it comes. The only group wanting an end of government support of farm prices are the speculators who thrive on wild price fluctuations.
While government support of farm prices has thus ceased to be front-page campaign material, actually it is becoming an important factor in the economy. Predictions are that in the coming year the government will pay out or loan several billions of dollars and will become the owner or potential owner of huge stocks of farm crops. This will happen because the biggest crop in history, now being harvested in this country, and the agricultural recovery in Europe and elsewhere, are already forcing farm prices down, and the government will be called upon to make good its guarantee to peg those prices at legal levels.
 
Parity and Support
When prices on the open market fall below parity, the government can step in to do one of two things. It can either buy crops or other farm products outright at 90 per cent of parity (for cotton it is 92% per cent due to the efforts of the powerful lobby); or it can extend a loan to the farmer amounting to 90 per cent of parity, so that the farmer may store his crop and continue operations. However, the farmer can turn the crop over to the government to cancel out the loan. This is how government support works.
A word about parity – what is this thing called parity? A period is taken as basic in which there was a balance between farm and industrial prices. Parity prices attempt to keep this balance throughout periods of rising or falling general cost levels. In the Department of Agriculture there is a list of parity prices of commodities covered by the government support program, which parity prices are supposed to represent a fair relation between farm prices and the prices of what the farmers need to run their farms and to live.
Disparity between agricultural prices and industrial prices has constituted a problem in almost every country, more or less acute at different times. It will be recalled that the difficulty of “closing the scissors” in the early years after the Russian Revolution led to bitter controversy. Stalin, of course, “solved” the problem by terror, violence, exile and annihilation. Today in European countries where inflation is acute, farmers hoard their products rather than sell because they could not buy equivalent value for the money they would receive.
In this country the 1929 crisis affected farm prices more quickly than others. The Roosevelt recovery program made an effort to put a floor under the prices of agricultural products, of which there were great surpluses because hungry people could not buy. When World War II loomed on the horizon and the government foresaw the need for stupendous amounts of agricultural products, it guaranteed prices to farmers to get them to embark on all-out production, just as it guaranteed, in one way or another, profits to the industrialists. After the war the support program remained to encourage continued high production to meet postwar needs – to say nothing of the powerful farm lobbies on the spot to look after their own interests.
Since the war, prices have soared far above parity and the government has not had much occasion to step in. Its price support has been given for such purposes as to encourage the production of eggs in the Midwest and flaxseed for the extraction of linseed oil used by industry. The notorious support of wool and potato prices is the largest item.
From now on, however, the story will be different. The relation of supply and demand has changed, and wholesale prices reflect the change. Already there are declines below parity. The prospect for next year is for tremendous government involvement. Some estimates are for an expenditure of a billion and a half dollars for grains alone. Then there are cotton and other crops. The government is expected to acquire, over and above what it usually buys for its needs in the open market, a stupendous stock of 300,000,000 bushels of wheat, 350,000,000 bushels of corn, 4,000,000 bales of cotton, etc.
Who benefits most from this enormous government expenditure? As with all such programs of the capitalist government, the big fellow gets the cream. An illustration can be given from the government support of potatoes. It seems that the cost to the farmer to grow and harvest an acre in potatoes varies from $150 to $300. The cost to the big farmer is naturally at the lower figure since large-scale production reduces costs. Government support is in the neighborhood of $243, which still gives the large grower a profit of $93 but the small grower a possible loss of $57.
Then again, huge surpluses in government hands encourage deals. Still illustrating with potatoes, when the government was paying $1.55 for a bushel of potatoes under its support program, it was selling them to a processor of potato flour at 9 cents a bushel, after itself paying freight to the processor at 40 cents a bushel. That processor certainly got a bargain.
Mainly, however, when the surpluses mount, government support becomes a program of outright destruction of valuable food, much needed food. This has been true from the inception of the program. From May 1933 to February 1934, the government bought up 6,136,717 pigs and lightweight hogs and 222,149 farrowing sows whose litters of baby pigs might have amounted to another million. With the approval of Henry Wallace, then Secretary of Agriculture, some of these pigs were processed into inedible greases and fertilizer, and the great residue was dumped or burned. At that time people in this country were on starvation diets. This outrage is well known.
Two years ago, when starvation stalked Europe, millions of bushels of potatoes acquired by the government under its support program, were allowed to rot in the ground or were spoiled by pouring kerosene over them, thus also wasting the kerosene. The Department of Agriculture explained:
“Generally speaking, dumping would be the most economical disposition of surplus potatoes from a dollar and cents standpoint since the cost of sacking, grading, loading and freight would not be incurred.”
What will become of the mountain of surpluses the government is now expected to acquire? “From a dollar and cents standpoint” some of it will doubtless be destroyed, especially where the cost of picking, packing, shipping and storage is too much. What is not destroyed outright, of the government-acquired crops, will go into the reserve stockpile to serve the larger destructiveness of World War III.
There are many families in this most prosperous country which do not have enough to eat. This program of destruction does not help them. There are many families which can buy food at current prices only by foregoing other needs and desires. Government support of prices that may keep up inflation does not help them. On the other hand, the small farmer will not get much support from this program either. And as a matter of fact the whole agricultural industry remains in a precarious position. If supplies far outrun demand, will government support be able to hold back a. price collapse, especially with the unstabilizing influence of large government reserves?
Burning little pigs and pouring kerosene on potatoes cannot establish a stable and sound price structure. This acute and chronic problem can be tackled basically only by changing the motivation of production. That motivation must no longer be for sale and for profits through sale, but for human beings, to satisfy their needs.
 




Recently the New York Herald Tribune opened its pages to a veritable civil war fought, in print, between the North and the South. The provocation was a series of twelve articles written by Ray Sprigle, reporter and staff member of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, called In the Land of Jim Crow, which, as can be guessed, was not pleasant reading. Whereupon the Tribune was bombarded by letters both approving and condemning Mr. Sprigle. Finally came a series of six answering articles by a journalist from the deep South, Hodding Carter, editor of the Greenville (Miss.) Delta Democrat-Times, hotly opposing Mr. Sprigle and his point of view.
What made Mr. Sprigle’s series important is that, with a Florida tan, a shaved head and a guide provided by Walter White of the NAACP, Mr. Sprigle passed the color line, from white to black, for four weeks. Thus he saw and brought to light many aspects and details of Negro life in the South that are not too widely known. On the other hand, Mr. Carter’s contribution is noteworthy because, a self-confessed “southern liberal,” he reveals what this rather recent growth – southern liberalism – is like. Readers of Labor Action who missed the exchange in the Tribune will be interested.
 
Lily White Murder
From Mr. Sprigle’s articles one learned that the public humiliations suffered by Negroes in the land of Jim Crow are not confined to segregation in buses, trains, stations, with the worst and the filthiest accommodations allotted to the Negroes. Not at all. In many Southern cities, for instance, the stores do not permit Negro women to try on dresses. In some stores cloths are put over black customers’ heads so they may not contaminate the hats they try on. In most places the colored customer must pick her hat and dress off the rack, and if she as much as touches an article, she willy-nilly has bought it. And did you know that Georgia’s entire coastline is barred to Negro bathers? Other Southern states have at least segregated beaches, but the makers of the rules in Georgia are afraid the Negroes may blacken the Atlantic Ocean. Negroes enter the lily white Atlantic lapping the shores of Georgia at the risk of being fined $50 and costs.
Segregation in the field of health at times brings wanton and unnecessary death to Negro patients. As is well known, all health facilities in the country are sadly inadequate. However, the inadequacy of hospitals and health facilities for the Negro is criminal, and the coldblooded exclusion of even dying Negro patients from lily white hospitals, as reported by Mr. Sprigle, is something hard to believe even for those who are well acquainted with the viciousness of Jim Crow.
Mr. Sprigle told of a young Negro mother in immediate need of a Caesarian at childbirth. She and her dentist husband lived in Clarksdale, Miss., where there is a good white hospital which does not accept Negro patients no matter what the urgency. Mrs. Hill was driven 78 miles to a Negro hospital. She died on the way, with her unborn baby. Again, two women badly hurt in an auto accident right outside of Dalton, Ga., where there is a 40-bed white hospital, had to be driven for nine hours to the nearest Negro hospital in Chattanooga. On arrival one of the women was already dead.
Sprigle cited similar tragic cases. He checked with the white hospitals involved, asking if it were true that under no circumstances do they accept a Negro patient. Neither letters nor telegrams brought any reply from any of the hospitals – which is answer enough.
 
Contrast in Education
“The pattern of 250 years of slavery still endures in the South. For 250 years, for instance, it was a crime, in some places, to teach a slave to read and write. And looking at some of the Negro schools in the South, it must still be a crime.”
Thus Mr. Sprigle on Negro education in the South. By and large, this general situation is widely known. Mr. Sprigle adds some not so well known facts. For instance, in the Mississippi Delta country, district No. 4, Madison County, the unusual situation exists that Negroes own about 90 per cent of all the land and pay 90 per cent of the taxes. But the Negroes have nothing to say about how the tax money is to be spent. The educational facilities for black and white respectively compare as follows:
The whites built themselves a new school consisting of five modern buildings designed by a good architect. There is a main school building, a vocational school building, a gymnasium, a beautiful bungalow for the principal. Fifteen teachers are employed, the minimum salary being $150 a month. On the other hand, only after persistent protests was a new school built for the Negroes. It is a square box on a dirt road, two partitions dividing the space into four rooms. One of the rooms has desks hammered together out of scrap lumber picked up out of the mud, the mud stains still present. The other three rooms have no desks at all, just home-made benches and tables. There is one toilet for boys and girls “leaning drunkenly in the wind.” Four teachers are employed, their pay running from $55 to $90 a month. The contrast speaks for itself.
In this delta country many places do not even pretend to provide school buildings of any kind. Of 121 Negro schools in one county, only 31 were so-called school buildings, the rest were in churches, lodge halls and even garages. Yet the school money in this county comes from a two per cent sales tax paid by the population, half of which is Negro. However, as Mr. Sprigle stated, as much is paid simply to haul white children to and from their schools as is expended for the whole Negro educational program. More could be related along these lines from Mr. Sprigle’s report. The abysmal lack of educational facilities for Negroes is so important because, as Mr. Sprigle pointed out, next to the right to vote freely, education for his children is most ardently wanted by the aware Southern Negro.
 
Grand Larceny
Mr. Sprigle also did well again to call public attention to the iniquitous sharecropping system. “This share- cropping in the South is grand larceny on a grand scale, and the Negro is the victim,” wrote Mr. Sprigle. He told of the lot of a so-called prosperous Negro sharecropper in Georgia, for 29 years a cropper under “The Man” – the all-powerful landlord. In 1946 his crop consisted of 14 bales of cotton and six and a half tons of peanuts, for which “The Man” allowed him $800 for the whole year. In 1947 his crop rose to 17 bales of cotton and 10 tons of peanuts, for which he was allowed only $700 for the entire year’s work. Mr. Sprigle figured that at the current prices the cotton was worth $3,400 and the peanuts $2,000, a total of $5,400. Technically the cropper is supposed to get one-half of the value of his crop, in this case, $2,700. Deductions are made for the hire of a tractor, for fertilizer, for the commissary bill and so on. But $2,000 definitely looks suspicious as deduction for these items. However, nobody but “The Man” knows how calculations are made.
The sharecropper never gets an accounting or statement from the landlord. “The Man” has to account for his figures to absolutely no one. In the Mississippi Delta region, where King Cotton holds sway over the most fertile land in the world, “the last outpost of feudalism in America” thrives on the sharecropping system of robbery.
Though Mr. Sprigle did not state the following conclusion from his facts – and, by the way, his facts are more important than his conclusions, which are rather superficial – one can see that the economic absolutism of the sharecropping system must be battered down and ended. Any Fair Employment Practices Law that does not require that “The Man” make strict accounting to the sharecropper for his crop will do nothing at all for this most exploited section of farm workers. It is to maintain this system of feudal robbery that the bourbons of the South want to keep the Negroes in ignorance and without political and civil rights.
A progressive program for the Negro must, therefore, include the demand for fair employment practices for the sharecropper.
 
Carter’s Contribution
Now to go to Hodding Carter’s contribution to the discussion on Jim Crow. In the first place, he accused Mr. Sprigle, in crossing the color line, of indulging in a stunt rather than in useful procedure. Mr. Carter stated that Mr. Sprigle revealed nothing of which people, North and South, are not already aware and “which increasing numbers of sensitive, compassionate and fair-minded Southern whites are combatting openly and successfully.” Mr. Carter expressed doubt that any investigation under the exclusive guidance of the NAACP could give a comprehensive picture of the whole Negro question in the South. He accused Mr. Sprigle of choosing the two worst Southern states, Georgia and Mississippi, for his exposures. And he pointed the finger of counter accusation: “... prejudice isn’t directed solely to black skins or limited to the South.” Which nobody would deny and which gets us nowhere except to show how deeply a Southern liberal resents publicity for the ugly facts of Jim Crow in his section.
Mr. Carter declared that Mr. Sprigle’s “bill of particulars just isn’t so.” If so, wrote Mr. Carter, there would be “either mass emigration or bloody revolt” – a contention which cannot be taken seriously. Mr. Carter stated that the abuses Mr. Sprigle reported could have been more true in his childhood than now. The Negro in the South of 25 or even 15 years ago is the one Mr. Sprigle is describing, according to Mr. Carter.
To refute Mr. Sprigle’s report Mr. Carter cited his own town of Greenville, Miss., also in the delta region. In the town of 32,000 population one half are Negro, and in the county of 75,000 population three-fourths are Negro. A recent bond issue of a million dollars for schools in Greenville was divided to provide $650,000 for Negro schools and $350,000 for white schools, taking into consideration that Negro schools are more needed. Showing progress on another front, Mr. Carter reported that the homicide record of the past year showed no killings of Negroes by whites and no lynchings of Negroes, nor any lynchings in that county for over forty years, Mr. Carter is hopeful of more improvement – of course, without interference from the North.
The measure of his liberalism, however, can be found in his comment on the sharecropping system. He did not wish to whitewash it, he said, and admitted the defrauding of the cropper by the landlord. But he pointed out that there are also honest white men and that “no better system” has been devised. So speaks a Southern liberal about one of the greatest economic injustices of all time, except to add that if the Negro is exploited by the owner, the latter in turn is exploited by other interests.
Mr. Carter’s basic approach can be gleaned from the following quotation:
“The Southern white is increasingly overcoming all but one of the emotional biases inherited from the 250 mutually blighting years of a master and slave relationship. That one exception is the white South’s insistence upon segregation in the mass. And that exception will remain throughout the ascertainable future, regardless of any federal legislation aimed at its discontinuance.”
 
Disaster in Justice
Mr. Carter places his faith in economic change, which he sees taking place. He pointed out that the one- crop system is going, that small farms are on the increase, that man- and-mule methods are giving place to mechanization that will force sharecroppers to leave the South for other sections of the country, that the specialist in production is becoming more popular than the overseer with the whip, that industry is entering the South to stay. Mr. Carter hopes that the South will receive a greater share of the national income, which will mean better individual incomes and a higher standard of living. He feels that the distribution of Negroes throughout the country, thus ending in the South the “specter of Negroes outnumbering whites three and four to one” will do more than anything else to break down segregation.
Mr. Carter branded “synthetic” the planks in the platforms of the Democratic, Republican and Wallace parties on the Negro question, written to catch Northern Negro votes and not to solve problems of the South. With this it is easy to agree. He does not see how these programs will get anywhere because “you can’t enforce tolerance with a policeman’s billy.” He feels that if tolerance is “enforced,” 30,000,000 Southern whites will rise solidly against it and that the only thing that would save the South from disaster would be if the Negroes themselves refused to take advantage of the new laws. To which one must comment that conservatives (and Southern liberals) always see disaster in disturbing the status quo.
All the interference Mr. Carter wants from Washington is federal aid to education, a broadened national health program, national slum clearance, soil conservation and resettlement, and so on. He is not for the lifting of the poll tax because in itself it won’t raise political standards. The economic level must be raised, then follows education, according to Mr. Carter’s formulation. He does not look at the other side of the coin, namely, that since the Negro is really not so dumb as not to know what he wants, his free vote would help him to arrive at a higher economic and educational level.
The above is, obviously, not an attempt to analyze the position of. a Southern liberal as presented by Hodding Carter, nor to posit the socialist solution as against his, but is mainly a report for the information of Labor Action readers. Nor has this article taken up Mr. Sprigle’s conclusions because they seem less important than his factual report. Neither of these writers even mentioned the increasing solidarity between the black and white worker in the South in those very industries Mr. Carter spoke about, and the basic work done by the unions in the South, especially the CIO, in breaking down prejudice, segregation and inequality.
 




Coming from all over the world, some four hundred delegates and food experts met for seventeen days in Hot Springs, Va., in a food conference of the United Nations. The pressing question supposed to have been tackled is the feeding of the undernourished, semi-starving and starving peoples of the countries they came from. Perhaps they also poked around with the problem of feeding the peoples of the Axis countries. In any case, they no doubt decided upon the uses to which imperialism could put food in black-jacking rebellious peoples.
In the countries tied to or allied with the United Nations, there are some 1,600,000,000 people – or three-fourths of the population of the globe. Of course, not all of these billions are undernourished, semi-starving or starving.
For instance, none of the assembled delegates and experts could be truthfully placed in any of these categories. Housed in princely comfort amidst rural splendor; dining and wining like potentates of old; swimming, golfing, riding, luxuriating in the balm of a Virginia spring, these delegates did not represents the millions literally dying from lack of food.
These upper class conferees only symbolized the great divide between the haves and the have-nots in this capitalist world.
 
Why the Conference?
When the President refused representatives of the press access to the food conference, realists rightfully suspected that such political fenagling would be going on, such shameful trading of a crust of bread for imperialist domination, that secrecy was essential. Whatever maneuvering of this kind went on behind the scenes, none of it seeped out. What did come through to the press indicates such a poverty of ideas, such a routine and unserious approach to the billion-mass problem of food, that it is quite possible Mr. Roosevelt simply wanted to keep this fiasco behind locked doors.
The editor of the New York Times is of the opinion that the accomplishments of the food conference, “for the most part, consist of a set of platitudes that no one would dream of, questioning. ‘All men on earth are consumers of food.’ Producers must be assured that ‘their labors will earn them an adequate livelihood.’ ‘The conference recognized that a great increase would be needed in the production of food if progress was to be made toward freedom from want.’”
It is a noteworthy occasion indeed when Labor Action, representing revolutionary working class interests, can quote with complete approval from the New York Times, representing die-hard capitalist interests. This is such an occasion. Any bright high school pupil could write a composition of equal value as the final declaration of this food conference – without being a food expert – and niight even use more original language.
But let us not forget to mention the greatest PUBLISHED achievement of this conference of winers, diners and horseback riders. After agreeing unanimously that “all men on earth are consumers of food” (how about pie in the sky?), they agreed also, to the establishment of a permanent United Nations food and agricultural conference, for which plans will be worked out in Washington, of course.
This permanent conference-to-be is very, reminiscent of the various committees and conferences for this and that grandiose humanitarian cause, all connected with the defunct and unlamented League of Nations – and all having gone the same primrose path as the League itself. And while it may have solved nothing as to the feeding of starving peoples, it probably laid more concrete plans for the use of food in crushing rebellion. And that, after all, was the REAL purpose behind the conference. On this we have already written, and will write again.
In order to give this silly conference at Hot Springs an air of importance, the President invited the whole delegation to the White House and made to them a broadcast speech of appreciation for what they did. The President told them and the world that this food conference was an “application of the principles of the Atlantic Charter.” Woe to the hungry, suppressed masses if their salvation were to lie in such an inept application of such nice-on-paper-and-in-speeches principles!
Roosevelt Speaks
Mr. Roosevelt paid the delegation many sugary compliments and intoned the usual neat cliches about freedom from want, etc. However, he made certain to remind the world that this end is “NOT EASY TO ACHIEVE.” Yet, according to the President, it is a “worthwhile challenge.”
But what about the famished people? What are they to do while capitalist politicians play their frolicsome game of “challenges” at swanky conferences?
The President did not stop to explain why it is “not easy” to feed the people of the world in this day and age of fabulous productivity. Are there not expansive Mother Earth – and plenty of human labor – and miraculous machinery of every kind – and marvelous chemicals – and ever-advancing science – and lightning-fast transportation? Why cannot at least as much food be produced to nurture life as bombs are being produced to destroy life?
Mr. Roosevelt did not say that the production of food – like the production of everything else – is for the profit of the owners of production. It is indeed not only “NOT EASY” but IMPOSSIBLE to change the characteristics of the profit system.
Mr. Roosevelt knows like a book the characteristics of the system of production (or profits which he so staunchly protects. He himself feels and yields to the powerful political pressure of the economically powerful farm bloc. He has knowledge of the vicious dumping of food into the oceans and rivers to keep up prices – and has, himself tried his own variant of plowing-under for the same purpose of keeping up prices. He himself caters to the big farm corporations by pushing government subsidies for them while workers’ wages are held on a line far below the rising cost of living. And as an admirer of the profit system, he understands how the cost of food is raised by putting up all kinds of artificial barriers to free exchange, by organizing monopolistic combines, by restricting production, etc. – to mention only a few ways in which profits are made out of starvation.
 
The People’s Way
Fortunately, the masses who don’t get enough to eat anywhere in this capitalist world – including the lands of the “benevolent democrats” as well as those of the dictators named Hitler, Stalin, Mussolini, Hirohito – have their own way to freedom front want.
For so long, but not longer, can the Roosevelts fool the masses with promises of plenty while these wise guys do battle for the system that starves the people. For so long, but not longer, will the people tolerate such insults to their intelligence and empty stomachs as this Hot Springs conference.
The way of the people is to sweep out of power the capitalists and their greater and lesser politicians. To eat and live in peace, to have security for themselves and their children, the working people will have to take over production themselves under workers’ governments.
THE ONLY VIRTUE OF THE HOT SPRINGS CONFERENCE IS THAT ONCE MORE IT IS MADE CLEAR THAT THE WAY OF THE PEOPLE THEMSELVES IS THE ONLY WAY.
 




Since 1939 milk has gone up thirty per cent, butter almost fifty per cent, eggs more than fifty per cent. Since last year, meat costs around fifty per cent more, flour twenty-five per cent more; potatoes and cabbage over a hundred per cent more.
The OPA is talking about a “TEN PER CENT (!) roll-back” on meats, coffee and butter. In view of the above figures, that is a laugh. The OPA is also promising a roll-back in the price of cabbage and lettuce. That also is a laugh. For, according to figures of the UAW-CIO, the new store prices will still leave farm prices on these items three times those of a year ago.
 
75 Per Cent Higher
It is no journalistic embellishment to talk about millions of underfed people. In a report by diverse New York welfare agencies – such as the Community Service Society, the Department of Welfare of the City of New York, the Jewish Social Service Association and the Catholic Charities – strong confirmation is given to the fact that many families are now “finding it difficult, if not impossible, to buy the milk, eggs, fresh vegetables, etc., that they need for a proper diet.”
And no wonder! In January, 1939, “a family of five had to spend a minimum of $8.27 a week for food, the kinds and amounts of which were specified by nutritionists from various welfare agencies.” But now, due to increased prices, “the same family must spend at least $14.30.” A little arithmetic shows that the family food bill per week for five people is seventy-five per cent higher than in 1939.
These welfare organizations also agree that while the worker’s income has increased, the increase is “not enough to compensate for the decided rise in food prices.”
Undoubtedly, the fight for food is the fight for higher wages. This means that organized labor must break the death grip in which the Little Steel formula holds wages.
But also, on the food front itself, the working people of this country can and must act in their own behalf.
Back in April 1942, President Roosevelt’s “stabilization” program laid an egg – except, of course, that wages were put into steel chains. Six months later another “stabilization” blast came from Washington – which tore more holes in workers’ pockets. Then came the infamous presidential “hold the line” edict – the “hold” applying only to wages.
 
No “Holds” on Prices
There are still no “holds” on prices. They balloon merrily upward. To be sure, new ceilings are being fixed and unfixed all the time. That makes life, more complicated, but it doesn’t lower prices – for the simple reason that the new ceilings are not lower, and in many cases are actually higher.
And, of course, everybody knows that ceilings are not observed. The UAW-CIO states that a store-by-store survey in Detroit reveals that forty-seven per cent of the chain stores and super markets and sixty-seven per cent of the independent stores are violating ceiling prices. This is true of the whole country.
It is everybody’s secret, furthermore, that the black markets grow like stink weeds. Plucking a few out here and there only makes room for more. Not the OPA, but the black markets are fixing prices!
Workers and working class housewives are registering the fact that nothing is being done for them – and they are bestirring themselves to do something for themselves. Such a step was recently taken by the New York City Joint Board of Hotel and Restaurant Workers when it urged upon the 50,000 members of twelve locals A BUYERS’ BOYCOTT. In other words, the hotel and restaurant workers of New York City are starting to do a little price controlling on their own.
The New York board is also suggesting to the Hotel and Restaurant Employees International Alliance and Bartenders International League of America to make the boycott general among the international’s 300,000 members throughout the country.
 
For Public Exposure
Jay Rubin, president of the New York Hotel Trades Council, with a 5,000 membership, is sure “housewives could organize picket lines to proclaim that a certain shop is really a black market.” He declared further:
“Public exposure of black markets would produce great pressure for closing them up, or at least forcing them to conform to legal price schedules. It may be illegal to paint the words black market on the windows of such shops, but it would prove highly salutary.”
Exactly! Labor Action has been pioneering for some such action for months. Picketing, painting, or some other method – the main idea is to DO something. There is absolutely no doubt at all that a buyer’s boycott organized by the unions of this country, rallying working class housewives to active participation, would go far toward pricking the price balloon.
David Siegel, president of the New York Joint Board, which has approved a buyers’ boycott, had this to say:
“If the 50,000 members of our twelve locals, as well as other trade union members cooperate in this movement, it won’t be long before the sight of fresh vegetables, fruit and other edibles spoiling on shelves will result in the profiteering merchant and wholesaler seeing the light.”
That sounds like sense. A most important item of business at the next union meeting of every organized worker should be the question of carrying out the idea of the hotel and restaurant workers, with demonstrations and picketing by housewives. Such action by the working people of the country will make not only profiteering merchants and wholesalers see the light – but also official Washington.
And out of such a boycott can grow permanent committees of organized workers, housewives and working farmers, to take over and do the job on the food front that the powers that be have wilfully flunked. Such committees can fix fair prices, force observance of ceilings, institute real rationing for rich and poor alike, exterminate the black markets, take steps to overcome food shortages. Such committees can do the job because organized labor, housewives and working farmers constitute that portion of the population which thinks of food IN TERMS OF LIFE – not in terms of farm blocs and profits.
 




If you have never known it before, you now know that cottage cheese is a good pinch-hitter for other proteins. Especially in hot weather is it a handy item to have around for salads and so on.
Last summer you could get a pound container of cottage cheese for eleven or twelve cents – and, according to the label, it was mixed with cream.
Now you pay seventeen or eighteen cents for a pound container – and it is NOT mixed with cream.
For a fifty per cent increase in price you, do not even get the same quality of merchandise – which is true not only of cottage cheese but of almost everything else you buy.
However, the Borden Company at least does not let you down completely. On its container where it used to say that cream had been added, it now kindly tells you to use cottage cheese as a meat substitute. Big-heartedly the company gives you the same amount of printing, even though it does not give you any cream in the cheese costing fifty per cent more.
*
Borden’s and other dairy product monopolists are indeed making hay while the sun shines – if you can mention the sun in connection with this global catastrophe.
By cutting down the milk deliveries to every other day, the companies are saving plenty of money on labor – while workers will be jobless.
The milk drivers’ union states that most of the house-to-house deliveries are made by horse and wagon. The claim that gas and rubber must be saved is therefore only another instance of bosses using the war to line their pockets with blood-stained gold.
Every time workers balk at being the goats, the bosses and their controlled molders of public opinion have a stereotyped answer ready: The workers are holding up the war effort!
*
A factory near Westport, Conn. – not named in the press, presumably for military reasons – is farming out homework to women in the neighborhood on a piece basis. The plant is making cable grips for the Signal Corps.
The head of the factory – who happens to be a woman – is very proud of this solution of the manpower “shortage” we are hearing so much about – while thousands of union workers in various industries are constantly finding themselves without work, and competent Negroes can’t get work.
The ingenious head of this factory also poses as a benefactor of the poor, stating for the press: “I’ve discovered real hardships the average Westport resident wouldn’t suspect; poverty and pride, an urgent need for money in the home,” etc., etc.
The self-created halo must be pulled from the self-righteous head of this she-boss.
Piecework at home is definitely a method for undermining union standards. Unions cannot organize home workers. Consequently home workers are prey for the bosses – a source of cheap labor. This Westport she-boss knows from where come sable coats.
*
This column hasn’t paid its respects to Mrs. Roosevelt for quite some time. Amends are hereby made with the following long quotation from a speech by the First Lady about the miners’ strike:
“Take the company stores, for instance. They allow the miners to run up bills and keep them ‘in hock’ forever. And they charge higher prices for their goods than neighboring stores.
“If you go down into the mining areas you will find that mining is an extremely dangerous occupation, and I am not satisfied that always efforts are being made to make it less dangerous. In the matter of wages, the miners are working full time now, of course, but for years many miners never worked more than two and three days a week.
“That, undoubtedly, was hard on the mine owners, too – [poor things] – but nevertheless these miners ended the week often with pay envelopes containing as little as three cents. I have seen pay envelopes containing three cents.”
Based on her first-hand information of the miners’ hardships, Mrs. Roosevelt is of the opinion that the miners are entitled to “some concessions” in the light of what they and their families “have lived through for the past ten years.”
You, reader, being a bit logical in your thinking, may draw the conclusion from the above that Mrs. Roosevelt was at least not opposed to the miners’ strike. Banish the thought. She assured her listeners – in this case some two hundred Chinese students in this country – THAT SHE HAS NO SYMPATHY FOR THE MINERS’ STRIKE.
She failed to indicate in what other way the miners can get “some concessions” – nor did she account for the fact that she herself did not make speeches about the miners’ hardship BEFORE THEY WENT ON STRIKE.
*
Delayed reports from France via London tell of the heroic acts of French women against the Nazis. With all their might they have been opposing the deportation of their sons, husbands and fathers for slave labor in Germany.
Mass demonstrations have culminated in mothers, daughters and wives laying their bodies across the tracks in front of locomotives to prevent the. movement of trains carrying their men to slavery. This and other actions have kept between fifty and eighty per cent of the French workers conscripted for German factories from going. Vichy supposedly admits as much.
Is it reasonable to suppose that these militant, fighting women – undefeated in a defeated country – will be content with the post-war replacement of Hitlerism by the old-time rule of French capitalism represented by Giraud, de Gaulle et al.?
Many a bitter struggle have French working men and women fought against the fascist-infested French capitalist class before the war, In 1936, they were on the verge of making a workers’ revolution – the only salvation for the working; people of the world.
MAY THE INDOMITABLE SPIRIT TODAY BEING SHOWN BY FRENCH WOMEN INDICATE THAT THE FRENCH WORKING CLASS WILL CONTINUE WHERE IT LEFT OFF IN 1936!
 




The Consumer Goes to War
by Caroline F. Ware, Ph.D.
Funk & Wagnalls Co., New York, publishers; 300 pp., $2.00
Inevitably in a book of several hundred pages, some important and interesting facts are given as, for instance, anent rationing in England, where at one time three out of five persons could not get their allowed ration of bacon because they were too poor to pay the high price. However, even such or similar information the fairly careful reader of the daily press already has, and does not need to wade through Dr. Ware’s book.
Dr. Ware describes well enough the war problems facing the consumer. Her solutions, however, are the routine, inadequate variety submitted by all capitalist apologists whose thought does not break through the confines of the status quo. For instance, the threat of inflation is to be met by “saving instead of spending.”
Naturally, Dr. Ware is as concerned about “winning the peace” as about winning the war. According to her, this is not merely a World War but – à la Wallace – a “world revolution.” However, Marx has made no contribution to the bright new world envisaged by Dr. Ware because – alas! – “He identified the public interest with the self-interest of the industrial worker.”
 




Some weeks ago the Truman Committee reported that 12,000,000 tons of shipping had gone to the bottom in the year 1942. This tonnage, of course, refers only to the vessels themselves. On board were seamen, thousands of them. Some were rescued from a watery grave. Many were not. On board also were huge quantities of supplies, embodying valuable raw materials and valuable human labor.
Ships, men and supplies were destroyed – just written off. As we all know, this large-scale ravaging of men and materials at sea is typical as well of wartime destruction on land and in the air – destruction inflicted by the Axis on the United Nations, and vice versa.
But this senseless annihilation of man and of the products of his labor is by no means the complete picture of imperialist war. Not only does world capitalism throw humanity into orgies of senseless wrecking for the ulterior purposes of the profit system. What also happens is that the individual capitalists of every warring country see in war the chance for making super-profits and for laying their hands on everything within reach.
A case very much in point are the shipbuilding and shipping industries. The wholesale sinking of 12,000,000 tons of ships – with men and material on board – is certainly not without compensation for the shipbuilding and shipping companies.
 
Who Gets the Ships After the War?
First of all, the reader must understand the relation between the government and the shipbuilding and shipping companies. It is indeed a unique one. Presumably the new ships that are now being built are for the government, on government contract. The shipbuilders are exceedingly well paid – on a cost-plus basis – about which more later. You would expect, therefore, the new ships to be the very best possible to meet the submarine menace. To get away from submarines, FAST boats are obviously called for.
But hold on. The shipbuilders know that after the war the ships will be turned over to them. This was done after the last war – and at a bargain-basement price! So what has happened? The shipbuilders have been building with an eye on their own post-war requirements. For post-war business the SLOWER ships, consuming less oil and requiring less space for oil and engine, would be more economical. THE SLOW CARGO SHIPS, THEREFORE, ARE THE KIND THAT HAVE BEEN TURNED OUT IN SUCH ENORMOUS QUANTITIES.
 
Bosses Build “Submarine Bait”
The much-touted Liberty cargo carriers, for instance, are now known to seamen as – and have been dubbed by them – “submarine bait.” They are slow because equipped with old-fashioned steam engines. According to a spokesman for the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers, the engine “belongs to the previous century and is only to be found in museums.”
The same IUM&SW-CIO spokesman, Lyman C. Covert, is further quoted as follows: “I see another angle to this matter of slow ships and profits, and that is: It seems possible that shipbuilders might prefer to build ‘submarine bait’ so that there would be more contracts, more ships to be built, and more millions to be garnered.”
 
The Bosses’ British Cousins
Until recently the British shipbuilders were producing in the same criminal way. The London Tribune is quoted as follows on the subject: “It is once again the private industry’s concern over post-war business that is the real obstacle to a clean-cut and necessary government policy on shipping.”
After a great furor arose from the Left – the labor press condemning not only the shipbuilders but their stooges in Parliament – faster ships are now being built in England. In this country likewise, the exposure of shipbuilding scandals has, according to the Truman Committee, resulted in redesigning the Liberty ship – “submarine bait” – which is to be replaced by the Victory ship, supposed to be faster.
THIS BELATED ACTION WILL NOT BRING BACK TO LIFE THE THOUSANDS OF SEAMEN WHOSE LIVES MEANT NOTHING TO BIG BUSINESS AS AGAINST POST-WAR BUSINESS AND WARTIME PROFITS.
 
Those Cost-Plus Profits
And the profits in shipbuilding have been – to put it very mildly – considerable. In England, an investigation of the cost of building thirty-two battleships, reveals profits ranging from ten per cent to over eighty per cent. What a plum!
In this country, those same Liberty ships which the seamen call “submarine bait,” are built on the cost-plus basis – ALLOWING THE SHIPBUILDING COMPANIES PLENTY OF LEEWAY ON BOTH THE “COST” END AND THE “PLUS” END.
The Truman Committee found that costs varied from $579,133 at Wilmington, Del., to $2,730,000 at Sausalito, Cal. It is true that these place’s are three thousand miles apart, but that does not account for this unbelievable difference in cost. Here is proof of what can be done with a cost-plus contract.
The Truman Committee also asked the Department of Justice to take criminal action against some companies on the counts of “rapacity, greed, fraud and negligence.” Maybe these criminal bosses will be tried and fined a farcically small amount – as is usual in such cases – and maybe not even that will be done.
But let the shipyard workers ask for more wages to buy the necessary food and clothing for their families, and they are given a presidential order to “hold the line” – meaning not to disturb the skyline of their bosses’ profits.
 
Profits That Stagger Imagination
The business of shipping war supplies, closely related to shipbuilding, is also enjoying a real bonanza. The publication of the International Longshoremen & Warehouseworkers Union – the ILWU Dispatcher – reports an orgy of profiteering by the shipowners that “staggers imagination.” Even the Stalinist believers in boss-worker unity who control the ILWU must recognize the proof submitted to a congressional subcommittee, that in some cases profits from one trip alone can be many times larger than the original value of the vessel itself. In all cases the values are set by the companies themselves – and the profits announced by them also. Following is a bit of interesting information:
On six trips, six ships of the American Export Lines brought home a profit of $1,572,141 – whereas the six ships were worth only $232,350. The profit was more than six and a half times the value of the ships.
On two trips, two ships of the American Foreign Steamship Corp., valued at $895,974, netted a profit of $481,128. That’s not so good – a mere fifty per cent of the valuation placed on the vessels.
But here business picks up again. The American President Line on two ships worth $307,828 in three trips made $814,242 – or two and two-thirds times the value of the ships.
On twelve trips, ten Luckenback ships valued at $1,426,857 made a profit of $8,879,729 – or over six times the value of the ships.
IN THIS WAY THE BOSSES ARE ABLE TO BEAR THE HARDSHIPS OF WAR – WITHOUT RECOURSE TO THE VULGAR PRACTICE OF THE WORKERS KNOWN AS STRIKING.
A rough idea of how such profits are piled up on transporting war supplies was given by the Grace Line. One of its Santa boats was wilfully tied up by its captain in New Hebrides for over one hundred days. The crew tried everything to get the captain to allow them to unload the materials on board – awaited by General MacArthur.
After fifty-one days only one-third of the cargo was unloaded. The crew held a protest meeting, which the captain declared illegal. He told the men to mind their own business – and dragged out the unloading for over one hundred days.
No wonder! The government pays the Grace Line at the rate of about $1,000 a day for a ship on a time-charter basis. The more days the unloading takes, the more pay from the government. Here is one reason why the working people are being taxed to the sockets of their eyes.
Every story of these merchants of death – of which there are legion – leads to one conclusion:
All war industries must be conscripted. Not as now, when the government takes over a factory to help the bosses break a strike. But war industries must be conscripted actually – TO END THE GRUBBING OF BLOOD-SOAKED PROFITS BY THE BOSSES AT THE EXPENSE OF THE WORKERS AND THE SONS OF WORKERS. Yes, war industries must be conscripted, and the workers themselves must get control, of them to stop the Merchants of Death from their crimes!
 




Food shortages get shorter. High prices get higher, The unprecedentedly big profits of big business become more unprecedented. The tremendous influence of the rich farm bloc on the reactionary Congress gets more tremendous – so much so that Congress cuts the appropriations for the already ineffectual OPA in order to make it even more ineffectual in keeping prices down. Mayor LaGuardia is still busy shaking his fists at and shouting about the black market in meat – and meat shops are still almost devoid of that commodity. So what’s the use of the alleged three-cent roll-back in meat prices?
The New York Times reports that “huge quantities of new potatoes shipped here from the South to relieve New York City’s recent potato famine have rotted in transit.” That didn’t exactly relieve the potato famine. And so it goes. Probably the President will one of these days create another department in Washington with another well-paid “administrator” to add to the total mess. That is what happened the last time FDR became aware that there was such a thing as a food crisis in the country. He created the Office of Food Administration with “Administrator” Davis at the head – and the crazy merry-go-round continued as before.
A so-called solution – supported by confused and intimidated labor leaders as well as by FDR and other Washington leaders – is to give subsidies to business. The idea is for the government to pay such huge sums to the bosses to net them profits in the style to which they are accustomed, that they may stop boosting prices. THIS BUCKLING-UNDER TO WAR-PROFITEERING IS TOO SHAMEFUL TO BE CONSIDERED BY ANY SERIOUS EXPONENT OF LABOR’S INTERESTS.
Labor Action once again declares that to clean up the food mess, “private enterprise” must give way to committees of organized labor, organized housewives and organized working farmers. Then, instead of the consumers being mulct for sky-high war profits, food will be distributed to the people at reasonable prices.
*
Certainly there is a shortage of labor. Haven’t you heard about it? Certainly women must drop their babies and grab the lever of a machine. Haven’t you heard about it?
But mostly the alleged shortage of labor is being skillfully used by the bosses to put it over on their workers as well as on consumers whenever possible. For should a peep of complaint come out of the months of the gypped people, the hypocritical answer invariably is: “There’s a shortage of labor. Haven’t you heard about it?”
It is noteworthy, however, that this alleged shortage of labor has not been acute enough to result in the employment of all qualified Negro workers. It is also remarkable that the alleged shortage of labor has not been pressing enough to prevent bosses from firing women workers as soon as it is known that they are pregnant.
Dr. Claude C. Pierce, interested in the subject of women in industry, returns from a tour of war plants and reports that abortions are increasing among women war workers because of the policy of firing women as soon as their pregnancy is learned. To hold on to their jobs, women are resorting to abortion.
This situation, combined with the increase in adolescent delinquency, has produced a boom in the abortion business. Not only do certain doctors engage in an “illegal” practice under conditions which are injurious to the women, but quacks without any medical training have formed abortion rings to capitalize on the need and misery of women caught in the net of boss cruelty or war morality. The deaths of women and girls who submit themselves to these unscrupulous charlatans are increasing daily.
THE DISHONEST JABBERINGS OF THE BOSSES AND THEIR POLITICIANS ABOUT WAR SACRIFICES ALWAYS RESULT IN SACRIFICING WORKING MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
Organized labor must protect its people first, last and all the time. Organized labor has to demand that pregnant women workers be allowed on their jobs as long as their health permits – with necessary medical supervision while at work. Furthermore, they must get financial support while having their babies. And lastly, women must be given assurance of re-employment after their babies are born – with retention of every seniority right.
It is the fear of losing their jobs which is driving so many working women into the death traps of the abortion business.
*
Running true to form, the wholesale attack on the Negroes in Beaumont, Texas – which resulted in so much injury to the Negro population and to their meager property – was started on the pretext that a white woman had been raped by a Negro.
However, a slight innovation was added this time. A reputable local physician examined the “wronged” woman. He found that there were no signs of rape. There were no bruises on her body. Furthermore, no fingerprints were discovered on a cup and saucer out of which the woman claimed the Negro drank some of her coffee before he attacked her.
In a word, this contemptible creature made a lend-lease of her so-called “womanhood” in the cause of race hatred.
She may have done this as an unconscious victim of the propaganda of the Ku Klux Klan and the American Christian Association, its modernized stooge. Or she may have consciously played this abominable role as a paid agent of the KKK and its stooges. In either case she was guilty of one of the most heinous sins on the calendar, namely, helping to keep alive the artificial hatred of white workers for their fellow workers of darker skin.
Where can the blame be placed for such baseness? Where, indeed, can the blame be placed for the entire disgraceful outbreak of race riots that have overrun the country?
To lay the responsibility at the door of the KKK and the American Christian Associati0n – financed by the bourbon bosses of the South and the industrialists of the North to keep black and white workers from uniting and using their combined strength – is to tell only half of the story. Even fifth columnists don’t explain the other half.
How about the so-called champions of so-called racial equality? How about FDR, the New Dealers, the press and radio “friends of the Negroes”? What have they done to end race hatred?
If only one-tenth of the money, the effort and the cleverness employed by the government, the press and the radio to make anti-labor propaganda when workers ask for a raise, were used instead to spread education on the race question and to make propaganda for inter-racial solidarity, the danger of these widespread riots would be greatly reduced. For the power of these agencies for shaping public opinion and action is stupendous.
But these “friends of the Negroes” are phoneys. Their “belief” in race equality is only as deep as their need for the Negro vote and as their need for Negro support of their war. In their hearts, these hypocrites are as opposed to the solidarity of black and white working people as the KKK itself. EVERY ELEMENT OP THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM BANKS ON RACE DISCRIMINATION TO KEEP BLACK AND WHITE WORKERS FROM UNITING IN THEIR MIGHT.
That is why race equality can be realized only under a workers’ government. With the government, the press, the radio, the movies, the schools, all under the control of the working people themselves, these powerful means for molding public opinion and action can be used to cement the bonds of mutual need and friendship between all workers. Artificial color lines will be erased when boss rule is ended.
Black and white workers, hasten that day!
 




One cannot emphasize too much that the bosses want to drive a wide wedge between black and white workers – that they subsidize the Klan, the National Christian Association, the National Workers League and other fascistic outfits for that purpose.
One cannot emphasize too much that the government itself sets the example of race discrimination.
One cannot emphasize too much that the war has created conditions of extreme social friction – that hundreds of thousands of war workers have been dumped into crowded production centers without necessary housing, recreation, schools, medical care, or even food.
It is also the sad truth that some workers from the South have brought with them to the industrial centers their long-standing prejudice against Negroes – a prejudice carefully nursed by Southern bosses.
All these are interlocking causes of the barbaric attack against the Negroes in Detroit, Mobile, Beaumont.
But these causes could not have produced the catastrophic outbreaks if there were not something even more basic working along with them.
JOB INSECURITY, FEAR OF UNEMPLOYMENT, UNCERTAINTY ABOUT THE FUTURE – here you have the fuel ignited by the fascistic elements trying to pit white workers against their back brothers.
Research organizations report that three out of four Americans fear the unemployment of the post-war period. Conservative capitalist economists predict that even if business is as good after the war as it was in the war year 1940, there will still be nineteen million unemployed. Already workers in war industries are being fired because of overproduction of certain war materials. The prospect of unemployment gnaws at the vitals of all workers.
The Klan elements could not have pulled the Packard strike against the upgrading of capable Negro workers – if white workers were not afraid that Negro workers might permanently take away their jobs. The fascistic scum who led the attacks on Negroes in Mobile were able to incite workers by the specter of unemployment.
This fundamental connection between job insecurity and the race question must be brought out into the open in order to show how foolhardy it is for any group of workers to suppose they can get permanent employment for themselves by turning against other groups of workers.
Suppose – for the sake of argument alone – the inhuman, undesirable and impossible feat of confining our Negro brothers to black ghettoes could be accomplished – even as the Nazis dealt with the Jews. Would that remove the threat of unemployment for white workers?
All Negro workers in all categories, rural and urban, in 1940 numbered only something over five million. The discrimination against the Negro worker has been so great that even today – the heyday of Negro employment – government departments report that in war industries on” an average only sixty-seven workers out of every thousand are Negroes.
In the Los Angeles aircraft industry – where there has been such an influx of war workers – only five thousand Negroes have found work. But in some of the war industries there are hardly any Negro workers. For instance, in the manufacture of explosives only one per cent of the workers are Negroes; in electrical equipment, only two per cent.
Putting the Negro into a black ghetto – Hitler style – would not save many jobs for the white workers. The whole Negro population of the country, men, women and children, is only thirteen millions. Whereas economists predict unemployment of nineteen million.
How do the Jews fit into this picture? They too are blamed for everything. There are all told some five million or less Jews in this country and they are not overwhelmingly in industry.
Or some vicious demagogue, might urge Protestant workers to start an extermination campaign against Catholic workers – to keep the jobs for the Protestants.
Or some mischievous messiah – going beyond the color and religious lines – might begin to shout for drawing the sex line. There are, after all, around fifteen million women industrial workers. Would it be an idea to throw all women workers out of their jobs?
Even if at a given moment the impossible were accomplished and all the available jobs were held by male White Protestants, the unemployment menace would still be as big as capitalism itself. For every new labor-saving machine would, as always, throw workers out of their jobs. Every factory made idle for lack of profitable sales orders would, as always, add to the army of unemployed – and the mass of disinherited, starving Negroes, Jews, Catholics, women and other groups, hovering in the background, would be a mighty weapon in the hands of the bosses to beat down wages, to worsen conditions, to break strikes, to bust unions.
This economically erroneous and anti-social – let alone inhuman – idea of suppressing groups of workers is meat for the bosses. FOR THE WORKERS IT IS POISON.
Workers must proceed on the correct premise that all people have an inalienable right to the needs of life on the level that modern industry can provide.
Workers must proceed on the correct economic and technological premise that modern productivity is great enough to provide plenty of the best things of life for every man, woman and child, of ever color, creed and race, of every country of origin.
And workers must ask why – in view of the existing means of security for all – do we live in constant fear and trembling lest starvation overtake us? In fear so great that there are white workers who allow themselves to be aroused against their black brothers because of it!
The answer is that the capitalists stand in the way of economic security for all. Not the Negroes, not the Jews, not the Catholics, not the women workers, not the foreign-born workers – the CAPITALISTS block the way of the whole working class. IT IS AGAINST THEM THAT ALL WORKERS MUST UNITE.
Unite to make your unions more powerful, class-conscious and militant. Unite to demand a short enough work week – -with an adequate basic wage – to allow every worker to get a job in the post-war period. Unite to take over and operate factories and plants that the bosses will shut down as soon as war orders cease – so that, the workers can continue on their jobs producing needed commodities for the people.
Unite against the bosses in a class-conscious working class political party. Unite for the goal of a workers’ government under which the capitalists will be ousted from their seats of profit-grubbing and the workers themselves will control industry.
Only then will labor-saving machines mean shorter work hours and more leisure for all – instead of unemployment, as now. Only then will no factories ever be made idle because of capitalist profit-seeking machinations and lack of foreign markets – for industry will be run to supply the needs of living people.
 




One could spend a whole week reading post-war plans and speeches full of good intentions about avoiding another apple-selling era and about providing jobs as the key to the post-war situation.
But one thing would strike the thoughtful worker as very strange indeed. One of the most obvious steps against unemployment is hardly even mentioned by any of the so-called planners.
What is more logical than to shorten the work week in order to create jobs for more workers?
It is easy to understand why capitalists and their backers are against shorter hours. The more hours workers put in for the same pay, the more profits are created for the capitalists with plenty to spare for their backers
But why do not labor leaders come out and say that the thirty-hour work week is on the agenda in any post-war plan worth its salt? If it is mentioned at all in labor circles, it is done softly, timidly, with an air of apology.
 
Thomas Speaks Out
A refreshing exception to this rule was a recent speech before the New York Women’s Trade Union League by R.J. Thomas, president of the United Automobile Workers, CIO. Talking on the question of post-war’ jobs for women, he said everything depends on the adoption of the thirty-hour week. This shortening of the work week, he said, would not only give the men and women who are now working from forty-eight to one hundred hours a week “a greater opportunity to enjoy life and improve their minds,” but would put “every able bodied man and woman who wants to work at their top skill.”
Mr. Thomas went to the heart of the question. But, of course, with the thirty-hour week must go the demand for undiminished wages in the post-war period and for a minimum wage commensurate with the great productivity of American labor. For without the wherewithal to live, workers cannot “enjoy life and improve their minds.”
Still another demand must go with the thirty-hour week. There is no sense in having a thirty-hour law on the books if it cannot be put into effect because the capitalist owners close down their factories. Workers must, therefore, realize the necessity to open idle plants and factories under their own control – in order to provide jobs and produce goods for consumption.
 
At the CIO Convention
But at least Mr. Thomas spoke up plainly and basically on the thirty-hour week issue. What is puzzling is this: Why didn’t Mr. Thomas, an important personage in the CIO, put up a fight for the adoption of the thirty-hour week at the CIO convention held a month ago?
There were plenty of opportunities to pose the shorter work week as an urgent need. For there came before the convention the question of jobs for women and for ex-service men as well as the whole post-war situation. But this logical measure was not even discussed.
The organized labor movement will have to take the lead in solving its problems – if they are to be solved at all. Peddling pretty phrases about the “four freedoms,” in imitation of capitalist demagogues, won’t do. What is required is a definite prospective of action and definite demands – with the thirty-hour week near the head of the list of post-war demands.
In his own inimitable fashion, President Green of the AFL touched on the question of the post-war work week the other day as he spoke before the Truman war production investigating committee. He very correctly complained that the Administration has “not kept its part of the no-strike agreement by adjusting wages to absorb increasing living costs.” Then he added: “We shall endeavor to restore equity by insisting that peacetime hours standards shall be established without reductions in earnings.”
 
Where Green Is Right and Wrong
Mr. Green is absolutely right that there should be no reduction in earnings when “peacetime hours standards shall be established.” But why, since the Administration has not kept its part of the no-strike agreement – which labor leaders had no business to make to begin with – should not Mr. Green urge higher pay for the workers in the AFL right now, as the CIO is already doing?
Certainly, with the capitalists making war profits this year totaling well over eight and a half billion dollars free and clear after deducting taxes and everything else, it is eminently fair to make them disgorge a little by paying higher wages – so that workers can keep up with the climbing cost of living.
Another thing. What does Green mean by “peacetime hours standards”? Is it the return to the forty-hour week that he wants? But that won’t do at all. The forty-hour week is washed up, as far as labor’s needs are concerned.
Much water has flowed under the bridge since the forty-hour law was passed: The productivity of labor has been increased enormously. In farm and agricultural industries the increase over the 1935–39 period was thirty-three and a third per cent. In war industries – which means modern industry as a whole – labor produces per hour from fifty to seventy-five per cent more than in 1935–39. In some industries, like aircraft, the jump in labor’s output is even greater.
If we settle on the very low figure of fifty per cent as the measure of labor’s increased productivity in both agriculture and manufacture over the 1935–39 period, then it follows that the amount of goods turned out then can now be had with one-half of the working force. In view of this situation, the thirty-hour week is a most reasonable demand if jobs are to be provided for America’s sixty million workers.
If organized labor does not take this step, it concedes to the capitalists all the benefits of industrial advancement and improved technology – and to the workers the miseries of unemployment. From labor’s point of view, labor-saving machinery and techniques must be translated into ever shorter working hours for the workers.
The solution of the unemployment problem is unattainable only for those who think in terms of capitalist profits and the perpetuation of capitalist power.
To those who think in terms of human needs and human rights, the solution is ready at hand. It includes not only the adequate shortening of the working week without reduction in pay, and not only the right of workers to open up factories closed down by the bosses.
Demands are in order for the peacetime expenditure for public benefit of the vast sums now wasted in destructive wars – as a means of providing employment and the good things of life.
In the final analysis, however, the profit-grubbing obstructionism by the capitalist class must be ended. The working people will be forced to take increasingly militant and revolutionary measures – and finally to oust the capitalists and establish a working class government and workers’ power. Therein lies peace, employment and plenty for all.
 




The prospect of more meat for civilians is something to look forward to.
The War Food Administration announced its suspension of quota limitations on the slaughter of livestock because there is now a record surplus of 17,000,000 head of cattle.
In fact, the OPA expects such a huge supply of meat in the near future that it contemplates reducing ration points on meats to induce the consumer to buy plenty. That will be fine, but – Why wasn’t the meat released right along instead of allowing such a surplus to accumulate? It looks now as if the meat famine was an unnecessary hardship!
The pendulum of food supplies for the people is allowed to swing from the extreme of dire shortages to the other extreme of oversupply. “All or nothing at all” is all right for the theme of a song, but hardly a sound policy for the distribution of the people’s food. And behind all the bungling and unnecessary hardship can be found the motive of private profit for the big food interests.
Labor Action has been pushing the idea that the food situation must be handled by committees of organized labor, housewives and working farmers. One thing becomes more and more certain: No one could do worse from the angle of working class needs than the big farm interests and the politicians are doing.
*
And what about the quality of the meat to be released?
Recent meat supplies have been decidedly inferior – so poor in fact that many retail butchers have refused to handle some of it.
One dealer in the Washington Market in New York City said he could not sell it to his customers and keep their trade. “The only thing that kind of beef is good for is for chewing gum,” he told a reporter.
Inferior meat comes from poorly fed cattle. Now here is a riddle to be answered. The government has just paid a subsidy of $450,000,000 to cattle growers because the cost of feed for cattle has gone up. So what have the cattle growers been doing with that $450,000,000 that should have gone for good feed to make good cattle to yield good meat?
Did the big cattle growers pocket the subsidy as gravy – and proceed to buy cheap feed for their cattle on the assumption that in this market anything can be sold?
Could be, could be!
Such ethics on the part of big business cattle growers would be right in line with the war practices of big business in general. It not only wraps its fists around all the so-called “legitimate” war profits it can but around every illegitimate billion that comes its way – witness the sale of defective war material which means shipping unexpected death to the boys at the front.
That’s capitalist morality.
*
While the dispute over miners’ wages was in progress, the Bituminous Coal Institute, the organization of mine bosses, staged at the Hotel Plaza in New York a fashion show unique in fashion history.
There were put on display by these exploiters of the bituminous miners the styles in clothes “that the daughters and wives of miners desire to wear and do wear.” Besides tailored clothes, the show included party and evening dresses, fur coats and jackets – naturally not of mink or ermine.
The hot-air merchants speaking for the coal barons at the show failed to give statistics on how many daughters and wives of miners actually do wear the garments on display – which certainly are nothing extraordinary in this day and age – and how many get no closer to these simple things than permitted by the thick plate-glass windows of the stores owned by the mine companies.
Neither did any of the speechmakers bother to state that a large portion of the retail business in the mining areas – as well as everything else – is owned and conducted by the mine companies. With such a monopoly of trade, they charge whatever they want to – thus very effectively keeping down the number of miners’ daughters and wives who can afford to buy their desirable merchandise.
Why do you suppose this deceptive show was put on by the mine companies? Simple, my dear Watson – to “prove” that the miners, whose daughters and wives roll in fur coats and jackets, do not need a wage increase. Presumably the miners were striking for the hell of it.
*
A different kind of fashion show was put on unofficially the other night. The “golden horseshoe” at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York blazed forth in all its splendor for the opening of the opera season.
“Fabulous jewels” were worn by many of the notable ladies. One matron dazzled the crowd “with her array of diamond bracelets from wrist to elbow.” (What, not all the way up to her shoulder?) This jane also sported, emerald earrings and a diamond and emerald necklace.
“It was somewhat of a toss-up whether mink or ermine appeared the most often.” The gowns were of satin, lamé, chiffon, net, lace – and did not come from the company stores in the mine districts.
This finery came from the swanky Mainbocher where anybody can get an evening flimsy for from $300 to $600, or from Valentina’s, where prices run on the same level. The “less expensive” among them might have been made up exclusively by Sophie at Saks-Fifth Avenue.
While these dames did not wear their street clothes on this occasion, it must be stated here – to complete the picture – that they are the social set that thinks nothing of spending $400 for a suit and $150 for a little sweater to go with the suit.
Yes, you heard me. And if any of my readers do not believe this, let them try to pick up a little “bargain” at Mainbocher, Valentina or Cartier’s.
The “golden horseshoe” at the Metropolitan symbolizes the class that fights tooth and nail against every demand of the workers for a decent wage. Yet labor produces all the wealth the rich wallow in as unashamedly in wartime as in peacetime. There will come a time when labor will refuse to support a class of useless parasites in the manner to which it is accustomed – or indeed in any manner at all.
 




Charles E. Wilson, No. 2 man of the War Production Board, has not been headline news. But all at once he becomes a much talked about man. He is being quoted, approved of, disapproved of. He certainly started something. It happened at the recent convention of the National Association of Manufacturers in New York.
You would expect a man like Wilson to be at a get-together of capitalists both as a capitalist who heads the great General Electric Company combine and at the No. 2 man of the WPB. But it was no routine speech that Mr. Wilson made. He surprised the august body of industrial masters when he, as one of them, began to bawl them out. He did so on two counts:
He accused them of working for their own private interests and ambitions. He minced no words about the cliques and special interests wanting to win complete victory for themselves regardless of the consequences. He berated the industrialists “trying to position themselves for the post-war period long before the country is out of danger and long before our fighting men have any chance to position themselves.”
But it was not merely on this score of grabbing war profits unprecedented in history by means fair and foul – and already maneuvering for postwar profits – that Mr. Wilson flayed his class.
 
If Words Have a Meaning
He told them also: “I am deeply alarmed today over the possibility that a right wing reaction may draw some sections of capital so far away from our traditions as to imperil the entire structure of American life as we know it.” He upbraided the “American breed of maggot” ready to spread the poison of hate. He warned the moguls of industry .”to withhold encouragement from dangerous men who preach disunity.”
If words have any meaning, Mr. Wilson was accusing the American industrial, masters of fascist tendencies. He is alarmed at their drawing away from “American life as we know it” toward fascism. By implication he said that they are encouraging the “little Hitlers” of the country who are peddling the poison of anti-Semite, anti-Negro, anti-labor propaganda. The “encouragement” most needed by these fascistic elements is, of course, money. This is, obviously, being supplied them by those who have it.
In a nutshell, Mr. Wilson sees sections of his fellow capitalists not only ruthlessly determined to get more and more pelf and power. He sees them making preparations to retain their mastery by the same methods of race hate, and labor suppression employed by Hitler, Mussolini and the whole breed of fascists.
 
Could Be Profits Are Too High
The reactions in the capitalist press to Mr. Wilson’s accusations are most interesting. Especially, noteworthy are the comments of two very conservative, very pro-capitalist columnists, namely, David Lawrence in the New York Sun, and Arthur Krock in the New York Times.
Both show a little fear. Both indicate that maybe it would be better for the capitalists to allow the government to shave off some of their bulging war profits under the renegotiation of war contracts law – out of which the teeth are being pulled by Congress under big business pressure.
Says Mr. Lawrence: “Business men, to be sure, do not want arbitrary action in renegotiation procedures, but, at the same time, any system that results in the earning of large profits will not stand public scrutiny ... When the service men get hack home and read the headlines of congressional inquiries into war profits, they will wonder what was done back home when they were at war – how much indeed was charged up against the taxpayers by a Congress that didn’t look out for the broad public interest.”
Mr. Krock goes even further. He warns against war corporate profits “at levels that, when spotlighted after the war, as they are sure to be, may infuriate the country, produce a reckless and destructive backswing against industry and start all over again the cycle of pacifism and ‘merchants-of-death’ propaganda ...”
But this is exactly what the industrialists who encourage and subsidize fascism in this country are preparing for. They will offer to the discontented a couple of scapegoats, namely, the Jews and the Negroes. In the ensuing strife the fascist hordes will try to demolish the labor movement which alone can take organized action against the capitalists and their encroaching fascism.
This, of course, is the familiar pattern designed by Hitler. Yet of the fascist tendencies of American capitalism exposed by Mr. Wilson, Krock has nothing to say except that it is a New Deal invention.
 
Fascism and “Liberal” Capitalists
The question naturally arises as to why Mr. Wilson, himself a top capitalist, is not with the sections of the capitalist class that are hell bent for fascism.
There always are divisions within a class, in the capitalist class there are more reactionary and more liberal elements, depending on how they consider their class interests will be best served. Mr. Wilson belongs to the group that thinks it can serve the ultimate interests of capitalism and the capitalist class by practising a little moderation now, by softening up labor through collaboration, by trying to pepper-and-salt the evils of the capitalist system.
But the liberal elements of the capitalist class cannot be trusted by labor in its fight against fascism. This has been proved to the hilt in Germany. Every element of the capitalist class recognizes the working people as their social enemies. When fascism is on one side and militant labor on the other, every capitalist knows which side he wants to win.
By its own basic interests the working class is the only force that can fight fascism. Upon the working class also depends the fate of all those other sections of the population that would be the victims of fascism. The Jews, the Negroes, the petty business men, the small independent farmers, the struggling professional people – these would all be ground down by the iron heel of fascism, along with the working class,
Mr. Wilson’s exposé of the fascist trend in the capitalist class can be taken by organized labor as nothing less than a warning to be prepared. Educational and organizational measures are urgently needed.
Labor – On Guard Now!
 




Mrs. Philip L. Crowlie, the OPA’s “typical housewife,” reports: “Housewives are dismayed to see the quality going out of shoes and materials, with prices remaining the same or rising.”
Mrs. Crowlie has just made an investigating tour for the OPA in Montana, Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, Nevada, Wyoming and parts of Oregon and Arizona. So it’s not only in your home town that you’re getting shoddy for your money – and for more of your money at that.
Department store buyers admit that they are putting into their shelves “merchandise that we never would have carried before.”
A wholesale butcher in New York recently stated that much of the meat put on the market is only good for “chewing gum,” so low is its quality.
Undoubtedly, nearly everything from a man’s overcoat or suit to a bottle of whisky, from a piece of meat to a piece of furniture, is of questionable quality.
 
Statistics – and Statistics
Yet the Bureau of Labor Statistics unconcernedly continues to publish so-called statistics on the cost of living – statistics that do not take into account AT ALL the deterioration in quality of merchandise. This is frankly admitted by Miss Faith Williams, chief of the Cost of Living Division of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Says Miss Williams: “As for deterioration in quality, we have not been able to find a statistical measure of how much less an item will wear.”
Still the Bureau of Labor Statistics says that the cost of living has gone up ONLY 23.4 per cent from January 1941 to October 1943 Labor says: “That’s a laugh. Such statistics do not reflect the truth as known by every housewife.” Every housewife knows that labor is right.
Let us see how poorer quality and higher prices affect the average family budget.
Women’s dresses around the $4.00 or $5.00 level are now so poorly made and so cheap looking that if a woman buys one she is throwing away her money on a dress that has no durability, warmth or anything. For TWICE AS MUCH she may get a garment comparable to the former $4.00 quality. The shoddy goods on the market are certainly not priced according to their inferior quality.
A salesman of children’s clothing said of a coat his store was selling at $6.90 which looked like one formerly priced at $6.00, “but the material in this year’s model is so poor that it’s not worth anything, really.” And how much protection from the cold does a child get who wears such shoddy?
Boys’ shirts of inferior quality to those formerly selling for less than a dollar are now priced at more than a dollar.
Several columns could be filled with instance after instance of the same maddening practice of passing off shoddy at higher prices than better quality merchandise used to cost.
 
Home-Made Statistics
Yet the Bureau of Labor Statistics doesn’t include such a trifling matter in its cost of living index. It does not know how to measure deterioration in quality!
But the housewife whose youngster in no time at all has run through a pair of shoes costing $2.98, and who therefore has to decide to try a pair at $3.98 – and has similar experiences all along the line – knows what has happened to the cost of living.
It is not only the exclusion of quality deterioration that makes the cost of living averages of the Bureau of Labor Statistics such a farce.
In figuring averages, these statisticians give the same importance to items whose price has remained stable but which the housewife does not buy often, as to items of EVERYDAY USE whose prices have SKYROCKETED.
They do not consider the widespread violations in OPA ceilings nor the effects of the black market operating in every field.
Neither do the official figures reflect the runaway prices prevalent in war plant areas.
Nor do they reflect what storekeepers charge good customers for shortage goods – when the statisticians of the Bureau of Labor are not looking.
The official cost of living index does not, of course, include the high cost of taxes to the working class family.
Yet these are the phony figures that are being used to show that labor is on easy street – that workers’ wages have gone up more than the cost of living.
Could that be the reason why so many war bonds are already being redeemed by the little man? A reporter for the United Press asked
people standing in line waiting their turn to cash in their bonds, why they were doing it. The answer was, of course, that they needed the money. Some needed money for Christmas presents, some for doctors’ bills. Large groups of workers are now on the move to get more pay. The Little Steel wage formula, based on the farcical cost of living index of the Bureau of Labor, has put more profits into the pockets of the capitalists. The workers are demanding wages commensurate with the REAL cost of living.
 




The CIO, AFL and railroad brotherhoods, together with the National Farmers Union, representing 13,000,000 organized workers and working farmers, have formed, a “common legislative front” to fight anti-labor legislation such as the Hobbs so-called “anti-racketeering” bill.
Such united action is, undoubtedly, a forward step. But it is hardly enough in the circumstances. In fact, in going so far and no farther, the leaders of these millions of working people act like frightened swimmers who, when they can grab a log, nervously, catch onto a straw.
The leaders of these organizations realize fully that we are on the eve of the most reactionary attack on labor that capitalist politicians have ever launched. CIO President Murray, in announcing the “common legislative front,” declared that “the unholy alliance of poll-tax Democrats with the most reactionary wings of the Republican Party ... have served notice of their intention to attack labor and reduce labor standards without regard to health or productive efficiency of war workers.”
In face of such an attack, the “common legislative front” is altogether inadequate because it still places laborers and working farmers at the mercy of Democrats and Republicans, i.e., capitalist class politicians. To be sure it is the “good” Democrats and Republicans that Murray, Green & Go. will rely upon to “protect” labor.
But isn’t that exactly what labor has been doing up till now? And hasn’t this policy of “rewarding labor’s friends” landed the workers in such a vulnerable position that today their basic standards can be taken away from them?
Why should 13,000,000 organized working people – with their families and friends and the mass of unorganized workers behind them – be beholden to “good” capitalist politicians for political “protection.”
In these organized workers lies the broad base for independent working class action. In them lies the strong base for an Independent Labor Party. That is the log labor must firmly grasp – or it will sink in the maelstrom of reaction.
 
A Well Planned Thrust
In the light of the above, let us consider the Hobbs so-called “anti-racketeering” bill. It is a shrewd, well planned thrust at labor’s heart – dressed up in the garb of innocence. It simply calls for “equal treatment” of all racketeers guilty of “robbery and extortion.” That is all.
When it is pointed out that there already is an anti-racketeering law – passed in 1934 – which includes protective clauses for labor organizations and legitimate union practices, and that the Hobbs bill carefully omits these protective clauses, the supporters of the Hobbs bill retort that there are no protective clauses for other organizations, either. Then why for labor? they “innocently” ask.
You see what “absolute equality” this bourbon Democrat from poll-tax Alabama aims at. Even “good” Dem’ocrats and Republicans can fall for such an abstraction – especially if they have pressure put on them “by their generous campaign contributors from the boss class.
But rank and file workers on an Independent Labor Party ticket would know better. Their class experience has taught workers that even protective clauses in the laws do not prevent pro-capitalist injustices. Their class instinct tells them that when these protective clauses are not in the laws, anti-labor judges and juries take it as an invitation to go the limit against labor,
Let there be ho mistake about it, an Independent Labor Party will mot cure all the ills that beset labor. For that a workers’ government is needed. But, sitting in Congress as representatives of the working people, workers and working class farmers elected on an Independent Labor Party ticket could use the tribunal afforded them as congressmen to blast to hell such anti-labor frauds as the Hobbs bill. THE PEOPLE OF THE COUNTRY WOULD SOON KNOW THAT IT IS NOT RACKETEERING THE POLL-TAX CONGRESSMEN ARE CONCERNED ABOUT.
For what is the poll-tax, if not a colossal racket depriving millions of citizens of the right to vote? What are the cost-plus war contracts of big business but a form of racketeering? What are the farm bloc antics in Congress, if not racketeering by big business farmers to get bigger pickings, while squeezing out the little fellow?
 
Half-Way Measures Inadequate
Independent Labor Party candidates elected to Congress would give out with the real McCoy. (We are speaking of a genuine Independent Labor Party which has no connections with the boss class.) They would be accountable only to the working people. They would be successful only to the extent that they furthered the class interests of the working people.
Nor could an Independent Labor Party merely fight a defensive battle to maintain the status quo. In reality there is no status quo – but only progress or reaction. We would have to give an Independent Labor Party a program of militant working class demands covering the gamut of questions that press for solution. And, once we have realized our political and economic strength, we would then proceed beyond the tasks of the Labor Party to the next step: vanquishing the fundamental iniquity of class exploitation at the point of production by wresting from the capitalists the factories and the mills which properly belong to labor.
The CIO has revealed that it has a legislative program, to be followed by each of its locals. It consists in organizing local committees “for purposes of basic contact with our representatives in Congress.” These CIO committees are furthermore to “operate jointly with AFL and railroad brotherhood locals, farm organizations, church and community organizations.” And “the views of these groups must be brought to Congress by joint committees of these various organizations, by joint rallies or demonstrations and delegations to congressmen.”
All these plans are excellent. Such pressure on capitalist politicians has always been and still is a necessary supplement to militant working class action. But it is only a supplement to the main line of independent political action – FOR WHICH THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE.
For the representatives in Congress are NOT OUR representatives, They are candidates of the Democratic and Republican Parties which are boss parties, and they are therefore boss politicians.
Everything considered, the decision of the CIO, AFL and railroad brotherhoods to form a “common legislative front” along the lines more fully explained in the CIO statement quoted above, is only a half-measure. The intensity of the reactionary forces today demands all-out progressive action from labor. Labor’s political interests can be defended and furthered in and out of Congress only by a political instrument wielding the solid economic strength of the unions – an Independent Labor Party, free of all boss ties, and with its own working class program.
Let the unions use pressure on capitalist politicians, yes. Let them gain the support of communities in rallies and demonstrations, yes. But the basic political perspective of the working people must be a nationally organized Independent Labor Party!
 




You pay sixty-five cents or sixty-seven cents for a dozen eggs if you are among the fortunates who can afford them at all. The chain stores and super markets, however, are charged forty-four or forty-five cents for those same eggs. In a word, there is a retailer’s mark-up of twenty-one to twenty-three cents on a dozes eggs – or around 90 per cent. This is one example of the widespread profiteering that is swelling war profits.
Now, it is not really hard for working class housewives to do something about war profiteering, HERE IS A VERY SIMPLE PLAN.
Every apartment house has some kind of tenant’s organization these days, and every organization has a few active women in it. Suppose some woman pioneer on the block – Why not you? – should speak to the active women in each house and convince them of the necessity for organizing a housewives’ committee for the block. The next step would be to take the question up at the tenants’ meetings to get everybody’s support. In a short time you would have your block housewives’ committee, composed of a few active women from each house. What next?
For example, you read in the paper about this robber’s mark-up on eggs by the A&P and other retailers. The committee meets, decides not to pay 50 per cent above wholesale prices, AND GETS BUSY TO CARRY OUT ITS DECISION.
A few women go to the local OPA and inform them that unless the retail prices of eggs are adjusted downward, the OPA office will be picketed. Other groups of women go to the A&P and the other chain and large retail stores in the neighborhood and demand an immediate mark-down in the price of eggs – or else! Or else what?
Their stores will be picketed and a consumers’ boycott will be organized. If the committee’s demands are not met, pickets are posted with placards: “WE WON’T PAY SIXTY-FIVE CENTS FOB EGGS WHEN THE A&P PAYS FORTY-FOUR CENTS!” “JOIN US IN A BOYCOTT AGAINST WAR PROFITEERS!”
Will the women join? You bet!
Will such action bring results? YOU BET!
P.S. – Since writing the above the pressure of publicity alone has forced down the retail price of eggs. Imagine what a little organized action could do to prices.
*
Armour & Co., one of the largest meat packing concerns in the country, has had. a windfall of profits for 1942 – NETTING $14,802,607 “after taxes and dividend requirements.” This huge take means as much as $20.85 a share on the preferred stock of the company – over and above and in addition to the aforementioned “dividend requirements.”
Do the prices at the meat counters make you grind your teeth in rage? Well, never you mind. There is no ill wind that doesn’t blow someone some good.
*
Frieda S. Miller, retiring New York State industrial commissioner, reports that 50,000 women in the state do Bight work and have a work-week of more than forty-eight hours – labor laws to the contrary notwithstanding. This situation, is true, for the entire country, with the result that the health and safety of women workers are being undermined and threatened.
The shortage of labor is, of course, given as the excuse for breaking laws which embody decades of straggle against plutocratic interests. However, that excuse cannot be accepted while there are millions of Negro workers kept out of jobs because of boss-bred race prejudice.
Negro workers must get jobs! Is better proof needed than that their poverty as a group is such that infant mortality in 1940 was 68½ per cent greater among Negroes than among whites?
At this point it becomes crystal clear how interrelated are the interests of black and white workers. Together they must tear away the shortage-of-labor camouflage the bosses are using to break down labor standards – while continuing Jim Crow and anti-Semitism.
Women must insist on their rights: the legal protection they are entitled to – equal pay for equal work – increases in wages to meet increases in the cost of living. This is the basis on which women should work – and not merely eke out an inadequate wage by dint of toiling unearthly hours, ruining their health and endangering their lives by fatigue.
To the shortage-of-labor alibi, let white workers reply: “WHAT ABOUT EMPLOYING OUR NEGRO SISTERS AND BROTHERS!”
*
While World War I was in progress, the rights-for-women type of public-spirited women were proclaiming loudly that women would have to participate in the peace council. It would require the woman’s touch, they said, to make a lasting peace. History repeats itself in this respect. Again we hear from the distaff side on the subject of the ennobling influence of women in making peace – and all that.
Of course, readers of this column know very well that it champions not only the rights of women, but of men and of children also – black, yellow and white ones of all ages, sizes and color of hair. The only “rights” it does not shout for are those appropriated by the ruling classes. Furthermore, this column is a staunch advocate of the woman’s touch – along the lines here indicated. It is not sex, age, color or size of nose of a political personage that matters. I don’t remember whether women participated in the making of the Versailles Treaty or not. But it would not have made any difference. It is class interests that count – and the program offered to further those interests. The men and women who will sit at the peace council of World War II will represent the ruling classes of the victor nations. They will put their heads together to preserve and extend the same property rights and powers that fathered World War I and II and that will sire World War III – unless the war ends with a social overturn that will place the working classes in power.
Then the negotiators – among whom there will naturally be leading women of the working classes will negotiate a socialist peace that can be made lasting.
 




Philip Murray and William Green are threatening to withdraw the labor members from the War Labor Board. They say that since the President’s “hold the line” order, the WLB no longer has any authority to remedy “inequities” and all that the board can do now is apply the fifteen per cent Little Steel formula. So what’s the use?
For Murray and Green this threat to withdraw from the WLB is merely a face-saving maneuver forced on them by the anger of the rank and file of organized labor which is sick to death of the pussy-footing of their officials, and is inspired by the miners’ stiff fight for a wage increase.
Up to now, Murray and Green have been ardent supporters of the WLB – in spite of the fact that since its inception the WLB has been the bargain basement for selling out labor. All this time the leaders of the CIO and AFL have been behind the counter with the bosses and the so-called representatives of the “public.”
 
Carried to Its Logical Conclusion
George E. Sokolsky, National Association of Manufacturers’ stooge, who writes for the New York Sun, has made the admission that “IF THE WLB IS CARRIED TO ITS LOGICAL CONCLUSION, THEN THE LABOR UNION BECOMES MERELY A SOCIAL ORGANIZATION FOR KEEPING LABOR IN LINE UNDER GOVERNMENT SUPERVISION.”
Get the full flavor of that sentence, you workers who have fought and bled to build your unions to protect your interests. The WLB is making of your unions – with the knowledge, consent and cooperation of many labor officials – a convenient vehicle for keeping you “IN LINE.’ And that is exactly where you’ve been kept – ABOVE ALL, BY THE LITTLE STEEL FORMULA, WHICH KEEPS WAGES DOWN – WHILE PRICES AND PROFITS HIT THE SKY!
But not even this unjust formula is applied universally. There is one of many instances in the case of the 1,750 employees of Lever Brothers. They were refused an increase in wages, even though they are getting less than the fifteen per cent permitted by the Little Steel formula. Why? Because – on the theory that two wrongs make a right – an increase for these 1,750 workers would mean increases also for the workers in the Cambridge and Edgewater plants of the same company – where the wages are also less than allowed by the aforesaid formula.
Let us look at some other outstanding decisions of the WLB.
There was the case of the General Cable Co. employees, who were denied a raise on the shocking theory that WAGES AS LOW AS SIXTY CENTS AN HOUR ARE NOT SUB-STANDARD!
Again, when the Textile Workers Union demanded that the wage differential between mills in the North and in the South be eliminated, the demand was refused by the WLB on the ground that “A DIFFERENTIAL IS NOT UNUSUAL.” Applying this principle, one may say that lynching is right because it too is “NOT UNUSUAL.” Though the labor members on the WLB wrote their own opinion in this, case, they CONCURRED with the majority!
The shipyard workers of the Bethlehem Steel Co. – one of the first-rank war profiteers – asked for two weeks’ vacation with pay for employees of one or more years’ standing because they thought the gruelling, tortuous labor of the yards entitled them to rest after one year. The WLB decided that ONE week for workers of THREE OR MORE YEARS’ standing is good enough. All the workers have to do is pray that they live that long.
There is the unforgettable case of the 32,000 New York transit workers, over which the WLB – by unanimous vote – refused to take jurisdiction, thus denying these workers even the dubious privilege of all other workers in the country to have their grievances buried in the files of the WLB. It might be said that in this case the WLB established its own precedent for being by-passed – as was done then by Mayor La Guardia, and as is now being done by John L. Lewis in the miners’ case. There are the many instances of WLB voting down wage increases where the bosses themselves – because of the labor market – were willing to grant increases.
 
A Graveyard for Grievances
And, of course, the method most often used to keep the workers “IN LINE” is simply to bury their petitions, demands and grievances. OF 2,119 CASES BROUGHT BEFORE THE BOARD IN TEN MONTHS OF 1942, ONLY 396 – OR LESS THAN ONE-SIXTH OF THE TOTAL – WERE SETTLED.
Today there are more than 10,000 pending cases. The President’s “hold the line” order has merely deepened the graves in which the WLB buries workers’ grievances. One can go on and on giving instances of how the WLB has employed labor leaders to convert the unions into bodies for keeping the workers “IN LINE.” But” no purpose will be served in multiplying the evidence.
To save the face of the WLB and of his faithful servitors in the CIO and AFL, Roosevelt may loosen the straight-jacket of his “hold the line” order – and allow the WLB to act on certain “inequities.” BUT WILL THAT BE A REASON FOR THE PAID OFFICIALS OF ORGANIZED LABOR TO STAY ON THE BOARD?
The crucial point is stated by Mr. Sokolsky in the above quotation, here again quoted: “IF THE WLB IS CARRIED TO ITS LOGICAL CONCLUSION, THEN THE LABOR UNION BECOMES MERELY A SOCIAL ORGANIZATION FOR KEEPING LABOR IN LINE UNDER GOVERNMENT SUPERVISION.”
Fascism and Nazism demolish the unions outright. Capitalist “democracies” seek to accomplish the same purpose through no-strike pledges, War Labor Boards and other devices for pulling the teeth and softening the muscles of the unions. The workers of several unions have already raised the cry for their leaders to get off the WLB. This cry must become an earth-shaking shout from the throat of all organized labor before the “LOGICAL CONCLUSION” Mr. Sokolsky speaks of becomes a reality – and the unions cease to function as such!
 




Much of the chopped beef being sold these days contains seventy-five per cent of fat and twenty-five per cent of meat – whereas the proportions should be the reverse.
Do you suppose that the salvage fat the housewife is urged to turn over to the, butcher finds it way back to her table in the chopped beef she buys – and at a price?
*
It’s a wonderful thing to be a banker. It gives a body all sorts of privileges, as we all know – even the privilege of being considered a food expert.
For, lo and behold, Chester C. Davis, appointed by President Roosevelt to become food production and distribution administrator and elbow Wickard put of the way, is former president of the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank. And ...
Jesse W. Tapp, appointed by Chester C. Davis as his associate administrator, is vice-president of the Bank of America.
WHOSE INTERESTS ARE THESE BANKERS GOING TO LOOK AFTER?
*
Eighty-one per cent of all the packaged flour produced in this country comes from the mills of sixteen large flour corporations. These giant corporations consequently control the market – and, we are informed; by the Department of Justice, they have abolished sordid competitive prices in favor of monopoly prices ... at all the market will bear!
How the itch for profits brings the capitalists of the nation together – indeed a touching example of national unity!
*
Less than one-third of the women employed in manufacturing industries average $35 a week. These are mainly the better-paid women in the metal-working industries. The largest number of women workers are still to be found in the textile and apparel industries, where their wages are about $20 a week in textile, and about $22 in apparel. The thousands of women working in laundries, dry cleaning, beauty shops, hotels, restaurants and other “service industries earn much less. In the twenty-six states where the minimum wage law is supposed to apply to women, plenty of firms disobey the law with impunity.
The above summary well describes at least one aspect of the “American way of life” that no under-paid women worker considers worth preserving. Union organization and militant action are wanted to effect a quick improvement for the millions of underpaid women workers.
*
Almost three months ago women war workers of the UAW-CIO met in Detroit to discuss the specific problems facing them as women workers.
They passed some excellent resolutions. Among them were those calling for the up-grading plan in plants for women workers, for the enforcement and extension of equal-pay-for-equal-work, for hiring more Negro women in the plants – to cite only a few of the urgent demands contained in resolutions. It is time to check. What has been done in the three months since the meeting set itself these tasks? Is there enough progress to date? Or is the situation more or less in status quo?
Merely passing resolutions – no matter how fine they are – is not, as the saying goes, “cooking with gas.” In the field of union accomplishments, “cooking with gas.” implies a readiness to back up good resolutions with militant action.
*
The wastage of human life by war cannot be measured, by the casualty lists alone. There is also plenty of human sacrifice on the home front, as evidence by the mounting number of industrial accidents. And most tragic of all is the wastage of child life.
Hundreds of thousands of children under 14 and 15 are in industry and agriculture, either full or part time. Millions under 16 and 17 are now wage workers, but at shamefully low wages. Child labor laws have become mere scraps of paper. Boys and girls are working during the day or at night, on hazardous jobs, at machines they do not understand, sapped by fatigue and. trapped into accidents and death. Even younger children are going to work. Teachers report increased absences from school and tell how illegally employed school children fall asleep in class because of exhaustion.
The bosses, who are getting greater profits on the much lower wages of children, are now pressing to put the cloak of legality on their evil practices. All sorts of bills are before state legislatures to legalize the vilest exploitation of child labor. One bill calls for permission to put children on graveyard shifts. One would excuse children of twelve from school for “any occupation directly or indirectly engaged in or connected with the war effort.”
While the bosses are permitted to decimate the children on the altar of profit, millions of able-bodied adult workers cannot find jobs – BECAUSE OF RACE DISCRIMINATION. The largest group discriminated against are the Negroes. There are also plenty of Jews in the same boat, as well as other nationalities at present in disfavor.
 




Joseph E. Davies, of Mission to Moscow fame, is a capitalist and, in his own words, “proud of it.”
Time magazine refers to him as an “American lawyer, capitalist and individualist.” Life magazine calls him a “capitalist lawyer.”
Walter Huston, playing the part of Davies in the film, tells the Russian, Kalinin, that, as a lawyer, he has represented the most powerful American capitalist interests.
Who’s Who lists Davies as a lawyer and diplomat, and enumerates his activities as such and as a prominent member of the Democratic Party – one of the two political outfits that take turns in running America for the bosses.
Ex-Ambassador Davies is married to Marjorie Post Hutton – a name out of the social register.
Marjorie Post Hutton Davies has for many years been on the board of directors of the General Foods Corp., which, one may say, is to the food industry what the United States Steel Corp. is to steel.
Mr. and Mrs. Davies have their home in aristocratic Palm Beach, Fla., with additional residences to taste.
Mr. Davies belongs to more than a dozen top-notch gentlemen’s clubs throughout the Eastern states, including the extra snooty Chevy Chase in Washington and the just too-too Everglades in Palm Beach.
One of Mr. Davies’ oldest and best friends is Owen D. Young, chairman of the board of directors of General Electric Co., which, one may also say, is to the electrical manufacturing industry what United States Steel Corp. is to the steel industry.
General Electric has done millions of dollars’ worth of very profitable business with Stalin’s government, and Mr: Young has told his friend Mr. Davies that “the Soviet government has an exceptionally high credit rating in banking and business circles in New York and this country.” It is evident from Mr. Davies’ book that this commendation of the Stalin government by banking and business made a deep impression on his capitalist soul.
 
His “Prejudices” Make Sense
In the prologue to the film, where Mr. Davies appears in person and turns on the charm to convince the audience that he – the proud-of-it capitalist – is of course “the friend of the common people,” he admits that he once had “prejudices” against the Soviet government.
He undoubtedly refers to the time when all his fellow capitalists throughout the world had similar class “prejudices” against the revolutionary Soviets of Lenin, Trotsky and the Old Bolsheviks, whose mock trials and executions by butcher Stalin? Davies wholeheartedly applauds in the film – though not quite so unequivocally in his book. Those were the days when the Soviet leaders were more concerned about maintaining a real workers’ government and building socialism than about the commendations of American proud-of-it capitalists.
Here, in the above, you have seen the ruling class background of Davies – a man of power and pelf, a man proud of his top-dog position, a man determined to maintain the capitalist system under which he is a favored son. It is not by high-sounding words that the suave Davies and the impressive Walter Huston of the film should be judged. Here is a man with an “overwhelming class bias, ticking to the tune of his class interests.
His round of activities in Russian is little different from what it was in America. Caviar and champagne – teas, balls and receptions – theaters and the ballet – museums and art collecting. As the film so vividly shows, life in the upper brackets is good in Russia, as it also is in America. That at the same time the mass of Russian workers are poorly housed, poorly clothed, poorly fed does not condemn, Stalinism in his eyes any more than the social differences between American workers and capitalists condemn capitalism in his eyes.
To his esthetic sense, however, it is a tragedy – no less – that the former city home of a Russian nobleman should be “run down,” as he wrote in his diary on January 19, 1937. That many families of workers and soldiers have to be crowded into this run-down dwelling of one former nobleman is not too hard for him to bear.
The political and propaganda stranglehold of Stalin on the movements and minds of the masses evokes in this Ambassador for the American ruling class, a touch of envy and admiration. In a letter to the President, quoted in Davies’ book, he stated: “Jim Farley might get some pointers if he were to come over here.” Basically, ruling classes agree.
The film shows Davies visiting mines and factories. As Ambassador of the American ruling class, what is he looking for? Only for an answer to this question: How will Russia’s war production affect the imperialist balance of power? To him, very obviously, the workers are only pawns in the imperialist game.
It is an old Stalinist trick to allow a movie audience pictorially to go through giant industrial plants to give the impression that everything is going fine. This writer has personally visited some of the very plants shown in Mission to Moscow, but it was only by going into workers’ houses that one could find out what it was like to live on one hundred inflated rubles a month. Thousands of tourists have gaped at the wonders of the Ford plants in this country, without knowing a damn thing about the labor spy system of that noted industrialist. Similarly gazing with Davies at Russian war production plants gives the audience no idea of the slave-labor system of Russia’s noted dictator.
Such things are of class interest to the workers and it is on such things that workers base their approval or disapproval. Not so the proud-of-it capitalist.
 
Mr. Davies Forgets His Doubts
In his book Mr. Davies expresses some doubts of the infamous Moscow Trials. Among other things, for instance, he calls attention to the lack of documentary evidence. However, in the film he is convinced of the defendants’ guilt, presumably by the ridiculous hocus-pocus that is passed off by Warner Brothers as a trial.
As a lawyer and capitalist, it was not difficult for Mr. Davies to forget his doubts. For what was Stalin seeking to put an end to by these trials? The revolution, the Old Bolsheviks who made the revolution, the fair name of Trotsky, which will always stand for the workers’ revolution – those “frightening” forces which caused Davies to have his earlier “prejudices” against the Soviets of Lenin and Trotsky. These forces, which threaten the stability of Stalin and the new ruling class of Russia also threaten the capitalist Mr. Davies, his capitalist wife, his capitalist friends, his Palm Beach estate, his swanky clubs, his expensive hobby of collecting art.
Therefore, aside from the immediate purpose of war propaganda, white-washing Stalin’s crimes against the Russian workers and their Bolshevik leaders, as Davies has done in his book and in the film, was an act of class interest per se. Let no worker be fooled by this whitewash by one ruling class into forgetting the crimes of another.
 




According to the figures of August 1943, out of the total civilian labor force, of 54,800,000 workers, 17,100,000, or almost one-third, are women.
Of the 17,100,000 women workers, around 6,000,000 are new workers coming from homes, schools, etc. Also among them are many women, who have shifted from office to factory, from unskilled labor to skilled labor; from low-paying to better-paying jobs.
There is still an untapped supply of womanpower in the country, from which will come perhaps another million workers.
 
New Phenomenon – New Problem
Due to the demands of war production and the vacancies left by drafted workers, women are now doing every kind of work done by men with the exception of the few jobs where physical strength required is beyond a woman’s capacity.
Women operate traveling cranes and weld plates with arcs and gas flames. They thread and cut pipe. They wire electrical machinery. They use every imaginable tool. They drive trucks and buses and trolleys. They throw switches for trains. And these are only some of the varied jobs that women are now doing. Perhaps fifty per cent of war workers are women.
Women workers in these numbers and in these jobs constitute a new phenomenon in. industry and a new problem for the labor movement.
To suppose that the seven million or so women workers who will have been added to the wartime labor force will return to the proverbial woman’s place – the home – is fantastic. Some will, of course. But many millions will not be able to, even if they should want to. For grim economic necessity will demand that they earn a living. And not only in the ordinary sense in which this is always true. But more so because the casualties of war run into millions, inevitably leaving families deprived of male bread-winners. The women workers must, therefore, not be the outstanding victims of post-war unemployment. On the other hand, because they will need jobs badly, they must not become the underpaid tools of the bosses to knock down the wage standards of all the workers.
The problem, therefore, is to organize the women workers on the basis of obtaining for them equal pay for equal work and on the basis of an adequate post-war unemployment program projected by the unions to get employment for all.
How did the two great organizations of labor in their annual conventions just concluded approach this very important problem? Neither the AFL nor the CIO faced it squarely.
 
AFL Delegates Hear a Good Speech
At the AFL convention, Miss Rose Schneiderman, president of the National Women’s Trade Union League, an organization which has done – in its limited sphere – some good work in educating women to the need for trade unionism, honestly posed to the delegates the urgency of the problem of women workers.
Following is a significant part of her speech:
“It is impossible to try to deal with the gigantic problems of women in war industries without looking ahead to what women’s place will be in peacetime industries after the war. Obviously it is too early to see the whole pattern, but even at this time certain basic things are clear. Equal pay is not only necessary, for women’s morale now, but if women are not paid for the same jobs that the men they are replacing were paid, the value of the jobs will go down and will be down when the returning soldiers come hack into industry. We must definitely resist the trend to pay women less, or the standard of living for all workers, both now and in the post-war period, will be lowered.
“The right of women to work at any sort of a job where they have established their capacity must be recognized now and in the future. It must be assured in an orderly and equitable fashion, applying equally to all workers and apart from sex considerations ... That many women, war workers will return to their homes, there is no doubt. On the other hand, economic necessity underlies most women’s desire for a job and this necessity should he treated with as much respect and consideration as is given to men.”
Miss Schneiderman urged the AFL to undertake an organization drive and predicted that if this is done in earnest, the AFL would be able to boast ten million members at its next convention instead of its seven million. President William Green thanked Miss Schneiderman for her address.
However, a careful scrutiny of the proceedings of the convention does not reveal a single resolution passed to implement the ideas expressed by Miss Schneiderman.
The only measure taken bearing on the general problem of women workers was the acceptance by the delegates of the report of its executive council favoring a bill by Senator Thomas of Utah. The bill provides for an allotment of $20,000,000 annually for the care of children of employed mothers in war areas. This is really a trifling sum for such a task. But, this aside, the important point is that the AFL in its 1943 convention did practically nothing to draw to the organized labor movement the army of women workers.
 
Action Taken by the CIO
The CIO acquitted itself better, although not as well as the situation demands.
The CIO also passed a resolution on child care, but related it to the realities of child delinquency, the drafting of fathers and so on. Whereas the AFL was concerned with child care only for the duration of the war and for six months after, the CIO asks for a PERMANENT program, including federal funds to cover all costs except food.
The CIO delegates, looking into the future, passed a resolution calling for a dismissal wage for men and women. “disemployed after cessation of hostilities and during the period of conversion of American industry to production of peacetime goods.” This demand is to be presented to the government with the object of having such a clause included in war contracts. CIO unions are to attempt to include a dismissal wage clause in all collective bargaining contracts.
Such a measure, if carried out as it should be, will provide a little protection and will surely meet with the wholehearted approval of both men and women workers to whom the post-war period looks pretty gloomy. But, again, this does not go far enough on the specific problem of women workers.
Another resolution of the CIO on organizing the unorganized directly recognized the problem of the women workers in the following clause.
“We must direct special attention to the new problems arising from the influx of millions of workers into these industries such as the women workers, Negro workers now being employed in other than unskilled jobs, to the number of former white collar professional workers who are now working on production jobs, and to the farm workers finding factory work for the first time.”
The same resolution continues:
“We must also demonstrate to our membership that the new problems which face labor today because of the war situation can be effectively solved through the strength of organized labor.”
 
Plan for Women Workers
This is exactly what the CIO – and the AFL – must prove to the mass of women workers. And these great unions would have gone a long way towards arousing the eager interest of women workers in organization, if they had faced squarely the issues involved and stated clearly a plan of action.
Such a plan would have to include a fight for equal pay for equal work for men and women, Negro and white – a fight that means business and would actually remove inequalities. A real plan of action would also have to adopt far-reaching measures to combat unemployment and provide jobs for every man and woman, Negro and white, who will want a job:
A demand for a thirty-hour week at the same weekly pay – a demand for the nationalisation of government war plants to provide jobs for peacetime production instead of giving the plants to big business for a song so that they may stand idle – a demand for a peacetime scheme for housing, public buildings and public welfare comparable to the huge expenditures made for war purposes.
This was the time for the CIO and the AFL to put forth such demands. Such a serious program for equal pay and on post-war unemployment, such determination on the part of the unions to protect women workers, would make their organization a foregone conclusion. For the sake of the women workers and for the whole. working class, drawing them into the unions is of primary importance.
 




Even the newest of the newlywed housewives – to say nothing of the old timers – knows that cold storage has its limits in preserving the freshness of food. For instance, no housewife would buy eggs she knows have been in cold storage from March to October – a matter of seven months.
The Food Distribution Administration and the other government bureaus in charge of allocating food to the Army, to lend-lease and – to US, don’t seem to be taking this simple fact into account, and have a very unique idea indeed of “planning” food distribution.
Their idea seems to be to lay their hands on as much as possible for the first two purposes. Then, if they have grabbed too much, they try to unload the left-overs on – US.
This month, when the government found it had overstocked on eggs – for which we are paying fantastic prices because their is supposed to be an acute shortage – it found it could not get any dealer to buy its offerings. There wasn’t a single bid for about 20,000 cases of eggs. “We prefer fresh eggs,” said one wholesale dealer, “and we understand that the government offerings include eggs that have been in storage since last March. It’s like buying a pig in a poke.”
Perhaps that is the real reason why the dealers didn’t buy these eggs. But just as likely they are satisfied with the fancy “shortage” prices and don’t care to throw more eggs onto the market.
At any rate, here are 20,000 cases of eggs WASTED – while thousands of children hardly know what an egg tastes like!
The government has stacked up on every other food – butter, meat, fruit, etc. With the same lack of planning, as displayed regarding eggs, think of the shameful spoilage, the cruel waste, that must mean!
*
To the Chicago telephone operator the tax burden is so heavy that she can spend less than half as much money for clothes as she otherwise might.
Arguing the case of these girls for a higher wage before the War Labor Board, the union representative showed that each week these workers pay out $4.00 IN TAXES, but only about $3.76 FOR CLOTHES.
Now $3.76 for shoes, stockings, underwear, girdles, brassieres, slips, dresses, sweaters, blouses, skirts, coats, hats, gloves – is definitely not a lot of money.
If she could keep the $4.00 she pays out for taxes, she could do a little better – though even then she would be far from a luxury basis at peacetime prices, and today’s prices and not peacetime prices.
The Chicago telephone girls are typical of the whole working class. There isn’t a family which – because of the tax burden – is not doing without things they need.
Will somebody produce a good reason why working girls must do without essential clothing in order to pay taxes while the rich get richer at the rate of eight billion dollars clear profit a year; while they pile up forty-two billion dollars for a nest egg; while they buy minks and jewels; while they throw parties where neither rations points nor money is a consideration?
*
With the coming of the harvesting season in Vichy France, reports say that a veritable epidemic of fires has broken out in fields, in bins, in barns and in mills. Both crops and agricultural machinery have been destroyed by French peasants and workers so as to prevent a new supply of food from getting into the hands of the hated Nazi invader.
Men, women and children participated in these fireworks. Men, women and children who are themselves actually starving, with their own hands destroyed food and the machinery for processing food – to keep it from the enemy. Here is heroism of the first order!
Also at this time comes news of an entirely different kind of harvest. The London Tribune reports the profits garnered by the French capitalists collaborating with the Nazis.
The leading French industrialists and financiers are getting a bumper crop of profits in occupied France – as they did in pre-war “free” France. The London Tribune cites a list of French concerns whose profits this year topped those of last year by from fourteen million to two hundred million francs.
I think these starving men, women and children who burn food in their fight against the invader are going to remember the contrast between the burning food and the bumper crop of cold profits. I think they will not be satisfied merely to drive out the Nazi and allow the French capitalist class to put on the garb of “democracy” under de Gaulle or Giraud or some other politician – and continue their profit-grubbing careers.
I think these heroic men, women and children will want to free France from the native French usurpers as well as from the foreign Nazi invader.
*
A few days ago the Associated Fress reported from Kansas City what seemed to be a spontaneous meeting of mothers of boys missing in action. One woman said: “We are living in the stillest silence. We only want the truth ... We think a way can be found to tell us more. It’s the waiting and not knowing that hurts ... We are the forgotten mothers.”
But the knowing also hurts. The number of grief-stricken women increases with the lengthening of the war casualty lists.
There are reactionary groups in this country already following a plan to turn the sorrow of bereaved women to their own use.
Before Pearl Harbor, the National Legion of Mothers of America and similar organizations flourished. Under the guise of being anti-war, they carried on out-and-out fascistic propaganda. In fact, it was later learned that Laura Ingalls, who has been indicted and convicted as a paid Nazi agent, was closely connected with Mothers of America.
Today the innocent-sounding Americanism Defense League and the Informed Voters of America, Inc., are doing the same kind of dirty work. In fact, a Mrs. Frances Sherrill, who claims to have founded the National Legion of Mothers of America, is a leading member of the Informed Voters of America, Inc.
These fascistic elements are trying hard to capitalize on the hatred of war that grows as its ravages reach more and more people. We urge the women of the working class to be on their guard against these enemies of society.
Hatred of war – to be constructive – must be translated into stipport of the cause of international socialism.
 




The assassination of Henryk Ehrlich and Victor Alter by Stalin’s murderous GPU was protested at Mecca Temple in New York City on March 30 by some 3,000 trade unionists, socialists, liberals – and a sprinkling of capitalist politicians grinding their own axes.
Among the speakers at the meeting was William Green, president of the American Federation of Labor, to whom Ambassador Litvinov had sent his letter of “explanation” of the murder of the two leaders of the Jewish and socialist movements of Poland.
The tone of the meeting had been set in a statement by David Dubinsky, president of the International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union and head of the committee which organized the protest meeting. Mr. Dubinsky said:
“The lives of Henryk Ehrlich and Victor Alter are shining examples of sterling and fervent devotion to the cause of their people. We dismiss categorically the absurd and wild charge that they were working for a separate peace with the Nazis. The effort to besmirch the character of these two martyrs, to cast black shadows on their fealty to the ideals of progress and humanity, is shameful and vile.”
James A. Carey, secretary-treasurer of the Congress of Industrial Organizations, who spoke at the Mecca Temple meeting against the violent opposition of the Stalinist contingent in the CIO leadership, struck a note of international solidarity of labor.
“I know of no men of independent though who have been persuaded that Alter and Ehrlich were guilty,” said Carey. “I have read and re-read the ‘explanation’ submitted by Ambassador Litvinov, and each time the explanation appears less convincing. Those who seek to defend these executions are reduced to the grim self-deception practiced recently by one columnist in the Daily Worker, who wrote: ‘These men were guilty or they would not have been executed.’ No apologist for any tyranny ever spoke more frankly. The Alter-Ehrlich case extends far beyond national boundaries. It cuts deep into the whole future of world labor. The Russian workers in the past have often joined with us in protesting injustices and persecutions in our own country. We have welcomed such demonstrations – in the cases of Mooney and Billings and of Sacco and Vanzetti. We ask them to see our protest tonight in a similar light. As a gesture not of hostility to Soviet labor but of concern for the future of world labor organization.”
Other speakers were Mayor La Guardia of New York, United States Senator James M. Mead and United States Representative Voorhis of California. It would have been in better grace and in the spirit of the sincere socialists in whose memory the meeting was called, if the meeting had been made strictly labor’s affair – excluding representatives of the capitalist class.
Professor Reinhold Niebuhr of Union Theological Seminary was the only speaker who even made mention of the scandalous Moscow trials. “Cynical defiance of the labor movement of the Western world which pleaded for the lives of these two labor men, refusal to give any plausible reason for their execution, all remind us of the Moscow trials years ago,” said Professor Niebuhr.
In justice to the labor movement of the whole world, the leaders of labor organizations speaking at the Ehrlich-Alter protest meeting should have taken it as an opportunity to denounce also those Moscow trials, the exile, torture and assassination of tens of thousands of revolutionary Bolsheviks by bloody Stalin and the murder of Trotsky by Stalin’s hatchet men. We must, however, note that most of these were disgracefully silent when Stalin was murdering Russian revolutionaries.
Green rightly said: “We do know this – that the lives and records and characters of Ehrlich and Alter thoroughly belie these charges.” But the lives and records and characters of Trotsky and the old Bolsheviks “liquidated” by Stalin for their revolutionary intransigence, speak far more loudly for themselves.
The Daily Worker and the Stalinist misleaders of labor have been getting high blood pressure over the mounting protest against the assassinations. These super-patriots who only recently were calling this an imperialist war out of no communist convictions but in line with the Hitler-Stalin pact, now condemn the Dubinsky committee for “deliberate efforts at corruption of the United Nations.”
In the crowd on the street around the meeting hall, arguments developed between Stalinists who seemed to have been planted there for the purpose of reminding people (who came to protest the assassination) that Ehrlich and Alter were just “a couple of Nazi spies.’’ These arguments did not go so well for the stooges.
In the course of the street arguments the Moscow trials were mentioned, Trotsky’s innocence was acclaimed again and again, and he was referred to as the organizer of the Red Army – which, of course, is NOT Stalin’s army of today.
This reporter left the scene as one good sized defender of Trotsky, using every restraint to keep his anger in check, shouted: “Without Lenin and Trotsky there would never have been a Soviet Union.” From the crowd came murmurs: “The man is right.”
 




In our issue of February 15 – under The Readers of Labor Action Take the Floor – we published a letter from “Shipyard Worker, San Francisco,” in which he stated his “substantial agreement” with the views expressed in Labor Action but requested us to “devote a column or two of your paper to explain how socialism in our time can come about and why it will, if indeed, you believe it will.”
He also wrote in this letter:
“I know men of like opinion with my own who would go to the point of death for their views, yet these men have no wish to be martyrs for the sake of being martyrs alone. They wish the assurance of conviction that even if they are lost in the fight, that the fight itself is not lost. Not a sure thing, mind you, but just a reasonable chance.”
This May Day issue seems the appropriate place for answering this friend who is a bit doubtful about us as well as about himself.
 
Capitalist Disease Has Only One Cure
Let me ask our San Francisco friend this question: If a man is suffering from a fatal disease and his only chance of survival is an operation, is he being a martyr if he submits, himself to this operation? You’d say, No. He’s acting intelligently.
While this is an old analogy, it still serves well to make the point. Our reader agrees with us substantially. Therefore, he must see that society is suffering from the rotten, cancerous, fatal maladies of decaying capitalism. He understands, undoubtedly, that all the schemes for bolstering the system are, at their best, palliatives .that cannot cure – and, at their worst, strictly dope.
What choice has the intelligent worker? He can either resign himself to the progressively worsening fits of the capitalist system – bigger and better wars; more widespread unemployment; labor’s cruel suppression under totalitarianism, the newest symptom of the disease; and to the eventual collapse of civilization, tragic and complete. Or he can submit himself to the operation known as social revolution!
The capitalist system is not the first rotting, exploitive system whose poisonous carcass had to be removed by social revolution to allow humanity a new lease on life. The slave system of the Roman Empire was swept away by social revolutionary forces. Feudalism was ushered out by history by great and inspiring revolutions. The thirteen American colonies in 1776 obtained by revolution a national independence that no other British colony acquired.
The Russian Revolution cleaned out the rubbish heap that pompously called itself the Imperial Russian Empire and a few months later drove the capitalists and landlords out of their strongholds. That the Stalin bureaucracy, as the new ruling class, now has to be sent to keep company with the Czar, the capitalists and the landlords, does not alter the efficacy of revolution as the instrument for social betterment.
Must not the intelligent worker place himself on the side of historical progress – as the ailing individual must place himself on the side of medical and scientific progress?
 
Is There a “Reasonable Chance”?
Our San Francisco friend wants to know “how socialism in our time can come about” and if he is “lost in the fight, that the fight itself is not lost.” He says: “Not a sure thing, mind you, just a reasonable chance.”
I invite him to cast his appraising eye on the European continent. Will those suffering people in Nazi-invaded lands be content to drive out the Nazis only to welcome back their old masters? Because socialists have been driven underground, has socialist thought and the socialist objective perished? Quite the contrary. Besides, the political commingling of “democrats” and fascists makes it clear to the European masses that the “democratic” imperialists no more than the Nazis will give them simple human freedom. Is there not a “REASONABLE CHANCE” that the people of Europe, whose sufferings have made them deadly earnest, will have to make a try at the socialist solution – in our time?
Suppose that the United States does establish its military police and its food commissary for ruined Europe – to keep down revolution with plenty of bullets and a few crumbs of bread. How long before that volcano must erupt?
Now consider our own country. Who do you suppose will be the goats of the post-war military dictatorship envisaged by our .imperialist planners? The workers, of course. When Rickenbacker, representative of the crudest self-interests of his class, calls for the outlawing of strikes, the suspension of the forty-hour week, the banning of the closed shop, the prohibition of double time pay and the institution of incentive wages – in his wishful thinking he is already fastening the burdens of the post-war global dictatorship upon the American workers’ backs. Will the workers stand for it?
There is a REASONABLE CHANCE that they will not – fe that they will fight like hell for their unions, their social gains, a living wage, against the heavy taxation that will be their post-war lot, for jobs for the unemployed, and so on. Under post-war conditions, these fights, these strikes, must necessarily assume not only a political character – that is, against the capitalist system – but also an international character.
Our San Francisco friend is worried that today he cannot persuade his union to his point of view. He says: “A worker who sought to speak the truth about this war would hardly get his mouth set for the words before he’d be pounced on from a dozen sides.” What of it? Today he can open his mouth on union issues, on the folly of the no-strike pledge. Tomorrow he may be able to persuade his union about the necessity for independent political action. And if he himself is not around to issue the call for social revolution, he can be sure that the era we live in will make that call compelling.
 
The Working Class Can Win the Fight
Will this fight be lost?
Many workers ask this question with Russia in mind. The 1917 Revolution has not brought socialism to Russia, but a new exploiting class ruling through a barbarous dictatorship. Again let me make a comparison with something very easy to grasp.
Suppose a country doctor is called to a patient and finds it imperative to perform an emergency operation in a farm house, without proper antiseptic conditions, without a nurse, without an anesthetist, without the full range of instruments for drainage of pus, etc., etc. The operation itself is successful, but later an infection sets in, necessitating another operation. Let us hope this time the patient can be removed to a modern hospital and the operation performed under favorable conditions.
Did the development of the infection prove that the cause of surgery is lost? No more does the counter-revolution in Russia prove that the cause of socialism is lost. Stalinism is the infection produced by the “farm house” conditions of the Russia in which the first socialist revolution took place – and because the Russian people got no revolutionary support from the workers of the more advanced countries of the West, just as the isolated country doctor got no assistance from the outside.
Yes, the infection of Stalinism necessitates another operation – another revolution. But this time the conditions will be better for success, because the overthrow of Stalin will be part of the European revolution as a whole. The working people of all Europe together will be fighting for a socialist federation of their countries – so that the backward and the most advanced will merge their resources.
What about us here in the USA? American capitalism looks huskier every day – with its tremendous plants, its pile of gold, and now its intimidating array of air, naval and military strength. What can the American working class do against this powerful fortress of entrenched wealth?
What, indeed, but the simplest, most natural thing in the world – just step out from under the capitalist fortress – WHICH IS SUSTAINED BY LABOR!
Workers have learned from their own strikes and sit-downs the elementary lesson that those tremendous plants are useless without them. The accumulated wealth of the capitalist class is wealth the workers produced but never got. The military strength of this country is the sum total of war material produced by labor and of soldiers, sailors, marines and flyers stemming mainly from the working people. Let the working class merely decide to use its labor and life for a better purpose than to sustain this capitalist fortress – and socialism will have that “reasonable chance” our reader is worrying about.
There is, of course, the question of leadership. Who will form the necessary vanguard? A political party is necessary to give force and direction to the struggle to mobilize the most advanced sections of the working class.
The Stalinists are tools of the Kremlin who exploit their connections with labor to carry out Stalin’s fluctuating international policies. The top union leadership is sold on capitalism and ties organized labor to a policy of class collaboration.
There remain the WORKERS PARTY, the supporters of Labor Action, a handful of true revolutionaries in other organizations – and the thousands of advanced and militant workers who, like our San Francisco reader, are or will be “in substantial agreement.” Out of this grouping will be built a WORKERS PARTY that will combine clarity of socialist program with the size of a mass organization and the proportions of working class leadership.
But not by worrying about being martyrs, about putting our necks “on the chopping block,” as our San Francisco reader expressed it. If we keep our heads and courage in our hearts, we can weld a revolutionary party of class-conscious, disciplined, purposeful militants for whom “socialism in our time” will be a realistic slogan with a very, very “reasonable chance” of success. And we recommend to our San Francisco reader that, as a first step, he join the Workers Party.
 




“For the next two weeks we we going to shout, beg and plead for justice from the Mayor and the Board of Transportation. If that gets nowhere, then we will call a membership meeting and a few hours after that meeting is held the people of New York can look for something – and this time it will BE something.”
Thus spoke Michael Quill, international president of the Transport Workers Union, CIO, on December 23 before a meeting of 600 delegates representing 212 New York City labor unions and civic groups. At the game meeting Douglas MacMahon, president of the TWU’s New York City local, declared that the transport workers are in a strike mood – WHICH IS NOT HARD TO BELIEVE.
Rather timidly and circumspectly, to be sure, but at long last the leaders of the transport workers of New York City were – on December 23 – beginning to talk in terms of strike.
 
Quill Retreats – Why?
On December 24 Mayor LaGuardia – who stands for workers’ rights, provided the workers are in Italy or some other distant land – bombastically reannounced his position that “Any interruption of service, by whatever name it may be called, is tantamount to a strike against the government. The right to strike against the government has not, is not and cannot be recognised. If any untoward action is taken as long as I am Mayor and happen to be here, I will meet it.”
The boss press cheered the Mayor’s brazen anti-labor statement till the rafters rang – and reminded President Quill that the transit workers cannot strike, not only because they are municipal employees, but because President Quill himself committed bis union not to strike for the duration of the war.
Perhaps his political mentors in Stalinist headquarters got after President Quill with the suggestion to pull in his horns. At any rate, on December 24 the union officers appeared to be back-watering. They no longer hinted at a strike, but again spoke of a “PEACEFUL SOLUTION.” They said: “The only avenue for peaceful solution of the dispute is to submit the matter to an impartial tribunal for adjustment and settlement.”
Such weak-kneed conduct will get the workers nowhere. Efforts of the union for a “PEACEFUL SOLUTION” have been going on for the past two years. THE NET RESULT IS THE OFFER BY THE CITY FATHERS OF A SIXTY-CENTS-A-WEEK RAISE TO MEN EARNING AS LITTLE AS $26 A WEEK AND NO MORE THAN $38.
The union’s efforts at a “peaceful solution” have been rebuffed by the WLB, which relegated the transit workers to the status of second-class citizens by refusing to take up their demand for the 15 per cent increase in wages allowed by the WLB’s own formula. All these efforts at a “peaceful solution” – plus the half-hearted threat of a strike made by union leaders on December 23 – brought from the Mayor on December 24 only the high-handed repetition of his former offer to give the 32,000 subway, trolley and bus workers a blanket increase of $l,000,000 – which breaks down to the pittance of a sixty-cents-a-week wage increase per worker. Here are the Mayor’s arrogant words:
“I cannot understand the purpose of any demand now, particularly after weeks of conference and my announcement – repeated announcement – only as late as the day before yesterday, in a message to the council, that the board was working on salary adjustments to eliminate some existing inequalities which amount to $1,000,000.”
The plea of the union for justice from the Mayor and the Board of Transportation is falling on stone-deaf ears. The two weeks’ limit set by President Quill, when he was in a brave mood, expires on January 6. That “SOMETHING” which President Quill spoke about must be delivered. Unless the transit workers now put up a fight for their rights they will entirely compromise their position and be reduced to the status of municipal slaves.
That means not only that there will be no wage increases – except sixty cents a week – but the very existence of their union will be in jeopardy. Capitulation of the workers at this point will be a complete victory for the anti-labor policies of Delaney and LaGuardia, WHOSE BASIC AIM IS TO BUST THE UNION!
Every union local in the City of New York should send a resolution of protest to the Board of Transportation and, to the Mayor against their anti-union campaign – and a resolution of solidarity and support to the transit workers in taking the strike action that has been forced upon them.
The 4,500,000 daily users of the subways, trolleys and buses of the city, whose safe travel depends on the well-being of the 38,000 transit workers, should also send protests to the reactionary city fathers – and back the transit workers in their demands for a modest wage increase THAT IS NOT EVEN ADEQUATE to meet the sky-rocketing cost of living.
 




The House of Representatives has rebuked the President for “usurpation of legislative powers.” That sounds like something worth rebuking a President for – until you get down to cases.
Then you find that the House of Representatives by a vote of 268 to 124 revoked the Executive Order of the President limiting salaries to $25,000 per annum. Not so good!
The logical step would have been to extend that limit to all income, including interest, dividends and other gravy soaked up by the rich. But no! The House lifted even the very limited limit on salaries alone, and it is predicted that the Senate will duplicate the action of the House.
These legislators – who are supposed to be representing you – would like you to believe that they are interested, purely and simply, in stopping Presidential usurpation of legislative powers. You see these politicians just got mad because the President had “assumed powers which Congress never intended to grant him.” So – hurrah – they clapped the President down.
But there is a catch here.
Why is the limit on fat salaries alone a “usurpation of legislative power”? WHY NOT ALSO THE FREEZING OF WAGES?
For, be it remembered, that the same Presidential stabilization program, which was supposed to limit salary to $25,000, put wages on ice IMMEDIATELY. The workers are, naturally, finding this a bit too cool for them – and are demanding that wages be taken out of refrigeration. But the House of Representatives and the Senate – the so-called representative organ of the people – passed no law to unfreeze wages as a “usurpation of legislative powers,” or on any other ground.
The same Presidential stabilization program that called for limiting salaries that have not been limited and for freezing wages that have been frozen still, also demanded that the workers give up their right to strike. This edict actually operated as a violation of the law which grants workers the right to bargain collectively – -for without the right to strike the workers have nothing that the boss respects enough to make him bargain with them. What has in fact happened since the no-strike regulation is that collective bargaining has become an empty phrase.
But neither indignation nor any other sign of disapproval issued from the United States Congress or from any other body of politicians – not one of them has lifted a finger to restore to the workers their right to collective bargaining – and to strike. Presidential usurpation of legislative powers against the workers and in favor of the bosses has, on the contrary, received the blessing of both legislative houses – and they have continued where the President left off, as evidenced by the flow of ever more vicious anti-labor bills into both houses.
It is only when a Presidential order might curb the acquisitive instincts of the rich – when it might crack the knuckles of hands dripping with blood-money – that the “representatives of the people” see “usurpation’ of legislative powers.” This true story has a double moral.
First, “EQUALITY OF SACRIFICE” is only a phrase – a catch-phrase for morons, which the working people are NOT.
Second, many and devious are the ways by which a capitalist government serves the master class. So nicely coordinated is the system of checks and balances that an executive can order a limit on salaries of the rich, thus get himself a reputation for being a “liberal and friend of labor” – and at the same time be damn sure that the legislative branches of the government will not allow any infringement of the sacredness of the self-determination of profits.
The executive can be especially sure of this, if he himself has – as President Roosevelt has – given out the word that he will protect – to its lost hair – the profit system.
 




This month marks the seventy-second anniversary of the Paris Commune of 1871. What was the Commune that it is such an important landmark for the working class of the world?
It was the first attempt – in all history – of working people themselves to form a government EXCLUDING the landlords, capitalist bosses, bankers, politicians and miscellaneous hangers-on – and AGAINST these exploiters.
A short account of the events leading up to its establishment will give a fuller picture of the Commune itself.
 
Set Up First Workers’ Government in History
During the Franco-Prussian war in 1871 the Paris population capable of bearings arms had been armed and enlisted in the National Guard, which thus consisted mostly of armed workers. The French government, under Thiers, was more afraid of the workers in arms than of the Prussian army. Thiers felt that as long as the Parisian workers had arms and artillery, the rule of the propertied classes was not too safe.
Thiers had bravely run out of Paris at the approach of the Prussian troops, setting up his government in Versailles and leaving the Parisian people to fend tor themselves. The workers had to have their arms because – with the government in Versailles – they alone were keeping the Prussian troops – which had occupied the forts and lines of fortification – from invading all Paris. However, on March 18, 1871, Thiers sent troops to Paris – not against the Prussian invaders – but with orders to steal the artillery actually belonging to the people of Paris, having been manufactured and paid for by them.
This was the last straw. Throughout this period in French history – marked by wars for territory and by political machinations of the ruling classes – the working people were, as always, the victims, suffered greatly and were in revolutionary ferment as a result. Thiers’ plan to disarm them made it clear that the French ruling class regarded French workers as more dangerous to their interests than the Prussian Junkers. The Parisian workers broke with their treacherous government.
ON MARCH 26 THE PARIS COMMUNE WAS ELECTED AND ON MARCH 28 IT WAS PROCLAIMED AS THE GOVERNMENT – THE FIRST WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT IN HISTORY.
Isolated by the siege of Paris from the working people of the rest of France and without the workers of other countries taking similar revolutionary action to support the Paris workers, the Commune could stand its ground for only about two months – against overwhelming odds.
With the bravery that only men and women defending their own can show, the Communards fought both against the besieging Prussian troops and the onslaught of Thiers’ forces. They lost, and the merciless massacre let loose by Thiers against the vanquished workers is something that only ruling classes frenzied by fear for their stolen wealth are capable of.
Yet this first workers’ government, which died almost at its inception, taught the workers of the world two invaluable lessons: (1) What a workers’ government looks like – what form it can take; and (2) What workers can do for themselves when they are in control of a government which excludes their exploiters.
The Council of the Commune consisted of working men or bona fide representatives of the working class. The people of Paris formed themselves into districts and by universal suffrage elected fellow workers to represent them on the Council of the Commune – a brand new governmental structure.
How were these representatives controlled by the workers? How did the workers make sure that their representatives would represent them? Very simply. All representatives were subject to recall at any time. Yes, at any time, the people of a given district – without fuss or political fanfare – could call a meeting to replace a representative who was not up to crack with them. In the second place, every single person serving in the Commune – from the members of the Council itself down to the humblest worker – was paid wages at the same rates as ordinary workers in the factories. All special privileges and favors for officials were ended.
Careerists could find no fruitful orchard in the Commune. This limitation of pay insured that the Commune would be in the hands of the sincerest workers, close to their class and willing to advance only as fast as the wages and well-being of the workers as a whole advanced.
The Commune, of course, abolished [line of text missing] The armed force of the Commune was the armed people, organized in the National Guard. The police that had served the master class to suppress every spontaneous act of the workers of Paris, was disbanded. Simple police functions necessary to the community were undertaken by the Commune itself.
THUS THE GOVERNMENT OF OPPRESSION WAS REPLACED BY A TRUE WORKERS’ DEMOCRACY.
This workers’ government was no talk shop for parliamentarians and cheap politicians. It was a working organization – and its work was to run the community in the interest of its people.
 
Undertook Solution of People’s Problems
In spite of the colossal military task of fighting, its two-headed enemy, the French rulers and the Prussian Junkers, the Council of the Commune proceeded in its civilian tasks of alleviating the misery of the people impoverished by years of exploitation and war. For instance, rents for dwellings from October 1870 to April 1871 were cancelled to help the poor; rents already paid were deductible from future payments. Pawnshops were stopped from selling the tools and other things pledged by the poor workers for the little money they had been obliged to borrow to live on. Later, pawnshops were entirely abolished as being incompatible with the right of workmen to their tools and TO CREDIT as workmen. Abusive night work was ended. Employment offices that had been flesh-pots for political scoundrels were closed.
The Commune furthermore undertook the real solution of the unemployment problem. On April 16 it issued an order for a statistical record of all factories and workshops which had been closed by the bosses and proceeded with plans for reopening the factories under the management of the workers who had previously been working in them. For the purpose of running the factories the workers were to be organized into cooperative societies.
In all this it is apparent that the Commune undertook the solution of the living problems of living people – without regard to capitalist property rights and without regard to private profit. This the Commune could do because it was a workers’ government. Short-lived as it was, it flashed upon the screen of history a brilliant example of what workers – freed from their exploiters – can do for themselves.
*
The very interesting and inspiring workers’ government under Lenin and Trotsky – the Soviets of 1917 – will be discussed next week, after which the lessons of these two workers’ governments of the past will be tied up with the problems of this year 1943. A later article will contrast the Stalinist government of today with a workers’ government.
 




Under Secretary of War Patterson declared before the House committee considering the Johnson “work or fight” bill that the absenteeism at one of the aviation plants was sufficient to build ninety-seven bombers last year.
Admiral Land, chairman of the Maritime Commission – that labor-hating gentleman who would be willing to see every labor leader hung at sunrise – is sure that absenteeism in the shipyards was enough to build one hundred cargo vessels last year.
Where do these soft-handed gentlemen get their figures? Perhaps No. 1 enemy of labor, Captain Eddie Rickenbacker, is their authority, But never mind that. Suppose these swivel-chair toilers-with-their-tongues are right that so-ond-so many planes and ships could have been built. The question still remains: WHY DO WORKERS TAKE TIME OFF?
Secretary of Labor Perkins answers this question on which everything depends. Her answer leave no doubt on the subject. This is her department – she knows.
SECRETARY PERKINS STATES THAT 80 TO 90 PER CENT OF THE ABSENTEEISM TODAY IS DUE TO INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENTS AND TO ILLNESS, HURT WORKERS AND SICK WORKERS CANNOT BUILD PLANES AND SHIPS. THAT IS FINAL AND CONCLUSIVE.
Enlarging on this subject, Secretary Perkins said further that improved working conditions could reduce industrial accidents by 90 to 95 per cent. Also many minor illnesses could be prevented by improved conditions in plants and at shipyards.
But do Secretary of Navy Knox, Under Secretary of War Patterson, Admiral Land, Representatives Johnson and Vinson and other “servants of the people” cry out for better conditions? Not on your life.
They are all for the Johnson “work or fight” bill. They want every worker absent “without prior authorization” to be reported to his draft board – as that bill would require. To allow the worker the right to decide whether he is able to go to work or not is allowing him too much freedom, according to the “guardians of democracy” in Washington. The worker must be intimidated into going, to work – sick or sound, hurt or hale – with the threat of induction into the Army. He must not be a free agent.
Secretary Knox is also eager to reach out and use compulsion on workers over draft age. He favors fines and wage penalties. “The place to hit them is in the pocketbook. If you dock their wages, you are hitting them where it hurts.” Such are the noble sentiments of the Secretary of the Navy in this “arsenal of democracy.”
The hullabaloo about absenteeism is false. It is raised to fool the public. What the political stooges of the bosses want is a noose around labor’s neck. They think the hullabaloo about absenteeism will give them the chance to slip it on.
Representative Curtis of Nebraska has introduced a bill which goes the whole hog in this respect. His bill would abolish the forty-hour week – and abrogate all union contracts for less than a forty-eight-hour week – and brand a worker putting in less than forty-eight hours a week an absentee – and cancel the draft deferment of a worker getting overtime pay under forty-eight hours of work. Mr. Curtis’ bill reflects the most ardent hopes of the most reactionary elements of the ruling class – AND HE INTRODUCED IT UNDER COVER OF THE HULLABALOO ABOUT ABSENTEEISM.
 
The Causes of Absenteeism
It is as clear as crystal that admirals, cabinet members and congressmen are not interested in absenteeism in itself. They are using it as a springboard to jump on labor.
Secretary Perkins suggested that good canteens in plants and at shipyards, better sanitation, rest periods and welfare service would go far to eliminate industrial accidents and prevent minor illnesses – both of which, as stated above, cause 80 to 90 per cent of the absenteeism. But not a peep about this from any of the aforementioned worthies. If they are so concerned about more planes and ships that might have been built, why don’t they tackle the CAUSES of absenteeism?
Other causes not mentioned by Secretary Perkins are: living long distances from the job; lack of decent housing; lack of sufficient doctors and hospitals for medical care – and lack of food that workers are used to, especially meat.
How would Admiral Land, for instance, fare in a “foxhole” in the bowels of a battleship in construction, cramped and overheated and breathing sickening fumes – and on top of that travel four to six hours to and from work every day – and on top of that get “home” to some primitive shack or sub-standard flat without even a bathtub to get cleaned up in – and on top of that have to eat an unsatisfying meal? How long would he last on the job under such – or any – conditions?
 
Some Workers Travel Sixty Miles
And would Under Secretary of War Patterson perhaps like a job at Ford’s Willow Run plant producing planes he talks so much about? There at least half of the workers travel sixty miles to and from work every day. There thousands live in shacks, basements, condemned houses, tents, trailers. These people are packed like sardines into these unhealthy surroundings. There the same beds are used over and over by different shifts of workers. There sanitation is not only primitive but there aren’t enough facilities to accommodate everyone. How long would Under Secretary of War Patterson last on such a job?
Representatives Bees of Kansas and Bryson of South Carolina introduced bills to curtail the sale of liquor around plants and shipyards – of course, as a cure for absenteeism in spite of the fact that drunkenness is one of its very minor causes. Naturally, the hard-talking admirals, cabinet members and congressmen, need something to pep them up – but airplane makers and shipbuilders working under conditions bad enough to take their heats out, need no pepping up!
None of the propaganda artists – from Rickenbacker up and down the line – bother to inform the public that while absenteeism now is about 7.5 per cent, during World War I it was 16 per cent – Secretary Perkins’ figures. As stated above, the hullabaloo is false.
 
Labor Has to Fight Back
Workers stay out of work because they are hurt or sick – or don’t get the time to do what every normal human being has to do. Workers must have the improvements Secretary Perkins enumerated, namely, good canteens, better sanitation, rest periods, welfare service (especially for women workers) – all these on the job. Besides, workers must have decent housing, sufficient doctors and nurses assigned to war industry centers – and adequate food, clothing and recreation, for which they must get pay commensurate with the cost of living.
FOR these things organized labor must fight – as well as AGAINST the Johnson “work or fight” bill, the Knox idea to penalize workers above draft age, the Curtis bill to abolish the forty-hour week.
LABOR HAS TO FIGHT – or that noose will be slipped around its neck!
 




We present below the first in a series of articles on What Is a Workers’ Government?
Is it puzzling, this distinction between a workers’ government and a labor government? Surely, labor means workers. Then, what’s the difference?
History has taught us that if the workers are to go forward out of the mire of capitalist chaos, unemployment and war – to a socialist society – they must use the instrument of a workers’ government.
History has likewise taught us that what has come to be known as a labor government is an instrument of the capitalist class for maintaining its power over labor.
The next article in this series will deal with the historic examples of workers’ governments, what they were able to do and what promise they hold for today. In the present, article labor governments as tools of the ruling class are on parade.
 
MacDonald Ruled For British Bosses
The most perfect example of a labor government was the Ramsay MacDonald government in England in the early 1920’s. MacDonald was head of the then powerful British Labor Party, was appointed Prime Minister and created a ss-called Labor Cabinet. You would think that the scene was all set for marvellous strides forward – that the control of the capitalists over British society would be undermined and way made for the control by the workers of their own destiny.
The exact opposite happened. As Leon Trotsky wrote in his highly recommended little book, Whither England?, MasDonald, as Prime Minister, “brings to bear all the methods of capitalist oppression and hands over these instruments of force intact to its Conservative successor in office.”
As a matter of cold fact, the labor government ruled as stooges for the British imperialist gang whose oppression the workers no longer wanted to tolerate. The First World War left British imperialism one of the military victors, but staggering economically. Its empire was badly shaken and its markets with it. So that the British workers were suffering from unemployment. To maintain profits, wages were being cut right and left. There was a series of tremendous strikes, and workers flocked into the Labor Party for redress through political action. The influence of the Russian Revolution was strong and gave the British workers a revolutionary outlook and hope for a socialist society.
The British ruling class was incapable of stemming this tide of working class rebellion single-handed. It, therefore, called in its lieutenants in labor’s own ranks – the misleading labor leaders – to do the dirty work. THAT WAS THE MacDONALD GOVERNMENT.
The Conservatives had passed many laws against labor – which the labor government proceeded to enforce. To make it easier for British capitalists to compete in the world textile market, it permitted the miserable wages of the textile workers to be cut. It sanctioned a law providing for the lengthening of hours in the mines – also to assist the capitalists in world competition. It upheld the extreme Tory policy of oppression in India. And continued to build battleships to prepare British imperialism for the present World War. And, the biggest plume in his bonnet, is the credit history gives MacDonald for crushing the general strike of 1926.
To be sure, MacDonald made “socialist” speeches, of a kind – as all misleading demagogues do – but not one step was taken in the direction of socialism. On the contrary, the MacDonald government did everything in its power to bolster and strengthen imperialism at home and abroad. It used its influence with the workers to run their discontent into
the ground and to dissipate their revolutionary energy – WHICH IS EXACTLY WHAT THE RULING CLASS REQUIRED FROM MacDONALD.
 
“Labor Government” Crushed German Revolution
Another outstanding illustration of “labor government” betrayal of labor comes from Germany. In January 1919, the German revolutionary movement, involving the broad mass of workers, was crushed in blood. The murderous business was carried out by a government of so-called “socialists” – Ebert, Scheidemann, Bauer, Noske. The frightened ruling class invited these labor turncoats to take over the reins of government, and from that vantage point to use their influence over the masses to get them to give up their revolutionary activities. When persuasion failed, these blood-hounds for the German Junkers used the armed forces of the capitalist state – outdoing the Junkers in Junkerism – to decapitate the revolutionary movement, jail thousands of workers, destroy their press and meeting halls.
At the juncture when the German workers had already formed their Councils of Workers and Soldiers as the basis for a true workers’ government – the German ruling class pulled out of its hat the Ebert-Scheidemann “labor”government to destroy the embryo workers’ government.
 
And in France – The People’s Front
Almost two decades later, in the spring of 1936, a government of “socialists,” Stalinists and radicals came into power in France – forming; that ill-fated and ill-famed People’s Front government – another so-called labor government with “socialist” Blum at its head. Just like the MacDonald government and the Ebert-Scheidemann government before it, it came into being to act as stooges for the capitalist class against the workers who were taking revolutionary action to overthrow the capitalist class.
Leon Trotsky wrote a remarkably lucid analysis of this period in French history in his pamphlet Whither France? This revolutionary period reached its height in the wonderful, strike movement of 1935. Not only were the workers taking over the factories. They were setting up efficiently, functioning factory committees to carry on in the place of the existing agencies of capitalist government. All the workers needed was honest, clear-headed, purposeful revolutionary leadership to guide them toward the socialist goal. They got the Blum sell-out government – WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OF THE FRENCH IMPERIALISTS.
The first thing it did was to placate the workers with a few reforms such as the 40-hour week and vacations with pay. But these reforms became meaningless in view of the widespread unemployment, the increase in the cost of living and all the other evils brought on the workers by the crisis in French capitalism.
Like any capitalist government, the Blum government began to mend the unmendable fences of French imperialism. It undertook an unprecedented armament program. It blocked aid to the Spanish workers in their fight against fascism because it feared workers’ power. At home it sent the Mobile Guards against striking workers – WHILE THE FRENCH FASCISTS THUMBED THEIR NOSES AT IT AND FLOURISHED LIKE STINK WEEDS.
The “socialists” and Stalinists in the People’s Front government, together with the radicals, did signal service in saving French capitalism – for the time being – from overthrow by the workers. That was what they were put there for – even at the expense of strengthening the fascist elements.
 
The British Coalition War Cabinet Today
Today there is nowhere in the world a labor government like the MacDonald set-up, the Ebert-Scheidemann-Noske counter-revolutionary government or the People’s anti-labor Front. But there is in England today a war coalition government. That is, so-called labor leaders have entered into the capitalist war cabinet to work with the ministers of the propertied classes. These so-called labor leaders are Bevin, Morrison and Attlee.
Professor Harold J. Laski, of the University of London, recently wrote an article for the New York Times Magazine – printed in part in last week’s Labor Action – in which he showed that British big business runs the British government, including the “labor” members thereof, namely, Bevin, Morrison and Attlee. The role of these three servitors of the British ruling class has been to sell the reluctant British workers an unpalatable bill of goods, i.e, the maintenance of British imperialism at home and abroad.
“All pivotal positions – economic, political and diplomatic – remain in the hands of the old ruling class,” writes Professor Laski. The laborites in the government are doing their share to keep the workers from upsetting this status quo. That is what they were put there for. How much longer they will succeed in their work of betrayal, remains to be seen.
In the United States, where labor has not developed along the same political lines as in England and where there has been no powerful nation-wide Labor Party, there has never been a labor government. Even today the ruling class here does not find it necessary to include labor in a war coalition cabinet as in England. Perhaps American labor is backward only to develop along more advanced class-conscious and revolutionary lines.
But the American ruling class has drawn labor leaders into the agencies of government, into the various war boards to do here the job that Bevin, Morrison and Attlee do in England. The function of the Murrays and Reuthers, the Greens and Tobins, has been to get labor to “cooperate” in making all the war sacrifices the ruling class demands from it.
The management-public-labor trio is a two-to-one arrangement under which the labor leaders buckle under to the pressure of capitalist interests represented by management directly and by the “public” indirectly. The same thing is happening here as happened everywhere and every time labor leaders enter into the capitalist government. In cooperating with the capitalist class, they serve the interests of that class against the interests of the working class.
For instance, the War Labor Board more and more makes unanimous decisions. In the case of the New York City transit workers, management, labor and the public all agreed that the transit workers are orphans without even the right to place their case for a wage increase before the WLB – perfect unanimity behind Boss LaGuardia.
Again, not only do labor leaders utilize the conventions of labor unions to ram down labor’s throat the no-strike pledge, the relinquishment of double time for Sunday work, the Little Steel steal, etc. – but these leaders shamelessly turn over the rostrum of workers’ conventions to capitalist politicians and officials of the capitalist government to propagandize the workers against their own interests.
Neither the MacDonald government in England nor the Ebert-Scheidemann government in Germany nor the People’s Front in France nor today’s war coalition cabinet nor management-public-labor representation on government boards in this country – none of these have even a remote relation to a workers’ government that can emancipate the workers from capitalism and lead on toward socialism. As shown above, they are all instruments for preserving capitalist class rule – for betraying working class interests. This is the historic pattern and purpose every time so-called labor leaders take over and run the government – AS IT EXISTS IN CAPITALIST SOCIETY. The same is true when so-called labor leaders or “socialists” enter the government in coalition with capitalist politicians.
*
In the next article you will read an explanation of why a real workers’ government cannot be within the framework of the capitalist governmental structure. As stated above, the next article will also review the historic examples of a workers’ government, what they accomplished, what promise they hold for the future.
 




Like the Paris Commune, the second workers’ government in all history, the Soviet Government under Lenin and Trotsky – was born out of war, World War I. Unlike the Commune, which encompassed only the city of Paris and remained isolated from the rest of France; this second workers’ government included 180,000,000 people and an entire country three times as large as the United States. Without the lessons of the Commune and without the preparatory 1905 revolution in Russia, the Russian people would not have had, in 1917, their wonderful governmental weapon – THE SOVIETS.
First a word about the background from which the Soviet Government emerged.
 
The Weakest Link in Capitalist Chain
During World War I Czarist Russia was the most backward nation, the one least able to sustain its part in modern imperialist warfare. The insatiable demands of the war fronts sapped the nation of manpower and supplies. At the fronts, soldiers were exposed to the enemy without adequate clothes, food, arms and equipment. At home the starving and war-weary workers and peasants could no longer stand the strain.
Soldiers deserted, working men went on strike, women stormed government offices demanding food. Rebellion swept the land. The cry arose for peace, bread and land. Spontaneously the workers, peasants and returning soldiers formed Soviets – which had already been tried out in the 1905 revolution. FORCING THE PEOPLE TO FIGHT BEYOND HUMAN ENDURANCE COST THE CZAR HIS HEAD. THAT WAS THE REVOLUTION OF FEBRUARY 1917.
The Kerensky government put up by the Russian capitalists did not fare any better. Ignoring the sufferings of the people and their demand for peace, Kerensky continued the war. Large numbers of soldiers and sailors began to side with the Soviets. Even the notorious Cossacks were sympathetic to the revolutionary masses. The Kerensky regime hung on for a few months and was overthrown by the November revolution led by the Bolshevik Party. THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT OF WORKERS, PEASANTS AND SOLDIERS TOOK POWER – WITH LENIN AND TROTSKY AT ITS HEAD.
Like the Commune, the Soviets had to fight both its domestic and foreign enemies. However, the counter-revolutionary forces of the landlords and capitalists at home would have collapsed immediately had they not been supported with money, arms and armies by nearly every capitalist country on earth, including the great western democracies. On all its borders Soviet Russia was attacked by armies of intervention sent to crush the workers’ government.
This time the count was called with the capitalist forces on the mat. The Soviets were triumphant. War-weary, in a war-robbed country, against superhuman obstacles, the Russian workers, peasants and soldiers rose to superb heights of human endeavor – not to “sacrifice” for the benefit of another class, but to save their own Soviets. Military force could not conquer the Soviets. It took the internal counter-revolutionary treachery of Stalin to take away from the Soviets everything that bad made it a workers’ government, leaving nothing but a meaningless, empty name.
What made the Soviets under Lenin and Trotsky a government of the workers, by the workers and for the workers?
 
The Soviets – And How They Worked
There was a Soviet in every city, village, district and county of Russia. The delegates to the Soviets were elected right from the shops and unions. The peasants of a district elected their delegates. The soldiers and sailors of a regiment elected theirs.
It was an industrial republic with an occupational ... vote for everyone who worked. It, therefore, included clerks, teachers, engineers, scientific workers. It excluded from voting capitalists, coupon clippers, parasitic politicians, all the exploiters of labor. Still, 95 per cent of the Russian people could vote in the Soviets – which reveals that prior to the November revolution 95 per cent of the people had been under the heel of 5 per cent. In the United States, which enjoys so-called “universal suffrage,” what with one restriction and another – including the poll-tax – approximately only 65 per cent of the people can vote.
How did the workers control their delegates in the Soviets? Very easily. The factory whistle sounded to call a meeting of the workers. They met to instruct their delegates as to their wishes or to criticize their conduct in the Soviet or to replace them by electing new delegates. The All-Russian Assembly of Soviets was made up of representatives from all the local Soviets – representatives coming directly from the factories, farms and regiments – and subject to similar control by the workers, peasants and soldiers.
The highest salary of any official in the Soviet Government was 600 rubles a month – or $60, plus $10 for each non-earning member of the family. Thus, for instance, Trotsky, as Commissar of War and head of the Bed Army, received $90 a month for himself, his wife and his two children. The long imperialist war and the exhausting civil war had reduced the whole country to abject poverty. Under the Soviet Government of Lenin and Trotsky nobody was going to eat cake before everybody had bread. There were no political plums to pick in the Soviets – NOT UNTIL STALIN TOOK AWAY THEIR BASE IN THE FACTORIES AND UNIONS, LEFT ONLY THE MISUSED NAME, AND MADE OF THEM THE HUNTING GROUNDS FOR CAREERISTS.
From barren bedrock, the Soviet Government began to function in the interests of the workers and peasants. It made peace. It made public the secret treaties of the lying, double-faced diplomats of the old regimes. It gave self-determination to the national minorities subjected to the Czar. The land went to the peasants who tilled it – THE IDLE RICH LANDLORDS BEING EXPROPRIATED.
In weeks the Soviet Government effected more social reforms than capitalism – even at its zenith – could accomplish in decades. The thousands of palaces, fine homes and public buildings theretofore reserved for the rich and for their politicians were opened as living quarters for the crowded people. Women were given the same rights as men, plus special care as mothers. People’s courts were set up in place of the former courts of class rule. To spread knowledge into minds darkened by ages of poverty and oppression, the Soviets opened thousands of schools, libraries, workers’ theaters and published Soviet newspapers in the remotest parts of the vast country.
 
Laid the Groundwork for Socialist Society
Finally the Soviet Government under Lenin and Trotsky took decisive steps to end capitalist economic power and laid the groundwork for a socialist society – which is the conclusive test of a workers’ government. All natural resources, forests, mines, waterways, all means of transportation and communication, were nationalized under the Soviet Government. Foreign trade – out of which capitalists make profit and for which wars are fought – was taken over by the workers’ government to serve the general good. Many basic industries, factories and shops became the property of the Soviets and were placed under workers’ control. Those factories which for good reasons were not immediately taken away from their private owners, were also placed under workers’ control.
In those early days of the Soviet Government, Trotsky explained workers’ control as follows:
“I mean by control that we will see to it that the factory is run not from the point of view of private profit, but from the point of view of the social welfare ... For example, we will not allow the capitalist to shut up his factory in order to starve his workmen into submission, or because it is not yielding him a profit. If it is turning out economically a needed product, it must be kept running. If the capitalist gives it up, he will lose it altogether, for a board of directors chosen by the workmen will be put in charge.
“Again, control implies that the books and correspondence of the concern will be open to the public, so that henceforth there will be no industrial secrets. If this concern hits upon a better process or device, it will be given to other concerns in the same branch of industry. Thus the public will promptly realize the utmost possible benefit from the find.”
These were all measures of a socialist nature. All were giant strides toward the socialist society of peace and plenty for all. Only a workers’ government – from which capitalist exploiters and all their ilk are excluded – can kick profits down the stairs and ascend to the higher social level of human needs. THIS THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT UNDER LENIN AND TROTSKY DID.
*
The next article will tie up the lessons of the two workers’ governments of the past with our problems today. A later article will contrast the Stalinist government with a real workers’ government.
 




How Does Workers’ Government Differ from “Labor Government”?

Why Workers Must Free Themselves from the Capitalist State

Out of the Pages of History – an Example of a Workers’ Government

How the Soviet Government Worked Before Stalin Crushed It

Workers’ Government Is the FUNDAMENTAL Solution to Our Problems
 




There is one basic truth every worker has to grasp about the state – or what we commonly call the government. The government is not an impartial umpire set up to see that everybody gets fair play. Contrary to Fourth of July speeches, it does not sit god-like above society administering justice to all alike. Quite the opposite is the case.
The state is the very partial, very biased agency developed by a given economic class to force the whole of society into subjugation to its private interests. That is why Marxian socialists talk about the CAPITALIST state and about BOURGEOIS democracy. The state in our modern world is the political arm of the capitalist class because that class is economic master. By the same token, the fascist and Nazi states are also capitalist states – only new and more despotic forms through which the same master class rules and which are capable of adaptation by the capitalist class of any country.
 
How Capitalist State Came into Being
The capitalist state has not always existed any more than the capitalist class itself has always existed. Before the advent of capitalist democracy there was the feudal state of the Middle Ages – the political armed fist by which the then powerful landowning nobility ruled over and extracted wealth from the toil of the serfs. THE FEUDAL STATE HAD BEEN CREATED AND DEVELOPED TO SUIT THE SPECIFIC NEEDS OF THE FEUDAL LORDS. When the capitalist class began to feel its oats, when it acquired money, began to build factories, to need wage labor, it realized it could not expand within the framework of the feudal state. History does not record that the rising capitalist class tried to establish “capitalist governments” within the feudal state – as chicken-hearted labor leaders have set up “labor governments” within the capitalist state. The young capitalist class undertook the revolutionary overthrow of the feudal state and the establishment of something entirely unknown in that age, namely, bourgeois democracy – their own capitalist state.
The most classical example of a capitalist class revolution was the great French Revolution. The great American Revolution was also a capitalist class revolution – the revolt of the maturing American capitalists against British imperialism, which used the powers of state to tax, suppress and exploit the colonies in its own behalf.
And just as the French bourgeoisie did not and could not utilize the feudal state, so the American bosses could not utilize the machinery of government set up in America by the British imperialists. The whole kit-and-caboodle was scrapped. American democracy was born – an independent capitalist state to serve the growing: American capitalist class. It has served it faithfully – it still does.
 
How Democracy Serves the Master Class
The capitalist classes in the various countries did not – and could not have – accomplished their revolution by themselves. It was the seething discontented masses of serfs, workers and townspeople who carried the capitalist revolution on their shoulders, fought the tyrants, gave their lives for liberty, equality, fraternity.
To the rising capitalists, liberty, equality, fraternity were ideals they wanted for themselves ALONE. They had no thought to grant the lower classes liberty, equality, and fraternity. To the ruling class the revolution ushered in a period of CAPITALIST MASTERY OVER THE LOWER CLASSES – IN THE PLACE OF THE MASTERY OF THE FEUDAL LORDS.
What could be better designed to placate and put off the irate people than political democracy? Certain political rights were given the masses – rights they did not have under feudalism and which the American people did not have under British rule. But ECONOMIC freedom – ownership and control of the means of production and therefore of life – this freedom was and is the special privilege of the ruling class. The state belongs to the class that has the economic power – to do the bidding of that class.
“In a democratic republic, wealth uses its power indirectly, but so much the more effectively, first, by means of direct bribery of officials; second, by means of an alliance between the government and the Stock Exchange.”
In the above quoted single sentence from Frederick Engels’ famous little book, The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State, he outlined the whole process of development of bourgeois democracy that, to the fifty years since Engels wrote it, has reached the acme of perfection. Nowhere has a capitalist class nourished more bountifully than our own boss class under American democracy. Finance capital not only owns or controls every branch of industry and agriculture, it is, in the final analysis, the government.
The executive, legislative and judicial branches of government, the armed forces, the police, the courts, state and local governments are all meshed and geared in the complicated machinery by which the capitalist class rules. It enters all the doors that open to the clank of gold – by raw bribery, by campaign contributions, by pressure groups. It controls by getting its chosen men into strategic places In all branches of government – and this method of boss control of government never stood out more clearly than during the present War. It moulds public opinion, education, culture through its press, its radio, its class-biased educational systems. Lawyers, politicians, law-makers, professors, journalists, artists are willing receptacles of capitalist class ideology.
 
The Tail Can’t Wag the Dog
The tail can as easily wag the dog as can a few labor lieutenants of the capitalist class – stuck into government cabinets and called “labor governments” – use this capitalist state in the interests of the workers. As inevitably as the dog must wag its tail, so inevitably does the capitalist state wag the labor governments, the people’s fronts, the coalition cabinets, the management-labor-government boards.
The only role labor can play within the capitalist state – AND SERVE ITS OWN INTERESTS – is essentially one of opposition. To this end it must use the rights afforded it by political democracy – rights it has earned a hundred times over by the part the masses played in the bourgeois revolutions of history.
Thus the boss political parties, through which the sham of capitalist democracy is maintained, must be challenged by labor’s own independent Labor Party. Against the political platforms of the capitalist class must stand labor’s political platform based on its class interests. The policy of no support or collaboration with the capitalist class must be carried by labor’s elected representatives into the halls of capitalist Congresses and Parliaments. There they can fight for laws and appropriations to advance the welfare of the working people.
 
From Opposition to Workers’ Power
A never-to-be-forgotten example of a revolutionary leader of labor using the tribunal afforded by the capitalist state to oppose it, was Karl Liebknecht. As a deputy to the German Reichstag during World War I, he denounced the war as imperialist – and refused to vote for appropriations to carry on imperialist war. His revolutionary courage fired the war-weary workers of all Europe.
But, of course, opposition that is serious and purposeful cannot go on forever as opposition. The labor opposition will grow more powerful, will speak for the great mass of workers, poor farmers and little people. The time will come for the working class to pass from opposition to power. Just as the capitalist class came into its own through its revolutionary action against the feudal states and for the establishment of capitalist states – so the working people will make their bid for supremacy through their revolutionary party and a revolutionary program for the erection of a workers’ state in place of the capitalist state.
*
The Paris Commune of 1871, and the Soviet government under Lenin and Trotsky are the subjects for the next article. What bearing upon the problems of our day have these workers’ governments from whose triumph and failure we can learn so much? In a future article the question why the Stalin government is not a workers’ government will be discussed.
 




The papers have been plastered with graphs to show how wonderful the OPA is. The Office of War Information (OWI) has issued these pictures of big stuffed purses – stuffed with money every family is “saving” because the OPA is so good.
As a housewife you only know that prices are the bane of your life, that ceilings matte you dizzy, that in the morning they may be at one place and in the afternoon a notch higher.
But OWI tells you something quite different. You actually “saved” $140 last year on the cost of living. Not only you “saved” $140, but every family in the land did, including our “good neighbors” on Park Avenue – to whom $140 in the bank means so much.
And here’s even better news of the same kind. In the year 1943 you and every family in the USA will “save” $400 more because the OPA – WHICH MAKES HISTORY BY THE NUMBER OF PRICE-RAISING RULINGS IT ISSUES – is so good somehow at keeping prices down.
How do the OPA and OWI figure this out? Well, if there were no OPA at all, say the statisticians, and prices were allowed to go up at the same rate as during the last war, then the cost of living would have gone up $6,000,000,000 more in 1942 than it did – or $140 more for every family. So yon just went and put that $140 in the bank, didn’t you? And in 1943, by the same kind of statistics, $17,000,000,000 will be “saved” nationally – and you will again “save” $400 on the cost of living.
Such statistics and the OWI are indeed indispensable. WITHOUT THEM, WE WOULD NEVER KNOW HOW MUCH MONEY WE HAVE IN THE BANK.
With them, we face a grim period of food shortages and war prices that will play havoc with our health – unless we take a little time off from going to the savings banks to organize our committees for action in our own interests.
*
It is reported by the Department of tabor that there are today 3,500,000 women workers in unions throughout the country as against about 1,000,000 a year and a half ago. Though these figures sound impressive, the fact is that the unionization of women lags far behind the needs. This is primarily due to the half-hearted attempts of union officialdom in the field of organization at this time, when 100 per cent organization for militant action is the only defensive and offensive weapon the working class has.
Though still very insufficient, the increased number of women in unions has brought up the question of women in union leadership. Women are stepping up – still on a small scale and in more or less minor positions. But the tendency is there. Courses are being given by some unions for the training of women for union leadership. As the war depletes manpower everywhere, more and more women will undoubtedly climb to union leadership.
There is a great danger lurking in this situation. The present union leadership has to a large extent deserted union militancy. Will this leadership train women to continue along the sell-out path of collaboration with the bosses? With such false training and the lack of personal experience in working class struggle, will women union leaders constitute a new force for union, conservatism and rank and file betrayals?
Women who have the ability for leadership and honestly wish to serve their own class, will do well to go easy. They will do well to study independently the glorious history of class struggle. They will do well to get a socialist understanding of the revolutionary role of the working class at this crossroads of history – one leading to fascist slavery and the other to socialist freedom. They will do well to stick close to the rank and file.
*
Housewives are urged to do their own washing because the laundries cannot get fuel. They are urged to substitute the kitchen stove for the can-opener because canned goods are precious. They are urged to do the family sewing because clothes will be scarce.
Summarizing these and other exhortations, it amounts to this: WOMEN ARE BEING PUSHED BACK INTO THE STATUS OF HOUSEHOLD DRUDGES. This is the kind of “progress” capitalist society is famous for. It gives us peace for a few years and takes it away – it gives us employment for a nonce and takes it away – it gives us improvements for a while and takes them away.
At the same time that the things that gave women a little freedom from drudgery are disappearing, droves of women are donning overalls and going into the factories – for reasons more pressing than patriotism.
Married women workers, working women with children, and even single working girls are all thus reduced to twofold slavery – they become slaves of the factory machine without benefit of machinery to help them in their household work.
*
The Axis powers are not alone in their worry about population. After all, war plays no favorites and – while this aspect of war is being planfully played down – death is depopulating the United Nations as well as the others. Also permanent war injuries cripple large portions of populations. On the civilian front, overwork and undernourishment sap the health of the people. Bombing takes its civilian toll also. So ruling classes are concerned about “replacements.”
Having more babies is the only way to increase populations so far known. So Herbert Morrison – labor traitor, now Home Secretary in Ihe British war cabinet – came out with the modest request that the average size of the British family should be increased by twenty-five per cent – five children instead of four.
But Mr. Morrison sees obstacles: “Parents have new ideas and standards, both for themselves and their children. They are increasingly refusing to have families if this is going to mean children that are ill-fed, ill-cared for or poorly educated and that the mother must become a perpetual drudge, ruining her life and health.”
So Mr. Morrison makes the deduction that: “The task of building up a social order that will induce such an increase [in population] provides one of the greatest tests of the wisdom and foresight of our people and the statesmanship of our leaders.”
Here looms up the ghost of the Beveridge Plan that was supposed to bring every kind of social security to every British family. IT PROVIDED $1.75 A WEEK FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF A CHILD – but just the same, this best of all possible plans that the British liberals could concoct WAS GIVEN THE BUM’S RUSH OUT Of PARLIAMENT. It is too “revolutionary” for the land and big business aristocracy that controls the British government and British life.
*
Nevertheless Morrison made a very important contribution on this subject of having babies.
He said, in effect, that the well-being of women and children depends on foreign trade. If business is going to be good after the war, then something of the profits made by the ruling class will be allowed to seep down to the working people who will produce ALL the goods that will be exported – provided there are post-war markets. Babies will be fed – but not if business is not good, for then fathers will not work and babies will sicken and many of them will die.
Mr. Morrison, has thus revealed an important secret – which has, however, been known to Marxian socialists right along. The “new era of the common man” – the brave new world that the war statesmen are desperately shouting so much about – MR. MORRISON TELLS US IS THE SAME OLD CAPITALIST SYSTEM.
Socialism is the system of society that will carry on production FIRST, LAST AND ALWAYS to supply the needs of babies, their mothers and their fathers – and to hell with foreign trade for profits and international wars for foreign trade!
 




A workers’ government is the only instrumentality the working; class can use for a FUNDAMENTAL solution of its problems, This is so because a workers’ government replaces the capitalist government – and immediately proceeds to administer the affairs of the nation on the basis of human requirements, suppressing the exploiting capitalists – and their yearning for profits.
If you examine the problems facing the working people today, you find, first, that they are not new, but only a new phase of old difficulties that have whiskers as long as capitalism itself; and second, you discover that they would disappear if the capitalists were out of the way.
For instance, the food situation, with its menace to health and to life itself, is causing most worry today. But is it really new for working people to live in fear of being undernourished, of becoming sick from malnutrition, of dying from stow starvation? Doesn’t the “food situation” CONSTANTLY hang over the heads of the working class like the sword of Damocles?
In peacetime depressions, the workers starve while warehouses are bursting with commodities the unemployed and underpaid workers are unable to buy. In wartime the workers are threatened with starvation from shortages created because fabulous quantities of goods and men are poured into the bottomless abyss of destruction. You have here both sides of the same coin.
But the situation confronting us is not only due to shortages produced by the war. The problem is complicated by the stranglehold of capital on the food industry. It both limits food production according to its own interests and then squeezes the last penny of profit out of the sale of food. Black markets and all types of gypping are the only logical evolution of the principle that profits justify any means.
 
What a Workers’ Government Could Do
But suppose the American workers should establish a workers’ government. That would mean that the capitalist would have no more to say in running the affairs of the nation. There would no longer be a Congress of capitalist politicians elected on boss money – no more lobbying by big business – no more big business-no, more $1.00-a-year men in the seats of government – no more farm bloc dictating to politicians.
Under a workers’ government, the food industry would be under the control of committees of working farmers, of farm labor and of all the workers employed In the production, packing, canning and distribution of food. The land holdings of the big farm corporations and the canning, packing and dairy plants of big business would be taken over by the workers’ government – AND MADE THE PROPERTY OF THE ENTIRE NATION. Thus, unrestricted by the profit motive, the production, pricing and rationing of food could be planned to serve the people, and coordinated with the needs, of all the other industries.
 
How to Make Jobs and Peace Secure
The expropriation of the capitalists and the national ownership of industry under workers’ control is the fundamental solution. The specter of unemployment, which haunts every worker while he sweats on his temporary war job, can be laid in its grave permanently only by such anti-capitalist measures as a workers’ government will take.
All the post-war plans based on a continuation of the capitalist status quo – Beveridge’s, Churchill’s, Wallace’s, Roosevelt’s – dodge the question of permanent employment. The best they offer is a pittance to prevent the unemployed from starving. In an honest mood, an editor of the New York Times recently confessed he knows no solution for unemployment. And Sir Beveridge knocked his own silly plan into a cocked hat when he admitted that he doesn’t know where post-war employment will come from.
But the working class, through a workers’ government, can solve the unemployment problem by putting people to work producing things for domestic consumption and enjoyment and for non-profit international exchange – ending once and for all the tie-up between employment and foreign capitalist markets.
So also would the problem of terminating wars be solved by the establishment of workers’ governments in this country, in England, in Germany, in France, in Russia, in Italy, in Japan.
All the post-war plans of the capitalist planners will wind up in another war as soon as the babies of today grow to adolescence. Churchill offers bleeding humanity nothing better than that old strumpet, the League of Nations, with fresh and heavier make-up. American politicians are preparing for global military and economic dictatorship. And behind all the talk and preparations towers the ugly head of new imperialist conflicts already materializing.
Whereas workers’ governments, displacing the imperialist governments and taking away the all-dominating economic power of the capitalist classes, will pave the way for permanent peace – BY UPROOTING THE CAUSE OF WAR. Then human society can reorganise itself for the peaceful development of the gifts of nature and of the ingenuity of man.
 
Working Class Must Have Self-Confidence
But could the workers run the country?
The reason why workers lack confidence in their ability to rule is because they understand government in the capitalist sense – as a maze of laws, policies, treaties springing from the fertile minds of lawyers, politicians, diplomats. But this useless labyrinth is purposely created so that the rule of the bankers and of the steel magnates can be hidden [in it.]
Once the workers conceive the function of government to be to provide the basic needs of the population and to plan and achieve an ever higher level of civilization and culture for the people, they can take a broom and sweep into the ocean the laws, policies, treaties of the capitalist state.
Who is better able to organize society for production than the producers? Who knows machinery better than the machinists? Who knows mines better than the miners? Who knows land better than working farmers and farm workers? Who knows the problems of education better than teachers?
Who is more competent to represent a factory than such outstanding workers as, for instance, the rank and file now choose as shop stewards? Such chosen workers together with technicians, engineers and other specialized workers indispensable to industry, have all the knowledge required for production. Needless to say, all the categories of brain workers will benefit as much under a workers’ government as will manual workers. But they would have to be elected by the workers to sit on representative bodies and would have to be subject to the same control as all other elected representatives.
The most capable manual and brain workers could thus run and control every department and phase of industry, public service, education and the whole of community life, both locally and on a national scale.
 
Will The Workers Make Mistakes?
This war has brought out in bold relief the qualifications of labor to plan on a national scale. Long before the bosses, concentrating on how to make money out of the misery of war – and long before the government, reflecting the bosses’ preoccupation with profits – had any industrial plans to offer, the Reuther plan was submitted. Since then organized labor has thought of other schemes to meet specific industrial problems. A workers’ government, naturally, will not employ the organizing and planning genius of the working people for waging war. The point made here is simply that men and women stemming from labor’s ranks have a know-how far superior to that of the capitalist class, narrowed in its outlook by the profit motive.
Will the working class make mistakes when it takes over the powers of government?
In 1918, Lenin, one of the founders of the workers government in Russia – later destroyed by Stalin – wrote on the subject of such mistakes as workers may make in the process of establishing a new society. Interestingly enough, the following quoted passage is front Lenin’s A Letter to American Workers, in which he asked for their support of the Russian Revolution. Lenin wrote:
“Each mistake in such a work, in this most honest and sincere work of tens of millions of simple workers and peasants for the reorganization of their whole life, each such mistake is worth thousands and millions of ‘faultless’ successes of the exploiting minority – successes in swindling and duping the toilers. For only THROUGH such mistakes will the workers and peasants LEARN to build a new life, learn to do WITHOUT capitalists; only thus will they blaze a new trail – through thousands of obstacles – to a victorious socialism.”
And ... all the mistakes that the workers can possibly make in the course of building the socialist society through a workers’ government will be like a drop in the ocean of major crimes against humanity committed by full-fledged capitalism in peace and in war.
*
The last article in this series will explain why the Stalinist government – a reactionary, totalitarian regime – can be called a workers’ government only by those very Stalinists who have respect neither for their own integrity nor for the intelligence of the working people.
 




Most capitalist opinion on postwar unemployment is based on the assumption that after the immediate freak boom, the demand for goods will not fall below the 1939 level. Just why this assumption is made is hard to figure out. For this simple reason:
The year 1939 was by no means a typical peacetime year. In 1939 American business was supplying considerable of the war demands of the belligerents and was already stepping up production for domestic war demands. But, for the sake of argument, let us take this baseless hope for the 1939 demand for goods, as our starting point also.
Do you know that in 1939–40 there were still 9,500,000 unemployed workers? Well, that’s a fact.
Dr. Julius Hirsch, the capitalist economist quoted in last week’s article, states that jobs will be needed for “fourteen million or so more persons than in 1939.” This, of course, makes his estimate of twenty million post-war unemployed a bit too low. By simple arithmetic, fourteen million plus nine and a half million already unemployed in 1939, equal twenty-three and a half million workers eligible for the army of post-war unemployed.
 
Where Will They, Find Jobs?
Will any number of these employable workers find jobs in agriculture? Dr. Hirsch believes that “as a result of improved techniques and equipment, the number of persons really needed will be less than in 1939.”
So that, instead of agriculture absorbing more than the 10,700,000 farm workers it did in 1939, it is likely to need less, and thus increase rather than decrease the figure of twenty-three and a half million unemployed.
How about distribution (department stores, etc.), finance (banks, brokerage houses, etc.) and the service trades (cleaning, laundering, repairing, etc.) – a group of industries which used 10,500,000 workers in 1939? Will these industries have openings for any of the 23,500,000 jobless?
In these fields, labor conditions during the war have compelled the use of labor-saving techniques and of a higher degree of individual efficiency. So that, with the possible exception of the field of repairs, the existing channels of operation can handle a considerably increased volume of goods and business. And if the increased volume does not materialize, even the existing staffs of workers will not be needed.
Will more men and women be required to run the railroads or to man the ships than in 1939? Here, too, the answer is negative. Dr. Hirsch says: “No additional employment, as compared with 1939, may be expected from the railways.” As to ocean shipping, after the last war it took ten years for this business to recover its 1913 level. After demobilization and the immediate postwar shipping needs, a similar slump in ocean traffic is expected this time also.
Well, let us try mining. Any better luck here? Dr. Hirsch states simply: “The industry as a whole has constantly lost manpower, primarily as a result of mechanization, which has made very considerable progress during the war.”
How about oil production? “As for the petroleum industry, it is doubtful that it will require more hands, because it is already highly developed,” says Dr. Hirsch.
 
Facts Against Fancies
Perhaps the reader wonders why so much stock is placed in the opinion of this Dr. Julius Hirsch. Here is why: He wrote the article from which extensive quotes are taken, for the business men who read Barren’s National Business and Financial Weekly. He wrote this article to give business men the real low-down on the “optimistic group of planners” who are “solving” the unemployment problem as fast as their glib tongues can wag or their fleet fingers can typewrite.
The facts, figures and opinions seriously presented for the guidance of the business world are more reliable by far than the demagogic speeches of the Wallaces and Willkies, who don’t care what they promise to get worker support – and than the wild-eyed “plans” of the well-wishers who take their wishes for facts.
So to go back to those 23,500,000 post-war industrial orphans. Will they perhaps be able to get asylum in the production of consumer non-durable goods? Again the job-seekers will be greeted with the “No Help Wanted” signs.
In this branch of manufacture the number of workers employed to get out the great mass of consumer non-durable goods is almost unbelievably small.
For instance, in 1939 only 1,009,000 workers were required in the manufacture of boots and shoes, men’s and women’s clothing, tires and tubes, cigars and cigarettes, meat packing. For about a million workers to turn out this big list of commodities for domestic and export trade tells the story of the wonders of modern mass production methods – even before the great technological strides made during the war period.
One of the starry-eyed planners, by name Stuart Chase, “expects” the addition of 1,000,000 more workers in the manufacture of clothing. Dr. Hirsch tells his business men readers not to expect anything of the kind, saying: “As for one million additional clothing workers, they could produce, with the help of mechanization, the fantastic amount of four or five times as much as was bought in 1939.” WHEREAS, REALISTICALLY SPEAKING, THE DEMAND WILL BE LESS BY FAR THAN IN 1939.
No, there will not be any openings for workers in the field of consumer non-durable goods, either.
 
Why Unemployment?
Of course, the reason is not that the population of this country does not need and cannot use four or five times the amount consumed in 1939. Quite the contrary.
Many millions of the people live far below the bare subsistence level. Millions more get by only by the skin of their teeth. And even the so-called well-off workers do not begin to live the good life that this machine age could provide for them and their families. Definitely the reason for unemployment is not that there is no need for the goods and services that the unemployed workers could be producing.
The reason is that the wages of the working people are too low to create a demand for the things that the working people need and that the unemployed could be making. In cutting the pie of national wealth, the capitalists give their workers a thin little sliver, keeping the hog’s share for themselves. THE PROFIT SYSTEM PREVENTS THE FULL EMPLOYMENT OF LABOR TO ITS FULL PRODUCTIVE CAPACITY.
Furthermore, under capitalism, the big corporations – which Mr: Wallace thinks are “harmless or beneficent” – utilize all improvements in labor productivity in their own interest. They reduce their wage bill and increase their profit-take by firing workers. Whereas the civilized method of a socialist society would be to shorten the hours of toil, thus lengthening the leisure and the life of the workers.
*
The next article in this series will take up the manufacture of automobiles, refrigerators, radios, etc., from the point of view of how many jobs it can provide for the 23,500,000 postwar jobless. Those fields of production that the “planners” expect will give a new lease of life to the capitalist system – such as airplane manufacture and the construction industry – will also be considered from the same point of view.
 




On the farms and in the agricultural industries of this country the productive capacity per worker has risen one-third above the 1935–39 average. In war industries – which means in modern industry as a whole – the productive capacity per worker has increased from fifty per cent to seventy per cent above 1935–39 – and in some industries, like aircraft, even more than that.
Under the rational system of socialism, this would be exceedingly good news. It would mean more things to eat, to wear, to enjoy – and at the same time more leisure for farm and industrial workers. Under capitalism, however, this splendid technological improvement tarns into a great social disaster – fewer jobs, more unemployed, more worry, more hunger, more starvation. In fact, the predictions of post-war unemployed run up to 30,000,000!
The figure settled on in these articles is a conservative 23,500,000 of post-war jobless. In the previous article it was shown that the possibilities for absorbing any considerable number of these 23,500,000 prospective jobless in the field of non-durable consumer goods are very slim indeed.
So now we come to the consideration of those avenues of production in which most hope is placed by the bolsterers of the boss profit system. You will see that – at the very most – these so-called promising industries can provide jobs for two or three million more workers than they employed in 1939, still leaving at least 20,000,000 unaccounted for.
 
How About Auto Production?
The automobile industry is expected to have a tremendous revival, due to the almost complete stoppage of auto manufacturing during the war. Optimistic estimates are that the demand for auto vehicles of various kinds will be seven to eight million.
I haven’t the figures for 1939 production of automobiles, but in 1941 some 448,000 auto workers turned out some 4,800,000 vehicles. On this basis, due to the great productivity increase of labor, the same number of workers ought to be able to turn out about one-half more cars – or 7,200,000!
It is only by foolishly supposing that the automobile industry will get going for post-war business at its old productive capacity – disregarding the new mechanical and efficiency improvements – that we can see the chance of employment of more workers. Supposing the same productivity level as 1941, perhaps 250,000 to 300,000 additional auto workers would be needed to turn out seven to eight million cars. But why suppose this?
To view the subject of auto production comprehensively, we must remember that military jeeps, army trucks and other vehicles used by the armed forces, can be converted to civilian uses – and why should they not be? Furthermore, the logical question pops into one’s head:
For how long, anyway, can there be a super-colossal demand for seven to eight million cars?
 
Airplane and Hot Air
Ah, but, airplanes! The optimists rub their hands in great expectation. Here will be a great industry that will do for capitalism what the auto industry did several decades ago.
Undoubtedly there will be an increase in the use of all kinds of airplanes – air flivvers, big cargo planes, big ocean-crossing passenger airships. However, to suppose that air traffic can assume the popularity and proportions of road traffic is fantastic. The solid ground is still what the average family man will want to drive his children on and the average business will want his goods carried on – leaving aside other weighty considerations.
American industrialists do not place the possible post-war market above 2,000 to 2,500 planes a month – or 25,000 to 30,000 in a whole year. And how many workers would the airplane industry require to turn out this number of planes?
Top estimates run to 500,000 men. More conservative figures are only half of that. In any case, there will not be many more than 250,000 employed in airplane production for some years to come.
How, pray, can this new industry that will at the very most give jobs to 500,000 workers, solve post-war unemployment? The auto industry, it will be remembered – producing several millions of cars, trucks, buses and stimulating roadbuilding, petroleum production, etc. – did not prevent the 1929 collapse, with unemployed rising to 17,000,000 and with 9,500,000 remaining unemployed right up to the war.
 
Construction the Trump Card
The “planners” who are going to build a post-war paradise right in rotten capitalism’s backyard, envision the erection of new houses, schools hospitals, nurseries, playgrounds – like the sprouting of weeds. All right. Let us give them the benefit of every doubt – and there are many. How many workers will this possible construction demand? That’s what we are interested in now.
The National Resources Planning Board reported that “highly exaggerated hopes” have been aroused for post-war construction as the solution for unemployment. Even if peacetime civilian construction were to continue the same as for war plants, shipyards, war housing, etc., etc. – in itself extremely doubtful – “this would not at all be decisive” in attaining the goal of full employment. No, indeed! A glance at the figures will show this.
In 1939 both private enterprise and government employed in the construction trades about 1,250,000 men. At the high level of wartime construction reached in January 1943 only twice as many workers were employed in these trades. Therefore, the most to be expected would be 1,250,000 more construction jobs than in 1939.
We could go into other fields of production to show that the prospects for jobs for those 23,500,000 to 30,000,000 post-war unemployed are very bad indeed – under the capitalist status quo. For instance, the manufacture of refrigerators required only 36,000 workers in 1939; radios and phonographs needed only 44,000 hands. This is mere chicken feed – even assuming a greater demand than in 1939.
Some people misguidedly think that the manufacture of the wonderful labor-saving machines used in production, themselves require lots of labor to produce. But the production of labor-saving machinery is also done with labor-saving machinery. Thus the manufacture of agricultural machinery never absorbed more than 60,000 workers, and in 1939 all the electrically machinery installed in modern plants was turned out by only 256,000 workers.
 
A Workers’ Solution Needed,
What, then, remains? To be drafted into the post-war armed forces which are expected to police the “bright new world”? To be shipped. Off to some CCC camp in the wilderness? Maybe to hold down a charity job on something equivalent to the WPA. or PWA? Maybe to get on relief? Or perhaps to produce for a world market which will be highly competitive and in a chaotic international situation?
That is all that remains if the workers want to leave the problem of 23,500,000 to 30,000,000 unemployed to the mercy of private enterprise and of the boss government.
But if the workers consider the solution of unemployment their own affair, there is an entirely different prospect ahead.
The labor movement must fight for a short enough work week to employ all workers, and at decent wages befitting this age of plenty. The unions must prepare themselves to take over and operate under workers’ control all plants shut down in the postwar period for reasons of profit – so that workers can have jobs and the things they need to live. The labor movement must fight for a real program of housing and public works – with financing covered by taxes paid by the rich, not by the poor.
To carry through such a program, organized labor needs to grow both in militancy and in numbers – taking into its fold masses of workers whose unorganized state is honey for the bosses.
But the workers must also realize that unemployment will be abolished once and, for all when production is carried on for use, and not for private profit. Therefore, organized labor has to acquire political wisdom – TO GET ONTO THE ROAD OF INDEPENDENT POLITICAL ACTION LEADING TO A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT, AND TO SOCIALISM.
 




Housewives listen to the radio more than any other group of people – that is, the working class housewife who sends her kids off to school, markets and lugs her bundles, makes lunch, does her own housework and some or all of the washing, cooks supper, cleans up once more, and finally puts the kids to bed with a sigh of relief. The women whose work is never done have the radio turned on pretty much of the time to keep them company.
 
The Palmolive Formula
There is another group of people very much aware of this habit of the housewife and very energetically trying to cash in on it. They are the National Association of Manufacturers.
This outfit, as you know, is what might be called the bosses’ union of this country. In numbers, this boss organization is very small – maybe 9,000 companies as against more than 50,000,000 workers in the country. But this handful own nearly all the plants in which the 50,000,000 have to work, and represent about $60,000,000,000 of wealth – a pretty penny.
So while you are told how to get young and beautiful in twenty applications of Palmolive soap and what department store will make your worn-out living room suite equally young and beautiful, the news is given to you with an anti-labor bias. And you listen to plenty of hooey about how workers are holding up the war effort – with nary a word about the pay-triotism of the bosses that can be measured only in terms of dollars. All this propaganda against more than 50,000,000 workers and against the labor unions is ladled out by clever radio commentators – with perfect diction and with the bosses’ fat pay checks in their pockets.
This high-pressure, reactionary and fascistic propaganda of the bosses does not mean to workers’ wives what it should mean. It should galvanize them into action. They should think: “That’s dangerous stuff. That hits me. I’ve got to do something about this!” For actually the anti-labor campaign of tha National Association of Manufacturers is a direct menace to every working man, woman and child.
 
What We Owe to the Labor Movement
Yes, an attack on the unions is an attack on everything that working people sum up in the word PROGRESS.
The eight-hour day – instead of the twelve-hour day – is a union accomplishment. Shop committees and stewards in the plants to take care of workers’ grievances – instead of leaving workers to the tender mercies of the boss’ stooges – are the result of union strength. Union contracts in which wages and working conditions of ALL the workers are set down, black on white – instead of EACH INDIVIDUAL worker being subjected to the unrestricted exploitation of the boss – have come about because of great union struggles.
Translated into the intimate conditions of life, what does this mean?
We owe it to the unions that a worker has a little leisure. We owe it to the unions that at least a section of the workers earn enough so that their children can go to school, and are not forced, as in earlier years, to work in mines and factories at a tender age to help earn a living for the family. In fact, the expansion of educational and other public facilities – insufficient as they are – is mainly the result of the pressure of organized labor and liberal elements to wrench from capitalism a few of the basic needs for decent living. Even the radio over which comes the anti-union propaganda, is a bit of not strictly “necessary” furniture that the worker’s family can afford only because of the wage struggles put up by the unions.
Of course, the war has made inroads into the accomplishments of the unions. Wars benefit the bosses in more ways than one. Not only do they enable the bosses to scoop up billions in war profits and to spread out into the world markets for higher peacetime profits. Under the headings of national unity and “equal” sacrifice, war is also an excuse to take’away labor’s hard-won gains.
But just imagine how far the bosses could go if there were not such powerful labor unions as the CIO, AFL, Railroad Brotherhoods, United Mine Workers to stop them!
 
Working Women Who Know the Truth
There are many working class women in this country on whose minds and hearts has been written in indelible ink the truth that only in the labor movement is there any hope for a better life for working people – not in boss politicians, not in their fancy charters, which are only war propaganda; not in their shiny post-war promises.
You will find these class-conscious women in the mining districts. They are women who helped build the United Mine Workers Union and who shared in raising the status of miners from the actual serfs they used to be. They saw their husbands and sons shot at by boss thugs and by troopers sent by boss politicians, but instead of urging their men to quit the fight, they joined the picket lines.
You will find these brave women in the steel districts – women who placed themselves between their men and the firing end of cops’ guns in strike after strike to get more wages, an eight-hour, day and union recognition.
They are in the textile towns – these women who understood that in union the workers have strength – who with their children joined their men on the picket lines in great conflicts with the bosses through which our powerful unions were built.
There are such women,in the Detroit region – women without whose invaluable help the United Auto Workers Union could not have come into its own. For in the great sit-down strikes, the wives, daughters, sisters and mothers of strikers attended to food and supplies for the men in the plants. These women bucked the police and even won fheir sympathy. They went through the towns soliciting the support of the people for the striking workers – and got it!
Yes, there are millions of working women who know what a worker’s life was like before the unions became powerful enough to force a little improvement.
You couldn’t tell these women that it was out of the goodness of their hearts that Roosevelt and the New Deal politicians favored the passage of the wages-and-hours law and other pro-labor measures. These women learned from first-hand experience that neither the bosses nor fheir politicians give up anything to the workers unless they are forced to.
It is a grim fact that every pro-labor law on the statute books was placed there as a concession to labor’s strength, and is enforced only because labor is strong enough to insist on it. It is indeed no coincidence that the so-called pro-labor policy of Roosevelt and the New Dealers came with the organization of the CIO; and it is likewise no coincidence that this so-called pro-labor policy of the Roosevelt Administration has gone with the wind as labor leaders have surrendered labor’s rights and union militancy.
It cannot be made too emphatic that an attack on the unions is an attack on everything that working people sum up in the word progress. And progress for you and for me, in truthful terms, is simply what organized labor has been able to force from the profit-clutching grip of the capitalists and their political lackeys.
It is quite natural, therefore, for reactionary and fascistic forces stemming from that boss organization, the National Association of Manufacturers, to strike at the very heart of progress – THE LABOR MOVEMENT.
What is not natural is that union men and their wives do not sense the grave danger and rally to strengthen the unions by their own wide-awake and energetic participation in all union meetings and activities.
How come that right now, when the fate of the common people actually depends on the alertness, strength and militancy of the labor movement, union meetings are so wretchedly attended? Isn’t it a crying shame that out of a union membership of several thousand, often not even a hundred members attend a meeting? Isn’t it something for the bosses to shout about when out of a membership of 15,000, maybe a couple of hundred unionists come to their meetings?
If a conscientious unionist gets into a conversation with one of the stay-at-homes and reprimands him for his indifference to union matters, the chances are the latter will hem and haw about his being a family man, about the children, about the wife wanting to go to the movies, etc.
But it is just because a worker is a family man, has children, and a wife who likes to go to the movies that he and she must be staunch unionists. The unions are the bulwark of working class life. Without the labor movement to fight for an adequate standard of living and for more and more progressive demands, there can be no happy future for a worker’s children – no, not even money for the movies!
You wives of unionists who haven’t been through the mill of union struggle and have not learned the value of the labor movement from your own experience, have you given a thought to YOUR OWN post-war prospects?
 
Post-War Prospects
We face the post-war prospects of anywhere from ten to thirty million unemployed. A strong labor movement can fight for a short enough work week with a decent wage so that your husband and every other worker can have a job. With the probability of such unemployment, all the capitalists and their politicians have to offer is a WPA job – or relief to accommodate some workers.
That means that the future of every working class family depends on the power of the labor movement. It Is the first and foremost duty of the wife of a unionist – a duty to her own family – to see that her husband attends his union meetings and participates to the fullest in all union activities. He must be on hand to express his point of view and stand up for the interests of the rank and file worker – not only against the bosses, but also against labor leaders who are prone to forget who pays them for their services and what their duties are.
But this is not enough. Every union local should have a ladies’ auxiliary, working in close touch with it – to help it when help is needed and to be helped by it in launching a program against high prices, the black market, unnecessary food shortages and other housewives’ war worries.
The labor movement is the bulwark and hope of the working people. Wives of unionists, pitch in to give it more power!
 




Every housewife will be just too, too delighted to learn that the V campaign of the bosses on the domestic front is doing very well. Here are a few indications:
The professors on the OPA have been replaced by business men. This augurs very well for the profits of the big four farm organizations and of the food industry – though not for the housewife. Even the restrictions of the very mild and absent-minded professors will now be removed.
The latest reports have it that the 1944 “plans” for food administration will be about what they were for 1943. The status quo of rising prices is being maintained because the big four farm organizations and the food industry prefer it that way, according to Samuel B. Bledsoe in the New York Times of August 22.
Starting August 5, you have been paying more for eighty food items and a trifle less for thirty-five – the balance being all in favor of the food bosses. This increase to the consumer reflects more allowances by the OPA to the food dealers. In New York City the landlords have been upheld by the OPA, which, for some occult reason will not place ceilings on rents because New York City is not a “defense area” – whatever that may mean, since the city is full of defense workers.
The only light on the horizon is that here and there the housewives are waking up and taking action. In Coney Island the gypping was so bad that the housewives formed a committee, for reporting ceiling violations. In Brooklyn the women of an apartment house where rents are being raised, picketed the property, carrying slogans such as “Pay Frozen – Why Not Rent?”
Such action is the real McCoy. It must become much more extensive and much better organized – and kept free of the deadly Stalinist influence.
*
Mrs. Helen Robar, working in Baltimore for the Koppers Co. and producing piston rings for the “war effort,” is almost as good at having babies as the proverbial oriental peasant women, who have their babies in the fields and continue working as if nothing happened. This, by the way, is not necessarily an indication of womanly prowess, but rather of a condition of servitude leading to physical exhaustion at an early age – as evidenced by the way most peasant women get wizened and old before their-time.
But to return to Mrs. Robar. She gave birth to a child at four in the afternoon, and eight hours later was at work on the midnight shift. Of course, this could not be kept secret from the other women on the job. They talked, and finally company officials heard the story. Whereupon the latter insisted on Mrs. Robar going home to get a doctor’s examination and perhaps to stay there for two months – to rest up.
But it isn’t rest. Mrs. Robar is worried about. “I can’t just sit around and do nothing, with all these kids to support ... I can’t get another job without a release from the company, so what am I to do?”
Some women have illegal abortions – take the chance of ruining their health that way – in order to continue supporting their dependents. Mrs. Robar emulated the female slaves of the Orient.
What a shame and disgrace! The government, which spends $265,000,000 EVERY DAY, and the bosses, who reap fantastic war profits, make no provision for the millions of women workers so they can have their babies as civilized women should.
Every company should be compelled to grant maternity leave with pay so dependents won’t suffer and so their jobs will be there for them when the women get back. Who’s going to make the bosses do this?
THE ORGANISED LABOR MOVEMENT!
*
Not only are practically no new protective measures being taken for women workers, but the reactionaries are aiming to weaken or remove such laws for women as now exist.
These reactionary forces working for the bosses are so wily about this that they seek to accomplish their aim under the benevolent guise of what is called the Equal Rights Amendment, now pending in the Senate.
Those equal rights that working women now want they will not get by this amendment nor by any law on the statute books. Women should get equal pay for equal work, equal conditions of labor, equal priority rights. They will get such equal treatment on the job only by becoming active, militant union members arid influencing the unions – in the interest of all labor – to raise the level of the women workers.
What this Equal Rights Amendment, if passed, would do is to give the boss-controlled judges the opportunity to declare unconstitutional every existing law that requires sanitary protection for women, limits their night work, compels certain industrial safety devices. For if women have equal rights with men, there should, of course, be no laws giving women these “special privileges.”
See the point – an Equal Rights Amendment to allow the bosses unhampered exploitation of womanpower.
Laws regulating night work for women and the like have, as it is, been “suspended for the duration.” The bosses would delight in extending the “duration” into peacetime.
The whole labor movement must be up in arms against the passage of this fake Equal Rights Amendment.
*
A union militant who is a devoted reader of Labor Action writes in about “wife trouble” in the labor movement. He is alarmed by the inactivity of rank and file unionists and points to the small percentage of union members who attend their meetings. He thinks that the wives of union men discourage their husbands’ activity – and to keep peace in the family the men stay home.
Wives of union men, hear ye, hear ye! You are being called by that old term of endearment: “Ball and chain!” But this is not in jest and is indeed no laughing matter.
Being a ball and chain on the labor movement is a serious matter indeed. Whatever progress the working people have made has been through union strength. Don’t forget that. And because the matter is so serious, Labor Action is going to give some attention to the question of the relation of workers’ wives to the labor movement.
 




While President Roosevelt was fishing on the cool waters of Lake Huron, the cattle slaughterers of the New York region staged a strike. They refused to purchase for slaughter and sale to the public four carloads of choice steers that arrived in the stockyards. These business men, trading the food of the people, struck because they do not like OPA ceiling prices on meat. Presumably they want to set their own prices.
No Connally-Smith anti-strike law was invoked against these bosses. Nobody proclaimed their strike “inflationary.” The government did not compel them to open their slaughter houses and provide much needed meat to the public. And President Roosevelt, now back from his vacation, did not even deign to comment on this strike against his so-called “hold-the-line” policy.
When bosses strike for more profits, that’s one thing. But when workers strike for more wages to be able to live a little like human beings, that becomes a major crime in a bosses’ world.
WHAT HAS BECOME OF THOSE CARLOADS OF STEERS?
They would have netted thousands of pounds of steaks and roasts which the consumers of this region could certainly have used. Where are these steaks and roasts, for which our tongues are fairly hanging out?
Undoubtedly they have gone into black market channels. They have found their way to the tables of those who can afford to be soaked black market prices. The ordinary worker’s family got no sight nor smell of them.
But these first-class steers would not have been lost to the general public IF THERE WERE IN THIS REGION STRONGLY ORGANIZED COMMITTEES OF HOUSEWIVES AND WORKERS. Such committees would have raised such a howl and would have/obtained such publicity over this really criminal strike of slaughterers that the government would doubtless have had to do something to release this meat.
And if the capitalist government’s respect for “private enterprise” is too strong for drastic action, what’s the matter with the organized working people themselves getting these steers slaughtered and the meat distributed?
Certainly the slaughterhouse workers do not need their altogether superfluous, parasite bosses in order to slaughter cattle!
Many of the gas and electric light companies have started issuing bills every two months, instead of every month. This is a poor arrangement for the housewife. It is so easy to spend the couple of dollars on something else one month, and then find it extremely hard to part with the larger sum the following month.
The companies claim that they have to do this because of the shortage of labor and transportation. THIS EXCUSE MUST BE TAKEN WITH A RAISED EYEBROW.
In the case of Consolidated Edison Company, for instance, its employees revealed that the company saves $5,000,000 annually by billing every two months instead of every month. Furthermore, this way of billing actually means a hidden rate increase of about five cents for each consumer – giving this powerful trust an extra tidbit of some $1,691,460 a year.
But what worries the employees most is that the company is permanently reorganizing its checking and bookkeeping departments on this new basis – AND ELIMINATING 1,500 BILLING AND METER-READING JOBS.
The company has given “assurance to employees in the armed forces, that their jobs will be open after the war, BUT ONLY IF THE JOBS STILL, EXIST.” The cat’s out of the bag! Of course, if the billing departments have been reorganized on the new basis, THE JOBS WILL NO LONGER EXIST.
What about the boy when they come marching home – TO THESE ELIMINATED JOBS? “Permanently eliminated jobs” is another aspect of the great unemployment problem that labor must solve by its own militant, progressive, class-conscious action.
*
One of the first things Mussolini did when he came to power was to start making cannon fodder out of Italian boys, and bearers of cannon fodder out of Italian girls. Hitler imposed the same curriculum of “higher learning” upon Germany.
So there is really nothing surprising that the Stalin dictatorship – going the way of all present-day totalitarian governments – has discovered that “there is an inevitable separation of labor between men and women ... The man must be a soldier ... What of the girls? She is essentially a future mother.”
Therefore coeducation is being abolished in Russia. Boys and girls will receive separate “education” suited either to becoming cannon fodder or the bearers of cannon fodder for the Stalin machine. And this kind of training will start with the children in elementary school.
Even within the educational limits of capitalist society, coeducation with the same opportunities for boys and girls has long been accepted as a minimum requirement. Every democratic instinct rebels against governmental regimentation of boys to certain careers and girls to others – to make make automatons of youth in the service of nazistic governments.
But the Stalinists – who have taken in their blundering stride the Moscow witch trials, the extermination of the Bolsheviks, the growth of Russian millionaires, the reestablishment of military castes in the Russian army – will undoubtedly interpret this extremely reactionary step in education as evidence that Stalin’s Russia is – if not socialism – then at least the greatest democracy on earth.
 




Under the above controversial heading the Bank of New York, a Wall Street house, ran a memorial “ad” on the financial pages of the press, the occasion being the death of Edsel Ford.
The “ad” itself consists of a quotation from an editorial in the anti-labor New York World-Telegram. This editorial asserts, of course, that Marx, the socialist, was wrong and Ford, the capitalist, is right, Needless to say, the editor arrives at this conclusion by misrepresenting Marx and by heavily sugar-coating Ford.
How would a jury of workers decide the case of Ford vs. Marx?
 
Edsel’s Will on the Stand
A very material bit of evidence in this case is none other than the will of Edsel Ford, late of the Ford Motor Co. THE ATTORNEYS FOR SAID DECEASED ESTIMATE THE ESTATE AT APPROXIMATELY $200,000,000 – a pretty penny, indeed!
Interesting it is to note that Edsel – whose fortune the editorial assures us was acquired because the principle of “security of opportunity” flourishes for all – saw his opportunity to by-pass the government on inheritance taxes and left the bulk of this money to the Ford Foundation, “an inheritance tax-exempt organization.”
This immediately arouses the justified suspicion that Edsel had during his life accumulated another fortune directly in the names of his wife and children – for surely he would not leave his loved ones penniless and unprovided for. THEREFORE, NOBODY KNOWS WHAT EDSEL’S WEALTH REALLY AMOUNTS TO. However, one can surmise.
Next appear in evidence some facts about workers’ wages. The most rosy estimate of the average wartime wage of labor cannot exceed $40 a week, or around $2,000 a year. This gives the bosses every benefit of every doubt – and practically disregards the 16,000,000 workers who get around $16 a week. And remember these are wartime wages.
Information on the possibilities of abundance for the whole population must also be brought into this case. Here it is: After World War I many economists believed that on the basis of the means of production and labor productivity then prevailing, IT WAS POSSIBLE FOR EVERY FAMILY IN THE COUNTRY TO LIVE ON THE SOCIAL LEVEL OF A HOUSE AND A $5,000-A-YEAR INCOME. That was a quarter of a century ago.
In the last twenty-five years the technological improvements and the increase in labor’s productivity have been almost phenomenal. So that today the latent, potentialities for a good life for the whole population are tremendous, going far beyond the possibilities of twenty-five years ago.
 
The Essence of the Case
Therefore, if the case of Ford vs. Marx is to be stated in its essence, it is this: Will you, workers on the jury, decide in favor of a system that permits the Fords to amass fabulous fortunes while depriving the majority of our 130,000,000 people of the good life, making them constantly battle against the wolf of want ($40 a week for a worker and his family is no bed of roses)?
In this case of Ford vs. Marx, the Bank of New York, the New York World-Telegram and the Fords mean by their pretty phrase “security of opportunity” the right of the few to filch peacetime and wartime profits at the expense of the many. Whereas Marx and the revolutionary socialists who follow him fight for the welfare of the many against the gluttony of the few.
To this formulation of the case the Ford supporters come back with the stock-in-trade argument that the capitalists further progress. The quoted editorial from the New York World-Telegram asserts that “the pioneering in the mass production of motor vehicles has created opportunities for millions in the stimulation of the oil industry, the development of a nation-wide highway system, the rebuilding of communities.”
 
The Socialist Is Not Floored
This argument does not floor the socialist – he doesn’t consider it an argument. Ford drew on the inventive genius of all mankind and utilized the brain and brawn of mental and manual workers – TO EXPLOIT THEM. A socialist government – with the workers instead of the capitalists in control of industry – can use the same assets and get better results because economy is planned on a national non-profit-seeking basis. Furthermore, a socialist government will employ the resources of the nation for no other purpose than to provide for the people the very highest standard of living – a standard upon which there will be no “freezes” – no “lines” – no “ceilings.”
The memory of the working class is not as short as the Fords would like it to be. Workers remember that along with his boasted $5.00-a-day wage. Ford maintained one of the worst sweat shops in the country, one of the most brutally efficient labor spy systems, one of the most gangster-like anti-union set-ups.
It is many, many decades since there has been any justification at all for the capitalist class. The capitalist class now hampers progress, in its quest for profits. And nothing has made this fact more clear than the war. For the government, to fight a war to establish the supremacy of the American capitalist system as a whole, has had to reveal and somewhat curtail the individual monopolists sitting on the lid of progress.
Thus, workers on the jury, the case of Karl Marx is further strengthened by the well known fact that the formula for synthetic rubber was tucked away in a safe, of no use to the world, because of the profit schemes of the international oil cartel – that the shipbuilders, for their own profit, install outdated engines instead of the newest and best – that the railroad monopoly in its own interest holds up the development of air, motor and water transport and the laying of pipelines. THESE, ARE ONLY A FEW INSTANCES OF HOW CAPITALISM NOW RETARDS PROGRESS.
 
Bosses, War and Fascism
Furthermore, would you call this war progress? What’s the use of developing highways and, rebuilding communities that are subject to instant destruction by bombing? The responsibility for the war must be laid at the door of world capitalism, of which the Bank of New York, the Fords, and their lackeys, the Peglers and the press, are a part. ON THE OTHER.HAND, ALMOST A CENTURY AGO KARL MARX CALLED ON THE WORKERS OF THE WORLD TO UNITE IN INTERNATIONAL SOCIALISM TO MAKE IMPOSSIBLE SUCH A CATASTROPHE.
Finally, workers on the jury, let me remind you that in every country capitalism has arrived at the critical stage where it turns to the use of fascist methods to maintain itself over the seething, discontented masses. Thus Henry Ford is known to subsidize and support anti-Semitic and fascistic elements in this country. In the interest of “national unity,” all this is hushed up – but by no means ended.
In the final analysis, the case of Henry Ford vs. Karl Marx resolves itself into the case of FASCISM vs. SOCIALISM, THAT IS, FASCISM vs. REAL FREEDOM AND SECURITY.
 




Whether the working people eat or starve for the remainder of the war – which even how looks like a long one – depends on the militant action of workers, housewives and working farmers. Every word of this statement is supported by the increasing, shortages of nearly all foods while the black markets expand and get more and more of the limited supplies.
The following gives a rough idea of how fast shortages are growing. The government announces that beginning July 1, there will be twenty per cent less canned vegetables for civilians than last year and forty per cent less canned fruit than before the war. Also, for the next twelve months – who knows what will happen after that? – there will be twenty per cent less butter, forty-five per cent less cheese and fifty-seven per cent less processed milk. Besides, a shortage of eggs is rapidly developing and a shortage of fish is on the agenda.
These drastic cuts in food supplies are in themselves alarming. But the situation is even more ominous because what food there is, is not made available to all alike. The black markets more and more monopolize the supply. Thus a black market is blooming out in the fish business. Even the savory onion is going to the unsavory black market. WE MUST FACE THE FACT THAT ONLY THE WELL-TO-DO CAN AFFORD TO PAY BLACK MARKET PRICES.
Most significant of all is that the black market is, in a way, receiving official recognition from the government. For in the latest Federal and State Market News Service, a publication of a branch of the Department of Agriculture, the poultry market is stated as extremely firm at “PREVAILING BLACK MARKET PRICES.”
When the government is quoting prices according to black market dictation, it is high time for the working people to start pulling themselves out of the deepening food crisis BY THEIR OWN INDEPENDENT ACTION.
 
Where Is The Meat?
Maybe you don’t know it, but we housewives are supposed to be able to buy meat at ceiling prices less the rollback for which the President was allowed subsidies by Congress. However, beef is still not only not available at ceiling roll-back prices – it just isn’t available.
Yet the cold fact is that the cattle-growers of the country are being paid a subsidy for the specific purpose of making beef purchasable by you and me at those much-publicized ceiling roll-back prices. In hard cash the government pays around $1.00 for every hundred pounds of beef on the hoof – amounting to from $8 to $11 per head of cattle slaughtered. So where are the ceiling roll-back prices? And where – oh, where – is the meat?
Could it be that the government subsidizes the cattle raisers – while they continue to send their cattle to the black market?
 
Grading on the Way Out
The resignation of Lou R. Maxon, big-shot advertising executive, from his post on the OPA, does not mean that his vigorous campaign against grade labeling has resigned with him. For behold, OPA now issues an order that the grade labeling of women’s rayon hosiery is no longer required. So watch your step in buying rayon hosiery.
More serious, however, is the end of government meat grading, now looming big on the horizon. For Price Administrator Brown is interpreting a certain rider to a certain bill to mean that meat grading is no longer required by law. The housewife will have even less than now to guide her in buying meat – provided it is there to buy – AND TOP PRICES WILL BE CHARGED EVEN FOR THE GRADE D CUT OF MEAT.
In his letter of resignation, Mr. Maxon explained his opposition to grade labeling of merchandise. It is the opposition of the advertising executive looking out for his profits. For if the government should honestly grade merchandise as to actual quality, there would be no point in trying to bamboozle consumers into believing that Swift’s meat comes from redder-blooded cattle than another firm’s or that Gold Stripe hosiery wears longer than “silver stripe.”
There would rapidly follow the demise of the bright ladies in magazine and newspaper ads, who keep their husbands’ affection by stuffing them with Kellogg’s Crispies rather than some other brand – and the air waves would be cleared of the silly commercials constantly offending our intelligence.
In a word, grade labeling and the billion dollar advertising business are not on speaking terms. Mr. Maxon and hundreds like him are in the seats of government to look out for their businesses – not for you and me.
Mr. Maxon and his ilk take very good care of their private interests. How much longer will we allow his kind to pretend they are looking after ours?
Mothers and Socialism
Ernest Brown, Minister of Health in England, told the House of Commons recently that he is concerned about the decline in population. Did this politician for British imperialism, disguised as a labor leader, expect a war like this to be fought without a decline in population?
Another member of the House made the brilliant, observation that there are more old people around. But naturally, since the young ones are on the battlefields.
Someone else contributed the information that there are fewer children under fourteen years of age. Perhaps, after the first crop of war babies, women are indulging in second thoughts.
Another spokesman summed up the situation thus: Woman “has refused to produce the most valuable commodity in the world, THE EMBRYO WORKER.”
Perhaps the last speaker in these quoted words unconsciously gave the real reason why women are not too anxious to bring children into this crazy world. Perhaps they are a bit tired of going through the agonies of giving birth – merely to supply the commodity labor power out of which the bosses make their profits, and the commodity soldier power with which ruling classes have for centuries settled their international conflicts over power and pelf.
Maybe women would like to bring forth just human beings, into a sane social system that would allow people to work like human beings, producing their human needs, at peace with all the world.
Working women, these ideals for a better life can become reality under socialism – and only under socialism.
 




There isn’t anyone these days who does not harbor in his heart the fear of post-war unemployment. To the worker, unemployment means starvation. To the mogul of big business, a large starving army of unemployed may spell the end of his power on this earth – for there is a point beyond which workers will not tolerate the social system that makes them starve.
The most forthright acknowledgement of capitalist bankruptcy in the face of the unemployment problem has come from Sir William Beveridge, the British “social problems expert,” whose “generous” plan for so-called social security would allow about $1.86 a week for bringing up a child. Here are his own words on unemployment:
“If we have mass unemployment we may not be able to carry out the proposals of my report ... I don’t know how we shall continue productive employment after the war ... I do not know how it is to be done and do not even know whether anyone else does.”
 
More Baseless Promises
That’s not mincing words! No such honest statement has been issued in this country from any capitalist source. The New Deal demagogues, anxious to keep the votes of disillusioned workers, rant about freedom from want and the war against starvation and unemployment.
Thus Vice-President Wallace recently in Detroit spoke bright words about a world free from want and unemployment – and a few days later he assured reporters that “ninety-five to ninety-eight per cent of the corporations are harmless or beneficent and suffer Just as much from the small minority as any other group in the population.” So it isn’t the main body of capitalists who cause the trouble – they are “harmless or beneficient.” If it weren’t for a few chiselers, according to Wallace, everything would be hunky-dory.
Actually, of course, it is the ninety-five to ninety-eight per cent of these “harmless or beneficent” corporations which, for one profit reason or another, keep millions of workers away from the means of earning a living. Was it the few chiselers who created the depression army of unemployed at one time rising as high as 17,000,000?
The demagogues of the Republican Party, anxious to win the votes of the workers away from the New Deal, are just as ardent in their platitudes and vague promises. The more sober contingent among the conservatives, like Walter Lippmann, columnist for the New York Herald Tribune, can offer nothing more encouraging than “we have to learn by trial and error.”
It seems, however, that the workers have already learned by sufferings and trials that, as far as they are concerned, tragic “errors” are all they can expect from the capitalist system, whether administered by the Democratic or Republican politicians.
In the meantime post-war unemployment already casts its dark shadow before it. It looms before us when 2,500 to 3,000 workers are dropped at one clip from a New Jersey arsenal. It looms before us when a government contract for $60,000,000 worth of tanks is cancelled. Such news items presage the end of the war boom, which is now keeping 60,000,000 Americans pretty busy – and pose the vital question: WHAT NEXT?
Optimists whose understanding of economics is gleaned from the convincing advertisements in such magazines as the Saturday Evening Post and other literature of the same level stick their heads in the sand and hope the unemployment problem will solve itself. Why, they say, after the war there will be such a stampede to buy consumer goods that industry will be humming and workers employed to nearly capacity.
There may be, immediately upon the signing of peace, a short flurry of “prosperity.” And, while the workers are compelled to “hold the line” for the war program, the bosses have been preparing for the peacetime rush.
Dr. Julius Hirsch, able capitalist economist, connected with OP A, says: “American industry is already more prepared for conversion than most people, think.”
All right. So there will be a great rush to buy everything from kitchen knives to automobiles. Pots and pans, radios and refrigerators, beds and dressers, phonograph records and pianos – these and other such goods will be bought up by a goods-starved population. FOR HOW LONG?
 
Post-War “Prosperity” Short
The same Dr. Hirsch, in a very comprehensive article on the subject of post-war unemployment written for a Wall Street publication,’ Barron’s National Business and Financial Weekly, estimates the boom in consumers goods as follows: “As a result, the employment problem will not be pressing on Armistice Day nor for some ten or twelve months thereafter.”
As will be shown later on, by “not pressing” Dr. Hirsch means that there won’t be 20,000,000 out of work right off the bat. However, the production of consumer goods for -the immediate post-armistice rush will not employ all the war workers, the demobilized armed forces, as well as the civilian workers. First, the demand for consumer, goods, even at Its height, cannot begin to equal the enormous war orders. And second, the productivity of labor, due, to technical improvements during the war period, has made it possible to produce much more goods with fewer workers.
THERE WILL BE PLENTY OF WORKERS WALKING THE STREETS EVEN DURING THIS FREAK RUSH IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE ARMISTICE – AND EVEN BEFORE THE COMPLETE DEMOBILIZATION OF THE 11,000,000 IN THE ARMED FORCES.
 
Twenty Million Jobless!
But how about war-torn Europe and the world-wide reconstruction needed after the war?
Dr. Hirsch believes the “requirements have been greatly overestimated.” He is not optimistic, His opinion is that this source of business will be dried up quickly – “Mainly because the productive power in Europe has risen to a degree which almost insures that its recon-struction this time will be much quicker and more efficient than last.”
Here is something we must not lose sight of. Not only in America has agricultural and industrial production been stepped up to meet war requirements – (the exact figures will be given in the next article); EVERY COUNTRY IN THE WORLD HAS DEVELOPED ITS PRODUCTION TECHNIQUE IMMEASURABLY.
The Brookings Institutes figures that the two factors of stimulated consumer demand at home and from war-exhausted countries abroad will together keep the American industrial machine operating for NOT MORE THAN TWO YEARS.
Dr. Hirsch thinks the .boom will end much sooner, but asks the question: “IRRESPECTIVE OF THE LENGTH OF THIS REPLENISHMENT BOOM, HOWEVER, WHAT THEN WILL FOLLOW?”
And he answers this all-important question: “While a labor surplus of between eight and ten million people was never absorbed in any single one of seven peacetime years after 1929, THE PROBLEM AFTER THE WAR WILL BE TO ABSORB A NUMBER PERHAPS UP TO DOUBLE THAT FIGURE.”

In the next article it will be shown – industry by industry – that it is impossible for Mr. Wallace’s “harmless or beneficent” capitalist corporations to absorb 30,000,000 unemployed.
 




The convention of the American Federation of Labor meeting in Boston the week of October 4 took up a number of vital labor questions on which we shall report in this article. Further analysis of its action will be taken up at another time.
The AFL, for example, had an opportunity to strike a severe blow at Jim Crow in the resolution introduced by A. Philip Randolph of the International Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, calling for abolition of all Jim Crow locals and bars to equal union status for Negro workers.
To the shame of the AFL leadership, none of the white delegates either spoke or voted for Randolph’s resolution – not even the delegates of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, who were presumably representing one of the first unions in the country to fight Jim Crow. Randolph himself and Milton P. Webster, also of the Sleeping Car Porters and the only other Negro delegate, were the only supporters of the resolution.
Instead of support in his efforts to bring real unity between white and black workers, Randolph faced a barrage of unjustified attack from President Green and the AFL tops. He was called an “AGITATOR” and a “PROFESSIONAL NEGRO” by his fellow delegates. John P. Frey, president of the AFL Metal Trades Council, characterized Randolph’s courageous speech as a “MORAL CRIME.”
In rebuttal Randolph asked:
“Is anybody here taking the position that racial auxiliary unions are justified? No one will contend that Jewish or Catholic unions should be organized. A racial auxiliary union is either right or wrong. If it is right, it ought to be justified. If not, it ought to be condemned and exterminated. If you were in the Negro’s place and were put into auxiliary unions without rights and had to pay dues and you were not permitted to exercise your skill and yon were not permitted to rise, what would you do? We contend that the AFL itself is not secure so long as the Negro is denied the same rights as white workers. Nothing has been said here to cause me to retreat from the position I’ve taken.”
In spite of Randolph’s fight, the convention side-stepped its responsibility and adopted a routine resolution for education against race prejudice, for the appointment of a sub-committee on minority questions, and for endorsement of the limping and ineffectual Fair Employment Practices Committee.
 
The UMW on the Floor
The question the outcome of which was awaited with the greatest interest by the whole labor movement was the readmission of the United Mine Workers into the AFL, from which it once withdrew to form the CIO.
Reaffiliation of the miners is surrounded by side issues having nothing to do with the main point – which is to solidify labor’s strength by unity. The difference between Lewis’s political ideas and those of many of the AFL leaders also was an undercurrent affecting the re-entry of the UMW.
The New Dealers in the AFL, among them Daniel J. Tobin, head of the Teamsters’ Union, and Harvey W. Brown, head of the Machinists’ Union, are not anxious to add he Republican tendencies of Lewis to those of W.L. Hutcheson, head of the Carpenters. Today, when independent political action is a must for labor, a great labor federation had its problems befogged by its leaders struggling to strengthen one capitalist political party or another!
On the legitimate matters requiring adustment, such as the status of District 50 of the UMW and the relation between the Progressive Miners of America and the UMW, Lewis sent a letter to the executive council giving assurances of his willingness to make settlements fair to all concerned. However, the criss-crossing of interests was not straightened out sufficiently to result in positive and immediate action by the convention. The matter was referred back to the executive council for further negotiation, with the right to unions having jurisdictional disputes with the UMW to file their grievances within thirty days. The counter-resolution to wait until the 1944 convention before settling the question of the miners was defeated, and the general feeling of the convention was that the miners would be admitted within a few months.
 
Machinists’ Return Ups Membership
The International Association of Machinists, which had quit the federation because of jurisdictional disputes with the Carpenters’ Union – such constant disputes being inevitable under the ancient craft divisions in the AFL – returned to the fold, with its membership of 625,000.
Secretary George Meany announced the paid membership of the federation to be 6,654,141. With the reentry of the UMW, it is expected the number will be brought to over the 7,000,000 mark – a mighty force of organized workers whose militant development, however, can be assured only by the rank and file yanking it out of the groove of class collaboration into which its leaders have sunk it.
 
Incentive Pay and the WLB
Of the burning union issues facing the convention, the delegates – to their credit – took swift and unequivocal action on incentive pay, rejecting all wage systems based on incentive pay as merely “speed-up” camouflage. Whether it was planned that way or not, Joseph D. Keenan of the War Production Board, who came to the convention to peddle propaganda for incentive pay, delivered his piece after the convention had acted on the incentive pay resolution.
Much time was given to the issue of the War Labor Board, without taking the simple action – required by labor’s interests – of calling labor’s representatives off this government agency which operates so effectively against the workers of this country. The resolution to continue the AFL’s futile efforts to defend trade union rights before the board, also voiced resentment that the CIO and not the AFL is the WLB’s pet.
Strong objection was taken to the present situation where wage decisions of the WLB are subject to Economic Stabilization Director Vinson and War Mobilization Director Byrnes, and a resolution called for the removal of the “load of super-agencies” from the WLB’s back and the restoration of the board to “its former position.” This action avoided the conclusion that the WLB was always the graveyard of labor’s demands.
The convention-approved telegram sent by Tobin to the chairman of the WLB indicated that the delegates realize that the WLB is just such a graveyard. The telegram said in part:
“I now notify you and the WLB that both myself and my associates find it impossible to convince our membership immediately in many places of the necessity of observing our no-strike pledge because of what they and I consider an unnecessary delay in endeavoring to make decisions.”
 
No-Strike Pledge and Connally Act
Furthermore, while admitting in this telegram that the workers have no redress but to strike for their demands, the convention at the same time reaffirmed the no-strike pledge. The leadership is between the devil and the deep blue sea on this question of strikes. For instance, they rightly and roundly condemned the Smith-Connally anti-strike law as “a new high point in anti-unionism in this country.” Yet because of the harmful no-strike pledge, Tobin made a spectacle of himself by actually complaining that the Smith-Connally law permits strikes.
 
Price and Post-War Plans
The delegates undoubtedly voiced the opinion of the whole working class when they expressed in a resolution on prices and rationing that prices are now stabilized at too high a level – though the word “stabilized” is far from a realistic description of the price situation.
A resolution urging the women’s auxiliaries to mobilize with union representatives on price control and rationing in each community was definitely a step in the right direction, but it is all too plain that sentiment is still for collaboration with existing boards rather than for action on labor’s own steam.
While the convention recognized the problem involved in 30,000,000 potential post-war unemployed, the measures it voted are very inadequate. For example, it overstressed the role of post-war housing in solving the unemployment problem. This, at its best, can provide only some 1,250,000 new jobs for a short time.
The convention opposed the AFL entering into an international committee including the Russian unions on the ground that “The fundamental differences between the federation and the government-controlled Russian unions are so glaring that no liaison between the two is now remotely possible.”
In this connection, it must be recalled that the AFL leaders were venomously opposed to the Soviet unions when Lenin and Trotsky were in power and when they were genuinely free institutions – the freest in the world. Refusal to have anything to do with the free Soviet unions was an expression of the bigoted and reactionary stand of the AFL leadership. Its refusal today to have anything to do with the “government-controlled” Russian unions is not a recognition of what Stalin has done to the once free Soviet unions, but the continuation of the same bigotry.
Indicative of the extent to which the AFL tops are still prejudiced and reactionary was the action on the Chinese Exclusion Act – which even the reactionary capitalist Congress no longer likes. The argument that the “Chinese are our fighting allies” did not rally enough convention support to defeat the recommendation of the executive council not to permit Chinese immigration. The convention merely voted to have the language “toned down” and referred the matter back to the council for “study.”
 
FDR in the Dog House
Although the body rose and cheered when Democratic Senator James Mead eulogized the President as “the man given to us by divine power – the most popular leader in the world today – President Franklin D. Roosevelt,” there was no pro-Roosevelt frenzy at the convention. There were plenty of references to how the Roosevelt Administration is giving labor a “kicking around.” Perhaps the delegates didn’t care too much for the part of the President’s message to the convention which said: “The working people will be asked to continue to support the war effort by lending their money and making sacrifices and modifying their personal habits.”
A resolution entitled Co-operation with President Roosevelt and praising “his progressive and far-sighted view on domestic and foreign matters” was prevented by the committee from coming before the house – and nobody got mad about that. Some convention observers took this lack of enthusiasm for FDR to indicate that the AFL leadership is putting itself into a trading position with FDR – others thought it a definite trend toward the Republican Party. Horse-trading with capitalist political parties is indeed a far cry from using labor’s political might independently to serve labor’s class interests.
 
The Italian Situation
The delegates considered the question of trade unionism in Italy and pledged the AFL to assist the workers of Italy in restoring their “free trade union movement which had been crushed by Mussolini.” There seems to be a bad contradiction, however. For at the same time the convention expressed its wish for the leaders of the “underground Italian labor movement” to be put “in charge of the former fascist unions.”
 
Atherton Puts Green on Defensive
There were, of course, the usual avalanche of pep speeches by all and sundry. The speech that attracted most public attention was that delivered by Atherton, reactionary head of the big-business-controlled American Legion, who had the brass to come before a convention of labor to say that “it should be treason” for a worker to strike.
In rebuttal, President Green did not do himself so proud. He allowed this reactionary – who had no business to have been invited to a labor convention in the first place – to put him on the defensive. Instead of attacking this enemy of labor, who uses the war as an excuse for his labor-baiting, Green assured him that labor is making “a fine record in a most imperfect world” – Green’s idea of perfection presumably being the same as Atherton’s, namely, no strikes by labor.
 




There is no denying that the common man needs an “era” – or two or three.
But when a capitalist politician – be he Vice-President Wallace or anybody else – assumes the role of modern messiah, a socialist has legitimate doubts. For how can a capitalist politician who defends the boss profit system be on the level about the “era of the common man”?
And Mr. Wallace thinks the boss profit system is just fine.
However – whether he realizes the contradiction of not – he says he is against “a small group seeking to parcel out the resources and markets of the world so as to control production, prices, distribution and the very life-blood of world industry.”
This champion of the “common man” has recently locked horns with the Standard Oil trust and called it names in public. And he so bravely declares: “The international monopolists should be conspicuous by their absence at the peace table.”
In his recent speeches Mr. Wallace has implied that the great industrial monopolies and international cartels stand between the common man and his era. Do away with these or curb them and – presto! – we will have that “economic democracy” about which he talks so much.
Wallace’s Game an Old One Mr. Walalce is another trust-buster – 1943 model. Other messiahs of the “common man” have before blasted the truats as the great evil which prevents dear old capitalism from being the benevolent institution it really is at heart. But it has all been to no avail!
As far back as 1890 the trust-busters had the Sherman anti-trust law passed to restore – in the 1943 words of Mr. Wallace – “American business principles of free private enterprise and equal opportunity.” But the development of capitalism from “a free competitive system” to monopoly could not be stepped by law.
Under the noses of the demagogues and the lawmakers of those days – and in spite of the anti-trust law – the Standard Oil octopus developed, the monopolistic National Sugar Refining Company blossomed, J.P. Morgan completed the structure of the United States Steel trust, and the basis of modern monopoly capitalism was laid.
 
Other “Friends of the People”
Later, Presidents Theodore Roosevelt and Taft found it very convenient to become the “friends of the people” merely by lambasting the trusts. And actually, lawsuits were brought against Standard Oil, American Tobacco and other trusts – to “bust” them. Formally and legally they were dissolved into several smaller companies, but what a farce! The dissolutions were in name only. Trustification continued more than ever.
Woodrow Wilson waa another trust-busting champion of “freedom.” During his administration the Clayton anti-trust law of 1914 was passed. This law the historian Charles Beard described as “an elaborate measure which IN LETTER at least threatened to tear apart all combinations large enough to control prices in their respective areas.” But the Clayton anti-trust law was also absolutely ineffective in stopping capitalist consolidation for greater profit and economic domination by the few.
The best proof is that the trusts of Woodrow Wilson’s day have grown to the magnitude of the international cartels against which Mr. Wallace flings his fiery words today.
There has been for many years in the U.S. Department of Justice a full-time, fully-manned anti-trust department. Indictments are made, suits filed, trials held against the wicked trusts – and they are wicked.
Nevertheless, their power increases. They gobble up all the industrial wealth that counts. And the funniest thing is that they have become high-pressure salesmen of “free enterprise” through their radio stooges and their press – meaning, of course, complete freedom for the monopolists to profit from the labor of the people.
No, the demagogic trust-busters who came end went before Mr. Wallace could not make the wheel of economic forces rotate backward – and neither can he. National trusts, international cartels and international imperialism were inevitable under modern capitalism. In fact, that IS modern capitalism.
 
Take a Look at the Giants
Have a look at the American trusts branching out into international cartels that Mr. Wallace wishes to bust. Here is a partial list of this country’s industrial giants, tied up with I.G. Farbenindustrien, Krupp and other German trusts as well as with the industrial monopolists of Great Britain and other countries:

Standard Oil, duPont, Aluminum Company of America, General Motors, Ford, Remington Arms, General Electric, Westinghouse Electric, National Cash Register, American Rolling Mill, International Tel. & Tel., General Aniline, Sterling Products, Winthrop Chemical, North American Rayon, American Bemberg.

Here are the giants of nearly every branch of American industry. Through financial connections and “interlocking directorates,” the owners of these corporations centrol manufacturing, mining, transportation, power, farming, insurance, finance, in a word, here is American capitalism, which has become monopoly capitalism – breaking all barriers to profits just as it broke small-scale business.
 
Capitalism or Socialism?
Mr. Wallace stands for capitalism. Today capitalism is monopoly capitalism. There is no other. The wheel of economic development cannot be turned back.
Nor is it desirable to turn it back. Combinations in industry for the elimination of the waste and the inefficiency of small-scale production are progressive – just as technological development itself is progressive, although under the boss system it has meant hardship for the workers. Similarly, international industrial combinations for the pooling of inventions, resources, etc., are in themselves progressive.
The big question is: By whom are the trusts owned – for whose benefit? By whom are the international combinations made – and for whose benefit? Today they are the means of pegging prices, cornering markets, withholding inventions, etc. – all for the private profit of the economic masters of the earth at the expense of the masses.
 
What Socialism Can Do
The socialist says that progress consists not in smashing these giants of industry – which cannot be done, anyway – but in taking them away from the monopolists and making them the property of the whole people, those who produce all the wealth of the world. Owned by the toiling people, by the workers, the poor agricultural laborers, the dispossessed middle classes and all the poor, these giant industries could produce plenty for all. That is the road to socialism, to a world system, of peace, security and freedom – a true era of the “common man.”
The “common man” has no need for a 1943 model trust-buster. What he needs is to set rid of the selfish, profit-bloated trusts, and the profit-bloated capitalists.
 




On the food front the uppermost worry now is about milk.
How long will we get how much?
The dairy farmers want higher prices from the consumer or government subsidies – or both. Naturally, they have all kinds of reasons for wanting more money – the main reason being that more money is what they are in business to get.
When dairy farmers are mentioned, maybe you think of a lot of little farmers whose wives go out to the red barn to milk Brown Bess. You’re wrong.
Dairy farming, like all farming, is in the iron grip of big business. Higher prices and government subsidies accrue to the benefit not of the owners of a few cows, but to the dairy bosses connected with huge banks, insurance companies and industrialists like the Pews of Pennsylvania, who are part and parcel of the powerful farm bloc as well as oil magnates and shipbuilding capitalists.
If the government allows a subsidy of from $20,0,000,000 to $300,000,000 to induce the big dairy bosses to keep the price of milk from going up, THAT PRETTY PILE OF DOUGH WILL GO MAINLY TO BIG BUSINESS.
And how soon will they ask for more government money – which in the last count comes out of the pockets of the working people?
This vicious circle of profit grubbing must be broken. It can be broken by the united effort of the small and independent farmers, of farm workers, of labor unions, of organized housewives. These elements, constituting the bulk of the working people, can and must end the power of big business to dictate whether we eat or not, and at what price!
*
Mrs. A.D. Wilkinson, socially prominent bigwig of Grosse Pointe, Detroit, has her own ideas about “equality of sacrifice.” The Wilkinsons were discovered to have a food supply good for several years. They had a stock of 1,276 cans of rationed food, with a point value of 7,273, and deep-freeze foods, valued at 1,078 points. How the rich suffer – poor things!
Another illustration of “equality of sacrifice” comes from the realm of politics. Firms supplying New York City institutions with food have very obligingly – probably for valuable consideration – supplied city food inspectors and food buyers with plenty of the wherewithal.
The chief food inspector got away with a six-pound leg of lamb and six pounds of steak as a typical week’s purchase. The lesser lights in the department got their share of top round, porterhouse, legs of lamb and eggs. None of the accused men has, as yet, been suspended from office.
Where there’s a will – AND PLENTY OF MONEY OR CONNECTIONS TO BACK IT UP – there’s a way.
As the working class housewife waits in line, shifting from one weary foot to the other, to get that quarter of a pound of butter – if she’s lucky – she can occupy her mind with pleasant thoughts of others who are more fortunate than she.
*
The First Lady has returned from her 23,000-mile jaunt to the far Pacific with a new hair-do, weighing less, and full of interviews.
At her interviews she keeps repeating that the boys in the armed forces “have very strong feelings about strikes.” She says, “I don’t think I saw a boy who justified any strike.”
Of course, Mrs. Roosevelt could not and did not take an authentic poll of how the armed forces – CONSISTING IN THE MAJORITY OF WORKING CLASS PEOPLE – feel about strikes. But if they feel as she says they do, at least one thing becomes clear: THE TROOPS ARE BEING FED BOSS PROPAGANDA.
Certainly no soldier who is told he is fighting for a better world would, for instance, be opposed to the miners’ strike if he knew the real facts about the miners’ pinched existence and about the mine bosses’ war profits.
Did Mrs. Roosevelt perhaps inform these misinformed boys that the bosses – who out of greed for profits supply defective war materials which may mean unexpected death on the battle fronts – will make $8,600,000,000 in profits this year, are also socking away a post-war reserve of $69,000,000,000, and will get for a song from the government war plants worth $10,000,000,000?
You bet she didn’t!
*
So important is the gentle sex these days that the British Cabinet – in person – saw fit to assemble 6,000 women picked from trade unions, professional groups, housewives’ clubs and so on, to tell them what more will be required of the people by way of war sacrifices.
Prime Minister Churchill informed the gathering that the almost superhuman war effort must be maintained “through the fifth year of the war, or the six year, or, if need be, forever – until we have achieved our purpose.” Which is not a very cheerful prospect.
Minister of Labor Bevin made it clear that large sections of workers will be shuffled from place to place this winter, and that more woman-power will be imperative in aircraft factories, cotton mills and transportation. This will mean increased hardship to very working class family.
Food Minister Woolton tried to inject a bright note by predicting that Britain would be “tasting some of the fruits of victory” in the form of oranges, lemons and onions from the conquered Mediterranean area.
But the real “fruits of victory” were described by Anthony Eden, Foreign Minister, in these words:
“As Cordell Hull rightly said the other day, we must consider that force of some kind is the element of any new world order. Indeed, unless such an order has sufficient force to give effect to its decisions, it cannot hope to serve its purpose.”
Is that what men, women and children are today suffering for? What kind of new world is it that will require a super-colossal military policing system? The seething conflicts of the world will not be ended, but will merely be held in check by force. For how long?
This “fruit of victory” will bear the seed of World War III. That is why we socialists urge all working people to band together and work for a socialist peace – THE ONLY KIND THAT WILL ENDURE!
 




A feeble effort was made in Congress to include in the bill creating the Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps a provision against discrimination based on race or color. However, the law-makers refused to write racial equality into the bill.
Thus, if in spite of this slap in the face, Negro women will apply for admission into the WAAC, they will be put into a Jim Crow unit or be refused admission altogether. As in the Army, Navy and Marine Corps, race discrimination will be on parade.
The Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy has loudly proclaimed his opposition to race prejudice. However, not a peep came from the White House to stay this congressional affirmation of race discrimination by the government itself – in a new department under his command.
Mr. Roosevelt’s policy of the left hand pretending not to know what the right is doing reveals him as the capitalist politician par excellence. For war purposes he can luxuriate in shining phrases about racial equality – and even throw a few bones to the Negro underdog – knowing full well that the status quo will not be fundamentally changed.
The status quo no capitalist politician wants to upset is the artificial division of the common people – the tricky segregation of black from white – so that the masters can continue ruling them both.

Not only did the WAAC start off on the foot of race discrimination, but it has taken the well beaten path of favoritism, pull, drag or whatever you may want to call it.
“Some War Department officials, acting as individuals, have promised a small number of women here that they could be assured of commissions in the Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps.”
Thus Nona Baldwin begins a column-long report to the New York Times from Washington on May 29th. She goes on to explain how everybody in Washington “denies” or “is amazed” or “deplores” or “promises fairness to all.” But she returns to the original accusation:
“It is admitted here that the known instances of personal assurances to aspirants that they should receive commissions are few, but there is unimpeachable authority that such assurances have been given.”
That little word “known” attracts attention. How about the UNKNOWN instances of favoritism? Favoritism doesn’t like the bright lights. It prefers a dim-out or, better still, a black-out.
The Wallaces and Welleses are spilling lots of oratory about the PEOPLE these days, but THE people still pull the strings in Washington.
Many of the thousands of women now going into the factories have a big question-mark in their minds about the future. These new workers are certainly not all going back after the war to a safe and sheltered place in the home. A war always leaves an increased number of women bread-winners because so many of the male bread-winners are consumed as cannon-fodder. This war will pile up more dead than any other, and correspondingly more women will find their place has shifted into the factory.
What will women bread-winners be earning in the post-war period? Let us have a look at women’s wages after the last war.
The depths to which post-war wages for women then sank is almost incredible, as revealed by a wage survey for 1918-19, covering 33,000 women, prepared by the New York State Department of Labor. Of those 33,000 women, 3,300 were receiving less than $6.00 a week – a coolie wage! Of the same group 17,490 who were “better paid,” earned between $6.00 and $12. Only a little more than one-third of the women included in the survey got more than the $12 a week pittance.
These figures should be impressed indelibly on the mind of every woman worker today. Needless to say, women’s wages were lower than those paid to men. In 117 plants covered by one investigation, 90 per cent of the women workers taking the places of men were getting less pay than the men – in many cases as much as 50 per cent less.
Thus in the post-war period the women became the most victimized and exploited workers. And the reason was that they did not have the weapon of self-protection against the bosses, namely, union organization. This mistake must not be repeated. Today women have the advantage of their labor being in demand. Today, therefore, they must do something about their future. The question-mark in the mind is not enough. Action is called for.
Now is the time for women to join the unions – to demand equal pay for equal work – to peg up the wage scales – to become strongly organized to resist the postwar squeeze. This will benefit not only the women workers, but every man on the job and every worker-soldier who will return from the battlefields. For only organized might and complete solidarity will enable the working class as a whole to handle the avalanche of post-war problems.

Readers of Labor Action will remember that in our recent series of articles exposing the home-grown fascists of this country, it was pointed out that these political gangsters will concentrate on anti-war sentiment in a demagogic attempt to get popular support.
”We, the Mothers, Mobilize for America, Inc.,” is the anti-Semitic, anti-labor vehicle of the female contingent of the American fascists. Up to two months ago it was carrying on its dirty work openly in thirty-two states. Lately it has taken on protective coloration, to escape attention. However, you can bet dollars to doughnuts that by whatever names it is now known, it smells just as bad.
As the casualty lists lengthen and the heartaches deepen, the fascist rats will scurry about busily trying to corral war-hatred. And war-hatred is bound to grow. Take, for instance, the radio messages sent by Private Irving Strobing describing the final battle for Corregidor:
“I know how a mouse feels. Caught in a trap waiting for guys to come along and finish it up ... Every one is bawling like a baby. They are piling dead and wounded in our tunnel.”
Such war horrors, multiplied as the war continues, will make hearts heavy with grief and loathing of war. Women of the working class, be on your guard against the gnawings and nibblings of the fascist rodents. They are against the Jews. They are against the Negroes. They are against labor. They are NOT really against war. They APPROVE of what Hitter did in Europe. They want a regime like Hitler’s for this country.
To give true, constructive expression to war-hatred, join forces with Labor Action. It exposes both sides ol the war as imperialist. It stands for permanent world peace through SOCIALISM.
 




The military pay allotment bill approved by the Senate and sent to the House is as good as passed. It makes at least one thing certain in this world of uncertainties:
While the men in arms will be fighting in foreign lands supposedly for the “four freedoms” – one of which is stated to be freedom from want – their families will be engaged in the centuries-old fight of the poor to keep the wolf away from the door, provided there is a door. For it is going to be as impossible for families to pay for rent, food and clothing out of the flagrantly low allowances for soldiers’ dependents as to get an elephant into a dog house.
A woman with two children will have to get along on $72 a month or $16 a week for all three. This drop in the bucket, even in peacetime before the cost of living rose to its present levels, meant a sub-subsistence standard of living. Today it means a sub-sub-subsistence level of existence. Tomorrow – when prices climb higher, as they are already doing in spite of the farcical ceilings – the only thing $16 a week will buy for three people is starvation.
To call this travesty “support of the dependents” of the men in arms is – to say the least – a misnomer. To call a spade a spade, Congress is passing a bill to force women into industry. For no mother will sit by and see her children “supported” in starvation. Small children certainly need a mother’s personal care and attention, but first they need bread, shoes and a roof. Women will have no alternative except to go to work. So the “preservation of the home” – which is supposed to be another war aim – will be put in dead storage by this very “generous” bill that Congress is passing.
The old and feeble will also suffer. A soldier’s mother and father without support will be allowed $47 a month, or about $10 a week for both. Figure that out in terms of shelter, food and clothing. And these will be the lucky parents whose sons are not married. Dependent parents whose sons are married will have bestowed on them the still more “bounteous” sum of $30 a month, or $7.00 a week, for both.
Other provisions of the bill are even more niggardly than the above – hard as this may be to believe. For instance, if an unmarried soldier has one parent and one sister dependent on him, they will be allowed $42 a month, or about $9.00 a week. If the soldier is married, then a dependent parent and sister will “wallow in the good things of life” at the rate of $25 a month, or about $6 a week for both. If, however, there is a second dependent sister of either the unmarried or the married soldier, the poor girl will be “smothered in luxuries” costing $1.00 a week – for that is all the additional allowance made for her.
These allowances, picayune as they are will not be paid by the government. The soldier’s contribution will, be out of all proportion to his pay. Every married and unmarried soldier with dependent will have to turn in $22 a month. If a married soldier also has parents or sisters or brothers dependent on him, he will have to plunk down $27 every month.
What then becomes of the increase in soldier’s pay voted by Congress recently? The rise from $21 to $50 is all but eaten up by deductions for dependents. It is a case of giving with the right hand and taking away with the left.
If you scrape the camouflage off this military pay allotment bill and see it as above analyzed, it becomes another illustration of the fact that the little people are paying for the big war.
Women, children and old folks will not have enough money for even their most elementary needs. Soldiers will be deprived of their very inadequate pay increases. But war profits will bulge the pockets of the industrial big-wigs for whom a war is a bonanza – and just when this bill soaking the poor is being passed in Congress the luscious quarterly dividend checks again come in to swell still further the bursting bank accounts of the parasites.
So again, Labor Action calls for the confiscation of all war profits to pay for the imperialist war. And if those are not enough, how about the ill-gotten fortunes of the “Sixty Families”! Let the rich pay for the war for which their class is responsible.
 




Last year there was a great deal of fanfare about so-called radical changes in the caste-bound British army. It was turning into a “people’s army,” no less – though, of course, in the service of the same old imperialist masters.
Then suddenly very little was heard about “democratizing” the British forces. And one wondered. Therefore, of great interest is a letter from London by S.L. Solon, published in the American Mercury of June, 1942, on the subject of Why British Soldiers Complain.
One has to conclude from the facts Mr. Solon presents that the process of democratization has been stymied – that is, if it ever even got started. The following from the English magazine, the New Statesman, summarizes the situation:
“The new generation of subalterns, with the approval or by the orders of reactionary commanding officers, have gone back to the polished cross straps, swagger canes and Mayfair moustaches of another day. The officers’ mess is again a class stronghold into which men who may be fine soldiers but are not considered ‘sahibs’ find their way with difficulty. Our new conscript armies are less democratic than our professional army of two years ago.”
Mr. Solon amplifies the above. He says that examination boards are more interested in the class background of applicants for officers’ rank than in their military and intellectual qualifications. Boards are known to ask such pointed questions as “Have you any private income?” “Can you afford to be an officer?” “Have you ever ridden to hounds?” Foxhunting, as everyone knows, is the sine qua non of a British upper class snob.
 
Lacks Spending Money
Of course, the worries of the average private are not that he cannot become an officer. Mr. Solon reports that Tommy’s big headaches are his family and his finances.
“The British married soldier,” he says, “after family allowances are met, is left with only a few cents a day spending money.”
Last winter a pitched battle was fought in Parliament, over soldiers’ pay. There was a proposal that the allowance to a soldier’s wife be increased to $8.00 a week with $2.25 more for each child, the soldier-father to have the munificent sum of 30 cents a day, or about $2.00 a week. The government rejected this increase, picayune as it obviously would have been. The total cost of the increase for the entire army would have been less than nine days’ current British war expenditures. Mr. Solon comments on this unfair allotment of war expenditures:
“There appears to be little doubt that hidebound notions of economy afflict the Treasury whenever service pay is brought into question.”
In the course of the debate in Parliament, a Capt. G.C. Grey quoted a soldier as saying:
“It seems to me that cannon fodder is the only form of unrationed commodity available in unlimited quantities at pre-war prices.”
To this frank evaluation of the situation by a soldier, Captain Grey added his own comment:
“That is a bitter remark, but there are tens of thousands of men who feel bitter, too.”
A lieutenant commander told the House of Commons that thousands of young men are being financially ruined, and concluded:
“We are laying up an awful legacy of social unrest when this war comes to a conclusion.”
At long last the government agreed to increase the total allowance for a soldier with a wife and three children by just $1.00 a week, namely, from $12 to $13. Mr. Solon reports that
“A general army horse laugh greeted the announcement that the increased allowances would be tax-exempt.”
 




Do you remember the highest prices in March for all the commodities supposed to be under the ceiling? If your memory is exceptional, you may recall the exact prices of a few items, but no more. That is quite natural. In day to day buying one knows when an item is higher than the last time it was bought. One also knows too well when the dollar is bringing home less bacon. But for every housewife to keep in mind exact prices paid for individual items as far back as March – and for the whole month to boot – is out of the question.
Furthermore, many commodities are not in the class of day to day purchases. Such are dry goods, house furnishings, clothing, shoes, etc. So that housewives who did not buy these more durable goods during March have absolutely nothing to go by today.
In spite of this unquestionable situation, Mr. Henderson and his OPA have – with a grand sweeping gesture – passed on to the individual consumer the job of enforcing the price ceilings. In the past week he has been appearing on the screen of every movie house and put it up to the consumer to keep retail prices in line with the March highs.
This means that Henderson cannot do the job of enforcing price control – and admits it. He drops the hot potato into the hands of the consumer.
All right. Let us take Henderson at his word – but not as individuals.
Housewives can handle the hot potato of price control if they put on the protective glove of consumer organization, namely, neighborhood housewives’ committees. By pooling their recollections of what prices were in March they may be able to check on the prices charged today. What one housewife doesn’t remember another or another will. And by using the strength of their united purchasing power they can exert pressure where pressure is needed.
Will you pardon Labor Action if we say: “We told you so!”

While this column is indulging in a we-told-you-so mood, it would like to remind the reader about a prediction it made long ago, namely, that prices will rise in spite of so-called price control. Not only does the OPA wash its hands of the boring though necessary detail of checking up on retail prices, but official Washington actually expects prices to raise the roof – let alone the ceiling.
A reliable information service writes its clients under date of May 16th that “the pressure of boosting price ceilings is already beginning.” After late summer or early fall, “higher prices seem SURE.” The word SURE is written in solid capitals in the original letter of information, which adds that “many officials now say so privately.”
So prices are taking the high road, but actual wages are taking the low road. Freezing wages, raising income taxes, levying withholding and sales taxes, to say nothing of slashing wages through compulsory bond purchases, will leave a beggar’s mite for the working class housewife. Congress will also decide for her how much of that may be spent and for what.
Therefore, this whole question of the standard of living of the working people during the war involves more than the control of prices – which can be done only by workers as producers of goods and by housewives as consumers of goods. The other edge of the sword cutting into the standard of living has to do with paying for the war. Not the workers but the rich must finance the war for which they are responsible.
There is a lot of accumulated wealth in the hands of Americas “Sixty Families” – squeezed out of the toil of the workers. Let the government compel them to disgorge. There are unprecedented war profits making the rich still richer. Let the government confiscate every bloody million of war profits.
Not a man, woman or child will have less to eat if the rich cough up the price of the war. Yet the burden of financing a war which costs $1,000,000,000 each week is being loaded onto the working class. That means that the cupboard of every working class family, if not entirely bare, will have many empty spaces. That means privation for people – privation that is avoidable by soaking the parasites instead of the workers.

Devious indeed are the ways of “democracy” under the system of profit for power and power for profit, as the following story once more illustrates:
The unlamented dictator, Huey Long, who has gone to his redeemer, had built his powerful political machine in close unison with organized vice in New Orleans. Undoubtedly he was very reluctant to leave behind him such a useful device, but there are some things even a political dictator cannot do. So his machine, and all its corruption, were inherited by his successors, of whom Robert S. Maestri, mayor of New Orleans, is one. Today New Orleans is the hub of a section of the country harboring some of the biggest military camps and naval bases. The business acumen of the owners of bawdy houses has not been wanting in the circumstances. The “war profits” have, of course, been shared by the mayor’s machine. As the New York newspaper PM puts it:
“The tremendous take from the vice racket is the very lifeblood of the machine, flowing from pimps, prostitutes and gambling operators through ward politicians and police officials.”
To continue unwinding the thread of cause and effect, the men concentrated in the military camps and naval bases around New Orleans go there for relaxation from the unnatural and arduous life in the armed forces. Unfortunately for them, they are carrying back with them worn the quaint streets of New Orleans something that makes them less manly. In fact, PM reports that venereal disease accounts for more man-days lost in the armed services than any other ailment.
Army and Navy heads don’t like that. Damaged goods won’t make a fighting Army and Navy. Hence, a problem: to save the armed forces by cleaning house in New Orleans – or to save the Huey Long political machine of corruption by not disturbing its main source of revenue. That is the question which is stumping the experts.

Mrs. Roosevelt is cutting a rather ridiculous figure these days. She wails and whines about the cruel curtailment of accustomed peacetime social services. In one column she is “distressed” because of a slash in housing appropriations. In another column she is “very much troubled” because everything has been ruled out of the National Youth Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corps programs except training for war work. Just what does the First Lady expect? She cannot have her cake and eat it. She cannot have her all-out war and the blessings of peace.
The only people who can state their preference for peace arid deserve serious attention are those who have the one and only program for peace: WORLD SOCIALISM.
 




A shortage of sugar in this country? Banish the thought! There is so much sugar that there are not enough warehouses to hold it all.
Then why the rationing? Well, thereby hangs a tale – another tale of the inefficiency and the anarchy in the capitalist management of national affairs.
It wasn’t much of a mistake that the Office of Price Administration made in calculating the available supplies for 1942 – only a small matter of 3,200,000 tons, or almost half of all the sugar consumed in the year 1940! OPA expected the sugar stock to be 5,300,000 tons for 1942, whereas it will actually be 8,500,000 tons, which is 400,000 tons more than even the extraordinarily large 1941 consumption.
Of course many reasons are given why this boner was pulled. OPA counted upon 1,300,000 tons of the Cuban crop being used for alcohol needed in explosives, whereas only 400,000 tons of it were so used. Also it was surprised by the domestic crop, which was a bumper one. Finally more sugar came in from Hawaii than was expected, but so much more that to date it already equals the estimates from that source for the entire year. Think of that for national planning!
We have a sneaking suspicion that national planning means to have a more or less accurate idea about just such things as these. A mistake of a hundred thousand tons one way or the other is understandable – but 3,200,000 tons! The inherent anarchy in capitalist production is the explanation. National planning and capitalism just don’t take to each other. Now sugar refiners and producers are hammering on the doors of the
OPA to increase domestic and industrial rations. The president of the Amalgamated Sugar Co. insists that “All the reliable sugar statisticians are convinced that there is enough sugar available so that rationing is unnecessary.”
So difficult indeed has become the problem of storing the huge sugar surplus, while you and I have been limited to half a pound a week, that one of the largest sugar refineries has resorted to putting it under tarpaulins on open lots. So that the sugar that the public has not been permitted to consume may now easily be ruined by the weather.
The repercussions of the unnecessary sugar rationing will be felt in Cuba and other Caribbean sugar-growing lands. With unused surpluses piled up all over these United States, imports will have to be curtailed, which will bring unemployment and economic crisis to those lands whose economy is largely dependent on their sugar exports to this country.
It will be interesting to see how the OPA tries to crawl out of the mess it has created. In the meantime, it is reported that thousands of dollars worth ot strawberries as well as a great quantity of small fruits and other berries used for canning, have actually gone to rot – unpicked because the stupid sugar rationing has reduced the demand for canning fruits.
So here is another tale of the waste, inefficiency and anarchy of the existing system. The demand of Labor Action for workers’ control of industry is certainly urgent
 




There has been great jubilation in Leon Henderson’s price-fixing department over the results of a special study by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the cost of living for the period since the so-called ceilings want into effect. Mr. Henderson – after first offering his resignation to the President, presumably because he couldn’t do the impossible job of fixing prices – now pretends to be rubbing his hands with satisfaction. “At last the upward movement in living costs has been checked,” he says.
But this department of Labor Action responds: “Says who?” It has conducted a little study of its own regarding the cost of living. Not having the facilities of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, it had to use the homespun method of looking up the prices advertised by the A&P Super Markets during March 1942 and comparing them with prices charged, by the A&P today. A&P prices are about the average.
The information sought pertained to those foods that Mr. Henderson – for reasons best known to himself – did NOT put under the so-called ceiling. They constitute a good half of the food needs of a family and include fresh fruits and vegetables, dairy products, fowl and some meats. For these products – if she can still afford to buy them – the housewife is paying through her nose.
In the category of fresh fruits and vegetables, for instance, oranges and cabbages have gone up 33 per cent. Oranges were 12 for 25 cents in March and are now 8 for 25 cents. Cabbage was 3 cents a pound and is now 4 cents. Among the dairy products, butter costs 7½ per cent more, having risen from 39 to 42 cents a pound, while sharp store cheese climbed 16 per cent, from 32 to 37 cents a pound. At the meat counter, the dollar is a poor contender for what is sold there. The price of fowl is up 18 per cent, from 28 to 33 cents a pound. Leg of lamb costs 25 per cent more, from 28 to 35 cents a pound. Loin lamb chops top the list with an increase of 50 per cent, from 33 cents a pound in March to 49 cents a pound today.
To state these increases and write finis is not to tell the whole story. The final denouément is the inevitable lowering of the standard of living of the lowest paid workers. When oranges go up 33 per cent in price, children of the working class are drinking less orange juice. When chickens and lamb reach the high notes, it means . that the working class family has to forego even the occasional indulgence in these “delicacies.”
So “equality for all” is – as always under capitalism – a matter of dollars and cents Those who have, get – and those who haven’t, just do without. And this is the way in which the upward movement of living costs has been checked by Mr. Henderson.

In spite of the fact that war prosperity is supposed to have landed in the lap of the little people, the evidences of economic insecurity keep piling up. The title of ownership of that “cottage small by a waterfall” – which has ever been associated with family well-being – continues to pass from the name of the little man and his wife to that of the loan corporation.
As of April, 1942, in the imperial state of New York the Home Owners Loan Corporation, sponsored by the government, has had to take over for non-payment of obligations FORTY PER CENT of all the homes upon which it had made loans!
One-third of these unlucky “home owners” or over 10,000 of them, were compelled to surrender all their worldly goods since the outbreak of the war, that is, in the two and a half years from October 1939 to April 1942 – the period of the very acme of war prosperity, at least judging by corporation profits.
Whether in a particular case the cause of misfortune was priority unemployment, the breaking up of a family due to the draft, or the need for the bread-winner to pack up and try his luck elsewhere, the fact remains that economic insecurity is the iron law of capitalist society.
That alluring picture of a happy family protected behind the pretty starched curtains on windows one can call one’s own, belongs exclusively to the movies.

It is necessary at this time, when glib statesmen make elaborate promises for a “brave new world” after the war, to remember that the First World War was also euphoniously fought “to make the world a better place in live in.”
But during the post-war period and right up to and into the present war period, 90 per cent of Kentucky’s mountain children did not go to school and do not now go to school. Those comparatively few youngsters from the southern mountains who have a minimum of clothing to cover their nakedness so that they can attend school are so undernourished that “the education does them little good.” The schools themselves can hardly be graced by that name, for they are one-room buildings no better than shacks. The Save the Children Federation, whose “charity” makes no halt to the spread of poverty, has recently once again called public attention to the above situation in the South.
This is, however, only a little peep into one of the dirtiest of the dirty backyards of America which – you remember – the last war made “a better place to live in.”

The story is told of a young soldier who entered a USO Club and made a very unusual request. The apology for normal life which these clubs specialize in could not fill the need of this particular soldier. His yearning was not quieted by any of the ordinary make-shifts, such as dancing, watching a floor show or movie, listening to a radio, or what have you. For what this young man wanted, above all else, was to have the feel of a three-month-old baby in his arms. His own baby back home is just three months old, he said.
This department has no desire to use this touching incident as a tear-jerker. The useless tragedies of this war of ruling class rivalries are of proportions greater than the natural yearning in one man’s heart. Yet in a peculiarly succinct way this young soldier does exemplify the monstrous distortion of life to which war subjects humanity. For this reason the socialist cries out to the parents of today:
“You owe something more than facile love to your children. Your parents were caught in World War I, because of the capitalist struggle for markets and raw materials. You are the unwilling participants in World War II because of the same world-wide imperialist competition. When your children reach maturity, their destiny will be to fight in World War III because of the same lust of ruling classes for power for profit – unless you, the parents of today, pay your debt to your children and to the future. What is that debt? Support the cause of world socialism for universal peace and plenty!”
 




Sugar is being rationed as a war measure – a war, we are told, “to preserve the American way of life.” Sugar, therefore, looms large in the public consciousness. What could be a more opportune time for learning something about the production of sugar?
This story will not go far afield into those backward places like Hawaii and Cuba, where sugar is a major crop. There one expects to find – shall I say – backwardness, meaning extreme, exploitation of labor and dire poverty among the sugar-crop workers.
But here in the land of the free and the home of the brave, the picture is not different. This is attested to by many students of American agriculture.
Dr. R. W. Roskelley, referring to the sugar-beet industry, wrote:
“There is a human drama in Colorado which is almost as spectacular as The Grapes of Wrath.”
Carey McWilliams, in his book, Ill Fares the Land, states:
“It is a drama which involves 25,000 Mexican sugar-beet workers, who, for twenty years or more, have been whirled around on one of the giddiest merry-go-rounds in America. It is one more illustration of the complicated patterns evolved in ‘rural’ areas where industrialized agriculture has become entrenched. The appearance of rural slums in a pioneer Western state – the development of a caste system in the shadow of the Rocky Mountains ...”
The Great Western Sugar Co. is the big boss of the beet-sugar industry of Colorado and other Western states, controlling one-third of the whole beet-sugar output in this country.
 
How the Companies Lure Labor
By the system of circulating lying handbills promising high wages and a farm-laborer’s paradise – re-enforced by local labor-herders – the company lured 25,000 Mexican laborers north to the sugar-beet fields. To ensure their remaining, the company used such gentle devices as withholding wages. In the years 1933 to 1938 there were never less than 500 unsettled wage claims by Mexican sugar-beet workers. The unique operation of the machinery of justice made it impossible for wage claims to be settled sooner than two or three years. This stranded the worker threw him further upon the meager mercy of the company, and virtually made him a peon in free America.
Thus the company shackled workers to the fields by the simple expedient of keeping them too poor even to move away. To ensure a sufficiently low wage level, it encouraged a constant stream of migratory workers. To perpetuate poverty every effort was made to divide the workers by artificial means arid prevent unionization. The Mexican born in this country was encouraged to look down his nose at the Mexican from Mexico. Each group was settled in its separate slum. When the “Okies” and “Arkies” began to pour into the region, still more dissension developed and was blessed by the company.
In 1938 the average yearly earnings per worker in the sugar-beet fields did not exceed $70. Therefore to be able to exist by seasonal work – even on the very lowest subsistence level – every member of the family becomes a slave in the beet fields. In fact, sugar-beet labor is almost exclusively “family contract” labor, thus securing for the employer the unpaid labor of women and children. During the 1940 season a man and his two sons had made a total of $165, according to Carey McWilliams.
The “Heritage” of the Children
In 1929 it was reported that 5,000 Mexican children of the sugar-beet district, of school age, were not attending school. One-half of the sugar-beet families were living in one and two room shacks. Five, six, seven, nine and even eleven people were jammed into disgraceful one-room hovels. Infant mortality rates are shameful. Disease among children and adults runs rampant. Because the children have no opportunity for advancement, the tendency is for the peon status of the parent to remain that of the children. These are some of the high points of the “American way of life” of the sugar-beet laborers.
Reports in 1938 show that little if any improvement had been made in the decade from 1929. Carey McWilliams states in his Ill Fares the Land:
“As long as Mexican labor has been employed in Colorado, these conditions have prevailed; and they are as bad today as they were in 1920.”
Larimer Street, the main thoroughfare of the Mexican district of Denver, is known as “Hunger Street.”
The Great Western Sugar Co. made sure that relief payments and WPA jobs would not interfere with its labor supply. With the coming of the sugar-beet season in the spring, public welfare agencies take all Mexicans off relief. All people with Spanish names are automatically assumed to be sugar-beet workers. If the Great Western doesn’t employ them, well, that’s just too bad. The Great Western also majestically places orders with the Colorado State Employment Service, and workers are taken off WPA when the big sugar boss asks for them. The control exercised by Great Western over state and local politics is by no means remote.
 
Misery Leads to Western’s Profits
The abject misery of the sugar-beet workers has been transformed into gilded profits for the Great Western Sugar Co. By 1939 it had tripled its assets. Its profit realization was 736 per cent on its original investment.
The domestic sugar industry has been a special pet of the federal government, receiving at times large subsidies and the “protection” of a high tariff. It is estimated that of the proceeds taken in by the sugar companies from the sale of beet sugar, only 27.6 per cent really represents the value of sugar at world market prices. The other 72.4 per cent – or about $350,000,000 a year – is today contributed by the housewives of the country because of the “protection” the government has given its favorites, such as the peon-owning Great Western Sugar Co.
 
The “American Way of Life”
The “American way of life” is rather nice for the beneficiaries of the Havemeyer estate and for the members of the Boettcher family, who own large blocks of the stock of Great Western Sugar Co.
Quite obviously the “American way of life” hasn’t worked out quite so well for the sugar-beet workers – who number a great many more than the stockholders of the Great Western Sugar Co. A final word on the plight of these human beings: On October 20, 1940, the newspaper PM reported an interview with one A. Halleck Brown – presumably an agent of the big boss – on the subject of sugar-beet labor. Mr. Brown stated, without intending to be sarcastic:
“Wages are better than they used to be. Why, a hard-working family now can clean up as much as $240 a season.”
When pressed for information on how the workers live during the off-season, Mr. Brown added – possible as further evidence of the well-being of the sugar-beet workers:
“You’ll see those Mexicans on a winter morning going around with their little second-hand express wagons, getting stale bread from restaurants and people that know ’em and picking up food from garbage cans.”
For the sugar-beet workers in free America, life itself has been on very strict rations indeed – a rationing system ruthlessly imposed by the profit-grubbing big sugar bosses supported by the federal government.
 




In further reprisal for the assassination of the unlamented Reinhard Heydrich, the whole Czech town of Lidice was wiped out by the Nazis in one ruthless stroke of violence.
All the men were shot. All the women were sent to concentration camps or other dreadful fate. All the children were taken to “educational institutions,” Nazi style. The town itself was “levelled to the ground.” The job of extermination was complete: The Berlin radio reported that “the name of the community was extinguished.”
The front pages of the daily press featured this frightful news and people reading shuddered at this additional act of Nazi terror. The horror of annihilating a whole town – its families and its homes – and leaving nothing but emptiness is indeed more shocking even than the cold-blooded execution in larger cities of individuals en masse – which is also a well known Nazi custom.
But such foul acts against humankind, such businesslike extermination of all opposition or suspected opposition, was not instituted by the Nazis nor is it only a Nazi custom.
For instance, the British imperialists are also well acquainted with such inhuman practices. Once upon a time – but not so long ago that the Hindus do not remember – entire villages in India were snuffed out because their inhabitants stood in the path of British imperialism, just as today a Czech town meets the same fate at the hands of the Nazis and for the same reason.
For instance, the “gentle” Belgian imperialists are likewise not strangers to the murderous methods of imperialist conquest. Native villages in Africa were inundated by the blood of the natives who were bold enough to oppose the white invaders of their land. Many an African village went up in smoke as did the Czech town of Lidice and for the same reason.
Instances can be multiplied to show that the imperialist record of the United Nations is also red with the blood of conquered peoples and black with the smoke of burned villages. Definitely imperialist terror is not solely a Nazi custom. It is a universal imperialist custom.
To label the arsenic in one bottle “poison” and the same deadly stuff in another bottle “tonic” is undeniably dangerous to human life. Similarly is it dangerous to the future of humanity to make false distinctions between the imperialist nations.
That is why the class conscious worker – wherever he is and whatever the color of his skin – looks on the Nazi extermination of the Czech town of Lidice as a symbol of international imperialist brutality. The class conscious worker responds by gritting his teeth, clenching his fists and pledging himself to the cause of world socialism.
 




“The deterioration of quality which was predicted as a concomitant of price ceilings has started and by January will have become acute.”
Thus matter-of-factly does W.J. Enright inform readers of the New York Times of this expected development of still another device for raising prices.
The ways in which deterioration will show itself are many. For instance, colors will not be as fast as they used to be. Cut and finish will be inferior. In the cheaper priced lines, pre-shrinking of materials will be discontinued – bringing grief to every housewife.
The percentage of wool in winter clothing will be reduced. Cotton or rayon will be substituted, so that warmth – the essential of winter clothing – will be absent.
Heaven alone knows what will go into women’s shoes. For men’s and boys’ shoes much less leather will be used; and soles will be much thinner. Durability, of course, will be shortened.
With a little imagination you can see that there is practically no limit to the methods by which goods can be given less value by lowering the quality – and you can bet your last dollar that all the methods will be used! THE CRUX OF THE MATTER IS THAT PRICE CEILINGS WILL BE MAINTAINED ON THE INFERIOR GOODS. THE HOUSEWIFE WILL PAY THE SAME – IF NOT MORE – FOR THE JUNK AS SHE DID FOR THE BETTER MERCHANDISE.
The gag about war shortages explains nothing but the desire of the capitalists to make money out of the war. For – given the shortages – the cheaper goods still cost the manufacturer less than the better goods.
Price ceilings have, therefore, become the vehicle whereby the class that thrives on war gets rich by charging high prices for cheap goods!
Why does the worker-consumer, the working class housewife, allow the scandalous robbery to be perpetrated!

Perhaps one reason is that those women of the working class who are in a position – by their organizational experience – to give leadership to the mass of unorganized housewives, are allowing themselves to be led about by the nose? This was unfortunately the case at the conference held last week at West Park, N.Y., by regional delegates from women’s auxiliaries of trade unions.
The conference started off on the wrong foot by giving a vote of confidence to the OPA. What a shame for working class women to back up Leon Henderson – who raises the ceiling on essential foods while firing broadsides at the workers’ demands for higher wages TO MEET THE PRICES HE HIMSELF BOOSTS!
The conference wound up with a program to place women from trade union auxiliaries on war price and rationing boards and also to use them as volunteer wardens. On its face it looks like a good idea to get working women on the “in” of the OPA. Ah, but the heart is false!
Miss Ruth Ayres, a big-wig in the consumer division of the OPA, sang the keynote of the whole OPA outfit in the following words: “CONSUMERS’ CONFLICTS MUST BE SUBORDINATED TO THE WINNING OF THE WAR.”
Where, then, does the interest of the consumer come in? And how are working women going to protect themselves through the OPA, which “subordinates” their grievances?
The participation of trade union women’s auxiliaries in the OPA is like the participation of labor in the labor-management factory committees. The latter is a glorified way of putting the speed-up over on the worker. The former will only help put the grade-down of the dollar over on his wife.
Members of trade union women’s auxiliaries – having had organizational experience – must do a real job for their class at the present time. They must provide the leadership for forming bona fide consumers’ committees to work hand in hand with the unions. THIS IS THE ONLY CHANCE THERE IS OF CONTROLLING PRICES.

The casualties of modern war are on a “total” scale. The more horrible ones are on the battlefields. But those in the civilian lines are just as real. Ask any of the women whom the war has thrown out of their jobs. Women’s hosiery workers numbering 59,000 were “drafted” into the army of unemployed. From the automobile industry 41,000 women workers were also “selected” for the battalions of jobless. About 18,000 women silk workers and 14,000 women workers from jewelry factories were forced into the ranks of pavement pacers. There are tens of thousands more.
A great number of these women have not been able to find other jobs. THOSE WHO ARE OVER THIRTY MAY NEVER FIND OTHER JOBS. They may be strong, capable, experienced, have the “know-how” at their finger tips. But the exploiters of labor don’t want them. For the lower wages that women are still being paid, the bosses make sure to get the cream of the crop.
But not all women are thrown on the ash heap at the age of thirty. IT DEPENDS UPON WHAT CLASS THEY BELONG TO. For instance, Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt will never lack a lucrative job. Neither will Mrs. Anna Rosenberg, who now holds down remunerative jobs, both government and private.
Women of the upper classes can either wallow in luxury and idleness, if they are built that way; or they can have the pick of classy jobs, if they choose to be career women. There is no 30-year age limit.

And what do you say about the hypocrisy of the advertised campaign “to get women into industry.”
There are all these thousands of seasoned women workers walking the streets – but they are not wanted.
There are also thousands of Negro women knocking at the doors of industry – but there is no answer. In spite of the official ballyhoo, industry as a whole still refuses to employ Negroes – men and women alike. State employment agencies “put on file” applications of Negro women for jobs, and of Negro girls for admission to trade schools. Some openly state that industry doesn’t employ Negro women.
Here’s a gem of hypocrisy in high places. Women are wanted in industry all right, but – not all women. The bosses are choosy. The women must be young, inexperienced and unorganized – thus more likely to save the boss “labor trouble.” And the color of their skin must not be too dark.
These injustices against women workers and against Negroes are LABOR’S PROBLEMS. A resolution on these problems passed at a convention and allowed to slide into oblivion may salve the conscience of union leaders too busy planning the war to attend to labor’s needs. But rank and file action is what is needed to bring results. These problems concern all workers. They must be handled by the unions with determination, militancy and the will to end these crying wrongs!
 




Just who is supposed to be fooled by the “price control” goings-on in the Office of Price Administration?
The latest step to take more money out of the consumer’s purse for the same goods is the official increase of 15 per cent on canned and dried fruits for the 1942 crop. Not that the prices now are UNDER the official ceiling – there is no shortage of violations. But this new 15 per cent slap-on is OFFICIAL
This increase is not on luxuries, mind you, but on essential vitamin foods. One department of the government is “educating” housewives on the better nutrition of their families – while another department makes it impossible to buy such nutritious foods as canned peaches, pears, apricots, apple sauce, fruit juices, raisins and all the dried fruits.
Mr. Henderson was, of course, careful to explain the reason for this latest increase which will add 2, 3 and 4 cents to the prices of these canned foods. He said that “growers’ prices for fruit have risen sharply under the parity formula, and because of the standards set in the price control act cannot be prevented from climbing to levels at least 110 per cent of parity.”
So growers’ prices have risen sharply! And who are the fruit growers who have boosted prices? The reactionary, powerful fruit-growing and canning corporations of California and elsewhere. Their brutal methods against labor are very well known throughout the country. These are the bloated monopolists who will get the millions of two, three and four cent increases that the housewives will be coughing up.
 
Henderson’s Remedy
Mr. Henderson’s remedy for this situation is indeed unique – though very popular with capitalists and their politicians. IT IS TO KEEP WAGES DOWN. What else would; you expect? The Senate sub-committee considering the appropriation for the OPA got a very strong impression from Mr. Henderson’s testimony that he is preparing “to go to bat” at once with the War Labor Board on the question of wage increases. Mr. Henderson’s intended crusade against the workers will probably get for his OPA the $161,000,000 he wants instead of the $75,000,000 the House committee was willing to give.
In the meantime other leeches are waiting around expectantly to fasten themselves also onto the consumer to suck blood-money. For instance, the vegetable packers are impatient for the final arrangements regarding the 15 per cent increase on canned fruits, to press their own demand for price increases.
To add insult to injury, OPA, stages a show in Nyack, N.Y., publicized in the papers and on the screen. Helen Hayes and other notables went around to the retail stores, smiled at the storekeepers and told them to be good boys and post their ceiling prices properly. Now, ain’t that something!
This naturally did not prevent the price of certain meats from keeping on the steady upgrade. So that loin lamb chop in the A&P stores went up 4 cents a pound in the past two weeks – from 49 to 53 cents – a rise of almost 67 per cent since March. While the “cheap” shoulder lamp chops have been promoted to the outrageous level of 49 cents a pound.
To round out the giddy picture, read the following from the Kiplinger Letter to its business clients, of date June 27:
“Price tags will lie about the same for another month or two, but later the same goods will not be available for the same money price. There will be quality cuts, elimination of low-price lines, added taxes.”
But Mr. Henderson is going to bat at once against wage increases. How does he expect the working class to live – or doesn’t he! The workers are going to have to do some batting on their own behalf – or they will lose all the bases.
 




Last month the press gave page after page of its space to long articles on the wonders of war production. The newspaper correspondents on a “Production for Victory” tour arranged toy the National Association of Manufacturers piled up superlatives to their hearts’ content.
When the National Association of Manufacturers “arranges” something, you can bet its motive is not altruistic. This war has exposed the mammoth industrialists of the country for the profit-grubbing bunch they are.
First they wouldn’t even take war contracts until they were assured of ample profits. Then the dollar-a-year men in Washington were revealed as go-getters for their corporations.
Next it was shown that many of the industrial magnates are closely linked with German industry and raking in fancy war profits from both the Nazi and “democratic” sides of the war. Finally it is now an open secret that many new inventions – such as the production of necessary light metals and certain more potent fuels – have been held up by mutual agreement between the capitalists of Nazi Germany and such pillars of American “democracy” as the Aluminum Company and Standard Oil.
Definitely, the ruling class has been caught with its pants down. So this tour sponsored by the National Association of Manufacturers for the purpose of publicizing the marvelous technological advances made in war industries is a frantic effort at pulling its pants up. That was also the reason for the full-page ads recently run in all the papers by the bigwig corporations, in which they self-praised their “unselfish” efforts to win the war – at the same time no doubt charging the cost of advertising to war contract prices paid by the government!
 
Motives of Capitalist Production
However, while the motives of the manufacturers are as small as their self-interest, the grandeur of war production pictured by the newspaper correspondents is real and should be so understood by every worker.
But it is also a fact – to be engraved on the mind of every worker – that American capitalist production was stimulated to further technological progress only by the call of war – which means the lure of war profits plus the prospect of preserving and acquiring more foreign fields for exploitation. The same call of war also activated German production and save birth to the remarkable industrial achievements of the Nazis.
PEACETIME NEEDS OF HUMAN BEINGS HAVE NO SUCH MAGIC EFFECT ON CAPITALIST PRODUCTION.
The heads of the American steel trust boast that their industry is now operating at full capacity, turning put this year 87,000,000 tons of all the different weights and styles of steel needed for tanks, bombers, fighter planes, warships. But in peacetime the crying needs of one-third of the nation for housing did not constitute reason for producing steel to the limit. In peacetime steel mills were on only 50 per cent – and even less – of capacity, while that third of the nation continued to live in holes unfit for animals.
 
Ships and Houses
Ships for war cargoes are now being turned out on assembly lines – an adaptation of the auto industry mass production principles. But no such easy and natural development was employed, for instance, to produce in mass modern bungalows to take the place of the ramshackle, disease-infected shacks inhabited by the millions of black and white agricultural workers of the South, the West and the Middle West
At Ford’s Willow Run plant – described by Sidney M. Shallett in the New York Times as “vast enough to swallow up an entire city, awesome enough to reduce man, her creator, to a lost speck in a jungle of giant machines” – stupendous dies and presses will stamp out big bombers almost as easily as the Model T’s were formerly produced. But no such measures were taken to make, for instance, apartment houses to replace the old tenement houses where dwell the poor in American cities – without heat and hot water, without proper toilets and baths, without minimum ventilation, without fire protection.
Now a new Chrysler plant is being erected which will be “big enough to put the Ford Willow Run plant inside and have room for twenty baseball diamonds around the edges.” These are the all-out methods for producing bombers in record time. But at the rate tenement house clearance was taking place in New York City, for instance – before it came to its untimely end in favor of producing bombers – it would have taken 133 years to have provided modern apartments for the 2,500,000 old-law tenement dwellers in the queen of American cities.
 
Guns and Kentucky Kids
The Buffalo Arms Corp., a United States government arsenal, is rolling out machine guns “like bread-sticks,” as one newspaper correspondent put it, But, as reported in last week’s column, Of Special Interest to Women, 90 per cent of Kentucky mountain children haven’t the clothes to wear to get to school, and the 10 per cent who have are too hungry to learn anything when they get there. But the wheels of industry and agriculture have never been geared to relieve this and similar inhuman situations.
The General Electric Co. now employs 1,750 scientists in its sixteen laboratories, all busy turning: scientific knowledge to the uses of war. In fact, all science is today used for the same destructive end. But there are normally 50,000,000 Americans in families with an income of $1,000 a year or less who cannot afford to pay for adequate doctors’ services, to say nothing of hospital care. There has never been an all-out effort of science to solve this human problem of making X-ray diagnoses, electrocardiograms and other essential tests available to the masses. Sickness still remains a luxury that only the rich can afford, but which conditions nevertheless inflict on the poor.
 
Post-War Promises
The heads of government – both of the United Nations and of the Nazi Axis – today promise their peoples that after the war the productive machinery geared to its new high, will be used for peacetime needs. But working people must remember that World War I also stepped up industry to a then new high. And what happened? After the war the marvelous new machinery of production stood idle. The whole world was plunged into the depths of a postwar depression out of which it could not crawl. Only World War II brought relief – of the same kind that a guy suffering from toothache gets when hit over the head with a blackjack.
Modern production – which has been built up through the ages from the labor and ingenuity of all mankind – can be released for the peaceful uses of people only by freeing it from the stranglehold of the political and industrial rulers of the world. This is true for America and for the whole universe.
Socialism will accomplish this next step in human progress. NOT the “national socialism” of the cruel, exploiting Nazis. NOT the “socialism” of the totalitarian Stalinist bureaucrats. NOT the “socialism” of the New Deal protectors of private profits.
The socialism for which Lenin and Trotsky fought will free industry for the people. For it will be a society of workers’ rule in government and in industry.
 




The latest developments in the price fixing fiasco are fully covered on page one of this issue of Labor Action. If you haven’t read the item, by all means turn back and do so. The following is merely a report of an incident that has undoubtedly been repeated thousands of times all over the country.
In a large self-service grocery store – one of several operated by the same owners in the City of New York – a woman stood arguing with a clerk over the price of some canned fruit. She claimed that the highest price in March was two cans for 25 cents, whereas the price now is two for 29 cents. Soon other women crowded around, some murmuring that the woman was right but others too timid even to murmur. The clerk, entirely flabbergasted, finally called over the manager.
Exuding “the-customer-is-always-right” make-believe through all his pores, the manager smilingly assured the complaining woman that she was mistaken because “that was a very special price we had on in March and the ceiling is for regular prices, not special ones.”
The woman was not prepared for that line – though obviously dishonest – and was silenced. She went away looking like a whipped dog when it hasn’t earned a beating. The other women around looked puzzled but skeptical. But the manager had definitely put one over for his boss.
There is only one reason why women are being fooled this way – only one reason why they are timid, don’t know their rights and can’t stand up for them. They are not organized. THEY NEED NEIGHBORHOOD WORKING CLASS HOUSEWIVES’ GROUPS.

For once at least Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt’s usual pollyanna optimism stands her in no good stead. In her column in the New York World-Telegram of July 2 she quoted the following postcard she received:
“Could you enlighten the people, by radio or some magazine article, how can a baby be supported on $12 a month – which amounts to about 40 cents a day – including his meals, clothing, medicine, etc.? The second child receives $10 per month, 331/3 cents a day, when he must drink two quarts of milk a day. How can you buy medicine, clothing for the other three cents per day?
“Also I would like to know how baby food which must be mixed with milk can be bought every five or six days at 79 cents. Also I would like to know if there is a nursery in New York States where you could board a child at such a ridiculous amount per month. I am inducted in the army.”
The First Lady is stuck.
Fishing around for a possible answer, she says “perhaps” it is in the new $50 a month soldier pay. This, however, is exceedingly funny for the simple reason that a soldier with dependent automatically contributes $22 a month, leaving, for himself $28 for the entire month – or less than $1.00 a day.
Mrs. Roosevelt also suggests as an answer that the mother of a small baby go to work, put her infant in a WPA nursery and her other child in a WPA nursery school – if these still function. Well, we all know what has happened to WPA appropriations in Congress, so that settles the WPA nurseries and nursery schools.
The First Lady has no answer to this problem – which she admits must be troubling a good many people – because of her profound respect for the social status quo. Labor Action, however, has no such respect – and therefore has an answer.
There is plenty of money in this country to give adequate support to every soldier’s family. IT SIMPLY HAS TO BE TAKEN AWAY FROM THE RICH. All war profits and all fixed fortunes must be confiscated by the government. Let the rich pay for the war – a very legitimate expense of which is to support the soldier’s family like human beings.

From a Washington source comes a rather concrete idea of what is to be expected by way of shortages in civilian goods. The gloomy prospect is that the things you and your family need “will slide down-down-down in the next six months to the FAMINE LEVEL. This famine level will run through something like three to five months, to a low point in the late spring of 1943.”
At the same time comes the report by William J. Enright, writer for the financial pages of the New York Times, of charges that “the military services are overbuying and that as a result the civilian economy is being penalized unnecessarily.”
Will big-wig bungling never cease? Will little people have to do without food, clothing, medicines and other necessities because of overbuying for the war program – most likely because of too enthusiastic contract procurement for their companies by the dollar-a-year men in Washington!
Why not! Sugar was unnecessarily put on low rations because of an under-estimation of the sugar supply by those who ought to have known better.
Sugar rationing is not too serious. But an all-out famine of consumer goods is. The lack of adequate food, clothing, medicines and other essentials translates itself into sickness, death and more waste of human life.
These are such vital matters that the masses must have something to say about them. Industry must be put under workers’ control. Every woman interested in the welfare of her family must also be interested in this issue of workers’ control of industry. It is our only salvation.

A very pathetic example of an ineffectual approach to a major social problem was given not long ago in the reports of the activities of Anne Brown in behalf of her race. Anne Brown, as you may remember, has very successfully repeatedly starred in the role of Bess in George Gershwin’s ever-popular Porgy and Bess.
On the basis of her own popularity, Miss Brown was making appeals to the heads of industry to end job discrimination against Negroes. She was reported to be very happy because she was getting such favorable responses. One company president wrote her: “If Negroes are good enough to fight for us they are good enough to work for us.”
Miss Brown’s jubilation, if true, is as pathetic as self-deception always is. Did she expect company presidents to be anything else but affable to her – whatever their private opinions on race discrimination may be? Were their white words worth the paper they were written on? How many of these agreeable gentlemen did more than give black men a few token jobs – if even that?
A social system that executes the Odell Wallers will not be changed by turning on the personal charm. That change can be effected only by the solid organization of the black and white masses of the country.
 




The latest attack on the workers’ wages via the road of boosting prices has come from the landlords. In the war against the standard of living of the workers, there is no lack of fronts.
Just as the Office of Price Administration has “cooperated” with the food monopolists in raising the ceiling on canned goods, so it works agreeably, with the landlords in raising rents on workers’ dwellings.
Half a million workers in the Detroit area are faced with the now familiar picture of the OPA itself inflating the cost of living this time by yielding to the pressure of the landlords for higher rent.
Every hovel in the Detroit area is rented and nets the owner plenty, but that isn’t enough for those who own the roofs over the workers’ heads. They want to reap a war harvest equal to the demand for housing – according to their own profit-seeking light. So they have put in a demand for a 10 to 15 per cent increase.
The OPA has indicated its willingness to go along to the extent of 5 per cent. But the 100,000 members of the United Automobile Workers are not going to pay a penny more for rent than they paid on April 1, 1941. In this, at least, they have the backing of their leaders.
Victor G. Reuther, in charge of “consumer problems” of the union, stated to reporters that the unrest among the Detroit workers is growing daily. In the last year there has been a 14 per cent increase in living costs. Prices continue to rise. The government blesses the bosses and landlords seeking to boost the prices of their commodities. At the same time it mutters curses under its breath and shouts its opposition to the workers’ demands for a higher price for their commodity.
Detroit workers know a thing or two about rent strikes. During the depression – when jobs were not as plentiful in Detroit as they are for war work – UAW members organized militant squads to see to it that the need of people for, a place to live in took precedence over the workings of capitalist justice. When a family was evicted, these squads appeared and in short order moved the victims back where they belonged. Many times they materialized on the spot to prevent evictions and save themselves the trouble of moving their fellow workers back to their homes.
In recent weeks members of the UAW living in trailer camps in Detroit engaged in a rent strike. They stopped paying rent to force the OPA to extend the Rent Control Act to cover them. There was plenty of rent profiteering in these trailer camps. The workers won the fight, compelling the OPA to extend the ceiling. This is merely a pocket edition of what a rent strike of 200,000 UAW in Detroit will look like.
The landlord front against labor extends pretty nearly over the entire length and breadth of the country. Not only in Detroit are the property owners getting out their big tanks for action. In New Haven, Conn., there have been attempts at wholesale evictions of tenants refusing to pay more than ceiling rentals – this in spite of the fact that the law presumably forbids evictions on this ground.
In Newark, N.J., landlords are trying to maneuver around the penalties for evicting tenants who refuse to be gouged for housing. In Mobile, Ala., property owners have petitioned the federal court to block enforcement of the rent freeze in that district. In South Bend, Ind,, the “constitutionality” of the rent freeze is also being questioned in court by the landlords.
Finally, from Seattle, Wash., comes the announcement of a nation-wide gathering of property owners to force rent ceilings upwards. One Floyd Oles, the head of this newly organized landlords’ organization, states that it has representatives from 24 cities.
THE EXAMPLE OF RESISTANCE SET BY THE 200,000 UNITED AUTOMOBILE WORKERS IN DETROIT WILL HAVE TO BE FOLLOWED BY ORGANIZED LABOR THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY. THE OPA HAS A LARGE AND SOFT SPOT IN ITS HEART FOR THE OWNERS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY. THE WORKERS CANNOT TRUST THE OPA. THEY MUST DRAW ON THEIR OWN ORGANIZED STRENGTH TO DEFEAT THE ENCROACHMENTS OF THE WAR PROFITEERS ON THE WORKERS’ STANDARD OF LIVING.
A complete understanding of the Detroit situation cannot be had without relating the part Henry Ford has played in support of the real estate men of that district. This “benefactor of labor” is fighting tooth and nail the government housing project designed for 60,000 workers’ families near the Willow Run bomber plant.
Ford’s representatives are in Washington using money and legal phenagling to stop the housing project. The landlords of Detroit – needless to say – are backing Ford to a man. He has strengthened their hand in demanding higher rents – which Ford workers and others are NOT going to pay.
 




Hard times for us means good times for the rich owners of the stores where we pay such outlandish prices.
For instance, Federated Department Stores, Inc., has made almost double the clear profit this year as in the corresponding period last year – of course, after deducting taxes.
First paying dividends on its preferred stock, the company still has enough left to pay SIXTY-EIGHT CENTS a share on its common stock – as against ONLY THIRTY-ONE CENTS for the same period last year.
Another instance of bigger and better profits as the war goes on!

Among the broader hints to housewives is the one to eat chicken when meat is scarce. That is like the tip that Marie Antoinette gave the poor of her day to eat cake when they didn’t have bread. Because, as every housewife knows, chicken costs around forty cents a pound.

The Borden company is never getting enough money for its dairy products. It is constantly before this or that government agency, pressing for higher prices – which we pay.
To complete the picture it is necessary to know that this poor, forlorn, underpaid corporation has netted profits amounting to $1.90 a share for the year 1942 – after making every kind of deduction for taxes, for a substantial “contingency reserve,” etc. Its shares of stock are selling at about $22 on the New York Stock Exchange. So that a profit of $1.90 a share would make the rate of gain around ELEVEN AND A HALF PER CENT! This will help you understand why we pay so much for milk, cream, cheese and other dairy products.

In a very old Broadway hit, Camel Through the Needle’s Eye, there is a scene in which a poor woman, about to receive a visit from the charity people, boils cabbage and lets the smell of it permeate the house. In those days about the only green vegetable the poor could afford was the humble cabbage. When a house smelled of cabbage, the inhabitants’ poverty was unquestionable.
But those were the happy days!
In the last couple of weeks the A&P has boosted the price of the humble green from two cents to five cents a pound – a 150 per cent mark-np! A three-pound head formerly at the purchasable price of six cents puts on the Ritz and sells for fifteen cents.
Price profiteering has thrown the humble cabbage up the stairs and under a top hat!
The A&P – the largest chain grocery in the country, doing an annual business of $1,378,660,000 and making plenty of profit – is under indictment for violation of the anti-trust laws.
The housewife will be interested to know that among the charges against this colossus of the grocery business is that it follows that “systematic practice of secretly enhancing their actual prices above their advertised prices through short-changing, short-weighing and marking up prices on store tags and purchases.”
In other words, this powerful, rich super-trust takes food out of the mouths of consumers to put more profits into its own pockets!

Colgate-Palmolive-Peet Co., Procter & Gamble Co. and Lever Crothers Co. do more than 80 per cent of the business in soap and soap products in this country. So they got together to take full advantage of their monopolistic position. They have entered into a conspiracy “to fix, maintain and stabilize prices” at exceeding profitable figures.
Why not? That’s part of the profit system which FDR has pledged himself to maintain, isn’t it?
 




When the, housewife buys her butter, eggs, meat, vegetables and groceries – that is, when she can get them – she has first-hand, uncontradictable evidence that the OPA has hardly done a thing about keeping prices down FOR HER.
When she buys underwear, stockings, a dress, a coat, a boy’s suit, a man’s overcoat – or a kitchen towel – she gets more of the same evidence about the OPA.
There isn’t a thing you and I buy that has not gone up from 10 to 100 per cent.
So you will be a very surprised person to learn that the OPA is actually keeping prices down. Believe it or not, the OPA is controlling and preventing the rise of CERTAIN prices. It even submits figures.
The question, however, is: WHAT PRICES?
Not food prices! Not clothing prices! But INDUSTRIAL prices!
And what are industrial prices these days? The costs of things that go into the making of war materiel. The OPA apparently is a howling success – though not insofar as the housewife is concerned. It has really kept the prices of war goods under such strict control that they have gone up a mere 3 per cent – or next to nothing – in the year since Pearl Harbor.
Price Administrator Henderson boasted before the 4,000 members of the National Association of Manufacturers gathered in New York last week that “There is nothing like it in the history of production.”
There is only one thing wrong here. The working class family unfortunately cannot eat stewed ballets and guns, minced tanks and planes, sliced bombers and battleships! As for controls on food and clothing prices and other prices, which concern working people, there has been nothing like it in the history of humbug and hocus-pocus.
The OPA puts price ceilings on things – only to raise them officially.
The ceilings have just been lifted on two such staples as potatoes and onions. The OPA announced further that before Christmas an additional number of everyday commodities will be removed from ceiling control.
But, of course, all this prattle about ceilings is a sorry joke. There is no serious control even of the things officially under ceilings.
The OPA itself reports that 400,000 retail stores are cheating. Daily the number swells. There are hundreds of ways of violating price ceilings.
But what the retail stores – both chain and independent – are doing to boost prices is a mere trifle compared to what big business is accomplishing WITH THE BLESSING OF THE OPA ITSELF.
In a recent issue of Labor Action this writer reported from a private source that the OPA permits the same goods with a new label to be marked up at a new price. Now it is everybody’s secret that the OPA has officially ruled that THE SAME GOODS WITH DIFFERENT BRAND NAMES ARE DIFFERENT COMMODITIES! How’s that for hocus-pocus?
So the manufacturers are exceedingly busy with their paste pots. New labels are being stuck over old ones. There is an epidemic of “newness” and “improvement” on grocery shelves. As reported in Labor Action previously, the “new and improved recipes” are strictly limited to the label on the outside of the can. What’s inside is the same as always – but the price is new and fancier.
The Consumers Union has now scientifically tested some of these fake “new and improved recipes” and reports that any noticeable difference would amount to about a fourth of a cent in cost. This hardly justifies an increase of 25 per cent in price.
If the OPA had been created deliberately to cut down the purchasing power of the workers’ wages, it could not have done a better job.
From Mr. Henderson’s own mouth we are informed that the OPA has been keeping down the prices of war materiel. Therefore, we must conclude that, like everything else in civilian life, prices on civilian goods are not important enough to bother with officially – except to aid and abet the private profiteers, big and little, to whose tender mercies the housewife has been entrusted.
If before now there was any doubt about the absolute necessity for the working class to create its own price controls, Mr. Henderson has removed every shred ot doubt. Those 400,000 cheating store owners could easily be handled by committees of organized housewives. Those big business pasting artists could be corrected by the organized workers in the very concerns that do the pasting.
United Nations spokesmen are warning us to expect a long war. Look where prices are already. Where will they be as the war progresses?
The working class will be robbed right and left. This can be prevented. Organize Committees of housewives, workers and working farmers to control consumer prices!
 




Leon Henderson’s “resignation” as head of the OPA means that prices are going higher – AND WILL GET THERE FASTER.
For Henderson’s resignation signifies that he has been beheaded by the “farm bloc” as part of a deal made by FDR with that bunch of farm bosses.
Newpaper men report from Washington that among the terms of the deal is one permitting “MODERATE INCREASES IN CEILING PRICES ON FARM PRODUCTS.” That indicates which way the wind is blowing. Moderation is a word not very popular with profit-grabbers.
Under Henderson’s OPA, farm prices have been allowed to go up – without a special deal, but with disastrous results to the consumer. It is no joke when spinach sells for 15 to 19 cents a pound – carrots for 12 to 15 cents a bunch – lettuce for 17 to 19 cents a head.
The wholesale prices of wheat and rye are climbing. Any day the prices we pay for bread will reflect this jump. Eggs and butter are priced way beyond the reach of many a working class family.
One of Henderson’s latest accomplishments was to allow an increase in the wholesale prices of meats, as if present prices are not bad enough. The new prices will soon be passed on to the consumers of meat – whose number among the working class is daily diminishing.
Every time we open a newspaper, another ceiling-lifting operation stares us in the face. When we go to the store, what we read in the newspaper HAS AGAIN DECREASED THE PURCHASING POWER OF OUR DOLLAR. On December 14 the OPA announced that it allowed increases in the prices of seventeen items of food, including canned apples, apple sauce, maple sugar and syrup, egg noodles, crackers, and honey.
All these holes in ceilings have been officially made by Mr. Henderson – without any, special deal with the farm bloc. CAN YOU IMAGINE WHAT WILL HAPPEN AS A RESULT OF FDR’S DEAL!
With the farm bloc exerting its influence on Congress and with ex-Senator Prentiss M. Brown as new head of OPA, prices will sprout bigger and better wings.
It can also be expected that this government shift toward loosening up further the already loose enough price controls of the OPA will encourage the chiselers of every stripe. The pasters of phony labels on the same merchandise, the fakers passing off shoddy goods at the ceiling prices of better goods, all of them will consider that the government is giving them a field day.
Too long have the profiteers and politicians been allowed to play around with the wherewithal of life. Price control is a matter of life – yes, and of death – to the masses.
Committees of workers at the points of production of civilian goods, committees of working farmers whose toil brings forth the fruit of the earth, and committees of housewives at the points of consumption must take over the problem of price control and create the machinery for such control.
Otherwise the politicians will continue to make their concessions and deals with the profiteers – while men, women and children are deprived of food and clothing by run-away prices.
 




Winter is upon us amidst conditions which threaten a national disaster. Aside from the fuel rationing and aside from the high cost of living, which makes proper food and clothing almost a luxury for many, there are other factors constituting a decided peril to the health and life of the civilian population.
The New York Physicians Forum, composed of 150 New York physicians, has issued the alarm. It states that in 300 key industrial areas in the country the shortage of doctors is so critical that “THE ORDINARY DAY-BY-DAY HAZARDS OF SICKNESS AND ACCIDENT CANNOT BE DEALT WITH.”
They add that the possibilities of this situation become frightening in view of “the appalling living conditions” in these areas, WITH MEN SLEEPING IN SHIFTS IN THE SAME BEDS, OR LIVING IN BOXCARS OR TRAILERS.
These physicians warn that such conditions “ARE THE NATURAL BREEDING GROUND OF EPIDEMICS.” They declare: “Let an epidemic start in one of these densely populated areas and there is no knowing where it will spread or when it may stop.” This is the ghastly prospect confronting us this winter. It should be the concern of organized labor and of all working class housewives. From these sources must come the persistent and militant demand to the government for adequate housing, for doctors, clinics and hospitals.
The last war showed us what havoc a war epidemic brings to the population. The workers and their families suffered most. Again men, women and children of the working class are in imminent danger from wartime epidemics.

Retail stores, numbering 400,000 throughout the country, are making their own price “regulations” on the simple arithmetical principle that higher prices will bring more profits.
The housewife is being cheated not only in the buying of food. For instance, the price of rayon hose is more than 331/3 per cent above the ceiling price – which ceiling price itself is too high for rayon. In fact, all clothing lends itself to plenty of gypping. Suits made of materials containing very little wool – and that re-used wool – are selling at the ceiling prices of the former all-wool suits. Another device is to mark two-piece suits at the prices charged for three-piece suits. Furniture also affords an excellent field for profiteering. Sofas, chairs, dressers, desks are sold way above the March ceilings, even though they are exactly the same merchandise.
A great to-do has been made in the newspapers about the OPA investigation of the Hecht Co. department store in Washington, D.C. – after which it slapped the Hecht Co. on the wrist with an injunction, saying, in effect: “No! Bad boy mustn’t violate price ceilings or daddy will slap.”
Isn’t that something? Even if the Hecht Co. obeys the injunction and stops violating price ceilings – for a while! – so what? There are 400,000 retail stores guilty of such violations! Will they be scared into being good boys by this action of the OPA in Washington? Maybe a few will pull in their horns for a while – but only a few and not for long, you may be sure.
Thus, as time goes on, it becomes ever clearer that the job of price control has been thrown into the laps of the housewives of the country. If they organize in their neighborhoods, they can talk turkey with the owners of the 400,000 stores taking advantage of them.
They can present their complaints as an organized, force both to these stores and to local OPA officials. They can boycott and picket until their complaints are met.
Working class women: Organize for your own self-protection!

In the East Paterson plant of the Wright Aeronautical Corp., 165 men and women went out on strike to put an end to a little trick the company was playing on them – a company lousy with war orders and war profits.
Taking advantage of the lack of experience of their women workers, the company put them on a six-day-week schedule in such a way that they had to work on
Sundays at time and a half pay – IN PLACE OF MEN WHO WOULD BE GETTING DOUBLE TIME FOR SUNDAY WORK. Rather a neat conniving scheme. But the workers saw through it and struck. The case is now in conference between labor, management and government.
The workers ought to know something about the profits of their scheming bosses. Especially should the women workers, being cheated by the company, know something about the profits the workers of Wight Aeronautical Corp. are making for it.
The company has 600,000 shares of stock. For the year 1938 – after allowing for taxes and every other conceivable deduction – the net profit was $5.00 for each and every one of the 600,000 shares. In 1939 the profit per share rose to $6.00 – an increase of 20 per cent. In 1940 the profit per share swelled to $11 – a gain of 120 per cent over 1938. And in 1941 the clear profit mounted to $1? per share – a climb of 240 per cent above the 1938 figure!
These are the escalating war profits of the Wright Aeronautical Corp. which robs its women workers of legitimate double pay for Sunday work. War is an ill wind, but it certainly blows plenty of good to the capitalist exploiters of labor.

You know that mink coat you bought at a bargain for $1,500 – out of your husband’s superfluous wages. Well, hold everything and take it on the chin. That beautiful mink coat that every working woman possesses may be outdated in short order. Isn’t that a major tragedy!
Ordinary brown mink, I’d like you to know, will no longer be the rage; The up-and-coming female of the species – not of the species mink – will be getting herself a “silverblu platinum” mink coat.
These little animals, the outcome of careful breeding, are a soft gray, a bit on the beige side. We are assured that the color will be very flattering to hair and skin and that it will blend beautifully with other colors. Hear! Hear!
Of course, “silverblu platinum” minks are still very rare – in fact, rarer than sables. Their value is very, very high. So start saving your pennies now, sister, or you’ll have to wear your old brown mink – while all the “silverblu platinum” minks go to the platinum blond minxes – with the compliments of the war profiteers.
 




A brilliant example of the utter uselessness of all capitalist plans for the post-war period is contained in the widely heralded publication, After the War – Full Employment, issued by the National Resources Planning Board.
Working people who are dividing their worried thoughts between their present troubles and those to come will find little to console them here. The publication was prepared and written by Dr. Alvin H. Hansen, professor of economics at Harvard and special economic adviser to the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System. You can hardly expect a capitalist economist, even of such note, to make sense. Dr. Hansen doesn’t.
In the first place Dr. Hansen bases his plan on the proposition that:
“No country need be impoverished if its productive resources (both capital and human) are intact. The productive resources of this country will be on a considerably higher plane when this war is over than ever before.”
Every person with only normal reasoning ability will be unable to accept Dr. Hansen’s basic proposition. The idea that total war can be waged in this day and age and leave the productive resources not only intact but on a “considerably higher plane,” is too ludicrous to need argument. Already upward of 150 billion dollars have been appropriated for the business of pure and simple destruction. Already several millions of the best in manpower have been drafted, also for the same purely destructive business. Already the labor power of the workers in the factories is being used to exhaustion.
 
Drain on Resources
This is only preliminary. Senator Taft expects the war to last at least five years. Senator Pepper thinks it may be ten years. Before the war is over, the drain on the productive resources of the country will be multiplied many times. Any plan that does not start with the proposition that the war will leave the economy of the country drained, twisted and disorganized for peacetime production deserves to be thrown out of court.
But let us suppose the fantastic: that the resources of the country will be left intact by the war. SO WHAT? Does capitalism go into tailspins because of lack of productive resources? Quite the contrary is the case!
Industrial crises have been marked by great abundance of productive resources, both capital and human – BUT UNUSED RESOURCES. That is the socialist indictment against capitalist anarchy. People starve in the midst of plenty because capitalism is geared to production for private profit.
Apparently Dr. Hansen is worried about the anarchy of capitalist production and even hopes to stop it because, according to Dr. Hansen’s plan, the government will retain “its far-flung controls over all groups and economic segments.” But at the same time Dr. Hansen says:
“We do not want the government to run the whole show. We do not want a totalitarian state. We want freedom of enterprise.”
Here, in a nutshell, is the contradiction all capitalist economists find themselves in. They make plans .for totalitarian control – which is the only way post-war capitalism can try to pull itself together. Then, they become panic stricken. “Good heavens,” they proclaim, beating their chests, “we must have freedom of enterprise too.”
 
“Positiveness and Vigor”
This is the “positiveness and vigor” with which capitalist economists like Dr. Hansen are planning. Not that the workers want totalitarian “positiveness and vigor.” That spells slavery. Neither do the workers want “private enterprise.” That spells unemployment, misery, anarchy – as in the past. THE ONLY WAY OUT FOR THE WORKERS IS THROUGH SOCIALISM.
But the capitalist professors burst a blood vessel at the mere thought of socialism. So they swing like a pendulum between a future totalitarianism and the played-out system of the past. This is supposed to be post-war planning.
If Dr. Hansen’s plan is scrutinized for the practical measures it proposes, it is found, according to the press accounts, that they are the good old-fashioned ones known as “priming the pump” or government spending. There is to be a huge program of public works, for highway construction, reforestation and flood control. Dr. Hansen also plans a social program for public health, cultural and recreational facilities, old age pensions, and so on – in fact a veritable paradise of good things.
If a socialist society were to plan for public expenditures, that would be the normal way, because all resources would be owned in common. But when a capitalist government proposes to go on a spending binge, the question always is: “Where will the money come from?”
 
Capitalists and Taxes
Dr. Hansen very well understands the capitalists’ aversion to paying high taxes and he very much respects their sacred right to undiminished profits. He says:
“It must be recognized that there are certain limits on how far profits can be encroached upon ...”
So he proposes that there be a relaxation of corporate taxes. And how, then, is the government to get money? Simple, my dear Watson. The high rate of taxes on individual incomes would be retained. The broad base of taxation would also be retained. Which means that Dr. Hansen proposes to tax every working stiff until his eyes pop out of his head.
This again shows how capitalist economists are caught in a vicious circle.
According to Dr. Hansen’s own figures, there will be 57,000,000 to 59,000,000 employable people in the post-war period. So many of them will be jobless that it will be necessary to institute this extensive “pump priming” program to keep them from starving. Yet, according to Dr. Hansen’s plans, these people, themselves needing help, will the the ones taxed to pay for his “humanitarian plan.”
These capitalist economists – with their grandiose but futile plans – dare not face the fact that all future progress lies on the road to socialism. When all they can produce is a plan for a public debt mounting into the stratosphere, to be lessened by taxes on the impoverished people, it means that their system of private enterprise has definitely failed.
 




NEW YORK CITY, Feb. 17 – Not only do corporations with government contracts practice rank and rotten race discrimination in hiring workers, but. they are fully supported by government agencies such as employment bureaus and public training schools.
This smelly situation was officially aired before the Committee on Fair Employment Practices holding hearings in this city, February 16 and 17, on complaints in the metropolitan district. This committee was created by the President, who is Commander-in-Chief of an Army, Navy and Air Corps guilty of the grossest anti-Negro bias.
Every government war contract has a clause supposedly binding the corporation not to discriminate against workers because of race, color, religion or country of origin. This empty gesture was made by President Roosevelt in an attempt to placate the aroused Negro population after the threatened march on Washington last July – which was abandoned by its weak-kneed leaders. But, as was to be expected, the bosses do not: regard this clause of their contracts with the same seriousness as, for instance, those clauses which pertain to their rate of profit
The Wright Aeronautic Corp. of Paterson, one of the two largest builders of airplane motors, a subsidiary of Curtiss-Wright, was put on the carpet. Of the 18,000 workers it employs, a mere 121 are Negroes, and they are permitted to do only heavy or menial labor.
The Wright anti-Negro labor policy is also the policy of the Paterson Vocational Training School. Of 4,000 students not one is a Negro. The Wright Corp. controls the advisory board of the school and also its faculty. The New Jersey State Department of Education condones this domination of a state institution by a private corporation. The New Jersey State Employment Bureau cooperates by not sending Wright any Negro applicants.
 
A Typical Case
Robert Smith, Negro, a university graduate and expert electrician, testified against the Wright company. His story is typical of the “freedom” of employment enjoyed by the Negro worker. Mr. Smith answered an ad for an electrician, and his qualifications were so excellent that he received a special delivery letter to call at the Wright plant in Paterson. That was before the company knew the color of his skin. When he called he was told the company does not employ Negroes as electricians. If he wished, he could have a job in the foundry.
Having been out of work for three months, Mr. Smith took the job. The bulletin board in the foundry prominently displays a notice urging foundry workers to better themselves by taking the training course at the vocational schoo1. Nothing daunted, Mr. Smith presented himself for an application to the school. He was informed, not too politely, that the notice isn’t meant for Negroes.
The Sperry Gyroscope Co. of Brooklyn is another company practicing “democracy” according to its own lights. It employs 11,212 workers, of whom all of 21 are Negroes. The Sperry company discriminates against Negroes, Jews and foreign-born Americans. The private employment agency handling its business inserts ads calling for “white, Christian and Americah-born.” Jewish applicants interviewed at the agency are told they cannot be used because the “Sperry company does not want Jews.” The New York State Employment Bureau works hand-in-glove with Sperry and sends them only “white, Christian and American-born” workers.
The Ford Instrument Co. also withholds jobs from Negroes. Its handful of Negro workers are kept at the lowest jobs, as elevator boys, porters, etc. A Negro, no matter how highly qualified, cannot get a skilled job. One Negro worker having four years of high school to his credit, a thorough technical training and two years of actual experience in making precision instruments, was offered employment in what is euphemistically called the “maintenance department” – which means janitor’s work.
The company spokesmen tried very hard to pass the buck to the white workers and to the unions. In his speech at the hearing, Mayor LaGuardia – whose anti-union record in New York City qualifies him to attack labor – also laid great emphasis on so-called union discrimination against Negro workers.
However, all CIO representatives at the hearing declared themselves 100 per cent against racial discrimination. Irving Abramson of the New Jersey State Council, CIO, did so in connection with his testimony against Wright Aeronautic. The representative of Local 1217, AUW-CIO, reported that his local voted to accept all Negro workers employed by the Fairchild Aviation Co. The same is true of Local 428, UERW-CIO, which likewise voted to admit all Negro workers employed by Ford Instrument Co. John Brophy, sitting on the committee for CIO President Philip Murray, read into the record a statement of CIO policy regarding absolute equality of all races, creeds, colors and nationalities. Thus the correct principle of working class solidarity was unequivocally stated.
 




The Secretary of Agriculture proclaims that there is no shortage of food. The United States Department of Labor comes out with authenticated information to the same effect. In fact government officials here, there and everywhere are patting the housewife on the shoulder and telling her not to worry because there is plenty of food.
We believe you, gentlemen. We know enough about the great productive capacity of this country to believe that there is an abundance of food.
We know, for instance, that there are plenty of eggs. So why did eggs go up 27 per cent since last year?
There is plenty of cheese. So why did cheese go up 31 per cent since last year?
The hog population is quite adequate. So why did pork chops go up 29 per cent in the last year?
The supply of fruits and vegetables flows uninterruptedly from the bosom of mother earth. So why has even the humble potato gone up 40 per cent in the last year?
Why? Because there is also no shortage of food profiteers!
Question: Will the new price control bill get at these leeches?
Answer: Neither Mr. Roosevelt nor Mr. Henderson expects this hypocritical piece of legislation to do anything of the kind!

The vociferous First Lady, in one of her recent press conferences, stated that the high cost of living has not created any empty spaces in the White House pantry. It is still well stacked with ample quantities of potatoes, eggs, cheese, flour, fruits, vegetables, meats – to enumerate only the simple staples.
This, of course, is a great relief to those of us who spend wakeful nights wondering what is going to hit us next. At least we have the assurance that the residents and guests of the White House eat as usual – which is unusually well.
The working class housewife who tries to feed, clothe, shelter, entertain and educate her family on $20, $30 or $40 a week would also not be worried or hampered by the mounting prices – if she were flooded with as much money as finds its way into the White House.
The President’s salary is a mere trifle – $75,000. To this must be added what he earns on the side from magazine articles, etc. On top of all this there must be a steady stream of purely parasitic income, namely, dividends and interest on stocks and bonds. For it is hardly conceivable that a man in his social position hasn’t a safe deposit box at least as well stacked as his pantry.
With the benefits of capitalist democracy so richly bestowed upon them, it is quite easy to understand why the Roosevelts are so keen about the “war for democracy” – and not worrying about the high cost of living.

Park Avenue is being very charming, “democratic” and condescending to the boys of the armed forces. But the boys don’t think Park Avenue so hot.
Hambla Bauer, writer for the World-Telegram, not long ago gave a report on what sailors want when they are on leave.
For instance, they like dancing “where the girls are just plain working girls, not them ritzy dames that look down their nose at you,” writes Miss Bauer.
When they go to a dance they want to meet girls “who have a background in common with their own.”
No, thank you. Sailors have no stomach for the “handouts” from the rich.
Park Avenue pretends to cross the class line.
But working class boys know it’s war-time camouflage.

A most eloquent indictment of American capitalism was unwittingly made by W.L. White in his book called Journey for Margaret. Mr. White went to England to adopt a war orphan. Therefore the title of the book.
He was in London at the height of the horrible blitz and he had the following to say about the chances of survival:
“You are infinitely safer living in London than you would be if you were a Negro infant living in rural Mississippi.”
Yes, in peace as in war, capitalism deals out death.
So get going, all you black and white mothers of the poor. We must save a “democracy” littered with the corpses of little children.

Since December 7, some long-overdue revelations have been made public on the subject of American capitalism at work. In industry the greed for profit creates bottlenecks, inefficiency, anarchy. The Truman report gave only an inkling of all this. In the armed forces political pull and stuffed shirtism yield the same results. The Roberts report on Pearl Harbor gave a peep into that situation.
In a minor key but on the same theme of capitalist obstructionism is the story of waste paper conservation in the San Francisco region.
Many housewives on the coast took seriously the drive of the former OPM to save waste paper. They saved it, and the Boy Scouts, the Salvation Army and other organizations went around collecting it.
But it turned out that the only waste paper company in San Francisco that could handle for manufacturing purposes the supply provided by the housewives was tied hand and foot by a sacred contract. Under this contract another private capitalist outfit known as the Scavengers Association – and it alone – may supply waste paper to this, the only waste paper company in the San Francisco area.
So thousands of housewives are “aroused,” according to the papers.
But the Waste paper saved by them still lies around unwanted – and the Scavengers Association goes merrily on collecting its profits under the sacred contract.
Do you wonder that Labor Action never stops its cry for NATIONALIZED INDUSTRY UNDER WORKERS’ CONTROL!
 




Every time world imperialism lets loose the demons of war upon, the victimized peoples of the world, it also lets loose a great avalanche of beautiful promises for a post-war paradise on earth, of peace and good will. This wartime abundance of empty promises is supposed to make up for the gaping wartime shortages in happiness and the other necessities of life.
The 1914–1918 holocaust was widely advertised by Wilson’s war-makers as the “war to end all wars.” That false slogan stirred only false hopes in the war-weary heart of humanity.
Again the 1939–???? catastrophe is hailed by Roosevelt and Churchill as a noble fight to free the would forever from “aggressors” – and consequently from war.
And how is the era of perpetual peace to be accomplished this time?
The plan in the rough is contained in the much-tooted-about Atlantic Charter. Its eight points – like Wilson’s fourteen – are supposed to be the blueprint for a brand new League of Nations, including victors and vanquished, all devoted to the pursuits of peace.
If you lift a quizzical eyebrow – your ears still ringing from the great gusts of windy oratory that characterized the functioning of League of Nations No. 1, now deceased – you are assured that the future league will be different.
But a future League of Nations can be different only if the nations comprising it are motivated by different purposes. Is there any reason to believe that the international struggle for power and profit which went on under the idealistic cover of League No. 1 will not be repeated?
 
Why the League Fell Apart
League No. 1 fell apart because its members were – and are – imperialist rivals for world power. It very rapidly became merely the pulpit for Sunday sermons on international good will, while in the dark cellars of imperialist diplomacy the dirty work of international power politics was carried on. England secretly encouraged Italy to expand into Ethiopia so that the French hold on the Mediterranean region might be weakened. The French maneuvered in the Balkans to consolidate a European bloc against England – and of course to isolate Soviet Russia, feared more then by the imperialists than now. England countered by assisting Hitler to acquire military might, hoping to undermine the power of France on the continent – and of course to cripple the working class movement of Europe.
The antagonisms of Britain and France gave defeated Germany and weakened Italy the chance they wanted to reach out for a place in the sun. When finally Hitler struck his fateful blow, the so-called alliance of Britain and France had been cracked wide open by the mutual hatred, distrust and double-crosses of the preceding twenty years of joint membership in League of Nations No. 1.
Some dreamers claim that it would have been different if America had joined the League. Those who think so have a very unrealistic notion of the nature of American imperialism. But even the most starry-eyed should now be disillusioned.
 
Yankee Imperialism and Altruism
The conduct of United States imperialism toward its war partner, Great Britain, has been far from altruistic. At every step American aid is being paid for with compound interest. Yankee imperialism is taking advantage of its economic superiority in England’s predicament to reduce the latter to the status of a secondary power.
The hostile interests of American and British capitalists stand ont like the hump on the camel’s back. And these rivals for world power are to be the idealistic leaders of the new League of Nations under the Atlantic Charter. It is important to show in some detail with what sadistic delight American capitalism has lashed out against British world power.
Lend-lease help has been accomplished by strict American supervision of British exports. England is being steadily pushed out of the Latin American market. Six months ago its exports of steel to our southern neighbors were already only 40 per cent of normal. On pressure from this country, British contractors were forced to give up lucrative projects like the electrifications of the Central Brazilian railroad, hydro-electric construction and so on. The United States has further maintained that Britain cannot receive lend-lease help and at the same time keep up exports to Australia, New Zealand and other parts of her empire. On pressure from this country, the British have been compelled to relinquish their hold on shipping to their empire outposts. The long-established Manx and Union Steamship lines have been taken off the Australian run and replaced by American steamship companies, to the extent that the war permits.
Raymond Clapper, columnist for the Scripps-Howard papers, sees in the present situation a chance for this country to lay its hands on the raw materials for which it is now dependent on the British and Dutch. These include rubber and tin, as well as chromite, jute, mica, graphite. Says Mr. Clapper:
“All of these are needed by American industry. We are not self-sufficient in any of them. In certain of them British government control is such that it ought to be possible to work out a joint international holding company.”
Mr. Clapper does not say that this can be worked out by pressure of lease-lend. Neither does he say that the CONTROL of this “international holding company” will naturally pass to the United States. This will be accomplished ipso facto by reason of the great debt the British government will owe this government.
 
Distribution of Raw Materials
The Atlantic Charter contains a point to the effect that all nations must have access to the markets and raw materials of the world. The conduct of United States imperialism today illustrates the kind of distribution of raw materials and markets that it is interested in.
Under the circumstances, it can be assumed that England’s masters do not have an altogether brotherly feeling toward their American partners.
League No. 1 was dominated by Britain and France and was destroyed by their ceaseless struggle for superior power, utilized by Germany and other would-be powers in their own interests. League No. 2 to be established by the clashing imperialists of the United States and Great Britain, if Hitler is defeated, is bound to have the same fate.
The new set-up will start with the United States on top due to overwhelming economic strength. British imperialism will not be quite bankrupt. It will have enough life left to want to regain its lost empire and its stolen markets: – not from defeated Hitler but from victorious Yankee imperialism.
 
Who Will Take the Orders?
For a while Britain will have to take orders from the big boss in Washington. But for how long? In the sub-cellars of diplomacy, once again the battle of power politics will begin. And there will be plenty of room to fish to troubled waters.
Europe will be a heap of ruins, but German imperialism, defeated and dismembered, will remember that it almost succeeded. French imperialism will angle for position to regain its losses. Russia, with world imperialist aims second to none, will have its paws in the grab-bag.
In this hemisphere, the Latin American countries will be held loosely within the orbit of United States imperialism – by the exigencies of war. Then what? Argentina obviously has its own plans for a place in the sun.
In the Far East, will Japanese imperialism – having once demonstrated its power – be willing to accept permanent defeat? When the chance comes, it will again try to dominate Asia as its own hunting ground.
Within this world-wide milieu of defeated but smoldering ambitions, the United States and Great Britain will play their cards against each other – even as Great Britain and France did after the last war. It is not for nothing that the Kiplinger News Services referred to the immediate post-war period as a transition from “fighting to economic war.”
 
An International Police Force?
The authors of the Atlantic Charter promise that they will establish an international police force to see that no nation becomes an “aggressor.” But, torn by rivalry and jockeying for position, how will the imperialist powers agree on an international police force? How will nations of opposing interests be able to have unanimity of command over an international police force – if such a thing is ever created?
Certainly the United States will not be able to police the whole world – including Great Britain. The connivings of rival powers and would-be powers will again start the same old race for armed might and military supremacy. AND WAR – ITS INEVITABLE RESULT – WILL ONCE MORE BE ON THE AGENDA OF THE IMPERIALISTS OF THE WORLD.
What is needed for peace is not a new league of the same old bandits – but an international union of workers’ governments of all nations.
What is needed for permanent peace is a change of personnel at the controls. The working peoples of each nation must take the places of the imperialist rulers. This means the death of capitalism and the birth of socialism.
Power and profit – the motive force of capital,ism – will then perish.
The peoples of the world will be able to exchange their goods and their resources ACCORDING TO THEIR HUMAN NEEDS.
THEN THE WORLD WILL SEE THE ERA OF PEACE AND GOOD WILL AMONG MEN.
 




The influx of women workers into war industries is not just a timely topic for a magazine article, after reading which the reader may yawn and go to bed. It poses problems to labor as a whole which labor must honestly face and solve. What organized labor does right now about the mass of new women workers will determine, to a great extent, the strength of the workers during the war and most certainly in the post-war period.
What is the normal women’s labor force in this country? Before this war women workers in all kinds of employment numbered around eleven millions. Their fields of employment primarily included clerical, laundry, domestic, food and canning, office, restaurant and hotel, textile and clothing, i.e., light industries and light trades. Also included are auto and metal, chemical and rubber, electric, radio and firearms. But the figure that concerns us here is that, according to the latest census, there are twenty-four million employable women entirely outside the labor force of the country, a vast reservoir of labor power that is beginning to supply the production lines for World War II.
How much labor will the war program of the United States require? There is no clarity on this subject, since estimates change from day to day. when the military experts figured that the high point of the war would be reached in 1943, one set of figures were given. Now that the summer of 1942 is considered crucial, the old figures no longer hold. Yet a general idea can be gleaned. At the end of 1941 there were something over five million workers in war industries. At the end of this year it is expected that there will be fifteen to seventeen millions in those industries. Where will the additional ten to twelve million workers come from?
Many millions will be supplied from the “non-essential” industries, from the priorities, from the regular army of unemployed, from the farms. But these sources will not be able to supply the requirements. The balance of needed labor for 1942, it is estimated, will be made up of perhaps three million new workers who will join the labor front. By the end of 1944 some 6,500,000 such new workers will have been added to turn out the weapons for war.
 
A New Source of Labor Supply
Many of these new workers will come from the youth and from the adolescents. This is evidenced by the number of working papers issued, by the reports from technical schools that students are being snatched up by industry long before they are graduated, and also by the number of youngsters in every factory.
The balance of several millions of factory rookies will have to come from the reservoir of employable women, numbering twenty-four millions. Aside from the advantages to the bosses in hiring unorganized workers at lower wages, the employment of women tends to facilitate the war labor problem for two reasons. Women are not subject to military draft. Thus they constitute a steady labor force. Again, employing local women helps alleviate the acute housing problem created by migrating workers.
To summarize this point: At the end of 1941 there were a mere 500,000 women in war production plants. By the end of 1942 great numbers of women workers will have been transferred from “non-essential” industries to war production. But more significant, a large part of the three million new workers employed this year will be women not previously employed anywhere. By the end of 1944, an even larger part of the 6,500,000 new workers employed in the next two years will be women not previously employed anywhere. As the war continues and the manpower of the nation is increasingly fed to the dogs of war, womanpower will come even more to the fore on the production front.
It is customary these days to make comparisons with England. It can be said, then, that Washington appears to be much more serious about tapping available womanpower than London was when it entered the war. Pictures of women in overalls, spread over the pages of American newspapers, have been deceptive. Actually, while British women have replaced men in the “sissy” jobs, they have by and large stayed out of war production. Only after Singapore and the realization that the war will be a long one did the British government go to town to get out its womanpower. A program of corrective measures has been launched. It involves such steps as the establishment of nurseries and play schools, serving meals in schools and in communal feeding centers, and other services to ease women out of the home and into the factories. The perspective of the British government is that within a very short time the majority of industrial workers will have to be made up of women.
The Germans, of course, had this perspective a long time ago. The latest available figures, which are old stuff, put the women workers in Germany at 50 per cent of the entire labor force. This was before the Russian campaign.
Washington, it seems, has learned from both London and Berlin. The establishing of nurseries and the other required services to release women from the home is getting into full swing. Government agencies and women’s associations are implementing plans of wide scope. Women are going places, they are going into the basic units of war production.
 
Experiences of the First World War
In this country, during the First World War, one million women quit housework and school-teaching alone to take industrial jobs. At the close of that war 23 per cent of the employees in forty airplane factories were women. During the present war these figures will become completely obsolete for any purposes of comparison. An idea of the rate of increase of the female contingent in the automobile plants alone is contained in the following figures. Whereas in the past years there were, at the peak, no more than 20,000 women in the automobile industry, the Auto Workers Union, CIO, now estimates that the converted automobile plants alone will employ up to 150,000 women before the end of the year, or seven and a half times as many.
This avalanche of womanpower will definitely burst the confines of unskilled labor. Women will also swamp jobs heretofore considered men’s specialties. One British writer on the subject of women entering the skilled jobs in his country, commented: “This movement is without precedent in British industry. Nothing like is was seen in the last war.” This applies with equal force to American industry. Women will do all the jobs they did during the last war and a great many new jobs that will create out of them a corps of new skilled workers.
In airplane factories today women are operating light rivet guns, turret lathes, drill presses, painting sprays. On the power assembly lines they are installing fittings and equipment in fuselages. They do electrical wiring of various kinds. They do spot and arc welding. They have moved into a field of jobs requiring training and skill. Estimates of the likely employment of women in airplane production run to 50 per cent of the total employees, and revision is being made upward. In the assembly of aircraft instruments requiring particular care and concentration, women can do 75 per cent of the work. In the field of instrument-making as such, from which women had been excluded in the past, they have been found very able. Employers in this line sing the praises of women workers for their painstaking skill with details. Already in many plants making instruments, women constitute half of the labor force.
The vocational schools all over the country are encouraging the enrollment of women. Besides training for jobs such as above enumerated, higher skills are taught. Such work as shop drafting, pattern construction, designing of beams, columns, trusses – are becoming less of a mystery to growing numbers of women.
This new female contingent of skilled and semi-skilled labor could constitute the hole in the dike of the organized labor movement through which the enemies of labor may rush in. Three significant conditions make it possible for this mass of new women workers to weaken the whole structure of labor’s gains if labor does not face the problem and solve it: First, the lower standard of wages of women. Second, many of the new women workers will be without militant union experience, if not completely unorganized. Third, at least some enter industry with a decided anti-union bias.
 
Wage Differentials of Women Labor
The extent of the gap between the wages of men and women is not well known. The conservative figures of the National Industrial Conference Board for November 1941 placed the hourly wages in manufacturing plants at 35 per cent lower for women than for men. The American Federation of Labor declares the difference even greater. The New York State Department of Labor, for example, published the 1941 figures of average weekly wages in manufacturing plants for the state as $35.60 for men and $19.25 for women. The difference here is $16.35 per week, or 45 per cent.
The differential also reflects itself in the rate of wage increases. The above figures for the state of New York represent wage increases over 1940 of 12 per cent for men and only 8 per cent for women. In other respects also women are underprivileged workers. For instance, both law enforcers and bosses – as well, unfortunately, as the women workers involved – assume that the minimum wage law does not apply to them.
A post-war survey of women’s wages in this country made by the New York State Department of Labor, covering 417 factories employing 33,000 women in 1918–19, revealed some gruesome figures. Ten per cent of these women were earning less than $6.00 per week. Fifty-three per cent were earning less than $12 a week. A survey of 117 plants as to the relation of women’s wages to wages of men showed that 90 per cent of the women who replaced men were receiving less wages for the same work – in many instances as much as 50 per cent less – constituting an excellent reason why the bosses were employing them in the place of men.
For the purposes of this initial study, a little information on wage differentials in England is of interest. There, inequality starts with apprenticeship, a woman getting 38 shillings or the equivalent of $7.60 a week and a man 60 shillings 6 pence or about $12.10. One report on wages of English women workers states: “Average earnings for adult women in machine factories today (November 1941) are almost certainly below 50 shillings per week, which is equal to 39 shillings pre-war.” Thus full-fledged women workers average considerably less than the inexperienced male apprentice.
 
Dangers to Organized Labor
At all times this double standard acts as a subtle drag on the wage structure of the entire working class. In times of widespread unemployment the lower wage levels of the women workers tend to become the norm, especially if large masses of workers are women and more especially if they constitute a considerable fraction of the skilled workers. This will undoubtedly be the case in the post-war period.
One of the most important tasks before organized labor, therefore is to cut out the wage differential between men and women workers. “Equal pay for equal work” is a vital slogan which must be made a reality.
There are today tendencies toward equalization of pay. The United Automobile Workers are supposed to have wage scales for women on war production equalling the pay of men for equal work. But is the union insisting upon this equality? When the Consolidated Aircraft Co. opened its new gigantic plant it announced it was going to pay equal wages to men and women. Whether, and to what extent, this principle is actually carried out is not yet known but, it seems to be a fact that recent contracts, including wage increases in rubber, auto and auto parts, airplanes and firearms, while also increasing the wages of women workers, did not accomplish equality.
A militant drive for equalization of wages, therefore, must be undertaken by all unions affected by the influx of women workers. On the basis of such a drive to end the under-privileged status of women workers, the organization of the millions of practically green women workers who will enter industry must forge ahead.
The Vinsons and Smiths in Congress are very wide-awake to the interests of big business in pressing so hard for legislation to “freeze” the open and closed shop. The use of the word “freeze” in this connection is inaccurate and misleading. Such anti-labor legislation will make it illegal to organize the 6,500,000 new workers who will be entering war production. It will inevitably result in the melting away of union strength in relation to the sum total of workers. It will allow the capitalists to obtain company-union domination over a large portion of these 6,500,000 new workers to be sent to the labor front. Labor must prevent the passage of such legislation and proceed with the pressing business before it, namely, an organization drive.
 
The Task of the Labor Movement
Veteran women workers who are also veteran trade unionists have a grave responsibility on their shoulders. They can do much to educate the new women workers. The women who in automobile, steel, rubber, textile, etc., directly participated in the splendid CIO organization drives have a tradition of militancy that must be and can be preserved only by imparting it to the new workers. Those women who, as wives and daughters of strikers, joined in great CIO struggles (such as the automobile sit-downs and the New York City bus strike) and will now be on the war production lines themselves, can and must do their part in arousing inexperienced workers to an understanding of working class solidarity.
The problem posed by the influx of women workers into the skilled trades will not be solved in the way attempted by British workers and to some extent by American workers also, namely, neglecting these new members of their own class. This method will be as ineffective in this day and age as the attempt to smash the machines was in solving the problems created by their introduction during the Industrial Revolution. War conditions compel women to become industrial workers. The production of war material requires the employment of skilled workers, and women will be trained as skilled workers. Once they have acquired skills, they will be part and parcel of the labor force of the country to a much greater extent than was the case after the last war when two and a quarter million women workers were permanently added to the labor force.
The way to solve working class problems is, now as always, to build up working class strength through organization. The new workers must be gathered into the union fold.
It must be borne in mind that many women will enter industry with anti-union prejudices as a result of anti-union propaganda in the press and on the air waves. Some of the anti-union propaganda has stuck. There are housewives who believe that high wages are responsible for high prices and that unions are rackets anyway. Besides all this, the capitalist press, the radio, politicians and other speechifiers will be flattering these women workers and playing them up as “the women behind the machines behind the men behind the guns at the front.” And very carefully cultivated by the above elements will be the anti-union propaganda that “this is not the time to join unions – this is the time for national unity.” All this is grist in the mill of big business.
Labor must also fully realize that new workers who join the unions, both men and women, simply as a matter of bookkeeping, are sitting on the fence. If they happen to get work in a closed shop and are required to join up, they do so – for a time, anyway. But they have been through no union struggles. They have not learned the meaning of unionism as a weapon and offensive and defensive might. Furthermore, the appeasement policies followed by the union officialdoms incline new union members to the belief that there is no particular advantage in belonging to a union. These workers will easily fall off the fence – on the wrong side – unless the rank and file makes up its mind to a program of labor militancy that will grip and hold new members.
It is definitely up to the rank and file. Union leaders are yielding up labor’s power and labor’s standards. Demanding better ones is not a wartime fashion. Organization drives are also not in style. The rank and file must be old-fashioned – in the CIO way. The CIO, which since its inception has stood for labor militancy, must again push on to militant action.
What organized labor does right now about the mass of new women workers will determine, to a great extent, the strength of labor during the war and most certainly in the post-war period. Equalization of wages will prevent the undermining of wage standards. A unionization drive will prevent the bosses from getting their claws on the green workers and “protecting” them in company unions. Finally, a well organized labor movement will enable the workers to carry out a progressive program for employment for all in the postwar period.
 




The great United States Steel Corp., grown much greater by dint of war expansion and war profits, has – not too graciously – bowed to the ruling of the War Labor Board on the matter of maintenance of union membership at the Kearny, N.J., shipyards, owned by its subsidiary Federal Shipbuilding & Drydock Co.
To claim this “settlement” gives “union security” to the Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers is to call a spade a steam-shovel. Rather does this “settlement” indicate to what an alarming extent the union leadership is on the run.
Heretofore a union has been able to sell its own wares, so to speak. It appealed to workers on the basis of actual benefits to be attained through the union. Union membership was “maintained” and increased by virtue of union militancy in fighting the battle of wage earners against profit fleecers.
Now, however, union officials are willing to rely for what they term “union security” on an NWLB ruling and the unwilling consent of the bosses. This is the natural result of their weak-kneed policy of yielding ground.
They have surrendered the right of workers to strike. They have lowered overtime standards. They have joined labor-management committees to speed up the workers. Now they are allowing themselves to be persuaded – by the flimsy promise of stopping inflation – to put wages in the icebox.
“Union security” cannot be had on this basis. An NWLB ruling balkingly accepted by the boss is no substitute for improving wages and conditions of labor. For this is the cement that binds workers to their union.
 
The “Maintenance” Clause
The “maintenance of membership” clause in the contract to be signed by the Federal Shipbuilding & Drydock Co. and the IUM&SW provides that workers in the union at the time of signing the contract or joining the union afterward, must remain members in good standing during the contract period. If a worker drops out of the union before June 1943, the end of the contract period, he will lose his job unless he continues to pay his union dues and fines anyway. Such a provision cannot effectively spike the open shop drive of the boss.
In the Kearny yards there are 23,000 workers. Only half of them are organized in Local 16 IUM&SW. Unless the militancy of the IUM&SW makes the advantages of union membership felt by all the workers, what chance is there for the union to hold its own, let alone grow?
United States Steel has used the dirtiest possible methods against labor in the past. It will do so again. What is to prevent it from inducing workers to leave the union by offering to pay their dues as required by the above provision? Money has never been an obstacle in the bosses’ attempts to break unions. The only hurdle the bosses have not been able to clear is unswerving union militancy adding up to real gains for the rank and file.
The order of business before the leaders of the IUM&SW today is to get for the shipyard workers the adjustments of wages to the higher cost of living to which they are entitled under agreement. President Roosevelt is opposed to the workers’ demanding their rights. He wants them to take a cut in real wages by foregoing the adjustment to the higher cost of living. If the leaders hold out for what is due the shipyard workers, the IUM&SW will be strengthened. Its membership will not merely be maintained – it will grow. If, however, the leaders capitulate, the union will be weakened. No fancy “maintenance of membership” clause will alter this fundamental fact.
 
What About New Workers?
There is also the all-important problem of new workers entering the shipyards to carry out the expanded shipbuilding program. “Maintenance of membership” clauses will not get these workers to join the union. But an organization drive based on demands in their interest will bring new workers into the IUM&SW in hordes.
The ruling of the NWLB in the Kearny case and its acceptance by both labor and capital set the pattern to be followed throughout industry in signing new contracts. But will “maintenance of membership” clauses be enough to carry forward the hard-won advances of the CIO in “Little Steel,” for instance? Or will such clauses solve the problem of bringing the mass of new war production workers into the unions? Unless the unorganized are organized, present union membership – even if “maintained” – will fall in comparison with the increased labor force of the country.
The Kearny case should put squarely before the rank and file of the IUM&SW and of all unions the pressing problem of “union security.” It cannot be had by NWLB rulings and by the “cooperation” of the bosses. “Union security” comes from union strength. That is not acquired by handing labor’s gains back to the bosses – nor by running away from the need for organization drives based on militant demands.
 




If the working class housewife has breathed a sigh of relief because of Leon Henderson’s price fixing order to go into effect on May 18, she is a bit premature.
Putting teeth into such a price fixing order involves the kind of widespread and honest enforcement impossible in a society based on the sacred rights of private profit.
Think of the tens of thousands of manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers and retail corporations, all dedicated to the cause of making profits and to hell with sacrificing. The driving motive of corporations and business men will not change between now and May 18. Judging by precedents, the ingenuity of those who obey the law of “grab” will not be unequal to the task of circumventing the price fixing order.
Remember that the minor job of enforcing prohibition was a major flop. And in England today the black market is more virulent than price control – which has managed to keep the prices of food climbing up to 72 per cent above pre-war levels – according to the British Board of Trade.
Indeed it is a bit too soon to heave that sigh of relief, especially since in Washington itself – from where Henderson’s order came – it is expected that prices will be 10 per cent higher by the end of the year, and less conservative economists put the expected increase at 15 per cent. This is what the Kiplinger Washington Service advises its paying business men clients.

Resignation to “a certain amount” of war profiteering and to the continued rise in prices may be considered altogether fitting and proper in Washington. For the working class housewife, however, resignation is too expensive a luxury.
If Washington expects Mr. Henderson’s price fixing order to be so toothless a thing that prices will go up from 10 to 15 per cent within the next few months in spite of it, working class housewives themselves must do something about price control.
Labor Action has been urging the women of the country to organize themselves into neighborhood housewives’ groups. This step can no longer be deferred.
One woman may grumble about what she knows to be illegal prices. She may even speak up and give an innocent store clerk an argument. But she is only one and her action is ineffectual. By herself she cannot reach the manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers and big retail corporations responsible for profiteering.
But suppose a committee representing all the housewives of a district demand of a certain dealer that profiteering prices stop. That is a horse of a different color. Suppose a picket line decorates the sidewalk to give substance to the demand. That is a bird of a different feather. Suppose this committee goes to the local rationing board or to the local OPA office to insist on the revocation of the licenses of manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers and retailers who war-profiteer. This would have a most salutary effect on all concerned – even on the moguls in Washington where orders are issued but not expected to be enforced against the upper-classes.
Workers on the production lines have learned that in organization there is strength. For working class housewives on the consumption lines there is also strength in organization.

Not only is Mr. Henderson’s order a toothless thing – by admission from Washington itself – but it leaves loopholes through which the war profiteer will have no difficulty at all in passing with his money bags.
There is the matter of quality. This most important element in determining the worth of an article has been completely ignored by Mr. Henderson. Yet every housewife knows that the quality of merchandise is constantly deteriorating. Many products on sale today are decidedly inferior to those of a year or two ago. Store counters are filling up with merchandise of lower serviceability and durability. Of this there is no doubt.
The price of a pair of shoes may remain the same, but it isn’t the same quality of shoes. What about the grade of leather – if it is leather? What about the workmanship? How will the shoes stand up in the rain? Will they keep their shape? How much sooner will they need repair?
Prices may not go through the ceiling, but how about the windows? Mr. Henderson leaves them wide open.
Here is more work for the organized housewives. They can boycott inferior goods. They can find out what manufacturers are responsible for picking the consumers’ pockets by selling shoddy, and bring the weight of their organization to bear against them and against all wholesalers, jobbers and retailers who share in this kind of mass robbery.
That sigh of relief was indeed premature. What is necessary is the gritting of teeth and the determination of the working class housewives of the country to organize in self-protection.

But the biggest loophole in the Henderson order and that which really makes it a laughingstock is the list of exceptions. The following list of everyday food items are not included under the price ceilings:

Fresh fruits and vegetables.
Fresh fish.
Poultry, mutton, lamb.
Eggs, butter, cheese, evaporated and condensed milk.
Flour, dried prunes, dried beans.

This list of basic diet necessities was not jotted down by this columnist in a whimsical mood. Mr. Henderson’s order actually lists these indispensable foods as exceptions to which price ceilings do not apply.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics in the middle of March this year reported an increase of 25 per cent in the cost of food above pre-war levels. The rich fruit and vegetable combines, the giant dairy companies, the moneyed poultry and packing houses which have been responsible for the rising cost of living, will be grateful for Mr. Henderson’s thoughtfulness. So will the “law-abiding” wholesalers, jobbers and retailers as they mark up the prices on Mr. Henderson’s list of excepted commodities – which are only foods that other government officials in Washington tell us we cannot do without. But, after all, an honest profit must be permitted under the profit system that Mr. Roosevelt has pledged himself to preserve.
It is thus very easy to understand why, in spite of price control, food prices in England rose 72 per cent – and why Washington economists expect costs here to advance 10 to 15 per cent before the end of 1942. It should be just as easy to understand why Labor Action hammers on the idea that price control is up to the working class itself.
 




Although it is more than a week since the writer has seen this documentary film based on the 1938 Senate Civil Rights Committee testimony on boss terror in this country, one of its episodes lives in mind as though experienced in real life.
Vigilantes in Arkansas in 1936 have broken up a sharecroppers’ meeting and driven into the swamps a Negro and. an older white cropper. The Negro has been wounded. The white cropper tries to ease him. When twilight comes, they begin to think of going home, so the white man crawls up to the highway to see the lay of the land. It seems to him that the road is clear. He helps the Negro to his feet, props him against his own body and thus they start homeward in the dusk. The Negro’s face is transparent with the pain of persecution, and the ache in his body. Like a father or a big brother, the white cropper smilingly encourages him onward. Thus , walking homeward, together, black and white brothers in bondage, are mowed down by the machine gun bullets of an ambushed vigilante.
The photographer and directors fully understood the symbolic and actual beauty of the episode as well as its horror and suspense, and gave it all it needed to make it unforgettable. Such feelingful direction throughout the film, by Leo Hurwitz and Paul Strand, with matching photography by Mr. Strand, creates the stir and impact on the mind and emotions that the material used, deserves.
 
Just People on the Screen
The acting is so unstrained and lifelike that one forgets to appraise it as acting. There are just people on the screen. It is just a Michigan farmer who in 1934 spoke up for farmers’ unity and was found dead by his wife a few minutes after a visit by strangers in a resplendent automobile. They are just three human beings tortured by the Ku Klux Klan in “democratic” Florida in 1935 because their politics did not please the powers behind the Klan. They are just working stiffs thrown out of their jobs because of union activity after a rat in their ranks turns the union membership book over to the industrial spying company employed by the boss to bust the union. It is just a friendly grocer ordered out of town by a thug, because he contributed to the strike fund. And they are just women and children weeping at the graves of their husbands and fathers shot in the back by “law and order” in the 1937 Memorial Day massacre of strikers in Chicago.
The cumulative effect of the film is even greater than the sum of these gripping incidents. This is accomplished by the narrative written by David Wolff and beautifully spoken by Paul Robeson, who also contributes some fine singing. The narrative tells of the private armies, private arsenals and propaganda of the “fascist-minded”, of the ruthless armed company deputies; of the utter contempt for human life of those for whom “the open shop is the American way.”
The narrative unfortunately is not all factual. The film is as unequivocal an indictment of “American democracy” – better known to farmers, sharecroppers and workers as boss rule – as has ever been presented. Yet the narrative – obviously for timely propaganda purposes – would have the audience believe that the bill of rights exists for the workers anyway. Although it has been enjoyed by rniliant workers from the hard end of a nightstick or the shooting end of a revolver or machine gun, Mr. Wolff assures us that it has been built into the very girders of the skyscrapers. He forgot to write at this point that the girders and the skyscrapers are owned by the “interests” exposed by the film, that in them the industrial spy companies have offices, that in them the boards of directors meet to count profits, and map out campaigns against labor. If the bill of rights has been built into the girders of skyscrapers, the film proves that it has been kept prisoner there.
 
Role of the “Founding Fathers”
Also, to serve the purposes of timely propaganda, the narrative constantly refers to the “Founding Fathers” as if they were the patrons of the present-day struggles of the farmers, sharecroppers and workers. Naturally no mention is made of the historic fact that there were plenty of labor-haters among the “Founding Fathers,” whose idea was that “liberty, freedom, democracy” should function primarily for the benefit of the capitalist class.
The acme of the ridiculous is reached in the epilogue, Paul Robeson appears on the screen to assure the audience that the bitter class struggle so stirringly; filmed has today been ended by “national unity.” All of a sudden there are no more “fascist-minded interests” in America. They are all in Germany and Japan. Would you believe it – since 1938, when a Senate committee exposed their vile practices, they have turned over a new leaf and now clasp the hand of labor in brotherly love!
However, this inept attempt to vitiate the effect of what preceded fails. The final scene, and not the epilogue, stands out as the real conclusion. It is the burial of the victims of the Memorial Day massacre in Chicago. Women and children are weeping, while the men stand grim and silent. A worker speaks a few words in farewell to his fallen brothers. He says: “We don’t forget that!”
The reviews of the film in the boss press prove that this worker’s simple pledge, “We don’t forget that!” is much more powerful than Robeson’s concluding verbiage. The New York Sun tries very hard to discourage the reader from seeing the film by describing it as amateurish, tiring, boring. The Daily News thinks: “Since it serves only to revive the wrongs inflicted upon the ‘little people,’ there seems little argument for it release.” The New York Times comments: “And one might also inquire whether a picture of this sort is not disturbing to national unity at this time.”
 




To make a purchase of a couple of pounds of onions these days is a sure way of bringing tears to the eyes figuratively speaking. This distress is not caused by the strength of the onions, but by the height of their price.
Last fall onions were three pounds for ten cents. Then they climbed to three for fourteen. A while later it took fifteen cents to get only two pounds. Today eleven cents buys just one pound of that cooking necessity, the onion.
Why this price increase of 330 per cent in a few months?
Why should a cotton blanket be one price on Monday and 50 per cent higher on Tuesday?
Why should a pair of shoes be marked up 50 cents in a few hours?
And why is everything else being marked up – except the wages that the working man turns over to his one-and-only for household expenses?
The government is taking a mighty long time getting around to stopping price profiteering. In the meantime the dollar shrinks daily. Presumably this is in line with the government policy that the people must get used to sacrifices. The profiteers, however, are fast becoming so accustomed to fancy war prices that they will be very unwilling to give them up – if and when Mr. Henderson politely asks them to.
If price fixing were in the hands of the workers themselves, it would be at the head of the list of things to be done – not at the bottom.

In a certain sense the shortages of eggs, meats and other foods are being overcome in England. The profit seekers who miss no chance to turn a dishonest million pounds or so, have put out a number of “substitutes.”
Mr. William Dayles, American correspondent in London, writes about “Peakegg – Egg Substitute Powder.” The manufacturer proclaims that two ounces of “Peakegg” stirred in water is the same as ten beaten eggs. But Mr. Dayles reports that “no hen ever laid eyes on Peakegg’.”
After many months and after thousands of housewives had thrown away their money on this fake “egg substitute,” government chemists “discovered” that “Peakegg” was “nothing more than flour, bicarbonate of soda, a touch of dye and a little gum,” says Mr. Dayles.
This correspondent also writes that many English workmen pay for pork sausage but get “oil-soaked bread crumbs stuffed into cellophane.” And there is a product on the market called “Meatlike.” According to Mr. Dayles, its composition defies analysis. “One thing is certain, it contains no meat.”
After income taxes, withholding taxes, sales taxes and other taxes, little enough money is left for working people to spend on food. Apparently Mr. Churchill’s “democratic” government doesn’t consider it necessary to see to it that the people get REAL food for their precious shillings!

Negroes are discriminated against in the army and navy. Negro workers of both sexes have the doors of industry slammed in their faces. The federal and local governments allow negroes to be barred from their homes in Sojourner Truth. The “imperial” government of the State and City of New York have been aware that Negro children are kept out of children’s institutions – and have done nothing about it. This is the latest race discrimination scandal.
It appears that at least nineteen private child-caring agencies in the State bar Negro children from entrance. Most people do not know that many of these private institutions get financial support from the public treasury. They are paid a given amount per week for each child accepted as a public charge. Some institutions are almost entirely subsidized in this way out of public funds. New York City alone pays out at least a million dollars a year to the very nineteen institutions known to discriminate against Negro youngsters.

The old-law tenement house at 1795 Lexington Avenue, New York City, went up in a blaze early the other morning. The toll was one dead and several injured. The dead victim was an old man of 76.
A few days before that, another old-law tenement caught fire. This was in lower west side Manhattan. The casualties of dead and injured there were greater, including little children trapped in their beds.
Inconspicuous items in the daily press constantly check off the victims of landlord greed and of the unwillingness of capitalist society to attend to the vital business of providing adequate housing.
In New York City alone 500,000 families live in old-law tenement fire-traps. The government housing program was a mere drop in the ocean of actual needs – and even this farce has been discontinued in favor of building battleships at $100,000,000 per.
A modern project that could shelter 17,500 parents and children in comfort and safety costs around $20,000,000 – only one-fifth the price of a single battleship. This is information everybody should have. Thus the $120,000,000,000 war budget, if used for peaceful construction, could make of this country a garden paradise for the people to enjoy.
What is wrong with this picture? Only one thing – The wealth of the country and control of its expenditures are not where they belong, namely, with the workers who create the wealth.

“It was sad to read of two more of our destroyers being lost. I cannot bear to think of the many women whose hearts ache for the boys and men who are lost with each of these ships; as well as any one of the airplanes that fail to come back from a raid, or that crash somewhere in this country or in foreign parts. These days are terrible ones for the men themselves and for the women who wait at home for news. So many of the boys are very young and, under ordinary circumstances, would have their whole lives before them.”
These are words that go to the heart of every one of us – even if we don’t agree politically with their author. But working women must look with suspicion on Mrs. Roosevelt’s next sentence: “I wonder if women in every country are making up their minds that out of this war there shall come some kind of permanent peace.”
“Some kind of permanent peace” is much too vague, Mrs. Roosevelt. These words sound like the old gag used in the last war, namely, that it was a war to end all war.
No kind of permanent peace can come while the propertied, capitalist, imperialist classes of each nation remain in power. This second world war, which is again annihilating the youth of the earth, is ample proof that permanent peace requires a Socialist world.
This thought should fill the mind of every working woman in every country on this May Day – dedicated to the struggle of the international working class.
 




Must labor be the tail to the capitalist kite?
Those worthies, the capitalists, and all their political and literary lieutenants answer, Yes. This is to be expected.
What is out of order, however, is that men and women who parade as leaders of labor also answer Yes. For a labor leader – political or in the unions – to wish no future for the working class except as a tail to the capitalist kite, inevitably makes him a misleader of labor.
To the capitalist-dominated labor leadership it is sufficient to fight for concessions from the bosses through Union action – for labor to “reward its friends and punish its enemies” in politics – to sit in on labor-management-government committees, and thus pressed in between the bosses and their government try to get something for labor. But the idea of labor cutting loose from the capitalist kite gives goose pimples to these conservative labor officials and leaders. They fear labor’s power as much as do the capitalists themselves.
The opposition of so-called leaders of labor to the working class taking power is in large measure responsible for the fact that the imperialist classes throughout the world still rule and were in a position to plunge humanity into this Second World War.
 
The French Turncoats
If in France, for instance, the socialists and Stalinists had not turned traitors to the workers in their great sit-down strikes, the world today would be a better place to live in. The French workers were then ready to oust the capitalists, take over production and reorganize society under a workers’ government. This would have undermined Nazism in Germany and changed the course of events in Europe and in the entire world. But so scared of labor’s power were those turncoats whom French labor had regarded as its leaders that they tightened the knot fastening the working people to the capitalist kite – even though that kite was rapidly plunging to the ground.
Labor Action has unqualified faith in the workers as the future rulers of society. It has nothing but scorn for those who contend that if labor assumes control of production and government, anarchy will result. On the contrary. Labor Action proclaims that because labor does not perform its historic role of establishing a socialist society, it is subjected to the destruction of war and the anarchy of post-war periods.
Long before this war and long before the last war, those revolutionary socialists, who see for labor a future freed from the profit system of capitalism, have proved with facts and figures that the boss class
is entirely superfluous as far as the real productive processes are concerned. The function of the capitalist owners has for a long time been merely to control and maneuver the course of industry to yield the most profits.
The actual production lines are manned by the industrial workers. The real production managers, engineers, inventors, technicians are also paid employees who could carry on under workers’ ownership and control much better because they would be unhampered by the restrictions of the profit motive of the capitalist owners.
 
They Never Would Be Missed!
Now the war affords fresh and additional evidence that the owners of industry are definitely on the list of those who never would be missed. The present war proves beyond the shadow of a doubt that capitalist industry is a goose laying golden eggs for its owners and that capitalist ownership is a straightjacket on production.
A year ago Packard and other corporations refused to take the first government contracts until they were guaranteed the profits they thought fitting and proper. Today shipyard workers are demanding that such outfits as Bethlehem Steel Corp. be investigated by the FBI because these octopi of industry are more interested in cost-plus profits than in efficient production.
The Truman report has revealed the magnetic charm exercised by the dollar-a-year industrialists in the government to start the flow of war profits in the desired directions. And could there be any more obvious demonstration of the complete uselessness of the industrial rulers than to see them by the hundreds packing up bag and baggage to migrate to the fleshpots in Washington?
Their absence from industry has not caused a single factory wheel to stop turning. “The Dogs in the Manger of Industry” would be a fitting title for the story of modern capitalists.
While the war has completely unmasked the uselessness of the bosses, organized labor has shown itself capable of nationwide industrial planning. The Reuther Plan was so technically efficient that the bosses and the government did not dare adopt it all at once for fear of the prestige it would give labor. But everyone knows that the Reuther Plan was adopted piecemeal before war production got on its way in the auto industry.
 
The Reuther Plan
One of the editors of such a pillar of the bourgeois press as Harpers Magazine was carried away by his enthusiasm over this contribution by labor:
“The Reuther Plan had been a brilliant natural,” he wrote, “and the more it was kicked around the more of a natural it became, whether the union got in on the management or not.”
The Reuther Plan is the best known, but is only one of the many industrial schemes submitted by organized labor in this period. For instance, there was the union idea for producing refrigerators needed for the preservation of food even though a war is on. Raymond Clapper, columnist for the Scripps-Howard papers, commented:
“The only mystery about this is why, after two and a half years with all the industrial brains assembled bere at Washington, and after all the official studies of what the British are doing in that line, it remains for some union people to bring up the idea.”
 
While the Bombs Burst
The lack of ideas on the part of both the industrial and political brains is not a mystery. The bosses are too busy making money while the bombs burst over the world, and the politicians are too closely connected with the industrial masters. Here are the fetters on the wings of progressive ideas.
Labor alone is free for progressive industrial planning. Unwittingly Clapper, the columnist for a newspaper syndicate far from friendly to labor, gives the reason why Labor Action has been advocating the conscription of war industries under workers’ control.
The realistic .grasp of the problems of production that organized labor has shown itself to have should give every worker a thrill of confidence in himself and in his class. The glaring contrast between the progressiveness of organized labor and the fear of innovations characterizing both capital and government is something every worker should understand – the working class is the class of the future, while the capitalist class is the class of the past.
It is a great human tragedy that labor’s social creativeness should come to the fore in answer to the needs of destructive war. But what labor does for a war from which it has nothing but trouble to reap, it can do a hundred times better for the constructive pursuits of peace. The Reuthers today are not inclined to lead the workers to their historic goal, to break loose from the capitalist kite and take over production and government in their own right. But what matter? The Reuthers rose from the ranks of labor. There are and will be others from the ranks to lead the workers to the social power that is rightfully theirs – when the working class as a whole wants it so.
 
On Our Own!
It is time for the workers to laugh in the faces of the demagogues of all political shades, with their windy promises to do this and that for labor. Labor doesn’t need anybody to do anything for it – and furthermore nobody will do anything for labor. Labor can and must get on its own. It has the numbers, it has the industrial power, it has the progressive ideas, it has the executive ability in its own ranks. It needs only to sever the knot that keeps it tailing the capitalist kite.
There are in this period three major threats hanging over the heads of the working people: post-war chaos, fascism rising in this country, future wars. All of these dangers flow from a common spring – the concentration of industrial and political power in the hands of the few against the many.
This war is demonstrating the power and ability of labor to dam up the poisonous spring. The future can be shaped by the workers in their own interests and the interest of the whole of society. To cut loose from the capitalist class, to step out into independent political action leading to a workers’ government, to supplant the useless capitalist class in the ownership and control of production – these are the historic tasks that labor can and must perform.
 




The other day, Mrs. Green, housewife, noticed – as she should – that her husband’s shoes were down at the heels. So they were taken around to Pete, the shoemaket, for the necessary repairs, consisting of rubber heels and leather patches inside the shoes where the foot had rubbed through the lining.
“What will that set me back?” Mrs. Green asked Pete. “One dollar ten,” he said.
Mrs. Green opened her mouth to protest, but was so flabbergasted that no sound came out. Several months ago this was a sixty or sixty-five cent job. When her vocal chords began to function, Mrs. Green exclaimed: “That’s robbery!”
Pete has been fixing shoes for Mrs. Green for six years. He was very apologetic – very, very sorry, but he said he just couldn’t help it. “So help me God, Mrs. Green. It hurts me more, than it hurts you,”
“OK, Pete, OK. I know you’re not a chiseler. But how come? After all, how come?” So. Pete told Mrs. Green “how come.”
Recently when he went to the supply house with which he does business, he was assured by the salesman in the outer office that there was a shortage of material and that Pete could not have any of the heels or leather he had come to get. Pete protested. He wanted to know how he was going to carry on his business, how he was going to earn a living for his family. “Well,” said the salesman with mock thoughtfulness, “I’ll let you speak to the chief.”
In the inner office the alarmed shoemaker was given a line by the head of the firm: “Seeing as how you’ve been a customer of the firm so long, I may be able to fix you up. I got a little goods – a special shipment that cost me plenty. If you want to pay the price, you can get yours, but it’s got to be over the counter – cash and carry. No bills, no statements, no checks, no deliveries, Get me!”
Whereupon the big shot submitted, his take-it-or-leave-it prices which made the local shoemaker open his mouth even as Mrs. Green did in his store. “Well? I’m a busy man,” snapped the big shot.
Pete mopped his brow and began to stutter: “H-h-how can I charge such prices? I’ll lose my trade.” “That’s gonna be the prices everyone will charge. And, I might as well tell you it’s no use you should go somewhere else for supplies. You won’t get past the telephone girl somewhere else. Everyone is careful with whom they deal these days. Whaddya say? I’m a busy man.”
The harrassed shoemaker still hesitated. “I’m surprised at you,” continued the big shot. “What kinda salesman are you? How about telling your trade there is a war? How about telling them the armed, forces is using all the domestic leather? How about telling them this is much finer stuff that comes from Argentina? Got to know your geography these days. Ain’t that what the President said?”
Pete explained to Mrs. Green that while the big mouth was talking, his imagination was plenty busy. He was seeing. the street on which his store is located. There is another shoemaker on the block. Besides there are two chain stores, which also do shoe repairing. On the next block and. on the next of that business street of a thickly populated district, there are more shoemakers’ shops and more chain cleaning stores. He imagined his customers taking their shoes to his competitors, if he didn’t have the leather and material he needs. Pete felt he had no choice. Reluctantly he paid the blackmail prices and took the goods from the shipping clerk.
“What could I do, Mrs. Green?” concluded the shoemakcr. “Could I go to the OPA office and report that chiseler? So what would I do for leather, anyway? How could I hold my trade? Even if I do complain, the big shot anyway gets away with it. And he ain’t the only one. You know how those things are – like fighting City Hall. I only ruin my own business. So every week I go and get my stuff and pay through the nose.”
Mrs. Green had listened with intense interest to Pete’s story.
“Pete, by yourself you can’t do a damn thing,” she commented. “All right, give me the check. I’ll come for the shoes this evening.”
A look of apprehension came into the shoemaker’s eyes, as he handed Mrs. Green the check. “Maybe I talk too much, Mrs. Green. I trust you. I want no trouble. I try to make a living, I’m in this country twenty years and an American citizen. But it could be easy to make trouble for Italian-born.”
“Don’t worry, Pete,” Mrs. Green assured him.
“People like me don’t want to hurt people like you.”

This columnist can vouch for the authenticity of the above incident for the simple reason that Mrs. Green, housewife, is nobody else but this columnist.
Pete may have over-dramatized his story. He may even have added five or ten cents more to the charge than he had to. All this, however, is unimportant. For Pete’s story contains the essential pattern for all war profiteering, for the Black Market, for the unpunished flaunting of all price ceilings under the present capitalist set-up.
Let us follow the streamlines of the pattern.
There is a big shot corporation that has hidden caches of priority goods or knows how to get them. It pegs prices at what the traffic will bear. It hides its illegal practices by doing a cash, and carry business so as to eliminate all bookkeeping records of its profiteering.
There is the helpless small retailer like Pete, threatened with ruin if he doesn’t come across. There is his fear of bis competitors, his justified lack of confidence in the government, his knowledge that the little man and the big shot are just that in the eyes of the law. There is finally the filthy flimflam of passing the illegal prices onto the consumer under the false cover of war necessity. And if that doesn’t work, just tell the customer that the quality is much better, that the cheaper grades are no longer available. So what? For better goods you must pay more money, no?
There is only one way to check these vicious profiteering practices: THE WORKING CLASS MUST CONTROL PRICES – both at the production and consumption ends.
At the production end, the workers must fix the prices of the goods they produce and handle. They alone must decide whether prices are right. If they let the chiselers’ prices get by them, it means that their wives have to pay them.
At the consumption end, housewives must band together in neighborhood committees to be able to act on such stories as that told by Pete. These committees must go before the OPA and demand action against black-mailing corporations. These committees must picket the profiteering capitalists and the procrastinating OPA until they know by the lower retail prices that the correct action has been taken.
 




Why didn’t President Roosevelt do something about the Pepper-Geyer anti-poll-tax bill?
Why did he allow it to be killed in the Senate by a sell-out agreement between the luke-warm proponents of the bill and the fascist-minded poll-tax senators?
Here is a capitulation President Roosevelt will have a harder time explaining than he had hemming and hawing about the deal between the “greatest democracy on earth” and Nazi stooge Darlan.
When freezing wages is the order of the day, the President knows how to talk turkey. He says to the Congress: “Either you do – or I will!” Not that Congress needed to be threatened to freeze wages.?
But when a bill involving the political rights of 10,000,000 disfranchised citizens is about to be tossed out the congressional window, the President has nothing to contribute but unbroken silence.
When asked for his opinion by the Washington correspondents – on the SEVENTH DAY of the filibustering antics of the poll-tax senators – the President had the unbounded nerve to plead ignorance of the whole thing.
This historic press conference at which the President of the USA used the flagrantly flimsy alibi of not knowing what had been going on in the Senate for a full week, was reported in the New York Times of November 21 as follows:
“The President said, at his press conference, that he knew nothing about the filibuster. Asked whether he thought the poll-tax repeal bill should pass, he reiterated that he knew nothing about it, had talked to no one about it, and therefore could not express an opinion.”
Read that again – and again!
Millions of American boys are and will be fighting for the capitalist brand of “democracy” in the four corners of the earth, while the President sees fit to express no opinion on whether the prohibitive poll-tax disfranchising 10,000,000 citizens should be repealed!
The President knew only too well what was going on in the Senate. You may be sure he knew without the direct appeal to him of the Committee to Abolish the Poll-Tax which represents seventy-five national organizations of labor, Negroes, women, etc. Yes, he knew without the direct protest to him by leaders of the CIO, AFL and Railroad Brotherhoods. But —
The filibustering poll-tax senators are all fellow Democrats. They are of the warp and woof of the President’s own political party. That would very well explain his lack of opinion. Besides the President shares with this political oligarchy of the South the fear of the voting power of the millions of disfranchised poor Negroes and whites. What a political overturn they could make! They could even vote for a party of their own class instead of for the reactionary politicians of one or the other of the capitalist parties.
It is true that Senator Barkley, also a Democrat and leader of the supporters of the bill – if you can call them that – declared, in the course of the shouting, that “if the only way the Democratic Party could survive was to tax the right of poor people to vote for federal officials, then the Democratic Party is built on sand.” He also said that the poll-tax is a “hangover from feudalism,” which means that the Democratic Party is built on political serfdom in the South. WORDS – ONLY WORDS!
For neither Barkley nor his chief in the White House nor anybody else was willing to fight to free the political serfs. Barkley and the other “champions” of the poor in the South made a deal with Bilbo, Connally, O’Daniel, McKellar and the other feudal lords of the South – as dirty a deal as was ever made. That deal has not only thrown the anti-poll-tax bill out of this session of Congress. Barkley also consented not to bring the bill before the NEW Senate. The arrogant anti-poll-tax bloc boasted that they expected to discourage “future congressional moves to outlaw the poll-tax.” Very obviously they succeeded.
Every one of the ardent “democrats” capitulated. Senator Norris, old-time “liberal,” assured the poll-taxers, “I’m not going to annoy yon by bringing the bill up again.” Senator Pepper, Democrat, who introduced the bill, agreed to the sell-out. Republican Leader McNary contributed his ignominious part.
This is how the politicians of both boss parties and of all shades of boss class opinion fight for democracy at home.
During the course of the eight-day jockeying, before the bill was killed by agreement, a beam of light was again thrown on the dark status of the Negroes in this “land of the free and home of the brave” – where racial discrimination is supposed to have been abolished by presidential decree.
In the course of a round between Senator Barkley, for the bill, and Senator McKellar, against, the latter argued that the passage of the bill was pointless because it would not grant “ANY ADDITIONAL PRIVILEGES” to the Southern Negroes. Do you know to what this bourbon referred? He referred to the fact that in Southern states there are means – official and unofficial – of preventing Negroes from voting – NO MATTER WHAT THE LAW IS.
McKellar had in mind the many ways used to intimidate the Southern Negro – including lynch law, which is still stronger than any other law in the South.
What do you think the “champion” of the anti-poll-tax bill replied? Was he perhaps indignant? Did he swear to fight such criminal intimidation of the Negro people? On the contrary, he as much as said that THAT part of the game is okay with him. Said Senator Barkley:
“That may be true, but this bill’s passage would enfranchise 200,000 white people – poor tenant farmers who may want to vote but will think a long time before paying $1.50 for that right when the money might be needed to put shoes on their barefoot children.”
The millions of Negroes in the eight poll-tax states are not the con-cern of great “democrats” like Senator Barkley. Lynch law “MAY BE TRUE” for these millions of dark-skinned poor people. But Barkley, Pepper, Norris, McNary – and Roosevelt – cooperate with the politicians whose power rests on poll-taxes and lynch law.
As a result the political interests of the 10,000,000 disfranchised poor are “represented” by such peerless specimens of political degradation as Senator Bilbo of Mississippi, whose own words characterize him much better than we can:
“Us Southerners don’t care if Nigras are on juries when niggers is bein’ tried. In fact, if Ah were prosecuting Ah’d prefer to have Nigras on the jury. There’s nothin’ one Nigra likes so much as convicting another nigger.”
This is the type of Negro-hating, worker-hating, low-grade politician to whom the whole Senate buckled under and whom President Roosevelt supported by his silence. The killing of the anti-poll-tax bill shows that capitalist society is no longer able to extend democracy. It is motivated by greedy fear for its entrenched privileges and day by day becomes more reactionary.
The anti-poll-tax fight is by no means ended. Since the poll tax is a prop under the powers that be, the working people cannot expect these powers to remove the prop – UNLESS THEY ARE MADE TO.
Labor has been delivered a resounding slap in the face by the action of the Senate. It must recognize this and fight back. Not by mild and mellow protests to the President as made by the Committee to Abolish the Poll Tax – and by the kowtowing Murray, Green & Co.
To win the anti-poll-tax fight every local in every union must voice its protest and demand that the 10,000,000 disfranchised be given their elementary political rights. Organized labor must take the lead in holding mass meetings and, demonstrations. The masses must make it known that they are not going to take pro-fascist capitulation as an answer.
 




The spring is the season for Barnum & Bailey circuses – for which you pay as you enter. But the fall is the season for election circuses – which you can enjoy free of charge.
Over here is the daring performer on the flying trapeze – Senator William H. Smathers, campaigning on the Democratic ticket for his re-election to the national Senate from the State of New Jersey. Over there is the dare-devil bare-back, rider, Albert W. Hawkes, Republican nominee opposing Smathers. They are performing for all they are worth. They aim to please a special audience – LABOR.
Smathers takes a flying leap at Hawkes, yelling:
“Mr. Hawkes’ entire career as an industrialist has been devoted to fighting labor!”
Hawkes snaps his whip at Smathers, shouting:
“What have you done in or out of Congress to advance the interests of labor? What labor bills did you vote for during your six years in office?”
Thus shamefully do two political charlatans vie for labor’s vote.
Both of them can only sell labor down the river. Smathers, Democrat, is reported not to have supported the Wages and Hours Act – even that begrudging legal acknowledgment of only some of labor’s elementary rights. Hawkes, Republican, is head of the Congoleum Nairn Corp. and a former president of the United States Chamber of Commerce – outfits unquestionably opposed to labor’s interests.
Labor – 50,000,000 strong, plus friends and relations – doesn’t have to sit around watching election circuses – and wasting its political might on Democratic and Republican representatives of boss interests.
LABOR HAS WHAT IT TAKES TO SWEEP ITS OWN CLASS PARTY INTO POWER.
Note: There is a senatorial candidate in New Jersey that Labor Action urges you to support: George Breitman, who is the candidate of the Socialist Workers Party. (See editorial, page 4.)

To give the devil his due, Thomas E. Dewey, Republican nominee for Governor of New York, has in the last week done something quite unusual for a campaigning candidate. He actually presented some real facts of great importance.
He spoke about the “homegrown fascists” who are staging a comeback on the dimmed-out streets of New York. He enumerated instances’ of wrecking and defacing synagogues, temples and Jewish centers, of attacks on individuals, of the appearance of the swastika smeared on walls and fences.
So far so good – but far from good enough!
What does Mr. Dewey propose to do about the home-grown fascists? Why, nothing – that is, NOTHING HERE ON THE STREETS OF NEW YORK.
According to Mr. Dewey, all the fighting against fascism must be done at the respectable distance of thousands of miles from here – across the Atlantic and across the Pacific.
A serious and sincere anti-fascist fighter knows that the fascist evil must be fought on the spot where it appears. The Christian Front hoodlums and other menacing groups can be put out of business only by organized neighborhood guards and by organized trade union guards – prepared to whip the fascist attackers and wipe them out as soon as they raise their ugly heads. The experiences of Germany and Italy bear this out 100 per cent.
Mr. Dewey, and anyone else who implies that the war against the home-grown fascists can be fought in Germany and Japan, ACTUALLY ENCOURAGE THEIR GROWTH HERE.

John J. Bennett, Jr., Democratic nominee for Governor of New York, has been worried plenty. Having started his candidacy without the blessing of the leader of his party, he was at a disadvantage. President Roosevelt’s later statement that he will vote for Bennett as “the best qualified of the three legal party candidates,” still left the implication that Senator Mead – the President’s own choice – would have been better.
With the trend toward the Republican Party strengthening in some parts of the state, and with the prospect of the candidate of the ALP diverting some Democratic votes in New York City, an alarm went out to President Roosevelt to do something.
So the President has sent a telegram to the candidate of his party assuring him that his endorsement is “neither formal nor lukewarm.” Furthermore, Governor Lehman, Senator Wagner and others who opposed Bennett’s candidacy in favor of Mead – as well as Mead himself – are now moving heaven and earth to elect the man they did not want nominated.
There is as much PRINCIPLE involved in the support that these quick-change artists now give Bennett as there was in their opposition before. First it was a question of the Roosevelt crowd or the Farley crowd controlling the Democratic Party machine. Now it is a question of the Democratic office-holders or the Republican office-seekers controlling the New York State political machine.
A lucid demonstration of machine politics!

The fight in the 17th Senate District, in New York City, is raging on a blitz pattern. The contestants are State Senator Coudert, who seeks re-election on the Republican ticket, and Jerry Finkelstein, on the Democratic and American Labor Party tickets, who wants to get into the State Senate in Coudert’s place.
On the one hand “Citizens for Coudert” have been organized and on the other hand “Allied Voters Against Coudert” have been organized. Already there has been an exodus of “liberals” from the “Allied Voters” and Mayor LaGuardia, who should logically be behind Finkelstein, also comes out for the Republican Coudert.
The New York Times, avowedly of , Democratic Party sympathies, similarly goes out of its way to support the Republican Coudert. While the Stalinist-dominated Greater New York Industrial Council announces that the CIO is getting out “an army of doorbell ringers” to rally the voters behind Finkelstein. And no one cares where the sparks fly.
What is the worker-voter to make of all this?
Obviously he cannot support Senator Coudert – but not only because the Stalinists are calling him a Hitler-Laval agent. The Stalinists, who were themselves Hitler fellow-travelers not long ago, are the quickest to fling that mud at others.
Coudert cannot be supported by a worker because a worker must condemn the hunt for “red” witches that Coudert engaged in on the Rapp-Coudert Committee. Labor will clean its ranks of the Stalinist and all other traitors. But the anti-red activities of the boss government through the Dies and Rapp-Coudert Committees are implicit attacks on labor itself – and must be fought.
On the other hand, a worker cannot support. Finkelstein either. He is obviously an unscrupulous petty politician, able to accommodate himself simultaneously to the requirements of both Tammany Hall and the ALP – while making his main bid for Stalinist support. Quite a triangle!
The “liberals,” LaGuardia and the New York Times are all-out for Coudert because they wish to clip the wings of the Stalinists, who are cashing in on reflected glory. That’s their business. The Stalinists think they can push through to political gains on the back of a politician like Finkelstein – which is nothing new for the Stalinists.
But the thinking worker will see that he can support neither the red-baiting Republican Coudert nor the Tammany Hall-ALP-Stalinist all-rolled-in-one Finkelstein. WHEN A WORKER ARRIVES AT THIS CONCLUSION, HE HAS MADE HIS FIRST IMPORTANT STEP TOWARD INDEPENDENT WORKING CLASS POLITICS.
 




Every store – in accordance with requirements – posts its “ceiling prices.” But —
The last time I bought “Niblets,” for example, they were 10 cents a can – while today, if I want them, I pay 15 cents.
The “ceiling” on “Niblets” has been raised by 50 per cent. Has the OPA perhaps heard about this escalating ceiling on “Niblets”?
Yes, every store – in a very touching cooperative spirit – posts its “ceiling prices.” But —
The last time I bought Del Monte seedless raisins I paid nine cents for a 15 oz. box. Before that they were two boxes for 15 cents. Today, if I want them, I pay 25 cents for two boxes.
The “ceiling” on seedless raisins has been elevated 662/3 per cent. Does the OPA perhaps know about the sprightliness of the “ceiling” on seedless raisins?
The “ceiling” on honey – recommended by government dietitians as an excellent substitute for sugar – is waving the housewife a sweet farewell. A pound of Orange Blossom honey used to be 49 cents. Today you pay 57 cents. True, it was once in a tin can and now it is in a glass jar. But surely that does not account for a boost of 16 per cent.
In these and other instances, the profiteering prices are slapped on WITHOUT ANY CAMOUFLAGE. Prices are shamelessly skyrocketed on the identical product. The wonder is that housewives continue to take such profiteering on the chin.
But there are also ways of CAMOUFLAGING ITEMS AND FOOLING the unwary – and these ways are being employed more and more.
Take a well known brand of soups, Campbells. For the longest time the vegetarian vegetable soup, to take an example, has sold three cans for 25 cents. Now you pay 21 cents for two cans – but the new can sports a label reading “NEW AND IMPROVED RECIPE.”
This label has the magic power of increasing the price from three cans for 25 cents to two cans for 21 cents – a difference upward of a mere 26 per cent. Investigating this matter further, this writer verified beyond doubt that the housewife is being bamboozled. There is absolutely no difference between the list of ingredients printed on an old can of tomato soup and the list of ingredients printed on a can bearing the label “new and improved recipe.” Both are made from tomatoes, butter, corn, oil, onions, parsley, wheat flour, salt, sugar, seasoning, spice water. The only change on the new can is the order in which the items are listed.
This writer was unable to get old cans of the other soups of this company to make comparisons. But if the tomato soup supposed to be made with a “new and improved recipe” is just the same as the old soup, what reason has anyone to suppose that any of the other soups are different?
Does the OPA know about this kind of fraud daily practiced on the consumer?
There has been a rumor around – or am I wrong? – that the job of the OPA is not only to know about such things – but to put a stop to them!
Instead, however, prices climb and war profiteering goes on – openly and under very thin camouflage.
There is reason to believe that at least local OPA offices not only know know about the gypping that goes on, but are perhaps responsible for it. A friendly butcher tells the writer this story:
At the wholesale house where he trades, he can no longer get boiled ham at the ceiling price. He was told they don’t carry it any more. A “new brand” called “fruited ham” – at a considerably higher price – was recommended to him. The friendly butcher swears that it is no new brand, but the same ham onto which the wholesaler slaps a few slices of pineapple – in order to be able to call it a “new brand” and raise the ceiling. The butcher tells me the wholesaler takes off the pineapple slices and uses them over and over on the same boiled hams.
This friendly butcher, inquiring around, has discovered that when wholesalers go to their local OPA offices and ask for permission to “adjust” ceilings upward, they are informed:
“If you use the same label and the same package, you can’t charge more!”
Such a broad hint would undoubtedly account for the “new and improved recipe” label on the same soup – for plain boiled ham blooming into “fruited ham” and for the strange-looking cans with new trade-names that are sneaking onto grocery shelves.
There may be a virtue in patience, but surely there is a limit. OPA “ceilings” are like vapor – constantly rising. The housewife is being gypped! How long will she put up with it?
THE REMEDY LIES IN HERSELF.
Nearly every apartment house today has some joint tenant activity in connection with scrap drives and such. Why can’t housewives in each house get together with the others on the block, organize committees and do something about prices?
Working class housewives have allies in organized labor. They can call upon organized labor for help and for the benefit of its experience in winning demands. COMMITTEES OF HOUSEWIVES AND ORGANIZED LABOR CAN GO TO TOWN AND REALLY CONTROL PRICES!
 




Dear Editor:
I have been reading the space-filler about Basis of Jewish Question in your October 19 issue. What it’s all about is too much ink.
From what I know and have seen I believe the Jewish people have always been taking good care of themselves. What is there here in the United States to stop them?
Personally I know many kickers about Jews are jealous of the luck the bunch have.
I believe a lot and a couple miles more of the reason of class scraps come from the mental punk condition that everybody ought to be equal, no one should have more than the others. If I’m happy, why should not the others? What hell right has one to pile and the others not? Awful what this country is coming to
and in the cities where lots have not and have not much else to holler about except what luck the other bunch have.
The whole cause of the class fights is too many punks and who do not know some are better, happier, smarter, richer, dumber, sadder, fatter, nicer. Bologna. Say, who started the fight. Call a cop.



 


Brooklyn Reader






Susan Green Answers ...
This reader is wrong in his belief that the Jewish people as a group are any better off than any other group. He is judging by the exceptions, not by the rule. If he will take a walk through any Jewish working class section, he will soon see that the Jewish workers are no better off than Irish, Italian or any other group of workers in the American melting pot.
The scrap against the Jews is not a class scrap but a phony race scrap which the bosses keep going in order to ward off from themselves the class-scrap punches that the workers should be handing out to them. The bosses spread the flim-flam about the Jews being better off.
The punks in our population are not the workers who think they are entitled to happiness, but those who stand in the way of the people’s happiness are the punks. Yes, the punks are the class that takes and keeps as private property what all the workers produce and have a right to enjoy.
Say, would you call the guys, who went out on strike to win the eight-hour day and were plugged with bullets by the bosses’ deputies and by the National Guard, punks? Would you call the auto workers, who fought like all hell to get their union established and recognized, punks? These were class scraps.
It’s true that, by nature, some of us are fatter, some nicer, some smarter, some sadder. But, you know, in one fundamental respect we are all alike – our bodies and our minds must have the things that give life and happiness. But when Mr. Grace of Bethlehem Steel pockets over $537,000 a year in salary, plus large amounts in interest and dividends and other income – and the rest of his class does likewise – we have the kind of inequality that nature has nothing to do with. That’s the kind of inequality the class struggle aims to do away with. For that fight all workers must unite – Jewish, Irish, Italian, Yankee. We hope you’ll be with us. No need for a cop.



 


Susan Green



 




On November 14 James F. Byrnes, economic stabilization director, had published in all the newspapers “a positive program that will guarantee our people the basic living essentials that they must have at prices they can pay.”
By this time the housewife has learned to give such programs an I’m-from-Missouri reception. So she probably was not surprised – though plenty alarmed – to read on November 15 that, so good are the economic stabilizers at making and carrying out “positive programs,” that THERE WILL BE A SHORTAGE OF BUTTER, CHEESE AND EVEN MILK.
To add insult to injury, it is predicted that the OPA will be asked to RAISE CEILING PRICES on dairy products – as if they now function honestly! And do you know why. this “modest” request will be made to the OPA? To allow the rich dairy companies “FAIR” PROFITS!
There is something very positive indeed about all these programs. Working class housewives can always be positive that while they get it in the NECK, the bosses who own production get it in PROFITS.

Dr. Clive M. McCay, professor of nutrition, State College of Agriculture, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y., recently declared that “the housewife should be as particular about what she feeds her family as the farmer is concerning the feed for his LIVESTOCK.”
The similarity between your family and the farmer’s livestock may be taken for granted by such pillars of capitalist society as professors of nutrition. Just as they take for granted that – while human beings are reduced to cattle – profits must go on as usual, only a little more so.
The working class housewife can afford to take neither for granted. She wants a society free from war and does not want to raise a family of cattle. Also she could be more particular about what she feeds her family if the bosses and the government agencies were less particular about that item of profit-as-usual – PLUS.
When she wakes up to her own interests, the working class housewife is going to be an ardent socialist. SHE HAS NO OTHER CHOICE.

Dr. Victor G. Heiser, medical consultant of the National Association of Manufacturers, reported “eleven thousand war workers killed or injured on and off the job every day since December 7, 1941.” SOME CASUALTY LIST!
He said that “fatigue and malnutrition” are the causes of this amazing slaughter of industrial workers. It was to provide some protection against just such a situation that labor fought to have labor laws passed.
If any group of workers need protection today it is certainly the inexperienced women who are entering production in droves. Yet the laws passed for the protection of working women have as much effect today as a feather in the wind.
For instance, night work is limited by law, but state Governors have taken it upon themselves to extend the limit from 10 p.m. to midnight to all the way around the clock. This means that women will be working day and night – during the day in their homes and during the night in factories. Of fatigue and malnutrition they will have plenty.
Another instance is the lowering of the age limit for girls employed in industry from 18 to 16 years. This was arbitrarily done by a ruling of the U.S. Labor Department. Kids of 16 will be thrown into the industrial cauldron where 11,000 workers are killed or injured each day!
MEN AND WOMEN WORKERS MUST PUT UP A FIGHT TO HAVE THE LABOR LAWS OBSERVED BY THE GOVERNMENT ITSELF.

Magistrate Jeanette G. Brill of Brooklyn is thoroughly convinced that “We have got to stop bringing unwanted war babies into the world.”
Speaking on the subject of juvenile delinquency, she said that while she was on the bench in Children’s Court in Brooklyn in one week – even before Pearl Harbor – eight girls between the ages of 12 and 15 were brought into court – about to become mothers.
She said that the situation is due to the fact that a “changed psychology exists among younger girls today. They label themselves the Victory Girls. They think that the boys are here today but may be dead tomorrow and they reason: ‘We’ll give them all they want.’” She said further that “War always brings about an increase in juvenile delinquency” and cited England’s increased rate of 46 per cent.
Nobody can find fault with Magistrate Brill’s understanding of her subject. It is quite complete – EXCEPT AS TO WHAT’S TO BE DONE. She made an earnest plea to schools and parents to “correct the situation,” but no serious correction is possible without removing the cause itself – WAR.
The millions of boys who “are here today and may be dead tomorrow,” the ignorant deluded kinds of 12 to 15, their unfortunate war babies – all are inevitable war casualties.
This human waste can be ended by the world-wide brotherhood of all nations in lasting peace under INTERNATIONAL SOCIALISM. That’s the answer.

In one of her columns in the New York World-Telegram, written from England, Mrs. Roosevelt said of the children evacuated from the city to the country:
“The children are all very good. The poor little things, I suppose so much has happened to them that nothing surprises them, any more. Usually these children are placed in some private house with large gardens, where the children thrive. But I fear the complication of returning to London’s slums afterward will be great for both mother and child, for the latter will undoubtedly be very unhappy.”
You’ve heard it said that this war is being fought for the “Four Freedoms” – the most important of which is “Freedom from Want”? Would you, expect that in a society free from want, SLUMS WOULD STILL THRIVE? Or does Mrs. Roosevelt conceive of a society in which the “Four Freedoms” will flourish right in the slums?
What really happened is that she was so carried away by sympathy for the children that she forgot all about “Four Freedoms” propaganda and came out with the naked truth: RIGHT BACK TO THE SAME OLD SLUMS THE CHILDREN WILL GO – if they are not bombed into powder, in which case the children will have nowhere to go.
Children in rotten slums in peacetime, bombed out. in wartime, only to be sent back again in peacetime – that’s what socialists want to put an end to!
 




As this issue of Labor Action goes to press, it is the fifth day that the majority leaders in the Senate have been unable to bring before that body for action the Pepper-Geyer anti-poll-tax bill.
The minority bloc of Southern Democrats from the poll-tax states is using every possible parliamentary trick to keep the measure from the floor of the Senate. And if it does reach the floor, this clique of rotten reactionaries is prepared to filibuster till the end of the present session of Congress – when the bill will automatically die.
The poll-tax disfranchises 10,000,000 United States citizens of black and white skin – BECAUSE OF THEIR POVERTY. Through the operation of this kind of “democracy” in the states of Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia and South Carolina, 264,419 votes were cast In the 1940 elections out of a population of 9,300,000. The other four poll-tax states are Arkansas, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia. Senator Bilbo, leader of the filibustering gang, comes from Mississippi, where only 10 per cent of the citizens vote because it costs $2.00 to exercise the rights of citizenship.
People have the notion that only the 14 to 20 filibustering Senators are the culprits and that the rest of the 96 are as innocent as new-born babes. This is wrong. What of the fact that this anti-poll tax bill has been bottled up in the Senate for more than one and a half years? Nothing was done to bring the issue to a head sooner. Now there is the possibility of a filibuster continuing until the end of the year. In 1938, an anti-lynching bill was killed by thirty days of continuous talking.
There is also a popular misunderstanding about the terms of the anti-poll-tax bill in question. The impression is that it aims to give the citizens of the poll-tax states full voting rights. However, if the Pepper-Geyer bill should be passed, it would repeal the poll-tax laws only so far as they refer to primary and general elections of nominees and candidates to FEDERAL offices. The Southern oligarchy could still keep the poor from participating in local and state elections.
So it can hardly be said that the majority in the Senate, now supposedly willing to vote for the Pepper-Geyer bill, have been untiring crusaders for full political rights for the disfranchised poor of the South. Many of these politicians are merely begrudgingly yielding to the pressure from the masses in the South, who don’t quite get the point of fighting for “democracy” in every part of the globe except the USA.
The final act of this farce in the Senate is not inconsistent with what has gone before. Jokes are bandied about by lolling senators – hot air is being dispensed hour after hour – sergeants-at-arms rush around “arresting” senators who hide out to prevent the body from functioning – while 10,000,000 black and white citizens still wait to be granted only partial release from political serfdom in the USA – to be granted the stingy hand-out contained in the Pepper-Geyer bill.
These 10,000,000 have waited too long. Rights have never been delivered on silver platters to the under-privileged by the protectors of privilege. This is clearly labor’s fight. The political shackles of the poll-tax will be struck to earth when labor raises its mighty arm to do so.
 




Every single item of Nazi-fascist propaganda is anti-labor. For a worker to fall for it is to jump from the frying pan into the fire.
Let us start with anti-Semitism. Hitler’s false and filthy racial issue has been taken over, lock, stock and barrel, by his American brothers of Social Justice. Every worker must be wise to the trickiness of anti-Jewish propaganda and know exactly how the Nazis hope to dupe him thereby. Here is a brief explanation: When conditions become very bad and suffering is widespread, the masses are ready to do something about it. The natural thing to do is to take power into their own hands and organize society for their own benefit. This is exactly what their exploiters do NOT want. So the Nazis carefully cultivate a scapegoat. They try to make the people believe that not the guilty capitalist system, but the Jews are responsible for the misery of the masses.
The pogroms against the Jews allow some people an outlet for pent-up steam. Then the real business of the Nazis – carefully planned and attended to by the top brains of Nazism – is undertaken: LABOR’S ORGANIZATION AND LEADERSHIP ARE DESTROYED.
This is what happened in Germany. Obviously the true function of anti-Semitism is to cover up the conspiracy against labor.
Coughlin and the other fountain-heads of Jew hatred are looking ahead to the period of post-war collapse. They repeat and keep repeating the lie that the Jewish bankers are responsible for the war, They also spread the falsehood that Roosevelt, his Administration and everyone connected with it is tainted by Jewishness.
These statements are pure fiction. Not Jewish bankers but ALL bankers are responsible for the war. The capitalist system of competitive imperialism has brought on the war. Furthermore, any capitalist administration – with or without Jewish connections – would do just what the Roosevelt Administration is doing, namely, prosecute the war in the interests of American imperialism.
Aside from the above fundamental facts, it so happens – as has time and again been proved by figures – that the really big and controlling fortunes of the country are not owned by Jews. America’s “Sixty Families” are not Jewish. Those capitalists who happen to be Jews are as like capitalists who happen to be Gentiles as peas in a pod. Also it so happens that the Roosevelt Ad-minisration is not Jewish. There is but a mere sprinkling of Jews in and around the present government. But what difference does it make whether a politician in a capitalist government is Jew or Gentile? Both are controlled by the same capitalist code.
Truth, however, is the least concern of Coughlin, Pelley, Kullgren, Christians, Smith, Kissinger and the other would-be founders of fascism in America. They want the people to turn their anger against the Jewish population, the overwhelming majority of whom are workers, small storekeepers and small professional people struggling to earn a living. Thus the real culprits, America’s “Sixty Families,” will remain in power – protected by the ruthless dictatorship of the Nazis. The masses, fed up with war, are supposed to change the “Jewish” Roosevelt Administration for the “Christian” Coughlinites – instead of for their own working class government.
 
Anti-Semitism – A Fraud
A worker has but to look at the world today to realize the fraud of anti-Semitism. Hitler annihilated the Jews, who, he says, are the cause of wars and similar evils. But what a shambles the “pure Aryan” imperialists of Germany have made of Europe! And how about the war the Japanese militarists have waged for years against China and now throughout the East? Are there “Jewish” bankers in Tokyo – but with slanting eyes and yellow skin – who are responsible for the imperialist aspirations of Japan? Plainly anti-Semitism is a frame-up.
Who stands to gain by hatred of the Jews?
Who gained in Germany? Obviously the junkers and big industrialists – and Hitler. While the Nazis were staging their orgy of pogroms, union headquarters were also destroyed, union printing presses were confiscated, union leaders were murdered and jailed, militant workers were sent to concentration camps.
In a word, the only real weapon against exploitation, slavery and Nazi barbarism – LABOR’S MIGHT – was broken UNDER COVER OF ANTI-SEMITISM. Will the American workers let that happen here?
 
Coughlin Anti-War Stuff a Fake
Basing itself upon the people’s natural opposition to war, the Nazi-fascists of America try to ingratiate themselves with the masses by being very much anti-war and anti-administration – very much indeed.
Thus in an issue of Social Justice (January 12) is found deceptive matter like the following:
“Let it be bluntly stated that besides fighting for liberty, our American boys will be expected to regain the Malayan Peninsula not for the people of Malaya or Great Britain, but for Sir John Hay and his legalized gangsters who own or control the Malayan Peninsula and the rubber racket throughout the world.”
This sounds like the real McCoy, doesn’t it? But —
What about the following treacherous Nazi tripe found in another issue of Social Justice (January 5):
“Any honest person will concede that Hitler and Hitlerism were protests against the old order dominated by Britain and the United States; were spearheads of a ‘new order’ to overthrow imperialism.”
Thus in the eyes of Social Justice, British and American imperialism are very bad, but German imperialism is a shining “new order.” And Japanese imperialism has the endorsement of God himself, according to Coughlin’s mouthpiece. To quote again from it:
“Japan is almost barren of natural resources. Her people are prolific. Is there not another law, mightier than the ‘Atlantic Charter,’ which permits a people to expand to unused territories? Is it not true that the earth is the Lord’s and the fullness thereof?”
This is typical of the double-talk of the Coughlinites and their ilk. When the imperialists of the small island of Great Britain moved into Malaya, they became legalized gangsters – as indeed they did. But when the imperialists of the small island of Japan take possession, they are only innocently expanding to “unused territories” – as indeed they definitely are not. For what has suddenly become of the poor Malayans for whom Social Justice was shedding crocodile tears in the first quotation above?
To the inhabitants of the subjugated countries, an iron heel on the neck hurts just as much whether the foot above it belongs to an Englishman or a German, to an American or a Japanese.
Any anti-war propaganda that doesn’t take this position is a fake. Any anti-war attitude that doesn’t come out squarely for the end of imperialism throughout the world, but whitewashes Nazi imperialism and calls it a “new order” – is dishonest and a fake. The would-be founders of fascism in this country are not opposed to war. They are merely taking sides in the war. They are helping the Nazis to win!
But from the viewpoint of the worker, the winners of the war must be the subjugated peoples and working classes of all the fighting nations – so that there can be no other war in the future. When the working peoples of the world establish themselves as the rulers of the world, there will be no more wars. That is the side of the war the workers must be on. Any anti-war propaganda that doesn’t say this – no matter how true is sounds in spots – is counterfeit.
So far two “strong” points of the American Nazi-fascists’ propaganda have been exposed. Their anti-Semitism conceals a vicious program to destroy organized labor. Their antiwar propaganda is really support of the Nazis in the war. The next article in this series will deal with the Nazi attempt to arouse their followers in this country to murder and pillage, also their pretended opposition to the “bankers and princes of privilege.”
The reason they speak so big against war is because they hope to win the support of the people that way for their reactionary program.
 




Let no worker think that the Coughlinites and Nazi-fascists of other names have folded their tents and stolen away. They are carrying on their dirty work of spreading Nazi propaganda. The methods of these enemies of the working class are the approved Hitlerian ones of anti-Semitism and lying demagogy.
A worker must realize that in the very nature of fascism it will not voluntarily fold up. Only the worker, can prevent it from accomplishing its aim of annihilating the unions and the whole working class movement. The ruling class will not do the job for the very good reason that fascism is created to serve the ruling class.
The truth is not altered by the fact that the authorities are now jailing a few American Nazis. In the present military clash of German and American imperialism, the immediate interests of the ruling class are connected with winning the war. So the Nazi propagandists who go “too far” are silenced.
 
What Churchill Said About Hitler
But the true attitude of the ruling class toward Hitlerism was enunciated on November 6, 1938, by Mr. Winston Churchill – who today declares himself a democrat second to none – in these words:
“I have always said that if Britain were defeated in war, I hoped that we would find a Hitler to lead us back to our rightful place among nations.”
The only addition to be made to the above is that those capitalists who are depending on fascism for salvation do not rely on FINDING a Hitler. They make sure that there WILL BE a horde of fascists and a generalissimo.
Just whom they are grooming for Hitler’s role in this country is still a secret. But it is no secret that many aspire to the honor – and are building up their following. The ex-Bundists, the Coughlinites, Christian Fronters and Christian Mobilizers, the Pelleyites and Shifters of various colors, and the Ku Klux Klan are the raw material for the Storm Troopers of on American Hitler – who would trample on the Jews arid destroy the strength and independence of labor.
The propaganda of these Nazi organizations had no effect on the American working class when they came out in their true cnolors. Whe/i the Nazi McWilliams screamed: “I want to do in America what Hitler has done in Germany,” a few hoodlums applauded. No worker wants his unions destroyed, his civil rights taken away and the iron heel on his neck – on the Hitler pattern. Neither will a worker swap Solidarity Forever for the Horst Wessel Lied of racial hatred.
It was only when the Nazi devils pulled in their horns and sprouted wings in the America First movement of pre-Pearl Harbor days, that they became more dangerous to the working class. Some workers opposed to war joined the Firsters, not realizing that it harbored the American Nazis – their worst enemies. Some Irish-American workers, having | tasted the butt end of British imperialism and not desiring to fight for it, unwittingly made common cause with the agents of Nazi imperialism, in the America First movement.
None of these misguided workers knew that the phrase “America First” was originally used way back in 1934 at the same time that “Britain First” became the slogan of Sir Oswald Mosley’s British Union of Fascists. “America First” was then incorporated and set up with headquarters in Washington. James True was made director. His offices became a clearing house for anti-Semitic and pro-Hitler propaganda. This is the same True who obtained a patent for a special nightstick which he called a “kike killer.” It might also have been called a “unionist killer.”
When war broke out in Europe, the Nazis here saw their chance to serve the cause of Nazism by infiltrating into isolationist groups. Many of the real activists of America First were the Nazi-fascists.
It is a well known fact that John T. Flynn, chairman of the Manhattan chapter of America First – an isolationist, and not a fascist – denounced the Nazi, Joseph McWilliams, before an audience of 22,000 in Madison Square Garden. But what is not so widely know is this: When Father Coughlin turned a furious barrage against Flynn, for his attack on McWilliams, General Robert E. Wood, national head of America First, sided with Coughlin. In a letter published in Coughlin’s falsely named Social Justice, the general wrote:
“Replying to your letter of July 5th, I have not rejected the Christian Social Justice movement. I welcome their support of our common objective ...”
It isn’t hard; to guess who was the real boss of the America Firsters. And Coughlin is no friend of the American workers.
 
Like Maggots in Rotten Meat
Throughout the country, from New York to Los Angeles, the American Nazis infested the America First movement like maggots on rotten meat. In Los Angeles, for instance, Benjamin F. Bullard, organizer of the American Guards, which sponsors abolition of labor unions in Hitler style, was chairman of a chapter of America First.
In Chicago, Cincinnati and Indianapolis, Donald Shea, Nazi leader of the Jew-hating National Gentile League, was an energetic Firster. In Detroit and Philadelphia America First rallies featured the Rev. Gerald L.K. Smith, a member of Pelley’s Silver Shirt League – a militarist organization based on the storm trooper model, that has “distinguished” itself by anti-strike activity.
In the South and elsewhere the Ku Klux Klan was distributing its poisonous literature with that of the America First committee. Throughout the heyday of this fraudulent movement the poison presses of the Nazis were working overtime, and filthy fascist propaganda was widely circulated along with official America First literature.
It is vitally necessary for the workers to understand the composition of America First. Though officially the Firsters are now dissolved, the fascist forces that utilized it as a COVER to strengthen themselves, definitely are not. They are today using the mass contacts they made through America First to spread their gangrenous ideology. Workers must be on their guard.
Another word, therefore, on who financed the fascist-infested America First movement. This will complete the picture and tie up with the introductory remarks to the effect that the capitalists build up the nazi movements everywhere.
 
Big Business Behind Movement
Writing under the name John Roy Carlson, an undercover man in the Nazi-fascist movement of America, reported in the American Mercury:
“Ernest T. Weir [the steel magnate of bloody fame] is known to have given heavily. Thomas N. McCarter, former chairman of the Public Service Corp. of New Jersey, is another heavy donor. H.L. Stuart, president of the leading investment house in the Midwest, is a financial supporter and so is Sterling Morton. The wealthy meat packer, Jay C. Hornel, has given liberally, as have Mrs. Janet Ayer Fairbanks and Max Wellington Babb, president of Allis-Chalmers. A glance at this list makes it apparent that the movement is backed by a small clique of industrialists and big business men.”
Militant workers have had first-hand experience with the Hitler-like anti-labor tactics of such industrialists as bloody Weir and the die-hard bosses of Allis-Chalmers. The iron heel of a Hitler on labor’s neck is their idea of a bosses’ paradise. Apparently they are willing to pay for it.
Just as before Pearl Harbor the American Nazis capitalized on the anti-war sentiment in the country, today they are busy employing, for their own blackguardly purposes, the discontents bred by the war.
The America Firsters officially dissolved themselves with the official declaration of war – in name, at least. The elements dangerous to the working class, comprising the ex-Bundists, Coughlinites, Christian Fronters, Christian Mobilizers, Silver Shirts and Ku Klux Klan, are very much in evidence.
Their blatant propaganda circulates all over the country. It emanates from the various vile publications of the veteran Nazi, William D. Pelley. Pelley’s The Galilean is printed on expensive paper, is profusely illustrated and bears evidence of plenty of financial backing.
George W. Christians – now under indictments – heading the Crusader White Shirts of Chattanooga, Tenn., is another source from which spreads the poison of Hitlerism.
Father Coughlin – whose radio speeches at one time paralled German Nazi utterances almost word for word – in his falsely named Social Justice – with subtlety and cynicism misinforms and misguides his followers.
Out of the industrial town of Wichita, Kan., comes Publicity, publicizing the Nazi cause. From Haverhill, Mass., Destiny rattles the chains of Hitlerite slavery. From Muncie, Ind., The X-Ray reveals nothing but the fascist aims of its publishers.
The above is by no means the whole list of the American Nazi poison propaganda press, but only a rough idea of its extent. It bears all the earmarks of generous financial backing. Some of the filthy lucre undoubtedly comes from Dr. Goebbels – some of the “clique of industrialists and big business men” in America who hate labor’s guts.

The next article in this series will be an analysis of the widespread Nazi propaganda. Their anti-Semitism, their fake criticism of the “plutocratic” war, their call for assassination and violence, their pretended opposition to the “bankers and princes of privilege” – all will be put under the searchlight of working class interests.
 




In the issues of Labor Action of April 5, 12 and 19, the anti-labor fascist movement of this country – financed and backed by American industrialists whose ideal for this country is a Nazi totalitarian regime – has been exposed. Not only the “who’s who” of American fascism, but the “why” of the movement as a weapon of decaying capitalism against labor, has been explained.
Furthermore, the various angles of fascist propaganda have been analyzed and shown to be the rankest demagogy, designed to fool workers into sympathy with a movement to enslave them.
This final article of our series deals with the methods by which the Coughlins, Pellys, Kullgrens and other would-be American Hitlers hope to accomplish their barbarous aims. And most important of all, this article also outlines a program for stopping in their tracks these enemies of labor, of the Jews, of the Negroes, of society as a whole.
 
Fascist Objective Is Complete Political Control
The first thing that must be understood is that the American fascists are not conducting debating societies for letting off steam. They mean business, just as Hitler meant business. Their objective is to gain political and military control of this land.
In its issue of September 1, 1941, Coughlin’s Social Justice editorially “predicted” the future hoped for by every American fascist:
“The National Socialists in America – organized under that or some other name – eventually will take control of government on this continent ... We predict ... the end of democracy in America.”
“National Socialist” is the name demoniacally adopted by Hitler for his Nazi Party, with intent to fool German workers. The unscrupulous and shameless use of the word “socialist” in connection with the “end of democracy” is typical of the filthy nature of all fascist demagogy. For the aim of true socialism is to take democracy out of the realm of wishful thinking and make it a reality for the masses.
However, as Social Justice stated, by any name the purpose is the same. The American fascists are not mincing words. They ore out to get power, to become the political rulers, to settle the labor question in the Hitler way.
 
Promise All Things to All Men
As was emphasized in prior articles, the fascists promise all things to all men, like the quack who will cure everything from toothache to cancer with a bottle of colored water. They likewise organize in any and all ways that will bring them nearer the throne of power. They create a nucleus of fanatics for violent mob action, to be directed against the Jews and against labor organizations. But to lure the vast majority who do not approve of mob violence, they will form a political party and pretend to use legal methods.
The same issue of Social Justice that predicted the conquest of power by the American fascists and the end of democracy, also predicted. the establishment of a political party to help accomplish this end. “We predict,” reads the editorial in Social Justice, “an attempt to establish a National Socialist Party in America, with emphasis on the word ‘nationalist.’” It is well known that when the Coughlinites use the word “nationalist” it is a synonym for “fascist.”
Thus will the American fascist gorillas clothe themselves in legality. When asked in 1930 by a Leipzig court whether he intended to follow only “legal methods,” Hitler is reported to have answered, without hesitation, “Certainly!” We all know now hpw legal were Hitler’s barbarous methods of blood and fire. The American fascists follow the methods of their master mind. If they are permitted to exist and gain a following, they will organize a political party to coax the legal-minded into their spider’s web. Let the wprkers be on the alert for such “legal methods.”
 
A Nest-Egg for America’s Fascists
As yet, however, the fascists have not formed a political party. Fascist leaders are organizing along different lines. There is every indication of an underground movement. In a prior article we quoted from secret instructions issued to the fanatical followers of fascism. There is, however, a much wider grouping that the fascists here are drawing upon, namely, the America First movement. This movement – now officially dissolved – was a nest-egg for America’s fascists.
Under cover of its legality, an organization was being shaped along military lines. Key workers – mostly out-and-out fascists – were designated as “generals.” An undercover man in the American fascist underworld has made public an Emergency Bulletin sent to chapter heads of America First some months before Pearl Harbor. It reveals the military set-up employed by the America Firsters:
“Each general’s assignment is to get ten ‘colonels,’ who, in turn, will get ten ‘captains,’ who, in turn will get ten ‘lieutenants.’ Under this plan of action, you or the mail marshall appointed by you, should be able to phone each general, each general in turn, his or her ten colonels, each colonel his or her ten captains, and each captain his or her ten lieutenants, all in one day’s time.”
Nobody wise to fascist maneuvering supposed for a moment that the American gang, so instrumental in building the America First movement with its military set-up, have allowed it to disappear. They have been utilizing it right along.
Now comes more proof. One Horace Haase, fascist head of the Brooklyn speakers’ bureau of America First, has promoted an organization called “Americans for Peace.” The aim of Americans for Peace is, of course, to convert Americans to fascism. According to Life, April 13 issue, the entire America First set-up is being employed.
“In private conversation Haase has explained how this would be done. Small ‘peace’ groups, led by comparative unknowns, are to be organized in various localities. They will carry on their work locally and not seek to form a national organization. They will carry different names and appeal to all kinds of political prejudice. Haase has used the Brooklyn mailing list of America First to circularize over 400 chapter chairmen and other leaders of this movement.”
 
Social Justice’s Instructions
America’s fascist leaders are furthermore directing their followers to join all kinds of war organizations. Social Justice has published such gems as: “There is another shortage with which we are concerned. It is the shortage of Christian Americans inside patriotic organisaitions.” And again: “What will happen to the Christian future of America ... Therefore, Americans, Social Justice advises you to get into every patriotic organization in America.” By “Christian Americans” they really mean “anti-labor, anti-Semitic, anti-Negro fascists.”
To summarize the organizational methods of the Coughlins and Pelleys: If they are permitted to gain strength they will hlossom out into a political party, as Hitler’s Nazis did. This will give them prestige and the eloak of legality. In the meantime they follow devious open and underground ways of spreading their poisonous doctrines and building a following. Their ace of spades as the war continues will be their fake “peace” propaganda and various fake “peace” movements, to cash in on the growing popular yearning for peace.
They will also “bore within” every organization they can get into. They will, furthermore, form phony “workers’ organizations” like fhe fascist National Workers League in Detroit – which reactionary outfit has distinguished itself by attempting to incite white working people against their brothers of darker skin.
 
How to Stop the American Fascist Menace
Can the American workers nip the fascist movement here in the bud? They not only can – they must. It is their job to stop the fascists in their tracks. Don’t think Attorney General Biddle is going to do it.
To be sure, the government will put some fascist leaders behind bars, and no worker will be sorry to see them there. Some of the filthy fascist sheets will be suppressed, and nobody but the fascists will miss them. But such measures are being taken against the American fascists only because the government believes they are impeding the war effort – and for no other reason.
In the post-war period, when the expected depression and chaos set in, when more industrialists and scions of America’s ‘’Sixty Families” use their war profits to finance the fascist movement here, what then? Will the government stamp out the fascist movement supported by the pillars of capitalist society? Will it not help capital keep itself in power by smashing labor?
The republican government of Germany allowed Hitler’s gangs of Storm Troopers – financed by the industrialist Thyssen and others – to be organized under its very nose. The same thing happened in Italy. When it comes to a choice between the fascists and the workers establishing a socialist order of society, the capitalist government invariably aids and abets the fascists.
 
Hitler’s Important Confession
Hitler has confessed: ‘’Only one thing could have broken our movement – if the adversary had understood its principle and from the first day had smashed, with the most extreme brutality, the nucleus of our new movement.” And his side-kick Goebbels declared: “If the enemy had know how weak we were, it would have crushed in blood the very beginning of our work.”
Obviously, the capitalist republic of Germany, with the police and military forces at its command, could have ended the Nazi movement at will. Ah, but here’s the rub – the republican government of Germany was NOT the adversary and enemy of Hitler’s movement.
When Hitler and Goebbels referred to their adversary and enemy they meant the workers, labor unions and labor’s political organizations. They knew they had nothing to fear from the republican government. But they did fear labor.
The American workers have it from the very leaders of German Nazism that THE WORKERS could have crushed Nazism. That is the lesson the American working class must learn regarding fascism – only the working class can crush it.
While this war is raging among world imperialisms, the workers must not forget that the source of American fascism is right here. Outstanding fascist leaders may be put in jail, but the industrialists behind them are making plenty of war profits to finance a more powerful fascist movement for post-war use.
Labor Action, therefore, calls upon the American workers to fight the fascist movement in this country.
 
We Must Ferret Out the Fascist Rats
Every worker must be able to smell a fascist a mile away. Every union local must ferret out these groups of fascist rats, and at union meetings and in union papers expose them for what they are and for what they do.
Every local union must make itself ready to defend its headquarters, its press, its leaders, its militant members, against fascist mob violence”. Every working class neighborhood must be prepared to protect itself against fascist attacks. Every Jewish neighborhood and every Negro neighborhood must do likewise. The workers must stand solidly behind the Jews, the Negroes and every racial minority. In doing so they defend their own basic interests against a common enemy.
On the political field an independent class-conscious labor party is imperative. Labor must win the political power away from the politicians who are the lackeys of the capitalist class. Neither Roosevelt nor Willkie is an insurance against the spread of American fascism.
The salvation of the Jews and the Negroes is bound up with the salvation of the working class. Jewish and Negro workers should know this. Jewish and Negro small-business and professional people who struggle along for a living must learn this. Capitalism throughout the world is Sat the cross-roads. If the American workers allow capitalism here to take the road to fascism, the Jews, the Negroes and all the workers will be the victims. If the workers take the lead, turning society onto the progresive road to socialism, there will not longer be a racial problem.
Labor Action calls on all the oppressed to join with the workers in the fight against the American fascist movement.
 




In the last issue of Labor Action the reader saw how anti-Semitism is really a knife in labor’s back and how the approach to the war of the American Nazi-fascists is outright pro-Hitler boosting.
In this, the third article of our series on fascism in America, two more “strong” points of the vicious propaganda of these Hitler worshippers will be subjected to the test of working class interests.
There is no doubt at all that the fascist leaders in this country are openly and secretly schooling their followers for the same outburst of violence as characterized Hitler’s ascent to power. On a minor scale the destructive and murderous rampages of the Ku Klux Klan against innocent citizens is the model of the mob eruption the Nazi-fascists want.
In its milder forms, the appeal to violence can be found in such sentences as the following, profusely sprinkled throughout Nazi-fascist literature:
“The people of America will become Jew-conscious to a serious degree and much violence will result.”
This sounds like an “objective” statement. But coming from Kullgren, associate of Pelley and publisher of the fire-eating anti-Semitic Beacon Light, the meaning is very clear to his hysterical followers. To them it is a call for a pogrom against the Jews – which is what he intended it should be.
The suporters of America’s would-be fuehrers also get the full implication of such suggestive tracts as the following:
“There is grave danger of assassination [of President Roosevelt]. If the people fail to act I am satisfied that divinity will act ... I prefer to paint the picture to show you the forces in operation and to leave the responsibility with you. ... And you will reap as you have sown; and the sins of omission are as deadly as those of commission.”
Thus does the same Kullgren, in a very “religious” mood, suggest to his followers that it is up to them to assassinate President Roosevelt – or else God will strike him down, and maybe them too, for not saving the Almighty this nasty job.
Open Appeal to Violence
Every normal person knows that only those whose minds and souls are hopelessly twisted and warped would honor such vile stuff with anything but contempt and loathing. But this is just the point. The leaders of American fascism gather around themselves the lowest elements, infuse them with unreasoning fanaticism and train them to carry out the bloody work of the fascist movement.
The private instructions issued to the chosen fanatics is much more rabid than the open propaganda. Below is a sample from a confidential memorandum addressed only to entrusted Crusader White Shirts by their leader, George W. Christians, dated January 1, 1942. This and similar secret instructions were made public by an undercover man working in the Nazi-fascist movement of this country.
“When the MAD MOB gets in MOTION make sure that they dig all of the blood-sucking banksters out from under their piles of rock and steel. Line them up against a wall and SHOOT them. See that they run down all the Political Parasites. Don’t miss a single Politician, big or little. Just HANG them to the nearest tree or lamp-post.” (The emphasis is in the original)
This is a sample of the more dangerous Nazi-fascist propaganda. An effort is here made to appeal to workers. The pretense is made that the “mad mob” will be directed to shoot or hang the “blood-sucking banksters” and the “political parasites” – both most definitely enemies of the working class. But right here is the catch. LABOR CANNOT WIN ITS EMANCIPATION FROM ITS ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL OVERLORDS BY “MAD MOB” TACTICS. The would-be founders of fascism in this country are well aware of this fact.
The fate of the German workers must be a profound lesson to the workers here. Hitler directed his “mad mob” violence against the workers and against their organizations. This must never be forgotten. The big industrialists and bankers retired to the Riviera for the duration of the “disturbance,” confident that the Nazis were looking after their interests. Many of the political parasites got on the Nazi bandwagon. But the workers woke up to find that while the innocent Jews had been ruined, the exploiters were stronger than before. They beheld themselves without their unions, without their political parties, without their militant leadership – a new slavery.
No worker should for a moment allow himself to be confused by Nazi-fascist ruses. There is only one way in which the working class can free itself from their politicians – AND PREVENT THE RISE OF THE NAZIS TO POWER. Labor must strengthen its own economic and political organisations and inspire these organizations with the socialist purpose of ending capitalism and establishing a better social order.
This is what the Nazi-fascists fear. This is What they are hell-bent to prevent. That is why they spread their vicious appeals for assassination and violence, that is why they aim to create a revengeful but unorganized and unthinking rabble, that is why they are preparing a blood bath against advanced labor.
 
The Totalitarian Black-Jack in the Kid Glove
Every worker must ponder the fact that Hitler’s movement – perhaps the most brutal and retrogressive in all history – has nevertheless been graded by its founder with the name National SOCIALISM. Socialism, as every worker should know, is the next step in human progress. Why, then, of all the titles he could have chosen, did Hitler tack the “Socialist” label to his anti-socialist movement?
The answer is, of course, that he was trying to fool the working people. The ideal of socialism was deeply embedded in the minds and hearts of German workers. Not only in their politics, but in their Unions as well, they connected their everyday problems with the goal of the working class to establish socialism. Unfortunately, the German Workers – as were workers everywhere else – had been misled by the social democratic politicians and betrayed by the Stalinists.
Along came Hitler with his false use of the word “Socialist,” with his make-believe diatribes against the bankers, with his cynical promise of a “new order.” With these lures he fooled a small section of the youngest and least experienced of the German workers into support of a movement which brought them abject slavery and more misery.
This is exactly the trick used by the American brethren of Hitler. They know that the American worker has no use for the profit-grubbing capitalist who has not hesitated to have workers shot down on a picket line. These Nazi-fascists understand the natural loathing of the American worker for the octopus bankers whose international investments require armies, navies and wars.
 
A Trap for the Unwary
So Hitler’s apostles here hand out a line designed to trap the unwary worker. Their publications overflow with such phrases as “this monstrous civilization based on gold and greed” – this by the above-mentioned George W. Christians. Coughlin’s disreputable Social Justice shadow boxes with “the princes of privilege” and’ “the money changers in the temples.” These fascist fakers also pretend to champion “individual liberties.” They even have the nerve to make fake protests against “regimentation.”
But does any intelligent worker believe, for one moment, that Hitlerism can champion the workers cause against exploitation?
For instance, could Thomas J. Goodwin, Christian Front choice for Mayor in the last New York City election, have represented the workers? That Nazi-fascist, in the midst of the campaign, shamelessly declared: “There’s nothing wrong with fascism. Hitler has done a good job in Europe.” That is the very job the American fascists want repeated here.
Or could Coughlin do anything but harm the workers? This sleek rabble-rouser has only praise for Hitler’s “new order.” This “new order” that Coughlin is so crazy about has spread the domain of the:German “princes of privilege” over continental Europe and under this “new order” the “money changers in the temples” have acquired more peoples to exploit for profit.
 
Coughlin Wants to Cut Workers’ Wages
But Coughlin and Company reveal their dishonesty in still other ways. The workers today are struggling to maintain their wage scales at a level to meet the towering cost of living. Ah, but Social Justice has quite different plans for the workers. It believes that the completely inadequate pittance of $21 a month paid to the draftee should be the national wage norm for all workers. It sets up as a brilliant guiding star the German, Japanese and Russian method of dealing with the wage question. Here are its very words:
“... factory workers, office workers, field workers and political workers [must] knuckle down to the same comparative salary received by the Army and Navy workers. Japan learned that lesson. So did Germany. So did all the Axis powers. And so did Russia.”
Every worker will agree that reducing his wages to a coolie level of existence is a very queer way of fighting the “money changers in the temples” and the “princes of privilege”!
The totalitarian black-jack sticks out of the smooth kid glove of Nazi-fascist propaganda. Hitler’s American disciples, like their master, stand for everything and promise anything that may get them support. But a worker must never forget what they want support for. THEY WANT SUPPORT FOR A NAZI-FASCIST TOTALITARIAN SYSTEM IN THIS COUNTRY!
All of the fascists – the Coughlins, Pelleys, etc. – have one thing in common with all fascist movements in every country. They hate and would destroy the workers’ greatest bulwark: the organized labor movement. They may talk big, but when it comes to a showdown they always side with the moneychangers, profiteers and industrialists, against the working people.

In the last article of this series, two points will be covered. First, how the Nazi-fascist fuehrers are organizing for action. Second, a program of action for the working class and the just-getting-along people – Jews and Gentiles, black and white. Hitler’s cohorts in America can be stopped. They must be stopped.
 




Vigilance is the price of liberty, and the possibility of organization of opposition opinion is the price of trade union democracy. This truth was written all over the Camden convention of the International Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers of America just held.
How did it happen that out of such a considerable number of opposition speakers, only four delegates had the tenacity to stick, to their guns and vote “No” on the surrender of Saturday and Sunday overtime?
The answer is that the opposition was not organized. There had been no preparation for the convention. No counter-resolutions were drawn up for submission to the delegates. No plan was formulated on procedure to defeat the rule of the chairman’s gavel.
That is why the appeasing leadership had it all its own way. Its well prepared tactics could not be overcome simply by unorganized speech-making from the floor.
The preservation of union democracy rests entirely with the rank and file. To keep and extend it, they must organize to fight for minority programs that may later become majority programs.
President Green, repeated so often the falsehood that it was no sacrifice to surrender Saturday and Sunday overtime, so often did he say that only chiselers would be punished, that after a while some of the delegates were hypnotized and took on the same falsetto tone.
Yet from the floor of the convention came facts blasting the fictions emanating from the platform. The delegate from Local 25 in Boston declared that only 1 per cent of the men were getting the $1.12 standard; that Bethlehem Steel was paying $1.02, 87 and 77½ cents. The delegate from Local 47, in the Greenpoint Basin reported that his men were paid 80 cents tops, and were graded down to 45 and 30 cents. Other such pertinent information was given by delegates.
Can it be claimed that these underpaid shipyard workers will not suffer by the surrender of the Saturday and Sunday overtime?

Everything was very palsy-walsy between the union leaders and the representatives of the government seated on the platform of the convention hall. President Green was “Johnny” to the admirals and politicians, and Secretary-Treasurer van Gelder was “Phil.”
Being patronized by government and tolerated by management on joint committees is turning the heads of the leadership away from the rank and file.
Sidney Hillman is the most disgusting example of a so-called labor leader who has turned his back on labor. Every time he mentions a visit to the White House he fairly bursts his vest with pride. President Green showed a similar tendency. When he mentioned his letter-writing to President Roosevelt – although quite ineffective – his chest expanded noticeably.
The workers need leaders whose “class collaboration” will be with the working class.
Resolution No. 2, which approves the immediate establishment in all shipyards of joint labor-management production committees, as planned by Donald Nelson, was pushed through the convention as a purely routine matter.
The auto workers did not regard these committees with an altogether unsuspicious eye. Delegates to their convention smelled a rat and said so. They declared that these committees will put over a “speed-up” which will both injure the health of workers and delay the re-employment of the unemployed.
Is this not also true in the ship and repair yards?
Delegates at the shipyard workers’ convention declared that even at the present pace of production, workers are knocked out by the gruelling labor in the yards. Other delegates described the lack of full-time employment in the repair shops and even in construction yards. It looks as if the fears of the auto workers are justified also for the shipyards.
Resolution No. 2 calls upon the labor-management committees “to diligently apply themselves to increase production in every possible way.” The workers must not allow “every possible way” to be boiled down to “the only possible way,” namely, by driving labor.
At both the morning and afternoon sessions of the convention, delegates got up to express their opinions on present-day politics. They stated their belief that it is not only the Vinsons, Smiths and Connallys who are pursuing an anti-labor fight in Congress. They said they thought that these political bourbons are merely the mouthpieces for the great majority of congressmen who would be just as anti-labor if they were not afraid of the labor vote.
The solution offered in these speeches was for the workers to keep sending letters to their congressmen and to fill these anti-labor politicians with fear of losing the next election.
Of course there is no objection to making politicians respect the vote of labor. But isn’t it the height of folly for the mighty army of working class voters to put into office politicians who they know are anti-labor, servants of the big corporations?
It is high time for labor to end this costly folly and break away from the parties of capitalist politicians – Democratic and Republican.
What is urgently needed is an independent labor party based on the unions. To get their interests truly represented the workers must put into office their own most able and trusted fellow-workers.
 




CAMDEN, N.J., April 10 – John Green, president of the International Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers of America, got the convention, held here today, to give up overtime pay rates for Saturday and Sunday work. But he paid the price of sewing discontent in the rank and file delegates.
After the resolution was passed at the morning session, many delegates left the hall grumbling about dictatorship in their own union. For President Green rode the convention with a tight rein, using his gavel much too freely, cutting off discussion, refusing to entertain motions from the floor. He also took it upon himself to argue against each delegate who opposed the proposition, instead of acting as chairman in the accepted parliamentary manner. He even tried to squelch opposition delegates by disapprovingly waving a copy of Labor Action at them. For Labor Action contained an appeal to the shipyard and auto workers not to give up their hard-won overtime standards. Furthermore, many delegates felt more or less dazed. They didn’t know just how far this retreat will set them back, how hard it is going to hit them, and their president didn’t give them much enlightenment. The natural question looming in the minds of thinking delegates must have been just what their president was doing down in Washington if he didn’t get the answers to the problems this sacrifice will entail for his union.
The tone of the afternoon session, however, was quite different. When the admirals and politicos from Washington gave their usual pep talks about speeding up production, sacrificing and co-operating to break the shipping bottleneck, they let loose a tornado of angry speeches from the floor. One delegate after another accused the shipbuilding corporations of sabotaging production, of stepping up cost bills to the government, of making untold millions out of the war. One delegate demanded that the FBI investigate the shady practices of Bethlehem Steel.
The vote on the resolution, surrendering overtime for Saturdays and Sundays and substituting overtime for the sixth and seventh consecutive workdays, did not reflect the true sentiments of the assembly. Many of the delegates who had expressed opposition and worry were intimidated by President Green’s tactics. Though they were far from satisfied with his repeated assurances that they were not giving up anything – even though in the same breath he called it a sacrifice – they did not vote against the resolution. A delegate representing 600 pipe fitters with an agreement for double time for all overtime worked, wanted to know why they should sacrifice what the employers had been willing to pay for over thirty years, what they had paid during the last war and what they can pay now. To his demand to know what the capitalists are sacrificing, President Green replied that this imperialist struggle for world domination is not “a capitalist war” but “our war.”
A Local on the Spot
The delegate from Local 53 declared that the resolution puts his local on the spot. He represents a new yard without a contract as yet. Wages and conditions are terrible. The men must have their Saturday and Sunday overtime to get “bread and butter.” If the convention passes the resolution, he said, they would be letting his men down because he was promising them the very things the resolution is giving up.
The delegate from Local 4 wanted to know who would determine whether a man was sick or just “laying off” in figuring out the sixth and seventh consecutive days of work. He described the hardships of the workers in the shipbuilding industry. They travel as many as sixty-five miles to work, breath in the smoke and fumes from galvanizing and other processes which poison their bodies. After four days of such toil, it gets them. Who will say whether they are sick and entitled to their overtime? President Green didn’t help much by his admission that this question “is beyond me” and will have “to be worked out locally.”
The opposition speech that got the biggest hand came from a young delegate who apparently made his maiden speech. He resented the charge that it is “unpatriotic” for workers to try to hold on to what they have. Workers are told that MacArthur’s men are not getting overtime, but neither are they getting profits, he declared. He sailed into the Kaltenborns who attack labor though labor’s standards have been lowered by the cost of living, taxes and now wage cuts. The unions yield up their rights, but what does Standard Oil do?
The speaker declared that not only are the bosses making untold millions out of the war, but they think they have labor on the run because it has surrendered its right to strike. He asked the delegates whether they should appease or fight. He predicted that appeasing the Smiths and Connallys will lead to more yielding on labor’s part. Will the 40-hour week go next? he asked.
 
Warns Against Yielding
He forcefully warned the delegates against the “yielding” policy of the resolution and, though he was not permitted to finish his speech, got quite a bit said before President Green’s gavel cut him off. Waving a copy of Labor Action, President Green shouted that he recognized the “political philosophy” of the speaker. It so happens that this delegate has not been a reader of Labor Action. But it is quite true that the “political philosophy” of Labor Action is labor militancy and President Green correctly implied that every militant worker is represented by Labor Action.
As far as answering the speaker’s points, President Green had to agree that “we don’t know what will follow.” He pledged himself to fight for the 40-hour week, but confirmed the speaker’s contention that the bosses think that labor is on the run by adding it will be a “bigger job than you think.”
To counteract the effects of this militant speech, President Green recognized a stream of pro-resolution delegates, deliberately hammering down those who were not known to be in line. When the vote was finally taken, only four delegates out of about 150 had the courage to openly express their opposition. After some wrangling about a roll-call vote, these four demanded that their votes be recorded, to which President Green consented – with the “democratic” comment that it will act as a “boomerang” against them.
 
Too Much “Delicacy”
In the afternoon session the most important resolution was dispensed with in purely routine manner. This was resolution No. 6 calling for the “security of our union.’’ It was presumably aimed at legislation ‘’freezing the open and closed shop,” but it didn’t come out and say so. This “delicacy” in handling a vital problem before labor could be easily interpreted as an another illustration of labor being on the run – or rather labor’s officialdom.
With from ten to twelve million additional workers expected to stampede the war production industries before the year is up, the delegates should have been impressed with the paramount need for an intensive organization drive and for a grim, relentless fight against “freezing” legislation. This was not done. Two delegates took the floor for short speeches. The delegate from local 37 in Massachusetts – President Green didn’t let him speak in the morning session – tried to ring the alarm by pointing out the situation in a closed shop covering 2,000 workers where only 1,100 are union members.
The resolutions calling forth the most fire from the delegates were Nos. 7 and 3. The former instructed officers, committeemen and shop stewards of all the locals of the union “to impress upon every individual worker in every shipyard coming under the jurisdiction of this Union the absolute necessity of making his full contribution to the winning of the war by building and repairing ships in record time.”
 
Local 43 Delegate Tells ’Em
The delegate from Local 25 wanted to know how it is possible to produce and repair ships when there are no ships to produce and none to repair. He blamed the companies for this condition. The delegate from Local 43 told about continued layoffs in Baltimore shipyards “for no reason.” The truth of what these delegates were saying was loudly attested by the volume of applause. Resolution 3 called for the establishment of the Shipbuilding Stabilization Committee to consist of government, management and labor and “to administer and regulate the shipbuilding stabilization program.” The discussion from the floor added up to a barrage of accusations against the corporations, repeatedly referred to as the Quislings of production.
The delegate from Local 13 in Brooklyn accused corporations of violating the hiring halls agreement and insisting on the old-time “shape-up” which caused the loss hundreds of thousands of labor-hours for skilled labor. He charged corporations with holding up work to “get theirs” in profits, and volunteered to give proof to the government representatives on the platform.
The Chester delegate from Local 2 drew a laugh when he described managerial bungling, as for instance when fittings belonging in the engine room are “by mistake” installed in the steering room. Every blast at the companies was loudly applauded by the delegates. In contrast, President Green’s repeated protestations that he understood exactly how the delegates feel, sounded rather weak.
 
Cost of Living Problem
The convention pinned too much hope in this Shipbuilding Stabilization Committee. It is not being born under good auspices. Questions from the floor brought out that the committee should have been convened many weeks ago, but was not because the leaders feared the Smiths and Connallys in Congress might hot like it. They deferred the undeferrable matter of adjusting shipyard wages to the increased cost of living, as called for in the regional agreements of the Union, which the committee was scheduled to take up. The adjournment of this committee is another instance of labor officialdom being on the run before the reactionary bourbons in industry and politics. The delegate from Mobile [line missing in printed text]
In the early part of the convention Philip van Gelder, secretary-treasurer of the Union, rightly said that the future of the Union will not be determined by a piece of paper but “by the strength of the Union.” However, the policies which he, President Green and the other officers of the Union steam-rollered through the convention – namely, relying on committees which meet in Washington and wind up by demanding another sacrifice from labor – have not resulted in strengthening the Union. Should the rank and file patiently wait for the next sacrifice? Or should it express its organized determination and defend its rights to the end?
 




Some weeks ago Leon Henderson ordered the freezing of prices of canned goods. The reports gave the impression that Mr. Henderson’s order would stop the galling practice of slapping 1 cent, 2 cents, and 3 cents onto the retail prices of canned goods – without rhyme or reason. However, that is exactly what continues to happen.
When complaining to grocers about the recent increases in prices of canned goods in spite of the freezing order, housewives get the answer: “We don’t know about any freezing order.”
Did Mr. Henderson order a ceiling on prices of canned goods, or didn’t he?
And if he did, why is the housewife not getting the benefit of his order?

A young woman recently employed in a war production plant was put in a department where she was the only woman. She was taken on to replace a worker who had been drafted. He had worked at 80 cents an hour. She was employed at 55 cents an hour.
The men immediately ganged up on her. They used every trick they knew to “disencourage” her from keeping the job. They hid tools and tried to bungle up her work. The men were so mean because they saw in the new woman worker, employed at a much lower wage, a threat to their own wage standards.
Not only that, they saw in her a new rival for a job in the post-war period, when jobs are going to be very much fewer.
However, that woman went to work because she needs a job. She will try again somewhere else. What did these workers accomplish by their hostile conduct – except to antagonize a fellow worker?
Something entirely different must be done about the influx of women into industry.
Every new woman worker must be turned into a good militant unionist. And the union must make an issue of, and put up a real fight for, equal wages for equal work regardless of sex or color. Thus and only thus will the threat to wage standards be removed.
Workers will not get anywhere by antagonizing each other. Only the boss will gain thereby. The situation demands working class solidarity.
For the post-war period, if socialism is not by then victorious, unions must prepare to demand a shorter work week – thirty hours or less, with an adequate minimum wage for all workers alike. This will make jobs for more workers. Unions must also prepare to demand that plants be opened to produce goods needed for consumption, when the bosses close down for reasons of profit. This will also make more jobs for the post-war period.
In this way men and women workers, black and white workers, must together plan for their mutual benefit. Otherwise the bosses will use women against men, black against white – and the whole working class will get it in the neck.

Washington politicians are overworking their poor brains on schemes to reduce the purchasing power of the workingman and his family. At the same time the society columns of the Washington papers tell of the gay goings-on of the real spendthrifts. There are no pikers in the Washington smart set.
On Sunday 70 guests dropped in on Federal Security Administrator and Mrs. McNutt. Then again the Rhode Island Avenue home of Mrs. George Barnett saw a constant “inpouring and outpouring of guests” on Sunday afternoon.
Mrs. Lawrence Wood Robert celebrated her birthday twice – once at a cocktail party given by her husband, and once more at a buffet supper given by the Under Secretary of the Interior and his wife at their Woodley Park Tower apartment. Among the distinguished guests were House Speaker Samuel Rayburn, Secretary of Agriculture and Mrs. Wickard, Rear Admiral and Mrs. George Pettengill, Representative James Barnes, Mrs. Leon Henderson. And you will want to know that “Hattie Carnegie, the famous couturier, flew down from New York for the party with her husband, Major John Zanft.” It takes a lot of purchasing power to throw such parties and to be ravishing in gowns by Hattie Carnegie.
On the same day Comdr. and Mrs. Charles Windsor were at home to nearly 200 people, according to the Washington Times-Herald. “Everybody came and nobody went,” the columnist wrote, and there was “much fun and forgetfulness of time.” It takes a lot of purchasing power to entertain 200 “discriminating guests” into “forgetfulness of time.”
The smart set in Washington is all for the war to save “their way of life.” And why not?

Mothers shudder with horror at the wholesale annihilation of adults and innocent children in the European countries by starvation and. disease. Some reports estimate that in France alone 1,000 children die daily. In Greece an epidemic of diphtheria took a toll of 700 to 800 children a day because of lack of antitoxin – this on top of the “normal’’ deaths from starvation.
Mothers in America console themselves with the thought: “It can’t happen here.” Why can’t it happen here?
The First World War – which was milk and honey compared to the present conflict – brought to this country an epidemic of influenza that played havoc with the population and killed off a lot of people. It was unanimously agreed by medical authorities that the epidemic was caused by malnutrition due to the war, plus the overwork, weariness, exhaustion suffered by the people. The shortage of hospitals, beds, nurses and doctors, also due to the war, made it impossible to give the stricken people proper care.
It is true that today life in this country is still “near normal.” But what of the years to come? Senator Taft talks of a five-year war. Senator Pepper talks of a ten-year war as a possibility. The Kiplinger Service for business men paints an even more devastating picture – a future of unceasing wars.
What will happen to us all if the destructive processes of war continue over five, over ten years? What if the devastation of war continue throughout our epoch?
Can’t it happen here?
The working class can afford to take no chances. Socialism holds the only guarantee of the survival of the human race in a civilized society. For socialism will end wars.
 




Lots of buncombe is being dished out regarding women in war industries.
We are, of course, assured that little strength is required to run big machines.
To convince us, many pictures are spread over the pages of the press. Women are shown operating lathes – with a smile; or, begoggled and serious, concentrating on welding torches.
According to S.F. Porter of the New York Post, we are even supposed to believe that women are .better able to man the machines than men. He tells us that while women’s strength is about 57 percent that of men and their physical stamina only about 68 per cent – whatever that means – still we have more of what it takes to run machines.
“The modern industrial plant demands patience and willingness to accept monotony and,” writes Mr. Porter, “women often are better able to accept these conditions than men.”
There is no need to heap insult on injury by pretending that women are designed by nature for long hours of monotonous drudgery at machines.

Labor Action takes for granted that masses of women will be doing the work of men during the war. Labor Action is concerned with the problem OF WHAT THESE WOMEN ARE GOING TO GET OUT OF THEIR LONG HOURS OF SWEAT AND TOIL.
A survey made by the United States Women’s Bureau covering 465,000 women in twenty-two large manufacturing industries, shows that women’s earnings are less than men’s in every industry reporting.
The New York State Labor Department found that in SELECTED industries where the weekly wage paid to men in 1941 was the unusually high average $35, women averaged only $19.75.
These and other recent surveys make it clear that while men’s wages far from keep pace with the rising cost of living, the wages of women lag much further behind.
If women replace me in industry and do not get equal pay, the bosses will be tickled silly. It means that for certain fixed war contracts, their labor bill will be much smaller. It means that their war profits – already hair-raising – will be even greater.
End all wage disparities! They benefit only the bosses.
Equal pay for equal work! This is in the interest of men and women workers alike.
And wage scales to keep pace with the rising cost of living.
At least this much women should get out of their labor. Never mind the buncombe!

The New York Dress Institute spends many thousands of dollars for full-page “ads” in the important papers of the metropolis, just to tell women to be lovely.
Yes, you must kiss your husband good-bye in the morning, send your children to school with a smile, be calm and steadfast, and give “your time and service to organized war work.”
But your main job is just to be lovely – so that “men may take courage from that loveliness.”
But wait a minute! Don’t think you can go about being lovely in your own sweet way! You must be “lovely in the clothes you wear” – or how will the high-priced dress manufacturers constituting the disinterested New York Dress Institute make profits commensurate with wartime profit standards!
In its full-age “ads” this boss outfit finds no room to tell the factory woman whose long working hours take all her time and energy, just when she will be lovely in lovely clothes which she can’t afford to buy anyway.
Neither is the working class housewife whose money is being cut in half between the pincers of rising prices and rising war taxes of every kind informed on what to use for money to buy the lovely clothes, in which to be lovely – and at the same time feed her family.

On Sunday, January 11, a pageant and revue was given in New York “as a tribute to Negroes serving with the armed forces,” as the newspapers put it.
The main speaker was – you, know who.
According to the press, Mrs. Roosevelt “expressed the hope that after this war minorities in this country will enjoy the same liberties that all other groups have.”
I wonder if there was an intelligent Negro in the hall or on the air listening to the democratic First Lady whose mind and heart did not shout:
“WHY NOT NOW!”
I wonder if there was any Negro survivor of the last war listening to Mrs. Roosevelt’s speech who did not remember the unfulfilled promises for a better world made to his race DURING THAT WAR ALSO.

There is a saying – not originating with the Greeks – “He gives away ice in the winter.” That graphic linguistic tidbit must today be applied to the great Borden and Sheffield milk companies – the givers of phony gifts.
It was announced far and wide that Borden’s and Sheffield’s milk will be reduced three cents a quart in the stores. Maybe you thought that you would pay 11 cents for a container instead of 14 cents, or two quarts for 21 cents instead of two for 27 cents. But you went to the store the next day and paid the same unwarranted high price for your milk as before.
There was, however, a difference – in the name on the container. In the place of trade names, Interstate, Reid’s or Daily Sealed used on its own milk, was printed the mighty name of Borden’s. THE MILK IS THE SAME – THE PRICE IS THE SAME.
The price of milk – which has gone up 14 per cent since the war began – has to come down. But it will not be by the voluntary action of the food profiteers!
 




Prime Minister Churchill never misses a chance to drag in by the hair some statement to the effect that in Britain there is no longer any double standard – one for the rich and another for the poor. The war has been a great leveler, don’t you know.
So the other day, when – for public effect – Mr. Churchill was gloating over the two eggs he was getting for breakfast at the White House, compared to the one egg a week supposedly rationed at home, he of course had to add: “Just like everyone else there.”
Just like every one else there – who isn’t in the dough. Mr. Churchill is in the moneyed class – and he looks too well fed to be limiting himself to rations. The fact is that money talks louder than ration enforcement in Mr. Churchill’s “democratic England.
On the subject of eggs, William H. Stoneman, special correspondent for the Chicago Daily News, wrote on December 18th that a “whole raft” of hotels, clubs and restaurants in London were fined for buying large quantities of eggs at high prices.
It seems that de luxe establishments – of which there are not a few – pay high prices and are not made bankrupt by an occasional government fine. They can make a big profit no matter how much they pay for their raw materials, and their first interest is to attract customers by serving good stuff.
We can safely assume that London’s East End poor do not patronize these establishments where prices are not an issue.
Under the headline London’s Black Food Market Becomes Shameful War Blight, Mr. Stoneman minces no words. “Al Capone at his worst was a Boy Scout compared to the boys who operate the Black Market in food in wartime England,” begins Mr. Stoneman’s report.
These racketeers deal in rationed foods. They specialize in fine cuts of beef, hams, poultry, eggs, oranges, onions, whiskey and cigarettes. War or no war, rations or no rations, the rich must live in the style to which they are accustomed. They can and are willing to pay – to pay enough to make it worth while for the illicit Black Market to cater to their demands.
While gentlemen in spats and monocle consume juicy steaks in their exclusive clubs, the butcher who supplies the working class housewife with meat has nothing better to offer “than a thin slice of green meat that you would ordinarily throw to your dog.”
So this is how food rationing works in democratic England: The poor get the rationing – the rich get the food.
In the expensive hotels, chicken, duck and other poultry are always available to the wealthy guests. The working class consumer gets – horse feathers.
To obtain the forbidden grub, the smaller hotels, restaurants and clubs resort to the well-known bootlegging practices of prohibition days in this country. But the larger establishments, according to Mr. Stoneman, have been doing it “in a much more businesslike and shameless way.”
The Savoy, Claridge’s, the Berkeley and Goring’s Hotel – four of the swankiest in London – were summoned for paying more for poultry than the legally fixed prices. Mr. Stoneman reported, however, that “There has been a very lengthy delay in trying this case.”
From which one might conclude that “fixing” in some fields works much better in democratic England than does price fixing.
Mr. Churchill is indeed a very diligent propagandist for British imperialism. But fancy verbiage does not stand up against the shameful realities of the capitalist double standard: One for the rich and another for the poor – one for the bosses and another for the workers – plentiful food for the rich and plentiful rations for the poor.
 




Even with all the dark warnings handed out by President Roosevelt and government spokesmen, the average worker does not have a concise idea of how terribly hard this war is going to hit him.
But here comes Colston E. Warne, professor of economics of Elmhurst College and president of the Consumers Union, who translates the dark Warnings into brass tacks:
“Taxes for 1942,” declares Professor Warne, “will reduce Mr. Average American’s $100 to $60.”
In other words, this year – which is only the beginning of what is to come – taxes alone will take 40 per cent right off the worker’s wages.
But this is not the whole disastrous story.
“Rising prices,” further elaborates Professor Warne, “will reduce the purchasing power of this to $42, compared to 1939.”
Actually, then, the worker will divide his wage – which he will certainly earn by the sweat of his brow – 42 per cent for himself and 58 per cent for the war.
A $40 a week wage will buy for the worker only $16.80 of the necessities of life. A $30 a week wage will be reduced to $12.60 in purchasing power.
A $20 a week wage will shrink to $8.40 over the counter of the butcher, baker and candlestick maker.
THE LITTLE MAN GETS LITTLER AND LITTLER AND LITTLER.
Professor Warne, being an expert on consumers’ worries, goes right to rock bottom.
Many families, he states, will not be able to buy that basic food – MILK.
People who now can afford one precious egg for breakfast, will have to do without it.
Clothes, according to the professor, will be worn not only until [line missing in printed text] honored uniform of poverty, will be worn by the workers who produce all the wealth in the wealthiest nation on earth.
Why should the little man pay this harrowing price for the war – while the big man gets bigger and bigger on war profits!
Taxes on the workers cut deep into their necessities of life – food, clothing, shelter. The rising cost of living, on top of this throws the working class back into actual poverty.
But even if every last cent of war profits should be taken for war taxes – as it should be – THE BOSSES WILL STILL BE ABLE TO ENJOY EVERY LUXURY OF LIVING TO WHICH THEY ARE ACCUSTOMED.
The question is: Does democracy mean that the rights of private property get more consideration than the rights of human beings!
 




There is a bill before the House of Representatives, endorsed by Secretary of War Stimson, for the creation of a Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps. Under the bill, women between, 21 and 45 would; be permitted to volunteer for the duration of the war. They would serve as clerks, machine operators, cooks and bakers, stewardesses, telephone and telegraph operators, pharmacists, dieticians, hygienists, hospital and laboratory technicians, hostesses, librarians, theater employees, welfare workers, post exchange employees and laundry workers. This is Mr. Stimson’s enumeration of army jobs for women.
The bill, introduced by Representative Edith Rogers of Massachusetts, provides the same pay for women as for army men, namely $21 a month.
For the various types of skilled, semi-skilled and even unskilled work to be done by women, $21 a month is ridiculously inadequate.
Nobody has yet produced an economic, moral or any other, reason why soldiers and army workers, both men and women, should be on coolie wages.
To the argument that there is no money for higher army pay, there is this irrefutable counter argument:
There is money for everything else, including war profits, which in the case of Aviation Corporation, for example, have increased in 1941 by 1,950 per cent over 1940.

Gathering Dust in Congressional Files
This once more brings to the fore the whole question of army pay.
When Congress amended the draft law extending the draft period for the duration of the war and after, to soften the blow, various bills to raise soldiers’ pay – now gathering dust in congressional files – were also introduced.
At that time certain women’s committees were putting pressure on Congress to get an increase for their drafted boys. Their reasons were strong ones. They argued that their family incomes had been too drastically cut Their drafted boys, who had previously contributed, could send nothing at all out of $21 a month. On the contrary, soldiers could not even provide for their own needs. In many cases the family had to send their boy money for miscellaneous needs as well as for an occasional trip home. These are still facts.
The entry of the United States into the war has not bettered the conditions of the soldier and army worker on $21 a month. Quite the contrary.
Neither has it lightened the burdens of the soldier’s family. Again, quite the contrary.
Wartime oratory should not be permitted to shout down crying injustices.
The needs of soldiers, army workers and their families make an increase in army pay the very next order of business.

The Debutantes Are Getting Along
That permanent wrinkle of wartime worry is not marring the beauty of some members of the fair sex. These fortunate ones are in the social register where my name and yours are not to be found,;
The resplendent annual pilgrimage to Palm Beach is well under way. The exclusive Everglades Club there is in constant demand for this and that ritzy social function.
Southern race tracks are thronged with the “smartest” people. Women – in stunning spectator clothes – have fun wasting money without stint.
On Long Island estates the holiday festivities reached a new high. Only one party was called off – not for lack of funds, I assure you. Rather because its sponsors thought it “unsuitable” to parade their wealth at this time when everyone is supposed to be “sacrificing.”
Debutantes continue to have their coming-out parties. Ballrooms of the swellest hotels are all a-glitter. The dazzling decorations vie with the gorgeous gowns and jewels of the women. Flowers abound in such profusion as if nature intended them only for the rich.
Money flows like water from a faucet – the water-main being war profits.
Contrast this picture of lavishness and waste with the lives of working people. You will immediately see the point in the demand of Labor Action that the rich be taxed to pay for the war.
The working people can’t afford it.

Women Workers Lose Protection
There is a movement afoot – naturally started by the bosses – to suspend the hard-won labor laws protecting women in industry.
Under pretext of the war emergency the bosses are beginning to work women seven days a week, without the required day of rest. The working week for women is being extended beyond 48 hours. Night work – legally limited to 10 p.m. – is again being introduced.
Women workers, compelled by the mounting cost of living, half-heartedly agree to the extra work in order to earn more money and even more, to just keep their jobs. But that it not the way to meet war prices.
The working women will neglect their families and ruin their health. Furthermore, to allow suspension of labor laws today will mean complete annihilation in post-war depression.
The thing for women workers to remember is that, in most cases, they are not paid on the same scale as men for equivalent work. That makes it profitable for the bosses to employ women for inhuman hours rather than to put on more shifts of workers, including skilled male workers wherever possible.
Women workers must set up a hue and cry for the wages to which they are entitled. Why should the bosses profit at their expense!
To demand more wages is the way to do something about the shameful cost of living.
Workers only hurt themselves by allowing the bosses to suspend protective labor legislation.

Rich Getting Own Shelters
A war emergency certainly underlines class distinctions, propaganda to the contrary notwithstanding.
While the Office of Civilian Defense is very busy talking about air raids and doing nothing at all to provide shelters for crowded city populaces, there are those who are playing safe and not relying upon the OCD and its uncertain protection.
These favored few don’t have to depend on the government which is in no hurry to spend a little of the huge war appropriations for mass shelters. They have enough money to build their own shelters.
The fact is not exactly being shouted from the housetops, but one gathers from inconspicuous newspaper items that the rich are providing themselves and their families with cozy underground homes and clubs, combining the element of safety with all modern conveniences.
Thus economic inequality translates itself into ine- [line missing in text] vival are all in favor of the members of the upper class – and against men, women and children belonging to the great mass.
 




The Gallup Poll has conducted a survey and discovered that one half of the housewives of the country are willing to take jobs in plants doing war work.
In taking this poll, however, the Gallup people did not acquaint the women canvassed with one very pertinent fact – which undoubtedly would have influenced the vote.
How do you think women would react to a question about their willingness to take jobs in war production if at the same time they were told that in November 1941 the hourly wages of women in manufacturing plants were THIRTY-FIVE PER CENT LOWER than those of men? This is the figure of the National Industrial Conference Board.
Women intelligent enough to understand the relation between profits and wages would certainly not see why they should “contribute to the national emergency” if their “contribution” goes into the bursting pockets of the bosses.

Gallons of ink and tons of paper are being wasted in agitating women to go into war industries. Women will be forced into factories by the gastronomic and other needs of themselves and their families in the bitter times ahead.
The important thing is that these working women should not be exploited because of their sex.
How about agitating Congress – always so full of proposals to curb labor – to pass a law making the bosses pay equal wages for equal work regardless of the sex of the worker!
But don’t suppose for one minute the boss press will do this. The only agitation for equalization of wages will come from the unions. Every working man out of his swaddling clothes understands that as more women enter industry at lower wages, the wage levels of all workers are increasingly threatened.
Workers’ standards won by blood and sweat can be preserved only by an intensified drive to organize all women workers – and the unions must make the equalization of wages a reality.

The war has forced upon Americans a new glory. The masterminds of racketeering in this country are being emulated abroad.
According to sundry reports, the Black Market of England is run on the same lines as the booze racket here during prohibition days. Several writers declare that Black Market operators have learned many valuable lessons in business organization from our own racketeers. The result of their efficiency is that today in England there are no shortages and there is no rationing for those who can pay Black Market prices – just as in prohibition days the wealthy could guzzle excellent liquor to their hearts’ content.
It is a foregone conclusion that, as shortages and rationing become more and more felt in this country – the home of the masterminds of racketeering – the boys will get on the job. The methods of prohibition days will become as modernized as a flying fortress – but much more noiseless. As a result no dollar-a-year man, nor his kith and kin, will want for anything. The war profiteer and the war racketeer will be united in wedlock by the law of supply and demand.
As in England, the family of the American worker – who creates the wealth the war profiteer will partly share with the war racketeer – will, of course, lack many things.

There is an old tradition in England that an officer is more or less helpless without a servant. This is not exactly democratic, but a British officer is still waited on hand and foot. He is brought his tea in the morning, his shoes are shined, his uniform is kept trim, his buttons polished – he is even guided into his jacket.
All this used to be done for the big stiff by a man-servant. With the shortage of manpower, however, instead of shifting for himself, as most people do, girls from the various services have been assigned as “maids” to his royal highness, the officer.
Came a day when a big stink about this arrangement was let loose in the House of Commons. As reported by William D. Bayles in the Saturday Evening Post, a violent debate raged back and forth, in the course of which charges were made of universal immorality in the services, of the spread of disease, and of the constant increase of pregnancies. Many members became very indignant and shouted their denials of the charges.
Nevertheless matter-of-fact arrangements for the care arid confinement of girls who become pregnant in the services have been secretly made. A girl is granted leave from her contingent, and all details are easily and efficiently attended to. All, of course, on the quiet.
In Nazi Germany, a similar situation was jubilantly welcomed as a solution to the population problem. Every girl was urged, as a patriotic duty, to have a baby by a soldier – but preferably by an officer.
However, neither the secrecy of the British nor the blatancy of the Germans can hide a nasty fact. In every country alike, this useless imperialist war has broken down norms that civilization has found necessary and desirable.
There is already plenty of evidence to the same effect in our own country.

Have you noticed how the volunteer salesmen of Defense Savings Stamps combine business with pay-triotic duty?
The following advertisement is typical: “FANNIE HURST, Author of Lonely Parade, will sell Defense Savings Stamps from 4 to 5 p.m. this afternoon at BONWIT TELLER, Fifth Avenue, New York.”
What do you think happened to the sales of Lonely Parade in the book department of Bonwit Teller that afternoon?
Both Miss Hurst and the department store unquestionably found it pays to advertise – Defense Savings Stamps!
So also Miss Glamora, lovely star of A Kiss for Liberty, that amazing new film you just must not miss, will sell Defense Savings Stamps to you – but hold onto the price of admission to the movie.
 




When the readers of Labor Action get this issue, they will just have filed their income tax returns and paid the piper. That is, if they are among the “wealthy” workers earning $15 a week if single or $30 a week if married.
They, like all the little people on whom rest the burdens of the war, will not have employed any lawyers or accountants to figure out their tax. So much earned, so much left to he taxed. It’s as simple as all that for the Jimmie Higginses of the country whose income tax payments will deprive them of necessities of life. The income tax law which every Jimmie Higgins was obeying on March 15th is supposed to play no favorites. Everyone is supposed to be taxed on the same basis as everyone else – all equal before the law. Says who!
The government has reached into the pockets of the poorest workers by this income tax law – which reach will go even deeper next year. At the same time it has eased up on the biggest money makers and war profiteers.
The newspaper PM recently published an eye-opening comparison between the excess profits taxes today and those of the First World War. Today, for instance, a corporation with $10,000,000 invested and making $2,000,000, or 20 per cent profit, pays a normal excess profits tax of only $39,250. In 1918 the excess profits tax under similar circumstances was almost, ten times as much – $359,100.
The war profiteers who are presumably taxed at the highest rate, nevertheless get away with more loot now than in the last war. Profiteering profits taxable at $797,600 during the last war, in 1942 are taxable at only $701,000 – or 11 per cent less. On the other hand, workers earning $15 or $30 a week, in 1918 considered too poor to be taxed, are now given, the dubious honor of being income taxpayers. Thus have the “democratic processes” expressed themselves in the tax law.
 
Outwitting the Taxes
A worker has no way of outwitting the law. He earns so much and the boss reports it to the government. But the boss corporation has its standard tricks, and corporation lawyers and accountants constantly think up new ones.
A good old stand-by is to pass taxable excess profits over to the corporation big shots in the form of increased salaries. For instance, in 1940 W.B. Jarvis Co. handed one officer a “small” increase from $17,540 a year to $80,000. Again, the biggest salary paid by Bethlehem Steel jumped from $271,000 a year to $478,000. American Rolling Mill Co. raised a $76,000 salary to $106,000. Of course, these salaries are taxable – but not at the excess profits tax rate. So the law gets the run-around by those very bloated corporations which it handles with kid gloves.
But the most maddening instances of inequality in the tax law are contained in some of the “innocent” provisions that are more or less taken for granted.
Such a one is the right of the corporation to deduct “deficits.” The law provides for the payment of excess profits taxes, on the basis of average earnings over a period of years. But if the corporation had “deficits” – real or imagined – during that period, deductions are made, taxable income is thereby reduced, and the corporation’s taxes are slashed accordingly.
 
Our Deficits and Theirs
But what about the “deficits” of the workers? What about the weeks, months and years of unemployment! Workers have been “in the red” ever since the depression. Why should they not be credited with their loss of employment over a period of years!
The tax law makes no allowances for “deficits” in wages as it does for “deficits” in profits. Here we see revealed the real kernel of the capitalist system. The law stands on the capitalists’ inalienable right to continuous profits. But it does not even recognize the workers’ right to earn the means of life day by day, week by week, year by year.
Another “innocent” provision of the tax law allows corporations to deduct huge amounts from profits for depreciation, obsolescence, depletion, repairs and replacements. Profits are thus further artificially reduced for tax purposes.
A corporation may take off for wear and tear up to 20 per cent of the value of machinery as well as amounts for buildings, trucks, etc. Additional deductions are made far obsolescence when new inventions make old machinery no longer “stylish.” A mining corporation may deduct from profits the value of the “using up” of the natural resources. And repairs and replacements are thrown in for good measure.
 
And the Worker?
What about the worker! There is plenty of wear and tear on the human machine. Steadily the worker is depleted of his power to labor. As he gets older he is threatened with “obsolescence” and is finally supplanted by a younger worker. Why should allowances not be made for the using up of the only “property” the worker possesses – his power to labor!
Nor does the income tax blank provide deductions for doctors’ bills for “repairs” in the form of illnesses and operations; nor for “replacements” in the form of such things as eye-glasses, dental work, etc.
None of these items of vital value to the workers are deductible from his wages for income tax purposes. Why not? Because the law – along with so many other laws of the land – adhere to the basic capitalist principle that property is sacred and workers’ lives cheap.
ALL equal before the law – Says who!
 




A reading of John Gunther’s Inside Latin America leaves the decided impression that our southern neighbors are suffering from extreme nausea induced by too much sugar in the economy. In a word, there is lots of sugar in the places where this country buys it. Corroboration came this week from U.S. Representative Celler of New York. He said there is “plenty” of sugar in the Caribbean islands, and that Congress could increase the import quotas if there was a shortage.
“But there isn’t,” declared Mr. Celler. So there is no shortage in this country, and if there were, more can be gotten in a jiffy. Why, then, the rationing of sugar? Another instance of official bungling. The ONLY answer indeed.
Washington has been literally moving heaven and earth in its effort to get the people “to make sacrifices.” Mrs. Roosevelt, as OCD official, has been talking about nothing else. Aided and abetted by Secretary of Agriculture Wickard, she warned housewives that they may have to “sacrifice” by “sharing their sugar with America’s allies.” The First Lady was merely talking for effect.
But the housewife responded in the natural way – she started to buy up a supply of sugar to help her out when need came. The stores of course could not stand this sudden abnormal demand. But this did not mean there is a shortage of sugar any more than a sudden run on a solvent bank means the bank is insolvent. In the confusion that ensued, sugar rationing emerged.
Those responsible for the bungling figured that people might just as well get used to rationing as one of the hardships of war.
However, normal people are not eager for hardships and certainly resent taking on altogether unnecessary ones. Sugar rationing definitely falls into the latter category.

A fireworks display of political hypocrisy was staged by Congress in connection with the appointment of Mrs. Roosevelt’s pet dancer to a $4,600 a year job on civilian defense.
It is not intended here to go into the question of whether or not dancing is necessary to civilian defense – though it seems offhand to be stretching a point in favor of th First Lady.
Just remember two, things about this whole matter: The Worthy congressmen were getting excited about (1) the waste of money, and (2) the favoritism – undoubtedly here practiced by Mrs. Roosevelt.
But if it’s saving money Congress is after, why bother with the picayune sum of $4,600. There are big, fat, juicy pickings elsewhere – for instance, in the field of war profits. To salvage waste LABOR ACTION would suggest the abolition of war profits running into many billions of dollars – acquired through the still-functioning, system of favoritism known as the “dollar-a-year men.”
And if it’s more favoritism the worthy congressmen are trying to expose, the people would like them to go the whole hog. For instance, what about the favoritism practiced by congressmen!
The Senate Naval Affairs Committee, in a special document has reported that congressmen repeatedly help persons “within the draft or military age” to obtain commissions in the Navy “to evade actual combat service.” It is further stated that the favoritism used in getting jobs in the naval intelligence service “has become almost a scandal.”
Working men and women would certainly like to know more about the “democratic way” in which the draft law appears to be administered. There seems to be some magic formula for evading the draft that congressmen know all about.

It comes to light, from a report in the Amsterdam New York Star News, that Negro women working at the Pictinny, N.J,, arsenal are subjected to conditions of almost criminal negligence.
About 3,400 Negro women, between 18 and 45 years old, are working there in three 10-hour shifts, seven days a week. Many of these women – weary and worn from ten hours of toil – are left stranded after midnight without any means of transportation to their homes. They have to resort to begging lifts at that hour of the night – and often pay the price of being shamefully, insulted.
The reporters of the Amsterdam New York Star-News state that Capt. Roger Barton, public relations official of the arsenal, promised “the matter would be probed by the Ordnance Department.”
This is the sort of “promise” given to get rid of investigating reporters. The health and dignity of 3,400 hard-working women cannot be allowed to remain at the mercy of official indifference. A strong demand for improvement is in order. The demand must be for adequate bus transportation for all workers. And the workers themselves must make this demand.

“No Peace, No Babies!” This is the slogan raised by Mrs. Rena Govern, mother of one son, to rally the mothers of the world to end wars. In moving words, reported by A.M. Wendell Malliet in the January 24 Amsterdam New York Star-News, Mrs. Govern condemns war. She says:
“I think war is cruel and inhuman, and to me does not seem necessary at all. A mother of sons gives much to educate them. When they are ready to make a start in life, along comes war in all its fury to kill, main and destroy. All she has labored for – love, patience and understanding – are lost. Why try to attain anything if it mast be torn apart by gun fire? Why must we give our sons higher culture, simply to be blotted out by war? Women are tired of giving sons for war game.”
What mother does not likewise condemn and hate the cynical waste of human life and effort in war. German or British, American or Japanese, black, yellow or white – every mother protests against the massacre of her children.
But the slogan “No Peace, No Babies!” just won’t work.
If we look back over the pages of history, we can find no case where human advancement has come by race suicide. Men and women en masse are not able to subvert the overwhelming urge of procreation.
But the masses have been known to change cruel and unjust social systems. That is how human progress has come about. For instance, the tyranny of feudalism that for centuries kept people in serfdom was swept away by the suffering people. So the capitalist system of today, which, among its other crimes, breeds modern wars, must be overthrown and replaced by socialism.
Labor Action raises the slogan, “PEACE THROUGH SOCIALISM.”
 




On February 24, Acting Secretary of State Sumner Welles and Viscount Halifax, British Ambassador, signed an economic pact which was hailed by capitalist spokesmen as a “further step forward.” This praise is as indefinite as the terms of the pact itself, which is supposed to implement that nebulous plan for a post-war world of “peace and prosperity” known as the Atlantic Charter.
But hold on a minute. The indefiniteness applies only to the post-war paradise stuff. That part – in which the masses are interested – is only frilly trimming to boost war morale. The main purpose of the pact is to state what’s what with regard to lend-lease aid.
It is quite clear from the provisions of the agreement that John Bull’s Uncle Sam is going to be a very strict “guardian” for the duration. It is furthermore beyond the shadow of a doubt that the United States does not intend to allow its ward any military advantages after the war.
Aside from the above definite agreement as to who cracks the whip over whom, the other “principles” are along the sketchy lines of the Atlantic Charter. Article VII states that when final settlement of lend-lease aid is made between the United States and Great Britain, it will “not burden commerce between the countries” but will “promote mutually advantageous economic relations between them.” Furthermore, all nations of “like mind” are to be invited to the settlement party to lay “the material foundations of the liberty and welfare of all peoples.”
 
Can’t Trust These Phrases
These grandiose and vague phrases, which also constitute the essence of the Atlantic Charter, are as much to be trusted by the peoples of the world as is Hitler’s new order or Tokyo’s Asiastic prosperity sphere.
It is impossible for imperialists – be they Yankee, British, Nazi or Nipponese – to lay the foundations for peace and prosperity, for liberty and well-being for all peoples. The foundations of imperialism are rooted in production for sale and profit, inevitably leading to international competition and war.
The nature of imperialism can not more be changed by charters, new orders and “prosperity” spheres than a devouring wolf pan be turned into a meek animal by dressing him up in a lamb’s skin. The international competition for post-war profits will be more deadly than ever before in human history. The war itself has intensified the competitive struggle. Those very nations which heretofore afforded markets for the big imperialists, have been developed by war production into seekers of markets as competitors. Very interesting on the subject of our good neighbors is Ralph Hendershot, financial editor of the New York World-Telegram:
“It is a splendid thing that we have Canada’s production facilities to supplement our own in the present emergency. But we may be deploring the competition from that quarter before another ten years have rolled around. Her aluminum capacity, for instance, is something to ponder in view of the tremendous expansion in the production of that metal that has taken place in this country in the last two years.
“For many years Canada has been one of our best customers. We have sold her millions of dollars worth of manufactured products. The chances are that such exports will suffer sharply after this war is over. It is worth noting, too, that virtually every country in the world has greatly increased its industrial capacity in recent years. Much of this capacity, to be sure, has been diverted to war production, but the time undoubtedly will come when it will be used largely for peacetime manufacturing. Even most South American countries are seeking actively to become industrially self-sufficient.”
C. Hartley Grattan, globe-trotter for the Carnegie Corporation and for the Institute for Current World Affairs, in an article in Harper’s Magazine entitled A Warning to the Peace Planners, bluntly states:
“It will be just as necessary to calculate how Canada and Australia and India are going to sell their stuff, including manufactures. And with regard to manufactures, it will be necessary to take into the calculation not the driblets they poured into the international market before the present war broke out, but the vastly increased quantities they will be pouring out when they shift their war plants to making peacetime goods.”
Mr. Grattan shows how India, which has almost destroyed England’s cotton industry, will, with its enormous reserves of rich iron ore – the greatest in Asia, if not in the world – also become a major steel producer in competition with the rest of the world.
 
China Industrializes
Mr. Grattan states further that China is permanently committed to industrialization and “It is a possibility that China, freed from foreign domination, will put Japan in the shade as an industrial nation.”
Australia, whose industrial plant in 1941 already was “infinitely more elaborate than the one she had in 1939, is looking to the lands and islands of the Far East as her natural export market, according to the report of a British commission to Australia.
These are only a few of the new competitive factors. They have intruded themselves into a world where already the competition was so great that it developed into the war that is now engulfing us. Nor have the imperialist diehards of old been marking time. In Germany and Japan, in the United States and England, the war is forcing an almost fabulous plant expansion that will be converted to peacetime production.
Mr. Grattan graphically states: “There will be some terrible traffic jams in the crowded streets of the post-war trading world.” The director of the National Resources Planning Board the other day declared that the post-war period may well be “almost indistinguishable from, war.”
The sooner the people of the world understand that it is impossible for any imperialist gang to lay the foundation for peace and prosperity, the sooner will the masses find the way to do it for themselves. For the purposes of war morale the imperialist governments fool around with such phrases as “liberty and welfare of all peoples.” But to all the peoples of the world it is absolutely necessary actually to accomplish this end. Without such a foundation this war will inevitably be followed by another and still others.
There is but one way to get the peace and prosperity that the people crave. The charters, new orders and “prosperity spheres” of the imperialists are snares. Socialism is the real thing.
 




The capitalist press has again been giving out on the subject of women workers. There is a hue and cry for 5,000,000 more women in war plants. Between you and me, thousands of women are being turned away from jobs for one reason or another. Between you and me, this is especially true if the color of their skin is deeper than a summer tan. However, there is no getting away from the fact that as men go off to war to the tune of 10,000,000 or more, women will have to take their places.
As a preparedness measure, Chairman McNutt of the War Manpower Commission has appointed a women’s policy committee consisting of twelve women. They are reputed to be “leaders of labor, industry and public activities.” There is no need to give the list.
Needless to say, there is no rank and file worker among them – no woman from the bench, no woman from the machine, no woman whose face is turned toward her fellow working women and whose mind is on their problems.
Every one of these “leaders of labor, industry and public activities” has the same “qualification” – she is not known as a militant champion for labor above all else. Her eyes are focussed on fulfilling the demands of, the war machine – otherwise she would not have been chosen. Like all the committees in Washington, the purpose of this one also is to tie the worker – in this case the woman worker – behind the war chariot.
According to the figures of Mr. McNutt, if 5,000,000 women are added to the labor force, there will be 18,000,000 women in industry by the end of 1943. They will be “plowed under” by the bosses and the war machine – UNLESS THEY PROTECT THEMSELVES THROUGH MILITANT UNION ORGANIZATION AND FEARLESS ACTION ON THEIR OWN BEHALF.

On September 8, Governor Lehman and Mayor LaGuardia were among the speakers dedicating the completion of a few buildings of what is known as the Fort Greene Houses Project, financed by the New York City Housing Authority with state assistance. The usual blah-blah was forthcoming in abundance, you can be sure. Equally sure can you be of the fact that the true import of the Fort Greene Houses Project Was not touched.
This project was a gauge – though a very stingy one – of what could be done for the house-starved population. Here was a housing project which for the sum of $20,363,000 – ONLY ABOUT ONE-FIFTH THE COST OF AN UP-TO-THE-MINUTE BATTLESHIP AND MERE CHICKEN-FEED THESE DAYS – could have provided modern homes for some 3,501 families or for about 13,133 men, women and children. A community building for recreation was part of the plan. The project was to cover twenty-three city blocks near the Brooklyn Navy Yard. Some 710 old buildings – many of them old-law tenements – were cleared away for the project.
The war with its priorities and its stoppage of all civilian “baubles,” has definitely cramped the style of the Fort Greene Houses project. For, from being a plan for the permanent housing of families, it has now degenerated into “defense housing,” and, of course, a community building had to go along with other “luxuries.’’
Because of the stubborn opposition of landlords waxing rich from high rentals of fire-trap dwellings and because the peacetime needs of the population is about the last thing to which a profit-making system is dedicated, government housing projects before the war only scratched the surface of the stupendous need for housing.
A socialist making a dedication speech at the Fort Greene Houses project; would say:
“You must consider the Fort Greene Houses and the nearby Navy Yard together. Together they are a monument to the fact that capitalist society can go all-out for war needs – but not for the peacetime needs of people.”

In her column in the Ladies Home Journal a reader asked Mrs. Roosevelt how come she and her husband – in addition to the White House – have other houses, estates, camps, apartments – with servants to match – when everybody is supposed to be sacrificing. A good question.
Mrs. Roosevelt’s reply is – in its way – even better. She protests that the Roosevelts do not own the White House.
Ordinary mortals lease a place for a year, and call it home. Many, many who haven’t the financial standing to lease a flat, rent from month to month – and call it home. The Roosevelts went to the White House for a minimum of four years, and are staying twelve. But presumably they must have a backlog of personal housing – even as a capitalist yearns for a backlog of orders.
She also tried to save face by claiming there is no market for real estate today, implying they would sell some of their backlog if they could. That may be true. However, neither is there a market – today or any other day – let us say for the tumble-down shack inhabited by the sharecropper and family. WOULD THAT PERHAPS PLACE THE ROOSEVELTS AND THE SHARECROPPER ON THE SAME SOCIAL LEVEL?

There came to Washington, representing Russia at the International Students’ Assembly, the fabulous Lt. Liudmila Pavlichenko, 26-year-old girl sniper in the Red Army – credited with killing 309 Germans. For this feat she is acclaimed a great heroine in the arsenal, and citadel of “democracy.”
However, this girl is peculiarly symbolic of the unrelieved brutality that reigns in both the Nazi and “democratic” camps in this war. In former wars it was deemed part and parcel of the sad vicissitude of war itself either to kill the enemy or to be killed by him. It was even with a measure of regret that a soldier killed his fellow man. Today, however, the Nazi propaganda machine denies to the people of the United Nations the status of human beings. The propaganda machine of the United Nations returns the compliment.
Apparently Lt. Pavlichenko has taken her government’s word for it that the Germans are not human beings.
“The only feeling I have,” she said, “is the great satisfaction a hunter feels who has killed a beast of prey or a poisonous snake.”
Not only does Lt. Pavlichenko personify the brutality of all the warring countries in this conflict. She is proof par excellence of the degeneracy of the Stalinist bureaucracy and of the complete disappearance of all Socialist thought from the minds of those who mold public opinion in Russia.
In the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky, the people understood that the soldiers in all the imperialist armies were human beings victimized by their imperialist masters, serving as cannon fodder. In the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky, the people were taught to fraternize with the soldier-worker in the enemy army, as the only way to bring about a people’s peace.
But Stalin teaches the people to be unthinking killers, and instead of the satisfaction of a Socialist goal, he gives them the brutal satisfaction of the hunter of his fellow men.
 




In a recent issue, Labor Action warned its readers to watch Congress on taxes. If you have been watching, you have an idea of what is in store for the worker – who will be paying for the war.
You remember, no doubt, that the bill sent by the House of Representatives to the Senate, lowered the taxable income groups. Poverty is no longer a protection from the tax collector. Single people earning the pittance of $500 annually, or less than $10 a week, and married people earning $1,200 annually, or less than $24 a week, are to be taxed.
The precedent set by the House for making the too-poor-to-pay cough up taxes which – through the machinations of the dollar-a-year technique – find their way into the bursting treasuries of big business, has been followed by the Senate. Without batting an eye, the hard-as-nails Senate Finance Committee took another dive into the pockets of the poor by reducing the exemption for dependents. Heretofore a dependent merited an exemption of $400 – but with the cost of living mountain-high, the Senate declares that $300 is plenty.
Naturally, to the millionaire and billionaire, this reduction of exemption allowance for dependents will not mean a tinker’s damn. To the worker with a family it is going to make a big difference. He will have to pay at least $19 more taxes for each of his children – and that is something he will feel where it hurts most.
If the Senate increases the normal and surtax rates – which in the House bill now stand at $19 on $100 of taxable income – the reduction of dependent exemptions will hit the worker even harder. Increases in normal and surtax rates above those in the House bill are by no means out of the question.
Through the welter of proceedings before the Senate Committee, it seems almost certain that the new taxes will be collected by the withholding method. Whether monthly or quarterly collections will be made or perhaps even weekly – the boss will take it right out of the worker’s pay envelope.
This means, mark you, that there will be strict supervision of workers’ tax reports. All possible loopholes, however tiny, will be plugged up. But how about the evasions practiced by corporations and their high-paid officials behind the smokescreen of legality created by corporation lawyers? Will workers be allowed to check up on their bosses? As far as this writer knows, none of the many schemes presented covers this angle.
 
“Pay-As-You-Go”
The pay-as-you-go scheme of Beardsley Ruml, treasurer of the R.H. Macy Co. department store – by the way, one of the most die-hard anti-union outfits in the country – is very acceptable to big business. This is evidenced by the favorable comment on the financial pages of the capitalist press. The Ruml plan means no taxes at all for the year 1942, the pay-as-you-go collections to begin in 1943 on 1943 income. For big business 1942 is a tremendous year. Why should it not be jubilant over the prospect of keeping for it’s very own the war profits for this boom year!
As far as the working class is concerned, not to pay taxes for one year is no particular favor. For any taxes upon the workers for prosecuting the war is shifting upon its shoulders a burden that justice requires should be carried entirely by the capitalist class – through capital levies and through the confiscation of all war profits.
For the time being, the much-discussed Ruml plan has put the sales tax in the shade. Also, fear of the electorate in November has made legislators less vocal on this subject for the present. However, Arthur Krock, Washington correspondent for the New York Times, has the following to say about the sales tax:
“While Chairman George has said he would favor a sales tax only as at last resort, it appears to a very great many that this last resort was reached some time ago.”
To conclude: The prospect for the worker – the poorest and the best-paid alike – is not at all rosy. His “stabilized” wages will be reduced by unprecedented taxes, collected at the factory and at the store counter.
Mr. Henderson, price administrator, predicts the cost of living will be up 30 per cent in the coming year. The workers’ purchasing power will have the same relation to the cost of living as a pimple has to a pickle.
Why doesn’t Congress confiscate all war profits and dip into the vast accumulated wealth of the “haves,” instead of mulcting the “have-nots”? Because Congress is pledged to preserve the profit system and the ill-gotten wealth of the profit-collectors.
 




Of all the political clowning that characterized the nominations for governor for the state of New York, the best circus show was put on by the American Labor Party – although the Democratic and Republican Parties did not do too badly in this respect.
The two old parties continued the antics of tweedledee and tweedledum – with a little variation in the Democratic Party due to the Roosevelt-Farley tiff. But the American Labor Party gave final and conclusive demonstration of the fact that it is not an independent political party and definitely does not represent labor’s interests.
The course of the ALP has been clearly charted. It has been to corral the votes of labor in New York behind Franklin Delano Roosevelt, “enlightened” political representative of dominant capitalist interests in this country. So pro-Roosevelt are the ALP big-wigs that when Senator Mead lost the nomination to Attorney General Bennett – political tools respectively of Roosevelt and Farley – the ALP big-wigs decided to outdo Roosevelt in their pro-Rooseveltism.
To consolidate the Democratic Party for the election, the Roosevelt contingent at the convention was willing to “forgive and forget” – and get behind Bennett for governor. But the ALP was content with nothing less than a “New Deal” candidate. So at its own convention it put up for governor one Dean Alfange, who, it is reported, accepted after six other “favorites” had refused the honor.
And who is this Alfange, the white hope of the ALP?
He is a dyed-in-the-wool Tammany politician. He is a member, not of the ALP, but of the Democratic Party. He has never voted for an ALP candidate who was not also a Democratic Party candidate. He has no intention now – even with the ALP nomination in his pocket – of enrolling in the ALP. This is the “independent” that the ALP has put up as its candidate.
Alfange is a lawyer in general practice. So far removed is he from labor and labor’s interests that he has never, even as a lawyer, represented a labor union. This “independent’s” office walls are decorated with autographed photographs of Farley, Lehman, Rayburn, McNutt and other Democratic Party leaders. He boasts that Boss Farley always was and still is his good friend.
The rest of the ALP slate – with one exception – is the same as the Democratic Party list. The exception is in its nomination for Attorney General. The ALP put up Alexander Kahn business manager of the Jewish Daily Forward, instead of Henry Epstein – perhaps because Epstein declared that his “platform is John J. Bennett.”
It is important that the workers of New York get the full meaning of the ALP debacle. Never was the need by labor for independent political action more urgent than today, when the capitalist government uses the war as a hammer to knock down labor.
Working class politics through an INDEPENDENT Labor Party is a weapon labor must grasp without delay.
 




If any one thing stands out above all else in this war, it is the fundamental anarchy of the capitalist system. It is just impossible to make the profit system work in accordance with a plan.
Whether in war or in peace, the purpose of production remains the same – how much is there in it for the owners of industry!
Workers in the UAW ought to know this. They are close to the source of a plan to coordinate private industry into a unified whole – that source being their own vice-president.
The Reuther plan for the auto industry was recognized by all in the “know” as just tops in promoting capitalist production. (We cannot here go into its inadequacies from labor’s point of view.) However, it was kicked around and landed in the dark shed of interested opposition. When finally it was used, it was a piecemeal and handled as enthusiastically as a hot potato.
 
Private Gain Comes First
The story of the Reuther plan is the story of every plan coming from the unions. They have been side-tracked or, if adopted, it has been done in such an emasculated form as not to hurt the profit motives of the bosses (though the plans themselves rarely went that far anyway).
There was, for instance, the union plan to continue the production of indispensable civilian goods by a careful allocation of materials and machinery and labor and, of course, the elimination of trade names.
What eliminate trade names – those camouflages of products that are essentially the same! What about all that advertising on the air, in newspapers, in magazines! Give up trade names – that edifice that fools the consumer – not on labor’s life!
Now Reuther submits a plan for the allocation of steel, of which millions of tons are being wasted by the brass hats of the Army and Navy, and millions more through the inefficiency and lack of planning of private industry.
But “why doesn’t that lousy red mind his own business and stop planning for us?” is undoubtedly the reaction of the military and industrial powers to Reuther’s idea – if they are running true to form.
But don’t get the notion that the capitalists resent plans coining from the unions, but are good boys and submit to a general plan of their own. No, indeed not. They are just jolly rolling stones gathering a thick moss of profits – and won’t be stopped even by the plans of their own government.
Take the OPA as an illustration. It has been a joke from the very beginning because its plan for keeping down prices was full of holes through which the gluttonous hands of the profit-seekers have clutched and grabbed their “just rewards.”
First, yielding to the pressure of powerful interests, a long list of essential foods was left out of the ceilings – and their prices have been skyrocketing. Next came the lifting of the ceilings on canned fruits and vegetables. Then the landlords licked their lips, rubbed their hands and cried: “Me too.”
The profit system, you see, recognizes no plans. It has one unshakable purpose: PRIVATE GAIN.
 
Rubber Another Illustration
The smelly mess surrounding the production of synthetic rubber is another illustration of the absolute chaos of capitalist production. The formulae for synthetic rubbed owned by big corporations like Standard Oil have for years been carefully locked up in vaults because the low paid (virtually unpaid) labor of the East Indies made natural rubber a better source of profit.
But now everyone wants to produce synthetic rubber. Everyone has a better formula than the next guy. Everyone wants to get his eager hand into the government flesh pots. And so it goes on, until even Mr. Roosevelt got a little dizzy and appointed a judge to try to make rhyme or reason out of the madness.
Investigating committees are constantly at work. The wealth produced by labor seems to be equally divided between the profit-makers and the politicians who thrive on exposing them. And the game of grab is never-ending. The profit system operates by its own laws – a national economic plan is not one of them.
Some members of the capitalist class and some of their politicians fully realize that the triumph of the United Nations in this war depends on effective planning for war production. They look with envy at Nazidom, where this has been accomplished; where the government has compelled each capitalist to yield to the general capitalist good. (The individual capitalist, of course, continues to profit.) An American totalitarian regime is their answer to the prevailing anarchy. They are pressing for it.
A totalitarian regime will for them have not only the virtue of keeping private capital in line with the general war plan. It will – oh, beautiful fact – knock down and trample on labor. No strikes, no demands for higher wages – not even any labor schemes for national planning – and no unions worthy of the name. What a paradise for the American master class!
“Enlightened” capitalists look toward totalitarianism as the up-and-coming thing. What does enlightened labor look toward?
It must be toward a system of production under which labor’s planning will be effective. Labor Action declares for such a system and as a step toward such a system: FOR THE CONSCRIPTION OF INDUSTRY UNDER WORKERS’ CONTROL.
And from that to a higher stage where labor, through its own socialist, workers’ governments, ends anarchy in production and frees labor. This is the only alternative to totalitarianism and wars.
 




To the housewife wheat is what goes to make bread and cereal, even though to the capitalists it is something out of which to make money.
You will, therefore, be interested to know that this country has mountains of wheat. For the season of 1942–43 there is on hand 1,589,000,000 bushels of what is known on the market as cash wheat.
This is not all new wheat. It includes the 634,000,000 bushels not consumed last year. In the 1941–42 season the consumption of wheat was 697,000,000 bushels. So that there was then almost twice as much wheat as was used up – even including soldier consumption, lease-lend, etc.
You don’t have to be a wizard to see at a glance that the 1,589,000,000 bushels on hand for this year’s use is a tremendous amount. It equals what was actually consumed last year plus the surplus left over last year and leaves a super-surplus above that of more than 200,000,000 bushels. In a word, THERE’S AN AWFUL LOT OF WHEAT AROUND.
In fact, there is so much of it that it is being dumped in. open fields for lack of storage space. The weatherman and farm children are having the time of their lives playing on these mountains of the wherewithal for making bread and cereals.
With wheat bins bursting and the field decorated with loads of wheat, bread and cereals should be cheap. But are they?
On, the contrary, all kinds of bread have gone up at least ten per cent in the last few months. The A&P Marvel bread which was selling two loaves for fifteen cents, is now ten cents a loaf. This is an increase of thirty-three and a third per cent. The A&P whole wheat bread, which was nine cents a loaf, is now ten cents, an increase of over eleven per cent. And the prices of cereals have risen by ten, twelve and a half and sixteen and two-thirds per cent.
Now what you are to figure out, dear reader, are the why and the wherefore of rising prices of bread and cereal, while a super-colossal crop of wheat is going to waste on the open fields.
Do I hear you exclaim: “Elementary, my dear Susan!” You said it! Huge private interests – with the cooperation of Congress – are pay-triotically taking advantage of the war to line their own pockets with gold.

On a Jersey road I was given a lift by a woman employed in an unorganized out-of-town mill operating exclusively on Army orders. From her fragmentary remarks, the following story shaped up:
The stretch-out is in full force. One woman is on twenty-four looms. The only help she gets is from a young girl who feeds the spindles for her and for several other operators.
The temperature of the work rooms is kept at 96 degrees – an Army requirement because the cloth for uniforms comes out better when ma.de in this heat.
Needless to say, women are constantly passing out. A six-hour day is the most they can take. Absences are not permitted. In case of illness necessitating a day off, a woman herself must arrange with a worker from another shift to take her place.
Being consistent in its taboo on absences, the boss pays the woman who is suppose to be on the job and not the one who actually did the work for that day. The worker herself settles accounts with the substitute who did her the favor of working through twelve hours in 96 degrees of heat.
With a wry smile, my informant commented that twelve hours of labor in that temperature doesn’t do the substitute any good, either.
Under such deplorable conditions millions of yards of cloth are turned out for the Army – while the organizing department of the United Textile Workers seems to have put up a sign reading: “Closed for the Duration.” That sign must come down.

From here and there one can piece together a picture of how soldiers spend their spare time. The mass of khaki-clad up-rooted humanity that swarms into the “soldier towns” must be a sad sight.
To these two-by-four towns, which boast perhaps a drug store, a movie, a bar and a restaurant, the hordes of soldiers come from the camps for a change of atmosphere. But there is nothing to do.
They sit around in doorways and lean against posts, just doing nothing by the hour.
The USO buildings don’t even begin to accommodate the khaki influx into these towns. Besides, many soldiers just don’t care for the USO.
The soldier who can get himself a girl is a man apart. Provincial mammas are not particularly anxious to have their girls traipsing around with lonely, women-starved soldier boys.
For a change from warming a doorstep or leaning against a post, the private gets the opportunity to salute officers who may have the hardihood to stroll down the street. Army regulations require this undemocratic procedure.

No WORKING CLASS ever wins a war. The working classes of the Allied Nations and, the working classes of the Central Powers alike lost in the last war. And no matter who the victors of this war will be, the INTERNATIONAL WORKING CLASSES can only be the losers – of their sons, their health, their homes, their jobs – when the war is over.
And that is what every working class mother should teach her children about war – Dorothy Thompson to the contrary notwithstanding.
Dorothy Thompson, whose name is never written or spoken without appending the words “celebrated columnist,” perhaps thinks she is so great that she doesn’t have to be consistent.
In December 1929, when nobody was yet seriously thinking about the Second World War, she was very outspoken on the subject of war.
“If I had children,” she wrote, “I would tell them just one thing about the last war, and I would tell it to them over and over again: No nation won it. Every one lost it. And from now on all great wars will always be lost by all the combatants.”
In December 1939, when the Second World War was a reality and this nation was preparing to get in, Dorothy scurried onto the war-mongering bandwagon with such decided opinions as:
“The statement that ‘nobody ever wins a war’ is pacifist propaganda and poppycock.”
Obviously Dorothy suffered amnesia and forgot what she had said a decade before, which is the pattern followed by all liberals – BRAVE BEFORE THE EVENT. However, the statement that “nobody ever wins a war” actually is cock-eyed nonsense. The RULING CLASSES of the Allied nations won the last war and got as their spoils Germany’s colonies and foreign trade. If the hated Nazis win this war, the RULING CLASS of Germany will get as its spoils the colonies of the United Nations and most of their world-wide trade.
Obviously, SOMEONE does win a war – and it is for this kind of victory that billions of dollars and millions of lives are staked. But —
 




When Dean Alfange – Tammany Hall politician – accepted the nomination as gubernatorial candidate for the misnamed American Labor Party he made loud claims to being the one and only true crusader for Roosevelt and for what Roosevelt stands for. Apparently, however, Roosevelt knows better than Alfange what Roosevelt stands for.
At any rate, no one can be arrested for making the kind of bid for presidential support that Alfange made. He just didn’t have any luck.
So Alfange shows signs of shifting his allegiance. While still wearing the drooping plume of a Roosevelt crusader, he is casting sidelong glances in the direction of the man he considers the “heir apparent,” namely, Willkie. Says Alfange of Willkie:
“I recommend his courage and vision as an example of the type of leadership which is needed in these days of upheaval.”
Will Mr. Alfange spare a moment of his precious time to show just why any working man or woman should support a candidate with a Tammany Hall background – running on the ticket of a fake labor party (of which he is not even a member) – and at the same time making eyes at the next presidential candidate of the Republican Party?
Thomas E. Dewey, the Republican Party white hope, has as little to offer the people as his opponents. His main talking point seems to be the blundering, the inefficiency and the inconsistencies of the Democratic administration – although he is a bit timid even on this point for fear of being accused of “disturbing national unity.”
Still, this being his main bone of contention, it is apparent that Mr. Dewey’s is a case of the pot calling the kettle black. His lot is not a happy one. For who is there not acquainted with the blundering, the inefficiency and the inconsistencies of Republican administrations – notably those of the last Republican administration.
Is it Mr. Dewey’s idea of enlightened democracy that the people must place their faith either in a soot-blackened pot or in a soot-blackened kettle?

“We must begin now to prepare America to receive home the millions of Americans who are fighting the battle of democracy ... I shall do everything in my power to see that nothing is left undone to take the fullest care of those whose physical scars have been received through their sacrifice.’’
This post-war promise from Democratic candidate Bennett sounds like the promise to a turkey that it will be roasted in grand style after its head is chopped off.
Labor Action has a better idea – the Socialist system of society that will forever outlaw war, war casualties and post-war cripples.

Israel Amter, Communist Party candidate, follows the party line up and down the State of New York.
From the Kremlin came the ukase that all the brethren must start shouting for a second front p.d.q. So they are all shouting. Mr. Amter uses his campaign speeches to shout the loudest.
If the Stalin-Hitler pact had not been so short-lived, Mr. Amter would now be trying to convince his fellow citizens that naziism is quite innocuous – IN FACT, ONLY A MATTER OF TASTE – as he was doing not so long ago.
American workers never had a taste for naziism. Neither do they or should they have a taste for a Charlie McCarthy for Dictator Stalin.

Here’s another one for Mr. Alfange to answer:
He promises that as Governor of the State of New York he will “preserve labor’s Magna Carta.” He also promises hat as Governor of the State of New York he will “place New York’s full weight behind the President’s seven-point economic program and implement it by state legislation.”
Now then, Mr. Alfange, the right to strike is the MAGNA of labor’s Magna Carta. Without that right, labor is like a glove without the hand in it. However, Mr. Alfange, President Roosevelt’s economic program has taken that elementary right away from labor?
Would you seek to restore that right? Or would you “place New York’s full weight” behind the President’s no-strike edict “AND IMPLEMENT IT BY STATE LEGISLATION”?
Just a question, Mr. Allange. YOU REALLY CAN’T STAND FOR BOTH, YOU KNOW!

In the past week the candidacy of Mr. Bennett, now blessed by President Roosevelt, has been endorsed by the capitalist Owen D. Young, by the Tammany politician, Alfred E. Smith – and by the officials of the “Big Four” Railway Brotherhoods, representing some 175,000 railroad workers.
It is altogether fitting and proper that Boss Young and Political-Henchman Smith should endorse the candidate of their favorite boss party. It is altogether unfitting and improper for officials of workers unions to endorse ANY CANDIDATE OF ANY BOSS PARTY.
That the officials of the Railway Brotherhoods and the officials of other unions do so, indicates that they are still engaged in the Judas job of keeping labor from realising its full political power.
The millions of working people of this country need be beholden to no one for political favors. They don’t have to worry about securing “the good will” of the New Dealers or of the Old Dealers or of any of the Raw Dealers.
Labor must get put of the straightjacket of boss politics into which false leaders have tricked them. With an INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY and a WORKING CLASS PROGRAM, labor could actually fight for the things it wants.
 




The would-be democrats who beat their chests, shout for race equality and put forth pet schemes to accomplish it, cut a ridiculous figure. Their schemes are as effective as a snowball in Hades because they tip-toe gingerly around the economic and class basis of race discrimination but do not dare to grapple with it.
One of the latest “contributions” on the question of anti-Semitism was a discussion in the newspaper PM by the novelist Pearl Buck of some warped ideas presented by W.M. Kiplinger in his book, Washington Is Like That. The subject-matter is Jews in government jobs.
Kiplinger, is of the opinion that “non-Jews, the 96 per cent of the population, should recognize that Jewish citizens are entitled to participate in government with the same rights as all other citizens.” On the, other hand, says Kiplinger, the Jews should remember that they are only 4 per cent of the total population – and should “AVOID AN EXCESSIVE LOADING OF THE GOVERNMENT WITH JEWISH CITIZENS.”
“If such good sense is shown by the 96 per cent and by the 4 per cent, PERHAPS EVENTUALLY this issue can be dissolved and become what it ought to be – no issue whatsoever.”
Thus Kiplinger.
What he does here is obvious. He is “solving” anti-Semitism by catering to it. Running a private news service for business men, he doubtless does not wish to rub any of them the wrong way. No wonder he is skeptical of his “solution” and dresses, it up with a “perhaps eventually.” Pearl Buck is absolutely right in declaring that Kiplinger is telling the Jews to “stay in your 4 per cent ghetto” in regard to government jobs.
Mrs. Buck states the case, against Kiplinger in the following:
“He does not face the question his facts themselves ask. What are the Jews going to do if private enterprise does not allow them jobs sufficient to feed them, and if they have to stay inside the 4 per cent ghetto? Obviously there will be many persons without jobs. No, unfortunately, this handful of facts does not add up to all the figures. To make them add up in this case, 4 per cent of all the jobs in the country ought to go to Jews. Anything less than this is not fair. You can’t ask people just quietly to starve in order to respect a prejudice against them.”
Then Mrs. Buck goes on to show how idiotic is this idea of allotting jobs on the percentage basis. The same would have to be done for the Protestants and Catholics, for Negroes, for women, for Italo-Americans, etc., etc. Society, of course, could not function on such artificial divisions. So Mrs. Buck does quite a good job in annihilating Kiplinger’s 4 per cent ghetto idea.
But what does she offer in its place? NOTHING, ABSOLUTELY NOTHING!
In effect, all she does is to tell the anti-Semites that they ought to be ashamed of themselves and to scold them for helping Hitler “conquer the United States from within.”
This is neither going to the root of the problem nor offering a solution. As a matter of fact, all the pogrom-mongers and Jim Crow demagogues must feel considerably strengthened if the so-called leaders of race equality can do no better than Mrs. Buck.
The pogrom-monger knows what will draw a following. He shouts that the Jews have too many professional and other jobs, that they own too many stores, and so on. Similarly, the Jim Crow demagogue rants that too many Negroes are getting into better jobs. Always race hatred – be it against the Jew or against the Negro – rotates around the vital matter of jobs, around the question of making a living. Why?
Because capitalist society is a system of job insecurity, of not enough to live on – in the midst of plenty. Food, clothing, shelter and trimmings are things we must struggle for. The flow of the wherewithal of life is uncertain, unreliable, controlled by the idiosyncrasies of a system geared for making profits for the economic masters.
Fear of unemployment, of poverty, of starvation, of destitution has its clammy grip on the heart of all the people. That is why the big and little Hitlers can stir up Gentile against Jew, making the Gentile falsely believe that if the Jew is kicked out there will be more security for himself. In Germany the Jew has been kicked out – and the Gentile starves. The same would be true here, but fear tor the future plays wicked tricks on people.
Until we have a society that guarantees employment for all, and the free and constant flow of consumer goods to all, the Hitlers will be able to use the economic insecurity of the people to create anti-Semitism – and Jim Crowism.
You never heard anybody – no matter how anti-Semitic – claim that the Jews breathe too much air. And no representative of the ruling class interested in keeping the people divided could work up a pogrom on the basis of the Jews consuming too much air. Why? Because there is plenty of air for everyone.
Similarly, for example, with water. Our rulers, whose power continues only so long as the ruled are divided, could never get a spark of Jew-hatred out of the Gentile population by shouting that the Jews drink too much water and take too many baths. Why? Because society provides plenty of water for everyone – that minimum capitalist society does provide, even though it isn’t always hot.
That is why Labor Action summons all workers to end the capitalist system of economic insecurity and class rule. The fight against race discrimination and for job equality NOW for all workers – Jew and Gentile, black and white – must be fought tooth and nail. THAT GOES WITHOUT SAYING. But socialism alone is the true basis for the brotherhood of man. For socialism will end the brutal struggle for a crust of bread. It will free the economic forces from the deadening grip of capitalist profit-makers and make secure to all men all the good things of life.
 




The Ku Klux Klan rides again. With fire and blood, this scum of the earth once more attempts to terrorize Jews, Negroes – and labor organizers. Here is a brief sketch of its most recent activities.
On May 9 a thousand hooded and robed artists of the fagot, whip and gun, burned fiery crosses near Atlanta, Ga., in a ceremony to initiate several hundred new members – at $10 per sucker initiation fee. There were also about one thousand spectators. A new feature is the acceptance of women into the Klan. The Grand Dragon of Atlanta boasted 20,000 new members in Georgia, among them Atlanta firemen and policemen.
In Chattanooga, Tenn., a cross was burned in front of a Jewish drug store, and all Jews were warned to pack up and get out. In Los Angeles on May 21 a fiery cross blazed before the Jewish fraternity house of University of Southern California students. The letters KKK had also been smeared on the walls of the house.
Last August a Negro taxi driver was killed in Atlanta, and agents working within the Kavalier Klub, the KKK strong arm squad, have reported to the Georgia Attorney General that these vicious hoodlums boasted about the murder. On February 13 a Negro veteran, 21 years old, was whipped while covered by a gun, receiving fifty-two lashes. This terroristic crime is laid at the door of the KKK by the Georgia Attorney General’s office.
On May 11 wires were cut to prevent William Green, AFL president, from broadcasting a speech from the Southern Labor Conference of the AFL, and Drew Pearson reported in his column that Klansmen in Asheville, N.C., were taking the glory of this deed upon themselves. In Crestview, Fla., as reported by columnist Victor Riesel, a mob threw a white-haired 70-year-old woman labor organizer bodily out of a public meeting, while the police stood idly by. At Defuniak Springs, Fla., a mob burned picket signs in the streets and the rioters were identified as “night riders.” In Andalusia, Ala., labor leaders found in their mail KKK threats to “blow the union hall to hell.”
 
Why the Revival?
The above enumeration is by no means a full bill of particulars – merely an indication of the kind of terroristic activities the revived KKK is engaging in. Why the revival of the Klan? Why the renewed use of terror by violence, by fire and blood?
To the putrefied in mind and soul, the anti-Semitic atrocities of the Nazis – continued in more genteel form by the victorious powers – have only intensified their own anti-Semitism. To the Southern white aristocracy, based on the enslavement of the Negro, the “new Negro,” who is insisting on some of the democracy he was supposed to have fought for, is a threat that must be put down. Here are two causes for the revival of the KKK. But the chief cause is the CIO’s “Operation Dixie.”
In “Operation Dixie” the Southern capitalists and landowners see their doom. The success of the CIO’s plan to organize millions of white and black workers in textile, lumber, steel, chemicals, agriculture, etc., throughout the South, will definitely deliver irreparable blows to the Jim Crow system below the Mason-Dixon line. The organization drive, which the AFL also announced, aimed to equalize the wages of the Southern worker with those of the Northern worker. Not only will this rise in the
standard of living cut into the profits of the capitalists and landlords, it will undermine the political backwardness that has kept such human garbage as Rankin and Bilbo in Congress as “representatives of the people.” Among other things to go will be the poll tax and the lily white primaries.
This accounts for Rankin’s crazed reaction to “Operation Dixie.”
“It’s a Communist plot,” he said. “That’s what I know about it. They’ll be down there buying elections. They’ll be trying to give the n........r a vote. No n........r will ever run against me. Of course we slipped up once. We let them beat Martin Dies and Joe Starnes. We’re all asleep at the switch. They’re takin’ over the country; we got to stop them if we want this country.”
The fiery fagots, whips and guns of the KKK won’t stop the drive to organize white and black workers, to raise their economic, social and political life, Mr. Ranting Rankin!
 
Bilbo and the Klan
Bilbo, “the man,” also incites the Klan elements. He is campaigning for re-election on a “platform” of keeping the “Northern Communists” out of the South, and “the man” presents himself as a courageous crusader against this new bunch of carpetbaggers from the North – the CIO organizers! Columnist Marquis W. Childs comments in the New York Post:
“Indications are that Bilbo will be able to make potent use of this appeal in his current campaign. He is aiming, of course, at the Ku Klux Klan elements.”
The CIO News reports that the Southern textile interests are taxing themselves ten cents per spindle to raise a war chest for “public relations” – from time immemorial this phrase has been used to cover up the less pretty word “thugs.” The CIO News comments that a large part of this fund “is expected to find its way into the Klan’s coffers.”
The usual whipping up of mob hysteria has started. Not only do the Kleagles of the Klan pretend a holy alliance between the church, God and the Klan, all of course endangered by the drive to organize the Southern workers. So-called respectable sheets, calling themselves Militant Truth – as does a Chattanooga anti-union rag – or similar crusading titles, also seek to arouse their readers to defend “God and the Constitution” against the CIO.
 
Opposition to Klan
Opposition to the KKK is today more widespread and active than in the past. The churches in their organized councils and from the pulpit condemn the Klan. Southern liberals, including some newspaper editors, are outspoken against rule by terror. In the Georgia Legislative Council the assertion was made that the Klan is trying to discourage labor organization by terrorism. Governor Ellis Arnall has directed the Attorney General of Georgia to institute action to revoke the charter of the Klan on the ground that it is not a non-profit, fraternal organization. The Collector of Internal Revenue has filed a lien against the KKK for $685,305 for income taxes due from 1921 through 1946.
But can the CIO and AFL, can the Jews and the Negroes rely on this kind of opposition to the KKK? Public opinion alone will not stop the violence of the hooded gangs. Neither will it do the victims of this violence much good to know, before they lose consciousness, that the slow processes of the law are grinding out remote justice to the Klan. The chosen victims of the Klan must be prepared to defend themselves now!
This becomes especially clear on reading what one of J. Edgar Hoover’s top administrative assistants at FBI headquarters said to Victor Riesel, columnist of the New York Post:
“But we’re handicapped. We’re keeping the KKK under close scrutiny. But you can’t arrest a man for going out and putting on a night shirt or for burning a cross. There’s no violation of federal laws there. However, if we catch them sending threatening notes through the mail we can pick them up under the Extortion Act. Or if the Klansmen deprive a man of his individual liberties we can grab them under the civil rights statute. But the country must understand that we have to wait until there are grounds which justify prosecution.”
If that dead Negro taxi driver could talk, he’d say that is too long to wait! So would the whipped Negro veteran, cut by fifty-two lashes. So would the organizer thrown bodily out of a meeting hall. If the Klan runs true to form, there will be tarring and feathering, taking labor organizers for rides, all kinds of humiliations and tortures – and lynching. These are the atrocities that will have to be prevented – BEFORE THEY HAPPEN.
This task can be accomplished by meeting Klan violence with organized mass defense. Every factory, mill and farm being organized by the CIO will need its defense guards to protect active union members, union organizers, union headquarters and meetings. Every Jewish organization will need its defense guards for protecting Jewish neighborhoods. Every Negro and bi-racial group, of which there are quite a few in the South, has the same task. The cooperating defense guards of the factories and of the oppressed minorities can most effectively map and carry out a plan to drive the Klan out of existence.
It is well to remember that Hitler confessed, after he came to power, that if the labor unions and other workers’ organizations had fought his Storm Troop hoodlums at their birth, they would have had to fold up – afterward it was too late!
 




Somewhere else in this issue of Labor Action you will find the Workers Party Program for Organized Labor. This program has twelve demands, for the reconversion and post-war period, designed to give all the workers jobs and wage security, to solve the veterans’ problems, to give Negroes and other minorities full equality, to stop militarism, to build enough houses and public works, to break the power of the banks and monopolies by nationalization, to curb profits and accumulated fortunes. This gives an idea of the kind of program it is. The twelfth demand is the one pertinent in this article. It is for an Independent Labor Party and a Workers’ Government. Why does the Workers’ Party make as the conclusion of its program the demand for a Workers’ Government? The reason is ABC.
These demands, which are so reasonable, still cannot be obtained while the capitalist class is in power and a capitalist government rules the country. Technologically speaking, it is altogether possible for every family to have a guaranteed annual income of at least $5,000, on the basis of at most a thirty-hour work week – but not while private profit is the motive of production. It is perfectly feasible to spend $250,000,000,000 in the next five years for building houses, public works and so on – which is only a fraction of the wealth this country burned up in the war – but not while capitalist outlook and capitalist interests determine government expenditures. And what capitalist government would reduce all profits to a maximum of five percent on invested capital, put a ceiling of $25,000 on individual income and levy a capital tax on wealth over $50,000 – in order to pay for housing and other human needs out of profits?
In other words, the struggle for a life of minimum decency, as set forth in the Workers’ Party program, means a struggle against the whole capitalist system; it means that the workers must make a bid for power; it means they must visualize their class power in terms of a government by workers’ councils. An honest and comprehensive program covering all workers’ problems is, therefore, a declaration of lack of confidence in capitalism and in capitalist reforms, and an open challenge for workers’ power. That is why the twelfth demand in the Workers’ Party program is for a Workers’ Government.
 
Importance of Labor Party
There is another thing about this twelfth demand that needs explanation. It says: “An Independent Labor Party and a Workers’ Government.” See how the Independent Labor Party – and the outstanding need of American labor is to break away from the capitalist parties – is linked by the Workers’ Party with establishing a revolutionary Workers’ Government. There is an excellent reason for that link.
The Independent Labor Party must indeed have as its aim the establishment of a Workers’ Government, a revolutionary government as described above, which excludes the capitalist class and roots itself on the manual and mental workers in the factories and other places of work. Otherwise, what have you? A labor government like the one in England today.
Laborites moved over to the same parliamentary benches occupied by the British imperialist politicians before them, only to carry out the same capitalist and imperialist policies. In nationalizing the Bank of England and the mines, the Laborites are mortgaging the national income to government bondholders, with control of the bank and the mines remaining in the same capitalist hands. While housing lags dismally, while food and clothing are at record low, the Laborites maintain, at tremendous expense, the large military equipment of the Empire to suppress the colonial peoples.
The struggle between capital and labor must not result in a “labor” label pasted over the same old capitalist system. The revolutionary overthrow of the whole capitalist outfit, kit and kaboodle, can save what is left of civilization – before the atom bombs begin to fall. The future of mankind rests in workers’ powers, in socialism!
 




Congressional refusal to go along with the President on his proposed labor-draft legislation and the Presidential veto of the Case bill by no means end the anti-labor attack. There will now be a short intermission for the reshuffling of scenery and then the play will go on. The capitalist class, through its politicians, has not given up its ambition to straight-jacket labor.
The vetoed Case bill had totalitarian aspects. It would put strikers behind prison bars; it would rob unions of their funds and thus lessen their power to function.
The debates in Congress were very revealing, though mostly hidden from the public in the Congressional Record. For instance, the question was raised, if the Truman proposal were passed and the government took over struck plants and drafted strikers, would they be paid soldiers’ or workers’, wages? Again, discussion developed around the consequences of drafted strikers refusing to obey the army command to return to work. How could thousands of workers be forced to work if they refused to? They couldn’t. Would they then be mowed down by machine gun fire? Or would they be punished by herding them into concentration camps? Those were the points raised in Congressional debate.
Why the attempt to use these Nazi methods in this “arsenal of democracy?” This is serious business and must be understood.
 
On Top of a Volcano
American capitalism has come out of the war top dog, but its peak is a volcano. The intensified international rivalries after World War II may erupt into open conflict. The suffering, hungry, war-torn masses of Europe and Asia constitute a revolutionary threat. American capitalism can exist only if it can stop up, at least for a while, the crater of war and revolution. In its own interests it is creating a peacetime military establishment superior to all. In its own interests it is bolstering tottering governments financially. At the same time it must hurry to capture world markets before war-crippled competitors stage a comeback with this very American money. If the international volcano can thus be stepped up, American capitalists see the possibility for the largest profits in history—if only the American workers would be content to bear the burdens.
But American labor is not willing to be the goat. The workers do not understand why they should not now get at least the same take-home pay that they received during the war. They have seen what American industry can produce for war, and wonder why not for peace. They feel that costs and profits are no longer the bosses’ business alone. They have a series of demands to give them security in life, including a guaranteed annual wage, a thirty-hour work week, and so on. Labor has started to fight for these needs and its militancy is bound to continue.
A fighting working class does not help capitalism solve its crisis, but deepens that crisis. What is the capitalist class to do? It tries to take away from labor its ability to fight. Labor must be suppressed; the unions weakened. For in this era of capitalist decline the ruling class must establish a single command. That is why totalitarianism raises its head in this country too, although still enveloped in the legal processes with which the Congress and Administration concern themselves.
 
The Totalitarian Threat
These developments in democratic America support the prediction of Labor Action and the Workers Party about the world today. We have said that capitalism in this era can brace itself only on repressive measures against the workers. We have said that capitalism is bound to become totalitarian, to trample human rights, to abandon human values—to become a form of barbarism. History poses against this the struggle for Socialism. The choice between Socialism and capitalist barbarism is placed before the American masses by the serious trend towards totalitarianism evidenced in the attempts to regiment and suppress labor.
In milder form we have here a trend historically similar to the developments in pre-war Germany culminating in the triumph of the Nazis. There the ruling class, in a state of deep crisis, planned to re-establish itself by means of successful war. But it could not prepare war against British and American imperialism without first taking away the power of the workers to fight it. Therefore, the Nazis liquidated the powerful workers’ organizations so successfully that they won the admiration of many “democrats"—and this admiration still glows in their hearts.
This is the light in which the people of this country must understand the repressive anti-labor measures. The historic choice between capitalism declining into barbarism and Socialism leading to a new birth of human freedom and well-being, has to be made.
 




Opposed to every effort concerned with liberating human beings and raising them to higher levels of existence, is the obstacle known as exploitation. For exploitation thrived on the enslavement of people, and will adamantly hinder progress until the exploited people get rid of it.
If I had sat down to write a skit or one-act play to prove the above statement, I could not have done better than was unconsciously done by the seven women who met early this month as the subcommission on the status of women under the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. These women gathered to recommend to the Commission on Human Rights a program for the advancement of women. Agreement was easily arrived at on questions of political rights, economic and educational equality and certain social improvements. Such generalities are always easily agreed upon – in principle. But when it came to discussing specific aspects of women’s enslavement, such as polygamy and prostitution which flourish so abundantly in the most backward, poverty-stricken and exploited colonies, there was deep disagreement.
As if presented on a stage or screen, it was demonstrated how the women representing France and Denmark, countries with colonies and the unshaken greed to exploit these colonies through the continued enslavement of the people, aligned themselves against the women representing India, Lebanon and the Dominican Republic, countries that have known the deepest degradation at the hands of imperialist exploiters.
 
Women Representatives of Imperialism
The topic under discussion was “marriage,” and the “dignity of the wife” was sought to be clarified by the women to whom the indignity of polygamy is not merely a phrase. Miss Angela Jurdak from Lebanon asked: “I’d like to know if dignity of the wife includes wiping out polygamy? If not, may we include that problem, which concerns vast areas of the world?”
Instantly Mme. Helene Lefaucheux of France sniffed a threat to French imperialism. She said that there are huge regions in the French colonies where polygamy is practiced as a custom. “I don’t think we are here to discuss customs,” she said. But why not? Doesn’t progress mean to abolish bad social, political and economic customs? Yes, of course, but not when more enlightened social customs may lead to more political enlightenment about French imperialism! Mme. Lefaucheux is a defender of the French ruling class and understands that for enslaved people to change their customs is to undermine the whole structure of slavery.
Mrs. Hansa Mehta of India retorted with the logic of the enslaved seeking freedom. “If we want to raise the status of women we have to fight customs. We should not be afraid. There are many regions where child marriages exist, just as polygamy does. That must be fought against too.”
Mrs. Bodil Bergtrup of Denmark, alert to the interests of Netherlands imperialism, displayed a light-hearted unconcern about the debasement of colonial women and saw fit to throw in a joke. “There are also areas where women can have more men than one.” Ah, yes; areas in Copenhagen and Paris where women of the ruling class can have as much of everything, including men, that money can buy!
But Mme. Lefaucheux was not in a joking mood. “I cannot support this proposal [to fight polygamy] because I think it will provoke a great number of women who are interested in our work but will not be able to share our point of view.” What women would be opposed to lifting fellow women out of degradation? Certainly not the working women of France, but the women on the top shelf, women whose station in society depends on the continuation of colonial slavery.
Also shedding light on the true character of representatives of imperialist nations was the contribution to the discussion of prostitution made by Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt, an ex-officio member of the subcommittee who, as we all know, is a liberal.
 
Mrs. Roosevelt and Prostitution
To the progressive women of the colonial countries, the traffic in women and female children is the measure of the bondage of their sex. To these women it is no academic topic for discussion whether or not to lift their sisters out of the gutters and market places. Education for all women, training for useful work, opportunity to do useful work and a high standard of living to provide jobs for all are the essence of the solution of prostitution, and the representatives of the colonial areas pressed for agreement on these points.
But the liberal Mrs. Roosevelt, looking down her nose from the height of well-being and culture that is hers as a member of the American ruling class, summarily stated: “Your report is going to be longer than that of the human rights commission to which you are reporting. I don’t think the subject has the slightest place in this report.” A technical objection, indeed, to a question of such human importance and so basic in raising the status of women!
Of course, in the long run the report covered all subjects and presumably satisfied everybody. It included a section on prostitution, and if it didn’t exactly come out to fight polygamy – and thereby ruffle the tempers of the French elite – it at any rate favored monogamy. But all this is form without substance.
The substance was revealed in the attitudes of the women representing the imperialist nations – nations which dominate the United Nations and all the councils and subdivisions thereof. Self-interest for power and profit, exploitation of classes and peoples by the ruling rich, these are the inhuman motives behind the scene, and they will never bring liberation to women, or oppressed races, or enslaved peoples.
When the motives of society are changed then there are results. When the workers and peasants of Russia made their social revolution in 1917 and established a workers’ government, when with that act they toppled from power the exploiting landlords and capitalists, in days and weeks more human progress was effected than in decades and centuries of capitalist exploitation. New avenues of social, political and economic endeavor opened up to women. They became co-partners with men in their effort to build a society free from exploitation.
It is symbolic of the counter-revolution and the new exploitation imposed on the Russian people by Stalin and his ruling bureaucrats, that Russia did not even see fit to send a representative to the subcommission on the status of women. Why should they? They have again reduced Russian womankind to the level of breeding cattle, and that is the way they want it.
In a world dominated by capitalist imperialism and Stalinist bureaucratic imperialism, there can be little hope for a higher status for the women of the world, just as there can be little hope for equality of races, just as there can be no lasting peace. Humanity Will make a leap forward towards liberty and peace and economic well-being when it lays the foundation for a world of socialist brotherhood ruled by human values.
 




At the March convention of the United Auto Workers-CIO, President Walter Reuther was asked at a press conference whether he considered an independent Labor Party in the cards. Reuther answered: “Not in the immediate future.”
Labor Action commented: “Just what is he waiting for?”
When on May 27 in Detroit Reuther announced a proposal, presumably backed by top leaders of the UAW-CIO, for a national united labor conference of all unions – AFL, CIO and Railread Brotherhoods – to take measures against the vicious, fascistic attack on labor by the Congress and the President of the United States, there was reason to hope that perhaps this is what Reuther was waiting for. Perhaps now such a conference would actually be called and the question squarely posed to utilize labor’s economic and political power in an independent class party.
Since May 27 the International Executive Board of the UAW-CIO met in Cleveland. The principal resolution passed by the board on the political crisis in which labor finds itself is a glaring example of craven labor leaders ducking their responsibility to the class they supposedly lead and clinging frantically to the coattails of capitalist politicians. The announcement of May 27 appears to have been a phony.
 
Program for Inaction
No militant call for a nationwide conference of all labor came from the heads of the largest and most militant union in the country. As a miserable substitute the IEB resolution contained these clauses:
“We call upon our local unions to join together in their own communities with AFL and Railroad Brotherhoods local groups to pretest against the President’s proposals and all anti-labor legislation.
“We call upon all organized labor to Join together nationally in a united protest against such legislation.”
That is all!
Congress is moving to take away labor’s right to strike. The President wants to clap military controls approaching totalitarianism on the workers. And all that labor’s leadership proposes is that the local unions and all organized labor meet to “protest against.” That, Messrs. Reuther, Thomas, Leonard, Addes, et al., is not positive action – and positive action is what the present political crisis demands.
Instead of going forward to an independent Labor Party, severing the chains that bind the workers and the mass of common people to the parties of the capitalist class, the resolution adopted by the IEB of the UAW-CIO looks back nostalgically – to what? “To the program and policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt!” Says the resolution:
“When Harry S. Truman took the oath of office as President of the United States he pledged that his administration would carry ont the program and policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt. He has violated that pledge.”
And again:
“The President is directly responsible for many of these betrayals of Franklin Roosevelt’s policies.”
And more to the same effect
What misleading nonsense about the “program and policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt!” What program? What policies? Did not FDR himself bury the New Deal, such as it was, in an interview with Dilworth Lupton, columnist of the Cleveland Press, at the end of 1943? Did not FDR himself call in “Dr. Win the War” – Dr. New Deal having served the purposes of American capitalism? And was it not FDR who started the firing of New Dealers, bouncing Leon Henderson off the OPA and Henry Wallace off the Board of Economic Welfare, as well as off the Democratic Party ticket – all as concessions to the reactionaries?
Not that Labor Action or the Workers Party ever put any stock in New Dealism as anything but a capitalist maneuver to keep the working class in tow at a time of crisis, but the labor misleaders did – and do! The rank and file should know the score.
 
FDR’s Strike-Breaking
Furthermore, just how did Truman “betray” Roosevelt’s policy on the labor draft? In FDR’s statement to Congress on June 25, 1943, he said:
“I recommend that the Selective Service Act be amended so that persons may be inducted into non-combat military service up to the age of 65 years. This will enable us to induct into military service all persons who engage in strikes or stoppages or other Interruptions of work in plants in the possession of the United States.”
Is this not the essence of the Truman strike-breaking totalitarian proposal? And don’t think that FDR gave up easily his attempt to regiment labor. For again in his message to Congress in January, 1944, he urged:
“A national service law, which, for the duration of the war will prevent strikes and, with certain appropriate exceptions, will make available for war production or for any other essential service every able-bodied adult in the nation.”
It is not Truman who is betraying Roosevelt. On the contrary, the former only applies in the peacetime crisis of capitalism the same antilabor policy that the latter sought to establish in time of war.
The betrayal is by the labor leaders of their rank and file!
 
Have They Forgotten?
It cannot be that these leaders have forgotten how all of them – CIO, AFL and Railroad Brotherhoods – protested against FDR and condemned his attempt to put labor into the straitjacket of militarism. And it cannot be that the top labor leadership has forgotten a most humiliating interview at the White House in January 1944 where Philip Murray tried to dissuade President Roosevelt from his draft-labor proposal, as “quack medicine.” Victor Riesel, labor editor of the New York Post, reported the President’s arrogant defiance of Murray, Green and the other leaders present, and his reiterated determination to sign any bill that would restrict labor.
These policies of FDR were well known to the labor officialdom when they supported Roosevelt in the 1944 election and went along with his support of Truman for Vice-President, a choice made to placate the reactionaries. The CIO squandered the money and energies of the PAC to get out the vote for this team of capitalist politicians. Now Truman is following the reactionary path already indicated by Roosevelt!
The labor bureaucrats look back to a Roosevelt paradise that never existed because they refuse to look forward. Events cry out the direction labor has to take. It has to break with capitalist politics. The PAC, with its human and material resources, has to be transformed from a tool of the capitalist parties and used as the foundation for an independent Labor Party. This is what the present crisis demands if labor is to save itself.
 
Dubinsky’s Call
Almost at the same time that Reuther and his colleagues were meeting in Cleveland, another labor leader, David Dubinsky, president of the International Garment Workers Union, AFL, spoke for what he called a “National Labor Party” at the convention of the United Hatters, Cap & Millinery Workers in New York. He denounced the labor “statesmen” whose “main object is to bore from within in the existing parties.”
“Have these statesmen prepared an independent labor political movement in this country so they could send their own people to Congress?” asked Dubinsky. “No! On the contrary, they have always been against a third party. They have told the reactionaries in advance: ‘Don’t be scared; we have nowhere else to go; we will have to vote for you anyhow’.”
That sounds like something, doesn’t it? At least it indicates that Dubinsky sees the handwriting on the wall, and feels the still unexpressed desire of the rank and file for something more than “protests against.” However, Dubinsky has a record. He is leader of the Liberal Party in New York. This Liberal Party, under Dubinsky, has played capitalist politics without hindrance from him. In 1944 it went all out for Roosevelt and the Democratic Party.
This year Dubinsky and the Liberal Party have indicated their support for Senator Mead, Democratic Party man, if he receives the nomination for Governor of New York. The Dubinskys may consider such politicians “their own people,” but will the workers and the masses of common people? What Dubinsky wants is merely a third CAPITALIST party. What the workers must have is an independent labor party, a class party, based on the unions and other mass organizations, cut free from all capitalist parties and politicians. What more proof is needed than the present attempts of capitalist parties and politicians to take away labor’s right to strike and to make involuntary servitude the law of the land!
Walter Reuther may be waiting for something else. But will the rank and file wait for Reuther!
 




On the one hand President Truman vetoed the booby-trap OPA bill on the ground that it would mean sure inflation, that it meant yielding to the greedy monopolists. On the other hand he went on the air and appealed to these very same greedy, to “every business man, every producer and every landlord to adhere to existing regulations, even though for a short period they may not have the effect of law.”
This doesn’t make sense. It is true that President Truman also stated that the “will of the people is still the supreme law of the land,” and urged: “Your determination to retain price controls and so prevent inflation must be made known to the Congress.”
This also makes no sense because exactly what labor, veterans, housewives, white collar workers have been doing is to make known to Congress their “determination to retain price controls.” Only it turns out that these are not the people whose will is the supreme law of this capitalist land.
Mr. Truman boasted that in vetoing the bill because it is “a sure formula for inflation,” he was calling a spade a spade. Certainly the profiteers’ bill passed by Congress was “a sure formula for inflation.” However, so is the absence of all price control the open floodgate to inflation, and so was OPA yielding to the pressure of the monopolists a road to inflation, though not so steep. Mr. Truman’s spade-calling is with one eye shut. We’d like to do some spade-calling of our own.
 
Left in the Lurch
The capitalist government of America has left the masses completely in the lurch with no protection against inflation. We can only speculate on how high prices of food, clothing and other necessities will go. There is no predicting what landlords will do. The stark fact is that all these matters have been relinquished to the wile and will of the very business and real estate monopolists whose profit greed has created this crisis.
Now what shall the working masses do? Once more write postal cards to fill Congressional waste paper baskets, as Mr. Truman suggests? Or is it time to by-pass the capitalist politicians? Yes, it is more than time.
There are three major actions the situation calls for, actions to be initiated and to be carried out by labor, veterans, housewives, white collar workers and all the “little” people.
First, the creation of people’s organs of price control. There is no way out of this responsibility. The capitalist government has failed. Factory and industry committees of workers are indispensable to determine the quantity of production and prices for distribution. They must be organized at once.
Second, fundamental political action has to be taken by labor, veterans, housewives, white collar workers and all of us little people – action that will permanently repudiate the capitalist system and the capitalist government, and dedicate the people to a new goal for society. The responsibility to form an independent Labor Party against the capitalist parties can be shirked only at the risk of the triumph of the worst kind of reaction.
Third, a buyers’ and tenants’ strike, widespread and all-inclusive, limited only by the absolute necessities to keep going. Such a mass demonstration is a must, against the monopolists who have produced and deepened the woes of the whole consuming population.
And who can lead the masses to take these necessary steps? Who else but labor?
 
Truman’s Veto
Let not Mr. Truman’s veto of the booby-trap bill fool labor into extending confidence in him and the Democratic Party. Why didn’t he come out sooner with a warning that he would veto the bill? Wasn’t it because he was playing with the idea of signing the “sure formula for inflation”?
He was measuring whether he would gain more political capital by going along with the National Association of Manufacturers and their brethren or by listening to Economic Stabilizer Chester Bowles’ political philosophy of serving the capitalists by reducing the dangers to them of run-away inflation – and at the same time appeasing labor!
Certainly one didn’t have to be too bright, listening to Truman’s radio speech, to snicker at his attempts to call the Republican kettle blacker than the Democratic pot. Everything he said about the amendments of Senator Taft and Representatives Wherry and Crawford, all Republicans, was deserved. These men, who sought to legalize, in peacetime super-wartime profiteering, should get the support only of class they serve. But what about the Democratic Party? Let’s turn that pot bottomside up.
Did not Senator Barkley, Democratic majority leader, urge passage of this same bill as “the best bill under the circumstances”? He did. And who hasn’t heard of the anti-price-control efforts of Senator Elmer Thomas, Democrat of Oklahoma? Nor can Truman exactly hide under a barrel the blustering, filibustering W. Lee O’Daniel, Democrat from Texas. The Republican kettle and the Democratic pot are both of the same color.
Both capitalist parties have amply earned the contempt of the people. Organized labor is in the position, with its forces and know-how in action, to take the lead in the creation of worker-consumer price control committees, in the launching of an. independent Labor Party to represent the economic and political interests of all the workers of this nation.
 




If the OPA’s “controlled” inflation is ended either by the passage of the emasculating Senate-House conference bill or by the outright defeat of all price control, the cost of living in the next 6 or 8 months will go up at least 20–25 per cent – as admitted even by the enemies of OPA. The supporters of OPA claim the swing upward will be even steeper, namely, 40–50 per cent in the coming year.
The CIO News illustrates the point It shows that chickens now 47 cents a pound will be 71 cents; eggs now 50 cents a dozen will be 75 cents; carrots will be thirteen cents a bunch instead of nine cents; lemons eighteen cents a pound, not twelve; onions three pounds for twenty-five cents will cost thirty-seven cents (pre-war price was three pounds for ten cents).
Other sources estimate meat prices up 40 to 50 per cent and bread up 50 per cent, bringing the price per loaf to 18 or 19 cents.
OPA Administrator Paul Porter, figuring on a 40 per cent boost in living costs in the next year if OPA is abandoned, shows that a family now spending $2,500 per year would have to have $3,450 to maintain the same standard of living.
The American Veterans Committee, fighting in Washington for the retention of OPA, circulated the following protest, appropriately printed on stage money:



“Mr. Congressman:
For your pay raise
AVC has only praise,
But if OPA is made impotent
Your raise won’t be worth a cent.”



Neither will the wage increases of 18½ cents an hour received by auto, steel, mine, rail and some other workers be worth a cent. And what of the workers whose raises were less than that? And what of the workers who have received no wage increases at all?
 
Living Standard Will Fall
What will happen to the American people, the great masses? Their standard of living will fall. The people will consume less food; will own less clothing; will have poorly furnished homes, if they have any at all; will get inadequate medical care; will afford less education for their children; will allow themselves less relaxation and entertainment. In these flesh-and-blood terms will the masses feel the absence of price control.
Furthermore, the lie must be nailed that the people will be able to bolster their standard of living from their fabulous caches of wartime savings. These are non-existent. The Federal Reserve Board in May of this year had a survey made of accumulated savings. The findings are as follows:
The top 10 per cent of American families have 60 per cent of the savings, namely from $3,400 and up! The second ten per cent owns 17 per cent of the wartime crop, namely savings from $1,800 to $3,400 – hardly a fortune by any standard. The bulk of 50 per cent of the families wallows in 23 per cent of the accumulated wealth, namely from $50 to $1,800 – yes, don’t laugh. The remaining 30 percent of American families luxuriate in savings from NOTHING UP TO $50. These most revealing figures on who got rich out of the war come from the United States News, a weekly business publication; these figures were not featured in the daily press.
Is it then an exaggeration to say that the removal of price control means the impoverishment of millions of working people? At the expense of millions of us, the capitalist government is tearing down the last bar – inadequate as it is – to run-away inflation. Yielding to the pressure of the farm bloc, the National Association of Manufacturers, the National Retail Dry Goods Association, the government deliberately proceeds to reduce our standard of living. The capitalist government does this because the 10 per cent that has piled up unsavory war profits in banks and company reserves refuses to use idle capital to produce unless these octopi are permitted to fix their own inflationary prices.
 
Bowles Gets an “Idea”
On June 17, Economic Stabilizer Bowles had a bright idea that he might be able to appease these gangster-like profit-grubbers. He wanted – no less – that labor make another no-strike pledge in return for NAM et al. laying off on OPA and allowing it to be extended for another year as is. This was hardly cricket on Mr. Bowles’ part, for he knows very well that the cost of living is going up steadily even under OPA, and that the workers must have the right to strike for the maintenance of their standard of living. The papers advise us of the OPA boosts in butter and milk, and we are immediately aware of these increases when we go marketing. But every day and in every way the all-around cost of living is being upped without unseemly publicity.
For instance, the Washington Memo of the New York Post, on the mailing list of OPA, learned in one day of twenty-six price increases, including 12 per cent on work shirts, 10 per cent on leathers, 28 per cent on lawn mower parts, 19 per cent on types of lumber. Hundreds of items are constantly being priced higher, inevitably reflected in the decreased value of the dollar. This “controlled” inflation is the greatest boast of the OPA.
Needless to say, Mr. Bowles’ bright proposal for another no-strike pledge came to naught. It would be risking their heads for the labor officialdom to try now to put that over on the rank and file.
 
Planting Booby-Traps
As this is being written on Monday, June 24, the Senate-House conferees are expected to iron out their final differences and insert the last “time bomb” and “booby trap” – as Mr. Bowles described their amendments to the Price Control Act. The points still at issue are whether or not to remove all ceilings on meat, poultry, dairy products, tobacco and petroleum products; whether to extend the mortally crippled act for one year or only nine months; whether or not to establish a de-control board empowered to overrule both the Price Administrator and the Secretary of Agriculture; for how much and for how long shall the government continue to subsidize the big food producers.
Already accepted by the conferees are enough amendments to take the last loose tooth out of OPA. They agreed to allow manufacturers, processors and producers 1941 prices plus added costs since then, stipulating that the added costs should be passed on to the consumers. They have accepted the abolition of OPA’s maximum average price lists and of OPA’s method of keeping some low-cost clothing in production. They will allow regular peacetime discounts and mark-ups on scarce reconversion items. They unnecessarily divide the toothless OPA authority and openly give the farm bloc a victory, by putting the Secretary of Agriculture in control of farm product prices.
The $64 question in Washington is whether or not President Truman will veto the bill when it gets to his desk. Just as many congressmen, when it came to voting on the issue, no longer knew whether they were voting for or against price control because of the amendments and counter-amendments, so Mr. Truman will be hard put to decide whether a veto will indicate one thing or another or anything at all. Undoubtedly Mr. Truman would rather fly to see his dear old mother and in general enjoy himself as President than be bothered with such sticklers.
 
Want Buyers’ Strike
At any rate, there is an indication that veterans, workers and housewives are losing faith in government action. They feel they themselves must do something about prices and shortages. A great clamor has arisen for a buyers’ strike. Walter P. Reuther, president of the United Auto Workers-CIO, came out with the idea. It was taken up by John Green, president of the Ship Workers-CIO. On June 24, in Washington, demonstrating workers, housewives and others listened to speakers urging a buyers’ strike.
A well organized and tightly disciplined buyers’ strike, directed by the unions and other people’s organizations, will be a dramatic and effective demonstration of consumer strength, and if carried out long enough, will accomplish some good. However, what the masses need above and beyond a buyers’ strike is permanent price control machinery.
It has been proved that this cannot be provided through the channels of capitalist government. What is the alternative? Committees of workers at the point of production, with access to the books of the corporations, the committees themselves fixing prices and volume of production to meet the nation’s needs. Such committees together with housewives and consumers’ committees at the consumption end to act as control agencies in every neighborhood, will have to be created to solve the price and shortage muddle.
 




Emanuel Celler, United States Representative from the Fifteenth Congressional district of Brooklyn, first elected to Congress in 1922 and re-elected at every Congressional election since, will once more run on the Democratic Party ticket in November. No matter whom the Republican Party nominates, he will have no chance against Celler. For Celler has the reputation and the record of “a good legislator,” a “progressive.”
Max Shachtman, the candidate of the Workers Party in the Fifteenth, will turn his campaign guns on Celler. He will prove that Celler’s kind of record, his kind of “progressiveness,” is not good enough to solve the tremendous social problems that confront the common people today.
The Workers Party does not seek to detract one iota from Celler’s record. Yes, he was for the Fair Employment Practices Act. Yes, he spoke against peacetime military conscription. He stood for the continuation of OPA. He was against the Hobbs bill which attacks labor under the cloak of anti-racketeering.
But there is more to the record of a Congressman than he himself publicizes among his constituents. These other things must also be known and interpreted in terms of the needs of our times.
That Celler’s political creed is the continuation of the capitalist system and the strengthening of the capitalist class, is beyond doubt. During the war, the most devastating in all history, Celler’s mind was on profits to such an extent that he introduced an amendment to the constitution to fix a permanent tax limit of twenty-five per cent on income. He aimed to raise the “diminishing returns” of capital, wanted inducements to capital to take “risks,” and like the National Association of Manufacturers, declared: “The country cannot be lifted from economic depression except by private enterprise.” Celler could say that, though the havoc of the war was giving hourly proof of what humanity can expect from private enterprise.
To go into another field where Celler showed his great concern for big business: He is reputed to be progressive on the question of colonial independency. He ostentatiously communicated with Mahatma Ghandi asking what America could do to further Indian independence. But we find also that Celler is anxious to remove India from the British sterling bloc which he charges hinders AMERICAN CAPITALISM’S trade with India.
So the question arises: Is it the Indian masses Celler has uppermost in mind, or does he desire freedom for American capitalist economic penetration.
It is easy to understand Representative Celler’s loyalty to the capitalist system and his concern for bigger and better profit returns. He is by no means one of the least favored of that system. His own personal and economic interests are rooted in it.
He is a member of a large and prosperous law firm, whose life depends on the continuation of capitalist social relations. He seems also to have gone into “private enterprise” on his own, for Who’s Who in America of 1944–1945 lists him as having organized the Brooklyn National Bank and being chairman of the board of directors of the Brooklyn National Corporation. He enjoys the life of the well-to-do, including the expensive privileges of the better clubs and country clubs.
Furthermore, in his twenty-four years in the House of Representatives he has become a mainstay of the capitalist government, acquiring chairmanship of the House Committee on Judiciary.
Let us take a look at Celler’s record on the question of oppressed minorities. For instance, while he has rightly denounced British imperialism and demanded unrestricted immigration to Palestine, HAS HE PUT UP ANY REAL FIGHT TO OPEN THE DOORS OF THESE UNITED STATES TO JEWISH IMMIGRATION? On the Negro question he has indeed supported FEPC, but how can a man who truly stands for complete equality for the Negro people stay in the same political party that harbors the Bilbos and Talmadges and other inciters to Negro lynchings?
We are living in times that require radical solutions to burning problems, problems really of life or death. Politicians tied to a faith in capitalism cannot give such solutions. Politicians tied to capitalist political parties and the reactionaries they contain, cannot give such solutions in spite of their superficial “progressiveness.”
 




The Fight For Socialism, The Principles and Program of the Workers Party
by Max Shachtman
New International Publishing Co. – Price $1.
The Fight for Socialism, Max Shachtman’s book on the why and how of socialism, fulfills a long-felt need in our movement. Here is a book of 182 pages, easily tucked into a coat or overall pocket or into a handbag, for reading in subways, trolleys and buses. Here is a book that gives in broad outline what every contact and newcomer to socialism wants to know.
Because the coverage is so comprehensive, this little book can serve as the basis and outline for further study. A class conducted with The Fight for Socialism as the textbook, would lead to that kind of inquiry and discussion that would net the students a pretty sound grasp of the principles and program of socialism, which are, of course, the principles and program of the Workers Party. Likewise can an individual by himself, making an acquaintance with these fundamentals through the pages of Comrade Shachtman’s book, feel impelled to further study of points only concisely developed in this necessarily concise little book.
This does not mean that it is merely a base for further study and cannot stand on its own. Quite the contrary. Comrade Shachtman has written not only a very readable and intrinsically informative book, but an enjoyable one as well. Several distinctive factors of style have contributed to this result.
 
A Smoothly Written and Clear Book
First, while the writing is expository, explaining as it does such phenomena as the economic laws of the capitalist system, the democracy of a workers state, the composition and function of the revolutionary socialist party, it is not weighted with lead. Rather the logical sequences flow so smoothly that for pages at a time it is like reading a narrative.
In the second place, Shachtman had in mind when writing, and put down on paper, certain capitalist myths, capitalist-inspired objections and legitimate workers’ doubts which have to be answered. Picking at random, here is how the section What Is Politics? of Chapter VI begins:
“What does the word ‘politics’ mean to the average worker? It brings to his mind a picture of graft, bribery and corruption. If he sees two men fighting madly to grab off a rich office-plum, he says, ‘That is politics for you.’ If he sees a public figure (or sometimes a figure in the labor movement!) doing something underhanded in order to line his pockets or to climb up the ladder of officialdom, he says, ‘That is politics.’ If he sees a man getting a summons for speeding cancelled by telephoning a friendly ward-heeler, he says, ‘That is politics for you.’ If he hears a labor leader shout, ‘We don’t want any politics in the unions,’ he nods his head in agreement.”
Against this common vulgarization of politics, the writer develops the idea of political action and state power, leading the reader to an explanation of an independent labor party and a Workers’ Government.
 
Socialism – the Alternative to Barbarism
Again, in the same style, the important Chapter IX entitled Socialism – The Alternative to Barbarism, begins with a direct address to the reader and what he may be thinking:
“Suppose you do not join in the fight for socialism. Suppose you do not organize and work for its victory. Will the society you live in remain just as it is, will it move forward, or will it slip backward? This question is of vital concern to everyone, especially to every worker. It is most important to understand what will happen to capitalist society, if it is not replaced by socialism. To answer the question, let us examine the direction in which capitalism is moving, why it is moving that way, and what are the consequences for society.”
It might also be added, on the score of style, that the “theoretical stuff” is not reduced to abstractions over which a reader would have to puzzle to no avail. Wherever possible the economic theory is clothed in illustrative material and developed in terms of living meaning to the worker. A good example of this style is the story of capitalist depressions at the end of Chapter III.
Now a few remarks about the excellence of the content, so lucid and clear-cut throughout. This reviewer was struck particularly with the first section of Chapter VII, the section entitled The First Steps of a Workers’ Government. So much is said, and so clearly, in a few short pages! The section answers the questions so often repeated! “Shall the property of the big capitalists be confiscated without compensation? – Shall all private property be nationalized immediately? – Shall economic life be centrally organized and planned? – Shall economic life be democratically managed and controlled?”
When these questions are succinctly answered, the conclusion is drawn: “The Workers’ Government has taken the first important steps toward the achievement of Socialism!” It is a conclusion that really flows from what precedes.
 
A Chapter That Requires Thought
A meaty chapter, requiring very thorough chewing, is VIII, entitled The Need for a Revolutionary Socialist Party. Here are no routine formulations. Introducing the division dealing with The Principles and Program of the Workers Party, we read:
“There are several parties which proclaim the same goal. This is often very confusing to a worker. He will say: ‘How am I to tell which party is the right one for me to join or support?’ Or, ‘Why don’t all those who are in favor of socialism unite into a single party?’ Or, ‘If you cannot agree among yourselves, how do you expect me to agree with any of you?’”
“It should not be too hard to answer these questions,” continues Comrade Shachtman. “When a worker learns that a tool is useful and necessary, he does not throw up his hands in despair merely because there are many varieties of that tool offered to him. He reads carefully the claims made for each variety and the description given of what it can do, and he judges from experience which one really serves the purpose best.”
 
A Book You’ll Want to Have
The chapter goes on to lay all the cards on the table so the reader knows exactly where the Workers Party hails from, what it stands for, where it is going. There remains no doubt as to the Workers Party’s position on revolution, on immediate demands, on democracy, and so on. Then this unequivocal revolutionary party is compared with others, the Social-Democratic and the Stalinist parties, so that the reader can have a basis for making his choice, or at least for studying further in order finally to make his choice. One criticism of this excellent Chapter VIII is that it could stand a few more sub-heads for more facile reading.
One final tribute to the utility value of The Fight for Socialism. A member of the Workers Party or any socialist confronting a worker who needs an explanation of a certain subject, can refer to chapter, subdivision and page of Comrade Shachtman’s book. This reviewer can hear herself saying to a friend who, for example, might object to a workers’ state as being opposed to democracy: “You ought to read pages 122 to 130 in The Fight for Socialism. This section entitled Between Capitalism and Socialism answers all your doubts and misgivings. Do you want to borrow my copy or would you like to buy your own?” And, of course, this reviewer would have on hand her own copy – as well as one to sell.
 




I made no claim that the solution of economic problems will automatically dispose of the tumultuous dissatisfactions that seethe within us and between us as human beings, both men and women. Trotsky, for instance, stated that such sciences as psychoanalysis which deal with the human being, cannot develop fully until the economic prison bars which confine us are broken. In that sense did I mean that “For the bulk of womankind, complete fulfillment through motherhood and creative work is unthinkable without a basic change in society.” With this overall view Ethel Goldwater says she agrees.
On my part, of course, I recognize the “real wishes and possibilities” of women that Mrs. Goldwater described in her article in Politics. I also agree with her, as she pointed out in that article, that unfortunately even among radicals the double standard for women still exists. Nor do I postpone to a more “favorable milieu” the self-criticism and effort at correction called for. Likewise, I do not advise non-resistance to the commercialism which, as Mrs. Goldwater’s article points out, makes of women worse slaves than they need to be even under capitalism. Again, I favor every present educational effort that would make for happier men and women.
 
Women Must Be Brought into the Political Struggle
These are all points that Mrs. Goldwater stresses in her Politics article. But such points can be made also by the “enlightened church” or by an ethical culture society. Of course, this does not make them wrong; merely inadequate. The Workers Party thinks of the woman problem as a social problem inextricably entangled in the social-economic roots. As such it cannot be left to individual endeavor, as do Mrs. Goldwater, Politics’ editor, the “enlightened church,” the ethical cultural society, but must be brought out into the political struggle. This is where Mrs. Goldwater misses the mark.
It is from this approach that I asked Mrs. Goldwater “how basically would it [her contribution] alter the situation? To this she now counters that the here-and-now demands of the Workers Party for the $5,000 minimum income, for instance, would also not basically alter the situation, since “a uniformly higher wage generally means higher prices.”
There it a fundamental political axiom Mrs. Goldwater overlooks, namely, that the demands of the labor and of the socialist movements must meet such capitalist contradictions as these, or fold up. Thus the Auto Workers Union had to adopt the slogan of wage increases without any price increases as well as the demand to open the corporation books. The Workers Party endorses this most progressive step and also projects a program for price control by labor and the consumers. We aim for higher wages that are really higher.
As to such demands, however, Mrs. Goldwater says it is “characteristic” of our party to make demands that “can’t be won, and even if they were won, they wouldn’t help much.” Of course, capitalism will not grant the workers what they need for decent living, let alone for a cultured, creative life. That does not mean that our demands for a thirty-hour week, for a guaranteed annual wage, for a $5,000 annual income and other needs to lighten the burdens of men and women, are “fashioned primarily for tactical ends, and have little connection with real wishes or possibilities.” We make these demands because we want these things and we honestly fight for them. I’m sure Mrs. Goldwater does not actually think that such demands are NOT the “real wishes” of the people. And certainly she must regard them as possibilities – that is, as improvements in life that technological advancement can easily provide. Why does she then say that our demands “have little connection with real wishes or possibilities?”
 
Toward Goals That Will Be Fundamental Solution
That these real wishes and possibilities are not realizable under private ownership, under the profit system, under industrial autocracy, does not produce in us “deepseated pessimism” nor “two minds” nor a disbelieving hope nor “the burden of such a conflict” nor yet do we find solace in any dubious psychological pleasures – all of which Mrs. Goldwater pins on us. The prospective of the Workers Party is straightforward and simple: to get the people to fight intelligently for, and to fight with them for, these things that they do want and that are easily possible. As they find they cannot attain and hold such reasonable goals under capitalism, the pressure of need for these things will force them, and us with them, to struggle on a wider social, economic and political arena, namely, against the whole system that stands in the way.
In my article in Labor Action I stated that Mrs. Goldwater was speaking only for a small number of middle-class intellectuals and not for the large body of working women. She now strengthens my contention. She finds the demand for a $5,000 income “so dull, so colorless” – “why not some interesting details?” Really? Have not the seventy per cent of the population living on incomes of less than $3,000 a year, imaginative powers strong enough to fill in the picture of a $5,000 income? Besides one does not put the “interesting detail” in the platform of programmatic demands; there is a place for everything.
 




Dear Editors:
Saul Berg’s disapproval of my use of the sentence “At long last a Democratic Union of anti-Peron forces has been formed to defeat him and his military clique in the election,” in an article I wrote on Argentina, must, of course, be narrowed down to the words “at long last.” This was a manner of expression and had no political content. The editors did not seem to think the words gave the coloration of approval of the all-class Democratic Union, but took the sentence merely as an objective statement of fact. The article was no extensive treatment of the whole Argentine situation. It confined itself to the meaning of the latest demagogic measures of Peron. By the way, the next issue of the New International will carry a fuller article on Argentina and the present situation.
Comrade Berg’s formulations of what would happen if the Socialist Party ran its own candidate, are interesting. Factually, at the present moment the Socialist Party – as far as I could gather from my reading – is not a class-struggle party. The only people today advocating the united
front of all working class organizations against all the feudal and bourgeois elements, are the small group of Trotskyites, our comrades of the Fourth International. The deepening of the revolutionary situation may bring changes in the rank and file and in the leadership of the Socialist Party, but I talk about what is now.
As to Comrade Berg’s conclusions regarding a Radical Party (coalition) election victory, it is too soon to say – in view of the heat under the political pot – that the anti-fascist struggle would be, for long, transferred “from the streets to the sedate halls of parliament.”
— Susan Green
 




Korea, small and indivisible as is its economy, still is divided into two parts – not by choice, but by compulsion. Upon “liberation” from Japan, the armies of Russia moved in and took over the land of the Koreans north of the 38th parallel, while the United States Army dittoed south of that imaginary line. General Shtikov’s military establishment is ensconced at Heijo, while some miles to the south at Seoul the American General Hodge and his forces hold sway.
The importance of Korea to the Russian and American imperialists is not that it is a country for forty years ruthlessly exploited and cruelly massacred by the Japanese imperialists, a country with a fighting people struggling for freedom and independence. To the new conquerors of Korea its importance is in its strategic position for power in the Far East.
Jutting out due south from Manchuria, Korea flanks the Sea of Japan with Nippon on the other shore and also flanks the Yellow Sea with the mainland of China to the west. A fortified Korea could undoubtedly dominate the whole region, closing in famous Port Arthur, the port of Dairen, the Chinese cities of Peiping and Tientsin, to say nothing of the Russian port of Vladivostok directly north and almost contiguous to Korea. And, of course, there are resources to be had and a market to be exploited.
The flame of rebellion burst forth in Korea after the 1945 Moscow conference of the Big Three, where the fate of the Koreans was decided as follows: military occupation to continue above and below the 38th parallel; no independence; a five-year “trusteeship” under the big powers – to “prepare” the Koreans for independence. The Koreans understood the earlier Cairo conference to have promised them independence after Japan’s defeat. They did not take the broken promise kindly, nor was their temper assuaged by assurances that they had “misunderstood” the Cairo conference or that their misunderstanding was due “to a bad translation.”
What the angry Koreans did in the north zone is locked behind the usual Russian censorship. But from the American zone came news of street fighting, of native attacks on the invading American soldiers, of Koreans in the employ of the American military government walking out and leaving officers to stoke their own furnaces, of policemen leaving their posts, of demonstrations demanding immediate recognition of a Korean provisional government. A projected general strike, however, was called off by Kim Koo, leader of the provisional government formed in exile, who yielded to pressure from General Hodge and to intimations from Secretary of State Byrnes that the trusteeship might be dropped.
However, no such thing has happened. Instead, a commission of Russians and Americans met in Seoul, and for three weeks, beginning January 16, the horse trading went on behind the scenes with no word to the public. The commission was supposed to coordinate “in administrative-economic matters.” While the meeting was in progress, there were more demonstrations against trusteeships, more demands for the removal of the 38th parallel boundary which divides southern agricultural Korea from the sources of fuel, power and manufactured goods in the north, and more proclamations for an independent Korean democratic government.
 
“Democracy” Under Imperialist Guns
Finally, the secrecy was broken and it was announced by the august conferees that a ten-man commission was to be set up in Seoul, composed equally of Russians and Americans but no Koreans, to start work within a month and carry out the decisions of the conference. What were the decisions of the conference? The military occupation, of course, to remain; the 38th parallel boundary to stay; between the two zones there is to be railroad, motor and water-borne transportation, as well as the exchange of mail and the establishment of radio broadcasting frequencies. But the farmers of the southern zone still fear they may not get indispensable fertilizer from the north and that the Russians may at any time cut off the power generated in the north.
The Russo-American conferees magnanimously declared that the ten-man council will consult “democratic political parties and social organizations of both north and south Korea.” At a later date there will be another meeting of the invading imperialists to establish “a provisional government of Koreans on a democratic basis” to face the task of working with “Russia and the United States for the unification of the country.”
A “democratic basis” under the guns of two imperialist vultures! “Unification of the country” torn asunder by the greed of the invaders!
It is not for this that the Korean people – starving on a standard of living only a quarter of the low level of the Japanese, trampled on and massacred – have fought for forty years. It is not for this that they have carried on unrelenting guerrilla warfare against the Japanese beginning back in 1910. It is not for this that they grew to 500,000 strong in the resistance movement against Japan during the war.
Looking soberly at the native forces active on the political scene, what are the chances of the Korean masses getting the freedom and national independence they have struggled to attain?
There are two groupings. One is around the Kim Koo provisional government formed in exile in China in 1940. This is basically of the same character as the provisional government created in Shanghai in 1919 after the gruesome purge of Korean nationalists by the Japanese. The same Dr. Rhee who was president of that provisional government is a leader in the present one. He was a close friend of Woodrow Wilson, believed in the letter’s fourteen points, and had faith in United States intervention on behalf of Korean freedom. This is referred to as the “rightist” group with the Democratic Party as the chief political element. The leaders appear to have one ear open to the demands of the masses and the other to those of Washington.
The other grouping is around the Communist Party. It refuses to have anything to do with the “rightists” – accusing them of violating the “spirit of the Moscow decision” and of being unable to form a representative government, among other things. Dr. Rhee, in turn, declares that the CP is “acting on orders from above” – which undoubtedly it is – and that it demanded a fifty per cent representation on the provisional executive committee, or else.
There have been assassinations of prominent leaders on both sides. The Russian news agency Tass has accused the American military government of inspiring demonstrations against the decisions of the Moscow conference, and MacArthur himself is supposed to have taken a hand in rebuking Tass.
From all reports, therefore, it seems that the leaders of the Kim Koo group lean toward the Americans while the CP, of course, stooges for Moscow. Koreans who align themselves behind one or the other of the invading imperialists will not lead their people to independence. They will help turn their unhappy country into a battlefield of World War III. The fight of the colonial peoples must be directed against ALL imperialists.
 




Throughout the war and the post-war period Labor Action and the Workers Party have urged the formation of price-control committees of workers and housewives because the problem of price control can be handled in the interest of the working people only by the people themselves. Sad to relate, there have been no people’s organizations systematically demanding access to production statistics and the power to fix ration quotas and ceiling prices, as well as to enforce rationing and prices through their own neighborhood groups.
Today, like a popular song that you hear on every radio program and out of every jukebox, the unceasing refrain of the capitalist class is: “HIGHER PRICES!”
The steel magnates demand a price boost even though their unprecedented profits can amply cover the wage increases asked by the steel workers, and this boost will be reflected in a thousand things we buy. The meat packers, heavily subsidized by the government out of public money and reaping greater profits than ever before, ask for upped meat prices, giving the wage demands of the packinghouse workers as their excuse. Civilian Production Administrator Small blames the OPA ceilings for the hoarding of men’s shirts and suits by manufacturers in order to achieve higher prices. OPA officials themselves come out for lifting price controls on so-called “non-essentials.” Strong capitalist combines are working overtime to prevent the extension of OPA controls – such as they are – beyond June 1946. Big farm corporations contemplate holding on to wheat and feed for higher prices in view of an anticipated grain shortage. Though there is an oversupply of both poultry and eggs, and officials pretend to be very much worried about spoilage, prices are still maintained at levels that prevent consumption of these foods by those who need them most. Top all this with the operations of the black market, which, having subsided for a while after V-J Day, is now back with newer and better get-rich-quick formulas.
Where will it end? While everyone talks of “preventing inflation,” the housewife knows it is already here by the shrunken size of her dollar. With the line-up for even higher prices, her dollar is doomed to buy diminishing quantities of the things necessary for bare living existence, to say nothing of good living.
So we say once more: The problem of price control can be handled in the interest of the working people only by the people themselves.
*

The Fate of Women War Workers
When I was in Linden, N.J., looking for the way to the picket line of the General Motors strikers, I asked a woman waiting for a bus for directions to the GM plant. Her instructions were so explicit that I commented on it, and she said: “I ought to know where it is. I worked there as a welder during the war. All of us women were fired.” “Well,” I said, “then what do you think of the demands of the GM strikers?” She replied: “To tell you the truth, I don’t really know too much about it because I’m not working there any more.” I asked her if she was looking for a job. “No,” she said. “My husband is working and I’m going to take it easy for a while. And believe me,” she continued, “I don’t mind if I do and that’s why I don’t take much interest in strikes and such things.”
This woman in Linden is one of the great army of women workers fired after V-J Day – as a reward for their wartime services. By the end of September, one million had been thrown out of the manufacturing industries. Month by month the number has mounted. Some of these women can’t afford to take it easy for a while. Their husbands may not be working, or their husbands may not be earning enough to maintain the family on a decent standard, or their husbands may have been victims of this useless war, or they may be single women with sisters, brothers, mothers, fathers dependent on them. If, like the Linden woman, they may be able to take it easy for a while, for how long? How secure is the husband’s job? How soon will the multiplying demands of the family require her financial help?
This army of women ex-war workers is still part of the working class. When labor strikes for higher pay, for shorter hours to provide more jobs, for no price increases, for more power to the unions, the fight is that of every member of the working class. Every woman ex-war worker is a member of this class. Let her not fool herself. Her protection in a class-torn economic set-up can come only from the labor movement. She must make their struggles hers. This is what I said to the woman in Linden.
*

Brooklyn Rent Strike
In a tenement in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, long-suffering tenants went on a rent strike.
Cold water from the hot water taps didn’t compel this action. Icy radiators in frigid weather didn’t stir them to do this. A broken dumbwaiter and shaft which acted as a catch-all for disease-spreading refuse were not enough to cause a solid front against the landlord. Rats, mice and roaches invading the flats were taken in stride. But when a child and her mother screamed with terror on finding a dead rat in the child’s bed, those screams shocked the tenants into a rent strike.
Why did they take so much? Why do people pay their money for rodent and vermin-infested places without heat, hot water or painting, with dirty halls, stairs and basements?
The answer is the housing shortage, which is today so critical that family life itself is threatened.
The economy of this country was able to provide battleships, bombers, submarines, tanks, bombs, guns and the atomic bomb, all valued at many times what it would cost to build the houses needed for healthy and comfortable living. Yet the housing problem is merely nibbled at by the city, state and federal governments of the capitalist class – while 7,000,000 families double up in the space barely adequate for half that, while millions live as do these Williamsburg tenants or little better, while others wander from pillar to post unable to find any housing at all.
But a workers’ government would use the wealth of the nation in the interests of its people – and build houses as quickly and efficiently as the capitalist governments build death-dealing war materiel. Do the working people have to wait for a nation-wide invasion of rats before getting together in an independent Labor Party that will establish a workers’ government to serve the people?
 




Nobody in New York City could see it with his own eyes, but every New Yorker was solemnly assured that ruin, worse than that inflicted upon Hiroshima by the atom bomb, had been visited upon the city by the 3,500 striking independent tugboat workers of the harbor. Yet on February 11, the eighth day of the strike, on which day they succumbed to the terrific pressure exerted on them and are reported to have consented to arbitration, there is still ample coal in the city, still a supply of fuel oil, no curtailment of food except by the black market and if the subways have been cold, this is certainly not the first time.
The 3,500 members of the United Marine Division of the AFL International Longshoremen’s Association (King Joe Ryan’s union) refused to accept the niggardly five and ten cent hourly increases offered by the tugboat owners and walked off the tugs on Monday, February 4. The men were asking for hourly increases for unlicensed deckhands to bring their wage to $1.35 from 67–72 cents, and for licensed mates, engineers and skippers to bring their wage to $1.57–$1.83 from $1.10–$1.42. These demands need to be understood in light of the fact that during the war these men did not receive a single raise. The other major demand was for a forty-hour week with time and a halt for overtime. This demand also can be understood only in light of the fact that the men worked as many as 72 and 80 hours on straight time.
On Wednesday, February 6, the federal government “took over” the tugs and demanded that the men return to work. Recognizing this as the usual strike-breaking move by the government, the men voted two to one to “Let Truman steer the tugs.” Truman couldn’t do it. The four hundred struck tugs remained docked. But the Army and Navy operated about forty-five of their own tugs, and the city added about five to that number.
On Friday, February 8, Ryan and other top union officials, over the heads of the strike committee, submitted terms to the strikers that had been agreed upon with the tug owners in a day-long conference. The sell-out didn’t work. Again two to one, the men voted down the proposition for a fifteen-cent hourly increase with no mention of the forty-hour week, but with the tidbit of a two-week paid vacation after three years of service.
Not only did the men vote this insult down, but they were plenty sore. Captain Bassett, head of the strike committee, is reported to have resigned. The indignation around the voting hall ran high. Unlicensed deckhands told reporters of having to work from 72 to 80 hours a week to get $50 take-home pay. Veteran skippers declared they were fed up. “They impose on us at every turn,” the men said. “Sometimes we are relieved on our boats as far away as New Haven and Providence, and we have to come home on our own time and at our own expense.”
 
A Good Strike
Just what went on behind the closed doors at Manhattan Center on February 11, when the men are reported to have accepted arbitration, is not known. It is known that King Joe Ryan went into the meeting “certain as anything can be” that the men would go along. On February 10, union officials, employers, federal agents and the calamity-howling mayor of the city convened and brought forth the hoary arbitration idea, the terms of which are: return to work, wage agreement to be retroactive to January 1, government to lift its seizure of the tugs. At last report, the tugboat OWNERS are holding out against arbitration but the heat is still on the strikers with the mayor’s scabby scare announcements.
This has been a good strike. The men recognized the strike-breaking tactics of government seizure and didn’t fall for them. They recognized the sell-out offered them by Ryan and voted it down. And their militancy bucked a vicious, lying, over-dramatized anti-strike campaign participated in by even the so-called “friends of labor.” Mayor O’Dwyer beat his chest and pulled his hair in public, ordered a brown-out, closed the schools and reopened them, and carried on ceaselessly. Radio newscasters spoke as if hospital patients were freezing in their beds. The New York Post, supposed to be liberal and pro-labor, with supreme hypocrisy editorialized that to continue the strike “is to give every citizen of New York, however sympathetic to labor, a vested interest in anti-unionism.”
The strikers realized that the picture was being over-painted to bring pressure upon them and to create anti-strike sentiment. The hardship story was fabricated. The strikers said that the city could get fuel oil with its tugs and barges. As for coal, the railroad tugs, not on strike, normally carry the city’s supply. The strikers were substantiated by impartial shipping men who affirmed that most of the city’s coal was hauled on railroad barges throughout the war.
But suppose the strike of these aggrieved essential workers were to have brought real inconvenience to that “New York citizen.” It is high time for him to place the blame for such inconvenience where it belongs. Definitely not on the workers who did not get a raise throughout the high-profit-high-price war period, who worked up to 72 and 80 hours a week on straight time, who today have to work that long to get $50 weekly take-home pay, who endure other impositions at the hands of the tugboat owners.
 




A socialist does not put any faith in peace treaties between imperialist governments for the simple reason that when imperialist interests so dictate, peace treaties become meaningless scraps of paper. But the mass of humanity that is not yet socialist, still puts some faith in peace treaties. They watch to see what will come out of the Paris conference of foreign ministers who met there weeks ago to arrive at preliminary agreements as a basis for peace treaties to end World War II legally – and have done nothing!
Capitalist reporters in Paris, both conservative and liberal, are of the same opinion, namely, that the peacemakers have other objectives than peace. Thus Freda Kirchwey writes in the liberal weekly The Nation:
“But the big fact behind every specific dispute is that no basis for any fundamental agreement now exists.”
And in the conservative New York Times, C.L. Sulzberger is tempted to paraphrase the famous saying of Clausewitz that war is the continuation of politics by other means, by cynically remarking that “nowadays peace is a continuation of war by other means.”
And mind you this: Byrnes, Molotov, Bevin and Bidault met to consider merely the fringe questions of European peace. On the agenda are Italy, the Balkans and Finland. Germany was the main enemy, whose fragments lie scattered across the middle of Europe, and about which certainly something has to be done. But Germany was not even put on the agenda. That is how controversial the subject is and how hostile are the four powers whose armies control the four German zones like armed bastions. But even on the less important problems the foreign ministers are getting nowhere very fast.
 
Dispute over Trieste
Thus far the bone of imperialist contention has been the Italian city of Trieste. Trieste is a fine city with good docks, a shipbuilding industry, other industries and businesses, and commercial connections to and from mid-eastern Europe. But above all, Trieste is important because it lies at the head of the Adriatic Sea, connecting with the Mediterranean and thence east and west to all parts of the world. Yugoslavia and Albania, both Russian satellites, flank one side of the Adriatic and Italy the other. The Russians, therefore, want Trieste to go to Yugoslavia, while the United States, Great Britain and France wish Trieste with seventy-five percent of its 700,000 population Italian, to remain an Italian city under the benevolent wing of the western powers.
But there is more to the unbending attitude on both sides than that. Trieste has been chosen to test the power of the two leading imperialists, Russia and the United States. Russia fights for Trieste not merely because it is the rich plum Russia promised to Belgrade. If Russia gets Trieste it means Russia strengthens the tentacles it has extended into western Europe and expands southward into the Mediterranean. On the other hand, Byrnes and Bevin are working to push Russia back behind the line of the Oder-Niesse Rivers, out of western Europe and away from the western Mediterranean, and they hold onto Trieste as the first step in this direction. So after fourteen sessions, a perfect stalemate was arrived at by the worthy foreign ministers, the staffs and the experts of the United States, Russia, Great Britain and France.
When Secretary Byrnes proposed to arrange for the general “peace” conference in Paris on June 15 with all twenty-one victor nations present – presumably not on the assumption that twenty-one clashing interests would get further than four, but rather that the United States can control more of the twenty-one nations than can Russia – Molotov protested with his usual vigor that preliminary agreements must be arrived at.
 
“War by Other Means”
And sure enough, a day or so later the correspondents were sending in reports overplaying a “new attitude” on Russia’s part. Lo and behold, a tentative agreement was reached about some of Italy’s North African colonies. Russia, which had an eye on Tripolitania and thereby gave the British imperialists hysterics, graciously consented to a United Nations trusteeship with administration over Tripolitania in Rome. Agreement on a reparations figure of $100,000,000 that Russia is to collect from impoverished Italy was played up, as were also some more or less important settlements of Balkan boundaries and an understanding on handling war criminals after peace treaties have been signed. So the air was full of expectations. They were fulfilled, for who could have expected anything but more dissension!
The next day Mr. Sulzberger wrote in the New York Times that while $100,000,000 was the figure settled upon for Russian collections, Byrnes wanted it paid out of Italian property in the Balkans and by transferring Italian naval and commercial vessels, while Molotov was holding out for that huge slice of current Italian production. But the real pay-off came when Molotov, without batting an eyelash, declared that now that he had made several concessions to the western powers – meaning Tripolitania which was not Russia’s anyway – he thought the western powers should give him his way on Trieste. So there was Trieste again, and still is!
The latest reports, as this article is written, are that Mr. Byrnes is bristling with another proposal regarding North Africa. Libya is to be under United Nations supervision with Rome as administrator, and special autonomy is to be given to Cyrenaica to avoid Italian administration of that province. Now it is Britain whose imperialist feathers are ruffled. It had its hand ready to grab off Cyrenaica for itself because Tobruk and Bengazi are strategic points, the latter being within single engine fighter range of the British island of Malta. On this issue Molotov has jumped onto Byrnes’ bandwagon planning to have some fun with Bevin. However, this does not look at all funny to the masses of the world hoping for peace.
 
Stop War-Makers Now!
What will happen when the ministers tackle the question of the Balkans? The issues there will be very hot indeed. What about the industrial equipment that Russia bundled off to the motherland? What about the special trade agreements made under the mouths of Russian guns? What about the Russian armies of occupation?
Then, as stated above, there is Germany. Molotov has firmly refused Byrnes’ offer for a twenty-five year agreement to keep Germany without the means for waging war. Molotov thereby revealed the real issue, which is how to utilize Germany TO WAGE THE NEXT WAR. In a debate in the House of Commons a Laborite Member of Parliament described Germany and Austria as “battlegrounds in which former allies are maneuvering for position.” Along the same lines, columnist Walter Lippman, back from a trip to Europe, wrote:
“The most important conclusion I have to report is, I am sure, indisputable. It is true that all European governments, all parties, and all leading men are acting as if there would be another world war.”
That is why Mr. Sulzberger was absolutely correct in remarking that “nowadays peace is a continuation of war by other means.” That is why the liberal Miss Kirchwey is also right when she reported:
“Peace is not going to be made in a room. It peace is made at all, it will be by people fighting their way out of a desolation of suffering and ruin toward new forms of social and political control.”
But being only a liberal, Miss Kirchwey doesn’t go the whole hog. What the suffering masses must do is overthrow the war-making imperialist powers and establish their own workers’ governments.
At the same time the fight against World War III has to begin right now. All measures in preparation for that annihilating conflict must be combatted by the people who will be devastated by atom bombs. Conscription must be fought; peacetime military training, military appropriations, manufacture of atom bombs, all are war measures that must be stopped. The working people have but to take a look at the foreign ministers in Paris to be convinced that only the working people of the world can bring peace by uniting against the war-makers.
 




The issue of price control before the workers and consumers is a broader one than saving the remnants of OPA. It is the problem of how the people can take price control into their own hands.
Inflation prices are no joke. They reduce the standard of living of all of us who live on wages and salaries, and for the lowest paid groups skyrocketing prices bring dangerous deprivation. The solution is not, of course, that of the profit-seeking National Association of Manufacturers and their like who want all price controls removed. But it is also not in the OPA nor any other agency of the capitalist government, which finagles prices in the interest of private profit- making a mockery of price control.
While this faking and finagling have been going on in every industry, nowhere are they more apparent than in the price increases granted the giant General Motors Corporation.
 
More Gravy for GM
On April 30, OPA gave General Motors boosts on its various cars from $16 to $60 above existing retail prices. The report from Washington bringing the glad tidings said: “The increases reflect the recent wage increase granted to General Motors workers.”
However, the price increases do NOT reflect wage increases. This is dust in the eyes. And here is the proof:
The findings of the Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion, dated October 1945, showed that manufacturing industries could increase wages 24 per cent without reducing profits and without advancing prices. The Department of Commerce on November 1, 1945, released a report to the effect that hourly wages could be raised 25 per cent without denting profits and without upping prices. The United Auto Workers, before the General Motors strike, submitted a brief to the Corporation proving that wages could be raised 30 per cent with an INCREASE in profits and a REDUCTION in prices, and the union challenged the company to open its books and show if the union is wrong. By refusing the challenge, the company admitted the union was right.
The wage increase granted the auto workers was not 30 per cent. It was not 25 per cent. Neither was it 24 per cent. The modest 18½ cents hourly raise was a meager 16.8 per cent advance – well below what industry, by the government’s own figures, can “afford” to pay. Yet OPA grants this powerful industrial monopoly price boosts of $16 to $60 on a car. This imposition on the consumer obviously does not reflect wage increases. It does reflect the assumption on the part of the capitalist government and capitalist industry that the masses are short on memory and long on gullibility
This latest shameful capitulation to the demands of private profiteers results in a “second round” of increases in the price of automobiles. Walter P. Reuther, UAW president, points out that OPA had already applied its “reconversion formula” and had already allowed prices which averaged $150 to $250 more than for 1941 models and $40 to $140 more than for 1942 models.
 
A New Swindle
These first substantial price advances were supposed to reflect “engineering changes and improvements.” About this swindle, UAW President Reuther says:
“Since the nature of the alleged changes and improvements claimed by manufacturers in their applications to OPA is not made public, it appears that they have found a loophole for turning a normal peacetime practice into a profitable racket under government price control. Auto manufacturers always made minor changes in their cars from year to year and frequently made important changes and improvements. Yet it was not their peacetime practice to reflect these developments in higher prices. It was the boast of the industry that competition regularly forced the delivery of a better product to the consumer without compensating increases in prices.”
This article highlights the increases in auto prices. But these boosts are symptomatic of a general epidemic. The cost of milk and all food, of wet wash and other services, of clothes and furniture, of electrical appliances and kitchenware, has been boosted by OPA. No wonder the National Association of Manufacturers can make such effective propaganda against OPA!
The General Motors workers who raised the demand for wage increases to maintain take-home pay WITHOUT price increases, also pointed the way to price fixing and price control by the workers and consumers themselves.
The General Motors workers pointed the way with their demand: “Open the Books!” How else can wages and prices be determined except by full knowledge of the estimated costs, sales, improved processes, increase in labor productivity for the coming year or other fiscal period?
But what sense is there in opening the books to the capitalist government that by its very nature evaluates profits as most important? The books of the corporations must be opened to committees of workers who understand the ins and outs of production, and to committees of consumers and housewives at the distribution and consumption end. These are the people’s agencies that could fix prices in the interest of the many and enforce those prices against the profiteers and black marketeers.
Afraid to call the people into action in their own behalf, the officialdom of the labor movement still hitches labor’s wagon exclusively to the dry, rattling bones of the OPA, which was never really an adequate agency for price control.
Labor must end this nonsense. Inflation is no joke. It has to do with whether we eat much or little, are clothed well or poorly, are healthy or sick. As workers and consumers, the people themselves can prevent inflated prices. The demand to open the books of the corporations to committees of workers, coupled with the demand that committees of workers and housewives be organized to fix and control prices, must be made by organized labor, by unorganized workers, by housewives, by salaried workers, by all whose standard of living is threatened by the looming price boom.
 




These days the woman’s question revolves around certain economic problems. There is the demand for equal pay for equal work. There is the fight against discrimination in the places women work. There is the need for special facilities in factories and in the community, such as rest rooms and nurseries, to enable women to follow their twofold course as women and as workers.
These, of course, are problems of working women. Their existence as pressing problems for some eighteen million working women is the answer to the moldy query: “Is Woman’s Place in the Home?” The need to earn a living for herself, or for herself and a family, has forced the woman to leave the home for many a decade now. Technological advancement has removed the barriers between women and almost any kind of job, and has created new jobs, for which women are especially adept. So today we find women doing double duty, inside and outside the home.
 
“Job” or “Career”?
In the May 1946 issue of the magazine Politics, Ethel Goldwater contributed an article – The Independent Woman: A New Course – the thesis of which is “that a woman needs both career and babies, both a life in the home and one outside the home.” Mrs. Goldwater believes that women must have a place both inside and outside the home, for their own good and their self-fulfilment.
It is interesting, however, to note that Mrs. Goldwater does not speak of a “job” with babies, but “career” and babies. It can hardly be claimed that sitting at a telephone switchboard, or punching out squares of metal at a machine, or even taking notes and typing them for eight hours a day, are necessary stimulants for the release of women’s potentialities, for their self-fulfilment and happiness. These are merely jobs.
What Mrs. Goldwater has in mind is something else. A CAREER has a different connotation altogether. It is work involving some individual initiative, some creativeness, some self-expression and self-realization. Within capitalist society few women, or men, can find such work.
However, in her article Mrs. Goldwater has no word to offer on how the great mass of women, who do indeed need the satisfactions of meaningful work as well as motherhood, can get this kind of work. In fact, this problem does not exist for her at all. At least, her article shows no evidence of it. Thereby she shows her limitations. Actually she is taking up the cudgels only for a small group of lower middle class intellectuals.
For the bulk of womankind, complete fulfilment through motherhood and creative work is unthinkable without a basic change in society. For satisfying work outside the home, there are definite minimal requirements. First, the pressure of economic necessity must be removed. Second, human happiness must replace the profit motive. Then only Will hours of labor be planned on the basis of technological possibilities and human consumption needs. With distasteful though necessary social labor reduced to the minimum, and the hunger removed from society, everyone will be in a position to exercise a choice about work, to train and qualify for that which may bring each individual most satisfaction.
Perhaps Mrs. Goldwater, and certainly the editor of Politics, will say that’s a “Marxist blueprint” – at which certain intellectuals turn up their noses. So let’s look at Mrs. Goldwater’s own blueprint. She offers one in three parts.
First, Mrs. Goldwater wants to erase the demarcation between “woman’s work” and “man’s work.” Both boys and girls should receive instruction in housework, and since they both become parents, instruction in childcare. A girl should be taught that motherhood is not the entire woman, that she may in fact renounce motherhood if she wishes.
Assuming that this will help the situation, how is it to be accomplished? By the educational system under capitalism? But Mrs. Goldwater herself complains of the “double standard” that permeates all capitalist society. She shows too – and this seems to be one of her chief grievances – how “left-wing intellectual circles” are still suffering from the same poison. This is indeed bad, but it above all shows how hard it is for even very good ideas to take root in the capitalist milieu. And even if such instruction were given in schools, how basically would it alter the situation? Would it relieve the man of his need to work all day in a shop?
The second plank of Mrs. Goldwater’s program covers several points. Housework and child-care should be simplified by full use of the machine-age tools – which, alas, are beyond the “reach of too many families.” Special services (diaper, sitter, cooked food shops) are to Mrs. Goldwater’s liking. We stop here, and ask once more how these things are to reach the “too many families” who don’t have them?
We of the Workers Party who have a “Marxist blueprint” also have a demand for a minimum family income of $5,000 for right here and now. This, we claim, would go a long way toward buying machine-age household tools and special services. Similarly we “visionaries” call for a $250,000,000,000 public building program to provide, among other things, housing, nursery schools and cooperative arrangements for child-care, while Mrs. Goldwater would like to have these things without the bother of politics and political parties. For indeed she makes no connection between her blueprint and the realm of politics where such things are accomplished.
Under her second plank she also wants an end to the “impossible ideal of order and cleanliness” which consume time “out of all proportion to the value of the transitory effect.” Woman’s “fanaticism is advanced by the women’s magazines, which see the woman’s life as spent on an endless treadmill of redecoration of the home and of the person.” And how, pray, is this influence of commercialism on our lives to be ended?
 
Man’s Place
In her third plank Mrs. Goldwater talks about how women should use the “regular leisure” they will have if the other two parts of her program are carried out. But, as shown above, “these ways” that Mrs. Goldwater advocates are terribly limited, inadequate, without connection to political action – and therefore of little value. Certainly the regular leisure women need, will not be campaigning for it in Politics.
We Marxists, who do have a guiding blueprint for raising humanity to a higher collective and individual existence, are wary about dotting the i’s and crossing the t’s. The complexities of human relationships, of family life, of character development stagger minute prophesy. We fight for many things in the right here and now, such as higher wages.
However, we know that the mess that capitalism and other exploitive societies have made of these aspects of life cannot be tackled for all of us without first establishing a more favorable social, economic and political milieu. So we say we do not know whether under Socialism man’s place will be in the home, except that Socialism will relieve man (and woman!) of the tediousness of long hours in the shop and the slavery of a shabby income. Thus, we say that the place NOW for serious men and women is in the revolutionary socialist movement.
 




The next raid on the wages of workers and on the, pockets of the people as a whole has been well organised, and the raiders are about to pounce. Truman and the OPA, yielding to the power of the real estate industry, are going to beat the new Congress to it in raising rents all along the line.
What are the tenants, the mass consumers of housing, doing to meet the onslaught? Unless they organize in their apartment houses, unite in their blocks and communities, to resist by planned action, they will be defenseless against the landlords and the government.
 
“Required” for Whom?
When Truman declared the end of price control recently, keeping it only on sugar, rice and rent, he forecast, however, that “It may be that some adjustment of rents will be required.” Why required? Have not the landlords enjoyed the greatest bonanza in history? Have they not rented every hole in the wall and uninhabitable hovel at top rentals? Have they not given in return a minimum of service? But the landlords covet more than that.
They want to squeeze every dollar of profit out of the great housing need of the people. What is this nonsense of rent control, when the extreme scarcity of dwellings places landlords in a position to mark up their commodity as their own greed dictates, since people must have a place to lay their heads! So, taking a leaf out of the recent history of the meat industry, the real estate industry is striking against the people.
According to Housing Expediter Wilson Wyatt, some 2,000,000 dwellings should be under construction this year. However, by the end of September only around 800,000 dwellings were begun. Today government officials report, and real estate interests admit, that building is at a standstill. The only activity is in the field of converting old structures into some kind of living space. Different from the strikes of workers who fight FOR a decent life, the industrial powers strike AGAINST the attainment of a decent life by the mass.
 
Landlords Confess Greed
At the same time the landlords and realtors make known their greed in no uncertain terms. Robert R. Watson, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, at the Atlantic City convention of the National Association of Real Estate Boards, demanded a fifteen per cent boost in rents “to save thousands of landlords [poor things] from bankruptcy.” This, it might be said, is by way of a minimum demand.
The real estate interests desire the complete elimination of all controls on rent and of all ceilings of new dwellings. Boyd T. Bernard, president of the National Association of Real Estate Boards, called upon members of his organization to “wait for the new Congress on the Capitol steps with a proposal for cushioned decontrol of rents.”
Not that these profit-poachers are always and under all circumstances opposed to government interference. Not at all. For example, they would like the benefits of certain tax exemptions on new housing. Again, while they will brook no meddling by the Federal Housing Administration in private enterprise, they heartily approve of FHA as an insurer of mortgages. They are perfectly willing for the government to take the risks of private enterprise.
 
Effects of Rise
How do the strike of the real estate industry, the lifting of rent ceilings and controls on new housing, and a fifteen per cent rent boost affect the veterans and the rest of us? The government has estimated that about four million veterans wanted to build, buy or rent a home this year. With only 800,000 units begun by September, no wonder a group of Pacific veterans at a recent reunion suggested the slogan: “We’ll rent a tree by fifty-three!”
The removal of rent and price ceilings on new homes will make them prohibitive for practically everyone who needs them most. Ceilings now on new homes limit rentals to $80 a month and purchase prices to $10,000  – at least theoretically. According to government statistics, those veterans who want to rent homes have average earnings of $44 a week. Certainly they cannot afford to pay $80 a month for rent. The veterans who would like to buy a house average $48 a week in wages or earnings. People in this income level buying $10,000 homes simply become slaves to their homes for the best years of their lives. So the present situation is bad enough. Now imagine what it will be with all ceilings and controls off.
Finally, it is absolutely impossible for the working people as a whole to absorb a fifteen per cent increase. Already the discrepancy between wage increases and price increases has drastically cut the standard of living. According to government figures, which, be it remembered, never favor the workers, wage increases since 1941 amount to thirty-three per cent in hourly rates, while the cost of living has gone up forty-six per cent. That is neither an accurate picture of the wage nor the price situation.
The hourly rate increases tell nothing about reduced hours and reduced take-home pay. And every housewife can tell you that the cost of living has gone up a good deal more than forty-six per cent since 1941. However, these figures, unfavorable as they are to the worker, still show wages as far behind the cost of living. It is unthinkable for the workers to shell out for a fifteen per cent rent increase.
Such considerations, however, have not deterred the OPA’s Housing Rent Advisory Committee from submitting to the OPA three proposals which could have been written by the National Association of Real Estate Boards. This committee recommends to OPA (1) Elimination of rent ceilings on’ new housing and on converted housing; (2) systematic and progressive removal of property from control where owners offer tenants leases at increases of not more than fifteen per cent; (3) an immediate overall fifteen per cent increase. These are the measures that OPA is now considering.
There are rumors that OPA will want an overall ten per cent rent raise to the landlords. Intolerable as this Would be to tenants, it would not be acceptable to the real estate interests. They want their full demands, and the administration will give in, as it did to the meat industry. The outcome of the election has by no means stiffened the backs of the executive branches of the government.
 
For Direct Resistance
Relying on themselves, as they have to, what will the working people do to counter the latest raid on their wages and pockets? Undoubtedly, from coast to coast, there will be a storm of demands for wage increases to close the gap between wages and the cost of living. But there must also be direct resistance to the landlords through tenants’ committees working with the unions and taking planned action not to pay rent increases.
Finally, the housing shortage calls for removing the problem from the hands of the profit-poachers and for a government spending program of at least $250,000,000 to construct badly needed homes and public buildings in the next five years. How else can the people hold what they have and get more of what they so urgently need?
 




The conference of progressives that met in Chicago in September had its aftermaths. First, there was a follow-up meeting in New York City during October. Then, last week, the same group gathered in Washington. Finally, plans were announced for a conference in January to develop a “progressive program” and to fashion “the most effective liberal coalition in the history of our country.”
The instigators of this movement are leaders of the CIO, CIO-PAC, the National Citizens PAC, the Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts and Sciences, the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen, the National Farmers Union, and the NAACP, with the blessing of the die-hard New Dealers Ickes, Bowles, Pepper, Wallace.
Reporting the Chicago conference for Labor Action, in its issue of October 28, Albert Goldman characterized the outcome of that meeting, on the basis of its composition and its politics, as “a program of middle-class progressives who have come under Stalinist influence.” These progressives, both the Stalinists and the anti-Stalinists, proclaim their adherence to Roosevelt’s New Deal. The CIO News reported the New York City meeting referred to above, as held “to further the unification of Roosevelt followers throughout the country.” And the pre-election issue of the CIO News gave a spread to FDR’s so-called Economic Bill of Rights, stating that the program of Roosevelt “is also the program of the CIO.”
 
Assisting Stalinism
Why the Stalinists should be “champions” of Roosevelt is not hard to guess. As always, guided by the foreign-policy needs of the Kremlin, the Stalinists profess great devotion for the so-called Economic Bill of Rights while hoping that the rise of Roosevelt progressives to power will re-establish the Rooseveltian policy of appeasing Russia which has been replaced by the “get-tough” trend of Truman-Byrnes.
But why should the labor movement, Negro organizations, farmers’ unions, in short, the masses of our people, hitch their political wagon to the fallen star of New Dealism – a star, by the way, which was meant to guide capitalism out of a deep crisis rather than guide the working people to security, peace and plenty!
The star fell long ago and it was officially recognized even by its own creator. While FDR was spouting about the Economic Bill of Rights out of the side of his mouth, he performed the funeral service over the New Deal out of the other side.
This happened at the end of 1943, and not out of a clear sky. Why was the creator of the New Deal forced to abandon it? To understand this is to see also the futility of the Roosevelt progressives of 1946 vintage.
Roosevelt’s wartime policy, as far as the New Deal for the people was concerned, was a progressively increasing capitulation to reaction. He kicked out New Dealers from government posts – beginning with Henderson from OPA and ending with the elimination of Wallace from the presidential ticket – to make way for the creation of the war economy by big business itself. Without them he could realize his war policy. His “hold the line” policy boiled down to allowing fabulous blood profits out of the war but disallowing wage increases to meet the skyrocketing cost of living. Yielding to the needs of the capitalist class, he became the staunchest advocate of a national service law that would have struck a solar-plexus blow at labor’s freedom.
 
New Deal Had to End
It is not contended here that Roosevelt did not believe in his New Deal. Roosevelt in his lifetime, like Wallace today, believed that capitalism must provide the people with at least a minimum of their needs to prevent popular discontent from rising to revolutionary proportions. The point is, however, that no matter what a politician states to be his beliefs, as long as the preservation of capitalism is his dominating aim, he is the tool of the system and of the ruling class. Roosevelt’s procession of capitulations well illustrate this basic point.
Roosevelt’s secretary, Mr. Early, in explaining to newspaper reporters the president’s abandonment of the New Deal at the end of 1943, used two small sentences:. “The term New Deal was born in 1932. It is now 1943.” The significance of these sentences cannot be overestimated.
In 1932 the capitalist class was still critically sick from the attack of sharp crisis in 1929. In 1932 the capitalist class was ready to do anything to pull itself out of an economic abyss. The capitalists were willing even to follow the prescription of Dr. New Deal. However, as the years progressed toward, war and war orders restored robustness to the profit-makers, their attitude kept changing and FDR’s policies reflected the changes.
By 1944, the American capitalist class could afford to demand the end of New Dealism. It was bloated with war profits. It liked the feeling. It was winning a world war through the sweat and blood of the people. It came out of the war richer and apparently more powerful than ever before.
 
New Stage Is Reached
Now in 1946 the so-called progressive leaders of common people call for the resuscitation of the New Deal, for the rallying of all New Dealers, for a crusade of Roosevelt followers. But it is not 1932, nor even 1943, but 1946. Today American capitalism has both “opportunities” and “responsibilities” as the writers in the Sunday supplements tell us. It has the opportunity, as the only thriving economy in the world to grab unprecedented trade and other world-wide advantages – if only labor will be good. It has the “responsibility” to impose permanent militarism on the American people, in order to police the world and to prepare for World War III – and the people must be made to take it. Besides opportunities and “responsibilities,” the American capitalist class has in its pockets fabulous war profits which stir, in its heart a , consuming lust for even greater profits – and the workers must be prevented from getting a bigger share of the national product for themselves. These are no liberal objectives and they call for no liberal policies to fulfill. Putting it mildly, this is American capitalism 1946.
“But that’s just it,” say the Roosevelt progressives, 1946 vintage, “and that’s exactly what we will fight – however, we will not fight so hard as to endanger private enterprise, the profit system, capitalism.” Thereby they become tools of capitalism, fighting only with paper swords.
When the Roosevelt progressives meet in Washington in January, history will be calling on Philip Murray, Jack Kroll, A.F. Whitney, Jim Patton, Walter White, to get off the capitalist, merry-go-round. Will they do it? Will they say they have had enough of “progressive” capitalist politics and politicians? Will they break with Ickes, Bowles, Pepper, Wallace? Will they say that the reaction looming black on the horizon of American capitalism, can be fought only on a class basis? Will Philip Murray and Jack Kroll propose that the CIO-PAC become the formulation for an independent labor party, to rally all the exploited, the segregated, the oppressed, the discontented? Will they proclaim themselves no longer the political tools of the capitalist class? We shall see.
 




Since the beginning of the war Labor Action and the Workers Party have stood for price control, and still do. Always opposed to the capitalist class, the parasites on the productive life of the country, we are most decidedly against allowing that class to soak the consumers. With worldwide shortages of so many necessities, and the profit-grubbers having a free hand, prices could become prohibitive.
The question was and is HOW to control prices.
Being equally opposed to capitalist government which is only the instrument of those same parasites, we have expressed our conviction that neither OPA nor Congress nor both, nor any other agencies of the capitalist government, would or could control prices in the interest of the people. The aggregations of capitalists in the National Association of Manufacturers, the National Retail Dry Goods Association and all the associations of the dairy, meat packing, lumber, textile, real estate and other industries have made a mockery of OPA from the beginning. And finally their high-pressure lobbies, on April 18, succeeded in getting the House of Representatives to take whatever heart was left, out of the OPA.
 
How Control Prices?
The action of the House in extending the Price Control Act for nine months from June 30, 1946, but with nine amendments which actually end all price control and reduce OPA from the limp wash rag which it has always been, to a mere disappearing drip, only proves how right Labor Action and the Workers Party have been.
The problem of price control must be divided into its two logical parts: price fixing and price enforcement. Only the working people themselves, constituting the great mass of consumers, can do both jobs. Prices could be fixed in the interest of the whole community by committees of workers to whom the books of the manufacturers are opened for that purpose. Such committees of workers, acting in coordination through out an industry, could separate the overwhelming capitalist itch for profits from the overwhelming need of the people for goods, and arrive at figures that are fair. As to enforcing those prices, who are in a better position than the housewives who do the buying? Their neighborhood committees, acting in cooperation with the workers’ committees, could do the necessary policing and boycotting in their neighborhoods to make violations and black marketeering very bad business practices indeed.
To date the people have not taken these self-protective steps. Certainly they have given the capitalist government enough of a chance to protect the consumer. But, as Max Lerner put it, “In the contest between millions of dollars and millions of consumers, the dollars won out.”
Now it is up to the workers and housewives to protect themselves. And do they need protection!
 
New Price Boosts
Listening on the radio to the commentators “of good will” including Lerner, Winchell, LaGuardia, Pearson. and others, one gets a good idea of the inflation ahead. The prospects are for at least 25 per cent being taken right out of every pay envelope. That is a conservative estimate of how much the purchasing power of the dollar will be cut. Milk may go up 4 cents a quart; butter may double in price; bread may be 3 cents dearer per loaf; cheese and canned foods may rise 30 to 35 per cent. Clothing, household appliances and furnishings, and every item of consumption, will be marked up.
Those nine amendments that the House passed will do the trick. For instance, one amendment guarantees to manufacturers prices based on cost plus a “reasonable profit.” This formulation has a familiar ring. This cost-plus business is something the capitalists always thrive on. Another amendment removes the food subsidies that the government has been paying the monopolists, amounting to two and a half billions a year. This was a pretty penny of taxpayers’ money that the profit-grubbers were collecting yearly during the war and since, but they are willing to forego this tidbit for the higher profits they will get from uncontrolled prices. The other amendments follow the same pattern, assuring price boosts in everything without exception.
President Truman’s comment on the action of the House was described as “not for print” and the Administration forces planned “a fight in the Senate.” However, the past few days seem to have brought more support to the House bill than otherwise. If the Congress as a whole passes the House bill and Truman has to decide whether or not to veto it, he will have to take into consideration that his veto of the House bill which does hold down rents to present ceilings, may well result in rent increases of from 25 per cent to 75 per cent without curbing prices anyhow.
 
Action – Not Letters!
All the commentators “of good will” can advise the working people to do, all the liberal press can suggest In the crisis, all the labor leaders are urging upon their rank and file, is to write letters to Congress. As if Congress doesn’t know that all but the monopolists favor price control! Of thirty thousand letters already received by Congress, only five per cent opposed price control. The University of Denver National Opinion Research Center ascertained hat 82 per cent of the people want price control, with five per cent doubtful and thirteen per cent opposed. If PM can procure this information, certainly Congressmen also have it.
But the principal objection to this course of action is that it still relies on OPA to fix and enforce prices. But the OPA has been steadily giving in to the pressure of the National Association of Manufacturers and other capitalist associations since its creation. It has functioned by TALKING “hold the price line” and ACTING to raise price ceilings. It has covered up actual price increases, as for instance when Chester Bowles before the House Banking and Currency Committee – where he spent a total of fifty hours testifying – declared that the cost of living has increased only 3.4 per cent since the spring of 1943. Tell a housewife this lie – that the cost of living has gone up only 3.4 per cent in the past three years – and she would either burst a blood vessel in suppressed indignation or resort to justified violence on the liar.
The price issue has reached a pass where the working people no longer have a choice. The capitalist-class bias of the capitalist government has been revealed time and again, and now without any room for counterargument. Price fixing and enforcement has been thrown into the lap of the working people. WORKERS’ COMMITTEES AND HOUSEWIVES’ COMMITTEES ARE ADVOCATED BY LABOR ACTION AND THE WORKERS PARTY TO GET TO WORK ON THIS JOB.
 




Here’s a conundrum for you, reader, to solve: When does a bulge become a breakthrough? What bulge? What breakthrough? Why, that price bulge President Truman solemnly declared – in the middle of February when the Big Steel companies got their $5-a-ton price increase – would not, no never, become a breakthrough.
Since then there have been price advances in steel, oil, textiles, clothing, meat, sugar, wheat and grains, lumber, glass, builders’ materials, automobiles, and on industrial machinery all ceilings have been removed. Well, come now, has the bulge become a breakthrough? What is your answer, reader? Or shall we wire the President for an answer?
But wait a minute. Perhaps Mr. Chester Bowles, Stabilization Director, can solve the riddle. When the high-price balloon was set off with the unwarranted increase in steel prices, Mr. Bowles also had a great deal to say about bulges and breakthroughs. He crossed his heart and swore that only the prices of durable goods would show some small price advance, but the prices of food, clothing and rent – which account for seventy per cent of consumer expenditures – would not be affected.
But, alas, Mr. Bowles only makes life more complicated. For now we have more questions: are meat, sugar, wheat and grains foods? And textiles and clothing – are these clothing? And do the prices of lumber, glass and builders’ supplies in general affect the rent situation? Either Mr. Bowles was lying or food is not food, clothing is not clothing, and building materials do not affect rents – because these are the very items that have gone up in price, with more to come!
As a matter of fact here is another list of items whose prices the OPA has lifted: dinnerware, lamps, alarm clocks, flatware, garden trowels, lawn mowers and a number of other hard goods items. These are, to be sure, not as weighty items in our budgets as food, clothing and rent, but they help pull up the overall cost of living.
 
How Far Will Prices Rise?
How much of a boost in the cost of living can be expected? Here’s what the Kiplinger Washington Agency advised its businessmen clients, on March 16, as to OPA policy:
“OPA is talking out of both sides of its mouth simultaneously. Out of one side OPA is saying that the price line will be held. This is the theme of all loud publicity, but it’s only half true. Out of the other side OPA is telling its staff to raise prices and to hurry, make it snappy, get a lot of raises out within the next 30 days. But keep the price raises quiet – play down publicity on them – play up the publicity about holding the line – the breast-beating theme. Make the public believe that the price line is being held – while the retreat to a new higher line is actually under way.”
How far will the price balloon rise?
Mr. Eccles, head of the Federal Reserve Board, predicts a rise in living costs this year of ten per cent. Mr. Bowles pooh-poohed this figure and compromised at five per cent. Mr. Snyder, War Mobilization and Reconversion Director, thinks the rise in living costs “would not be substantial.” However, Kiplinger advises his business clients: “Ten per cent rise in average consumer prices by year end now seems sure.”
United States News, which is a businessman’s magazine, wrote in its issue of March 29: “Prices are rising at a rate that will amount to about 12 per cent over all, if continued through 1946.”
But, of course, it’s those wicked workers who are responsible. They can’t content themselves with a lower standard of living due to the cuts in take-home pay. They have to go out on strike for wage increases. So can you blame the bosses for demanding price boosts on their products?
This myth has been exploded time and again, but never has it been so completely pulverized as today. The General Motors strikers have done yeoman service to educate the public on the question of wages, prices and profits. Before the strike the union showed that the company’s business in 1946 would warrant a thirty per cent wage increase and still leave enough profits to amount to fifty per cent more than in the pre-war years 1936–39 – AND PERMIT ALSO A DECREASE IN THE PRICE OF CARS FROM THE 1942 PRICE.
The GM strikers challenged the company to open its books. The company sidestepped this logical challenge – and thereby implied that the workers’ figures were correct. It was furthermore attested by government fact-finding boards that manufacturers could “afford to raise wages by around twenty-five per cent without boosting the prices of their products.” But a capitalist government by and large does what the capitalists want, and so Mr. Truman and Mr. Bowles came out with their wage-price policy – with the results sketched above.
But don’t think for one minute that the companies are getting in price increases ONLY the equivalent of the wage increases they will be paying! Big Steel got in the $5-a-ton price boost $140,000,000 over and above the total wage increase. Why suppose this an exceptional case. Also let it be known that many businesses that have not increased wages, have nonetheless been favored by OPA with higher ceilings.
 
GM Program Needed
What concerns the worker, and the housewife who meets these towering prices head-on, is what has already happened to the wage increases that the workers fought so militantly to attain. The fifteen, sixteen or eighteen cents an hour raises, on the basis of the forty-hour week, only partly made up the cut in take-home pay suffered at the end of the war. With OPA’s two-faced policy, with the farm bloc pressing for higher parity prices that will up the cost of food still further, what is becoming of that inadequate wage increase? It is rapidly melting away. The result? The standard of living of the working people will drop. This is the kind of progress capitalist production assures the class on whose labor the greatness of this country is predicated.
The situation calls for the adoption by the labor movement of the principles enunciated by the General Motors strikers. Wages must be increased to maintain and improve the people’s standard of living. Wage increases must come out of bulging business profits not out of the pockets of the consumers, who are the working people. And let the companies open their books and reveal the steal the profit system perpetrates on all of us.
How about price fixing and control? The OPA has demonstrated that an agency of the capitalist government cannot serve the needs of the people. Price fixing must be linked with the demand to open the companies’ books to committees of workers in the factories who are at the point of production, in a position to see and know what’s what. As to price enforcement, this has been a farce under OPA. The still-flourishing black market makes OPA look pretty silly. The people themselves, through neighborhood committees of organized labor and organized housewives, can enforce price ceilings and fight the black market.
Militant action along these lines will solve the conundrums about bulges and breakthroughs.
 




May Day is so very different from every other holiday on the calendar. The Fourth of July, Washington’s Birthday, Labor Day and other holidays the workers get by the grace of the capitalist class and the capitalist government. May Day, however, is a holiday labor has taken for itself – a day it celebrates as a class, separate and apart from, and against the capitalist class – a day symbolizing the struggle between labor and the parasites on labor’s back.
Though the celebration of May Day grew out of the long and bloody battle for the shorter work day, the meaning of this holiday has gone far beyond that limited fight. The significance of May Day embraces the historic enmity between capital and labor – a battlefront that can be demobilized only after the victory of labor over capital. In a word, May Day proclaims the challenge of labor for POWER to rule society on behalf of all the toiling peoples.
And what is power? It is organized government by dint of which one class or another rules over all. So we may say that May Day betokens the revolutionary push of the workers towards their own government, a workers’ government, to displace and replace the government of the capitalists, monopolists and bankers.
Just what would a workers’ government look like?
First let this be made clear. The establishment of a workers’ government implies a rock-bottom revolutionary change in both the basis and the form of government. Whenever a historic class triumphs over its oppressor, that triumph can be realized only by the victorious class creating the governmental system that will allow it to rule society.
 
How Capitalist Democracy
How it works in this country is daily demonstrated to the workers. Take price control as an instance. With prices merrily ballooning skyward, with a world famished for food, clothing and bare necessities, “our” legislators think first of the profits of the capitalists. How can this happen? The basis of representation under capitalist democracy is a geographical division. Congressmen are supposed equally to guard the interests of all the classes in their districts. Actually this is impossible. So they represent the class that controls the capitalist parties and that wields monopolistic economic power. Congress is full of lawyers, politicians, office-grabbers and businessmen who understand how capitalist democracy works for the capitalist class.
Obviously this is not what a workers’ government would look like. Something else is wanted.
The special strength of the workers is that they are workers – their strength is in the factories and wherever else they work. Therefore, geographical districts embracing all classes must be scrapped in favor of industrial and occupational representation, proportioned to numbers of workers, not as now to all-inclusive population. This would be the new base and form of a workers’ government.
Let us see how it might shape up in an industrial hub like the city of Detroit. The government might be called the Detroit Workers’ Council. In this council would sit the democratically elected representatives from all the auto plants and all related and other industries in the area. The transport workers of all branches would elect and send their deputies. The clerks and all employees in department stores, markets and all goods distribution centers would choose their ablest and best, and probably in this group would be included the small businessmen who do not exploit labor but eke out a modest living by retail trade.
Then there are schools, libraries and all educational institutions from which would come duly elected representatives to the Detroit Workers’ Council. Employees in hospitals, clinics and all institutions for public health and service would delegate fellow employees from those institutions. Farm laborers and farm families who feed the teeming city, would be likewise represented in the Detroit Workers’ Council.
Who would have the right to vote in the factories and other occupational units? Every worker by hand or by brain, the man on the production line, the stenographer, the technician, the engineer, the hospital attendant as well as the doctor, the school janitor as well as the principal.
 
Who’s Missing from List?
Who then is missing from the list? Only those who never would be missed in a society based on use and not on profit: the capitalists, monopolists, bankers, stock manipulators, profiteers – all who exploit labor, all parasites on labor, these alone would be excluded from a workers’ democracy.
Actually a workers’ government extends democracy. Also you can see how close the workers’ government is to the workers themselves. They are really represented by fellow workers from their factories and other places of work. Furthermore, workers would have the right, by majority vote, to recall their representatives from the Workers’ Council if the latter did not carry out the wishes of their factory constituents. That means, in turn, that elections in factories and other occupational units would be on the basis of a program that the workers want carried out and that the candidates to the Workers’ Council would pledge themselves to carry out.
This is what a workers’ government would took like in Detroit or in any other industrial center. On the nationwide scale, the government would be a larger edition of the Detroit Workers’ Council, likewise based on worker representation from industries, likewise responsible to the workers. This is the only conceivable way in which the interests of the working people can become the concern of government. Through their own workers’ councils the people who work by hand and by brain, can freely participate in the construction of a new society, can socialize production under the control of workers’ committees, can organize the whole of production for the use of the masses. When on May Day we speak of the struggle of labor and capital, this is the outcome that we hope for and work for.
 




Of more than three hundred billions of dollars of war goods produced by the United States for World War II, one hundred billions is surplus and subject to peacetime disposal. This vast reservoir of goods, ranging from shoes to ships and pins to plants, is the product of American workers. Those goods were paid for out of taxes directly lifted from our pay envelopes. So the disposal of war property that was not blown up in the holocaust, is definitely the concern of the workers.
In the first place, civilians were led to expect that up to twenty billions of consumption goods would be released to fill the vacuum made by intense shortages. Nothing of the kind happened. Sheets and shoes, jackets and blankets, jeeps and housing material, and many other consumable items have been held back. Only a trickle of a few items has materialized.
On V-J Day there were 62,000 new and reconditioned jeeps ready for shipment to the United States to fill the demand of veterans. However, a mere 10,000 have been released, and since the price is $800 most veterans cannot afford them.
Under pressure of public clamor for housing, the Navy has released some building materials for temporary housing. Still the House Expenditure Committee has accused the Army and Navy of obstructing the flow of surplus material and in many instances destroying it.
Are the Army and Navy yielding to the pressure of business, which does not want a flood of released goods to interfere with high prices?
 
The Crime of Destroying Useful Goods
The working class must raise its voice in angry protest against the destruction of goods by official order. In a world where millions of people lack almost everything, destruction of useful goods is a crime. Drew Pearson has reported the dumping of jeeps, gasoline, leather jackets, watches. Representative Albert Engel charged the burning of gloves, jackets, parachutes, engines, beacon lights, magnetos. Letters have come from the Pacific telling of the burning of boats, of sinking material into the sea, including new electrical equipment and tires, of dumping hundreds of cars and then covering them with earth from adjoining hills. Air force headquarters recently announced that 6,000 planes costing nearly a billion dollars are considered obsolete and will be scrapped.
Why cannot army clothing be sent to warm the needy? Why cannot material be converted to peacetime purposes wherever possible and sent to those in need?
What about the guns and ammunition scattered throughout the world and estimated to have cost many billions? Besides a ten million dollar purchase of planes, tires and trucks by Dictator Franco, two American ships docked at Barcelona loaded with machine guns. This information comes from the reliable Christian Science Monitor. Will the American workers permit the guns they manufactured to be sold to the forces of reaction to be turned upon fellow workers abroad?
In this country the industrial powers are the chief beneficiaries of surplus property disposal.
Lush bargains are available for those in the know. For example, a hundred navigation instruments were sold at $1 apiece, each instrument containing three pounds of mercury worth $2 a pound. Understanding this trend, experts figure that not more than seven to ten billion dollars will be realized for the estimated hundred billion dollars’ worth of surplus goods. What a steal!
 
Big Business Takes What It Wants
But the most important aspect of the question pertains to government property of a permanent character. This means plants and industrial equipment costing twenty billion dollars, including aircraft, electrical, synthetic rubber, aluminum, steel, magnesium plants and shipyards – all the last word in technique. These splendid assets are offered to big business on a bargain counter. With nose in air, big business picks and chooses. General Motors, United States Steel, Aluminum Co. of America, the monopolists take what they want.
The Workers Party demands in its program that government-owned plants, equipment and utilities not be turned over to private monopolists and not be allowed to stand idle. These valuable assets must remain public property, placed under workers’ control and be reconverted to peacetime use to provide goods and services, and jobs for workers.
To show the correctness of the Workers Party demand, here are two instances. The United Electrical Workers, CIO, has charged that General Electric and Westinghouse have given up fifteen war-built government plants. These stand idle. They could have been converted speedily to the production of tens of thousands of radios, refrigerators, washing machines and other electrical equipment for an electrical-appliance-hungry public. Instead, five thousand workers were laid off, and the companies sought sites in low-wage areas where the union is not strong.
Again, during the war the State of Texas was industrialized to the extent of one and a half billion of government cash. These plants can be easily converted to produce stoves, kitchen cabinets, light metal furniture, aircraft parts, sheet metal, chemicals, oil-well equipment, rubber and tin products for peacetime use. But pressure is on to dismantle the plants because industrialization of the South means unions, enlightened workers, political advancement, a ray of light in the dark South.
In the next period the bad smell emanating from war property disposal will get worse, not better – unless organized labor acts. The situation calls for the following: demand for the immediate release from war stock of all goods, fit for civilian consumption; protest against the destruction of goods; demand that government-owned plants industrial equipment and utilities be placed under workers’ control and converted to peacetime production, as national property.
 




The eleventh annual convention of the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers of America, CIO, held in Atlantic City from January 7 to 12, re-elected John Green president of the union and with him John Grogan as vice-president. But Philip Van Gelder was not re-elected secretary-treasurer. He was replaced by Ross Blood, temporary secretary-treasurer, while Van Gelder was in the Army. The defeat of Van Gelder symbolizes the entire defeat of the Stalinists in the leadership in this convention, which was used as a battlefield by the Communist Party forces and the administration machine for their knock-down and drag-out fight for control of the union.
The set-up at this convention was entirely different from that at the last. Then the CPers and Green were bedfellows, though not very affectionate ones. Green, the class-collaborator, forcing the no-strike pledge, the treacherous WLB and support of Roosevelt down the throats of the rank and file, needed the very able assistance of the Kremlin agents to break strikes and suppress all militant and progressive action.
At this year’s convention the CPers came dressed in other raiment. By order of the Kremlin, whose honeymoon with Washington is over, the Stalinists are once more waging a struggle on Stalin’s behalf. They now behave like the most militant of the militants and the most progressive of the progressives – casting bait to catch the really progressive elements in the union. However, the administration steamroller was well prepared, and not even sympathy for the returned GI could get camp-follower, Van Gelder, re-elected.
 
Local 16 Dispute
Until the third day of the convention most of the business took place in the corridors and caucus rooms. Then the Credentials Committee reported, including the hotly disputed question of which delegation from Local 16 was to be seated. A roll-call vote on the recommendation of the committee, which was the administration point of view, resulted 650½ in favor and 288½ opposed. The next day the Appeals Committee came out with its recommendation that neither delegation be seated, on the ground that both were illegally chosen. From the floor came protests at disfranchising the second largest local in the union and demands for seating both the administration and opposition delegation. Finally it was agreed to hear both sides.
The CPers charged that the administration delegation was hand-picked, whereas theirs was duly elected at the meeting of December 17. The spokesman for the other side contended that the December 17 meeting was more of a caucus than a meeting and that the opposition had used rule-or-ruin tactics to prevent proper elections.
This fight over the seating of a delegation from Local 16 highlighted the dishonesty on both sides. At this convention the CPers were shining white champions of democracy in the union, against hand-picked delegations, administration goons, packed conventions, etc. At the last convention, however, when their own delegation from Local 16 was handpicked, that was a different story. Then they did not threaten Green with physical violence so that he had to leave the convention hall flanked by guards. Their ardor for democracy in the union was not so apparent when the administration machine supported them.
On the other hand, correct as it is to label Stalinist tactics in the union “rule or ruin,” how about the administration’s tactics? Have not the autocratic tactics of crushing union morale by lifting autonomy of locals and suppressing the militancy of the rank and file seriously weakened the IUMSWA?
At a later session, when an amendment to the constitution came on the floor to take local autonomy out of the bureaucratic control of the officers and to provide for a bill of particulars, for open hearings and for a two-thirds vote of the GEB, did not the chair railroad through a motion to refer?
It was not until the fifth day of the convention that the question of wages finally reached the floor. Even then the factional heat might have scotched the discussion with points of order and similar ruses. However, Delegate Lenihan of Local 13 brought the convention to its senses by a plea to get down to the business that rank and file delegates came to transact. The report then given by Pettis for the Wage Reviewing Committee, which had met at Colorado Springs and Washington, did not even make clear what the wage demands of the union now are. It DID make clear that nothing had been accomplished except an adjournment to meet again in Washington on January 14.
 
On Strike Action
Delegates sought to pin down the committee to a definite line of action. Rose of Local 2 called for a referendum on a strike within thirty days if by January 18 no settlement was had. Reeder of Local I offered a motion to establish a Wage Policy Committee, to put February 1 as the deadline for a wage settlement. Delegates called for the rescinding of the no-strike pledge in connection with their wage case. They were assured from the platform that the no-strike pledge ended with V-J Day. Whereupon Lenihan of Local 13 pointed out that when his local was ready for most militant action against the company’s union-busting tactics. Finn, Versch, Kaplan and other officials prevented their strike by pressuring the members on account of the no-strike pledge and the stabilization agreement!
On the stabilization set-up, Delegate Phillips of Local 16 cut to the root of the matter. He pointed out that as long as IUMSWA was bound by stabilization agreements there would be a modified no-strike pledge, that there are no impartial boards, since Wall Street lawyers and professors also “think company,” that the only way to stabilize the industry is by a standard contract, and that there is no reason why IUMSWA should not take the same action as the auto workers. However, every progressive idea coming from the floor was defeated, and the whole wage question was left where it was before the convention.
Throughout this discussion on wages, the Stalinists were most vociferous in calling for strike action. They were following the new line all the way down the line. Van Gelder from the platform asked for “a decision in view of what is happening.” “We must go along with the CIO fight,” he said. How true! How true! But coming from the mouth of camp-follower Van Gelder and the Stalinists, what a mocking ring it has! For at the last convention, when Van Gelder was still in uniform and the divorce between Washington and the Kremlin had not been consummated, Van Gelder spoke against “the good, old-fashioned militant strike.” Along with Harry Bridges, he was quite ready to give up the right to strike – forever and a day.
At the Friday night session many important resolutions were run through the administration mill and came out pulp. There was the resolution against the WLB and in favor of direct negotiations with the companies. There was one against the stabilization set-up or any labor-management-public agreements. A resolution to rescind the no-strike pledge was ruled out of order. The resolution to endorse an independent Labor Party never got to the floor despite the fact that delegates from various locals came committed to vote for it.
In spite of the fact that in his opening speech Green threw a sop to the progressive sentiment for a Labor Party by threatening “labor would create its own political party” if it could not get its aims within the framework of existing political parties, he did not allow the resolution to see the light at Atlantic City. Green disregarded the fact that there are ever-increasing numbers of shipyard workers who have ALREADY learned that their aims cannot be accomplished within the framework of existing political parties.
 
Administration Wins
The last order of business, the election of officers, entrenched the administration machine for another year. The opposition slate for officers was Duffy of Local 39 for president, Seese of Local 4 for vice-president and Van Gelder for secretary-treasurer, against the administration slate of Green, Grogan and Blood. The administration slate for General Executive Board was Moses, Miatico, Hansen, Pettis, Bailey, Meyers, Carter, Oakes, Flynn and Dempsey. The opposition slate was for Miatico, Ramsey, Watson, Goodwin, Rose, Woods, Seese, Connelly, Hughes, McCann. Except for Miatico, who was supported by both sides, the vote was approximately three to one in favor of the administration.
What is the score at the end of this eleventh annual convention of the IUMSWA? It is undoubtedly a fact that the union is in the hands of a well-oiled machine. It is also a fact that John Green is no longer at the controls of the machine, but is at the mercy of Organizational Director Gallegher and Vice-President Grogan, whose supporters in the union are far from being enlightened and progressive elements. Green admitted his own helplessness in his final speech when he stated that he would have preferred to have the “old team” – meaning Van Gelder and himself – but had to go along with the “majority,” as he put it.
What of the defeat of the Stalinists? They are definitely out of the top leadership. When Green promised in his concluding speech to take the fight against the disrupters to the membership, that was a promise to eliminate CPers from local leadership also. Consequently, there will be floating around a lot of Stalinists – well trained as rank-and-file leaders and organizers – fishing in troubled waters. In the corridors at Atlantic City were rumors of making deals with Lewis’ District 50 – rumors of splitting the IUMSWA wide open. The rank and file interested in strengthening the union along progressive lines and in establishing union democracy will have to be ready to combat the “rule or ruin” policies of the Stalinists. ‘
In the final analysis, the future of the IUMSWA is in the lap of the truly independent and progressive elements. In this convention, they formed a bloc with the Stalinists and submitted to CP leadership, though they themselves rated the number of CPers as far from a majority in the bloc. The tail of the kite can only go where the kite goes. The IUMSWA needs a rank-and-file progressive bloc standing on its own feet. It must bring out and develop its own leadership. It must, above all and fundamentally, have its own progressive and militant union program and educate the membership along those lines. These tasks cannot be accomplished by waiting until a week before the next convention.
 




There is unfolding in Argentina a political drama which no worker can afford to miss. In that lush country which breeds cattle and dictators, the military dictatorship which has been in power since the 1943 coup d’etat, now seeks to gain popular support in elections scheduled to be held in February, 1946. To get popular support means above all to get the support of the working masses. So we see in Argentina one of the most vicious dictatorships on earth, headed by the clever and power-crazy Peron trying to pass itself off as “the friend of the workers.”
It is no exaggeration to call the Peron regime one of the most vicious on earth. Many of its acts were exact replicas of the Nazis’. It ruled by terror and brute force. Concentration camps and prisons were populated by democrats, labor leaders, socialists and “reds.” It suppressed all political parties, freedom of speech and the press. It created a ruthless police equipped – against the people – like a modern army. “Colonels” were appointed absolute rulers in the provinces. The dictatorship put its greedy hands on the budget to increase its military might and its power as the ruling caste.
By the fall of 1945 it had succeeded in turning practically the whole population against it. Workers, students, the middle class, also the commercial and industrial rich and even the most conservative of all Argentine classes, the great landowners, were in large majority against the Peron government for one reason or another. The ruthless terror of Peron’s police could not suppress the strikes of workers and students and the anti-Peron demonstrations that spontaneously sprang from the aroused people. Peron’s support amounted at most to ten per cent of the entire population. His demonstrations were staged mainly by paid hoodlums, brought into Buenos Aires from outlying places.
By October, 1945, the pressure from the population was so great that even the military minds in the dictatorship conceived the possibility of being overthrown. There were powerful elements within the military clique who thought it best to sacrifice Peron on the altar of mass discontent, in an effort to regain some prestige with the population. Therefore, Peron moved to a battleship.
But the democratic forces were not prepared to take advantage of this break in the military armor. They had neither coordinated program, nor leadership, nor plan for seizure of power – instead they weakly requested the Supreme Court to take over the government until elections could be held. Neither did the anti-Peron dissenters in the military prove strong enough to take over the government. The Peron gang continued in power and Peron returned to the capital to resume his place as the master mind behind the colonels.
 
Peron Turns “Friend of Labor”
He came with new ideas. Dictatorship was no longer in vogue. Not only did the Argentine people proclaim that, but had not the forces of “democracy” won in the war? Peron is going to be in style. He will run for president, get himself elected, and, with that formality out of the way, his military clique can rule with “the sanction of the people.” Besides, as “the choice of the people,” he may get loans from the great democracy of North America and possibly even modern military equipment from the same place.
Taking a leaf out of Hitlerism, which tried to get worker support for the Nazi Party by calling it “National Socialist,” Peron organized the Argentine Labor Party. He put additional bait on the hook by choosing as the symbol of his party a worker’s shirt hung from the pole of the flag of Argentina – the reporters said “a sweaty worker’s shirt”.
But apparently the fish didn’t bite too eagerly. On December 14, Peron staged his first public appearance in two months. He addressed a mass meeting in Buenos Aires as head of the new party. The reporters described the meeting as a masterpiece of staging similar to those of Hitler in his heyday. This was no spontaneous crowd. It was brought in from “far and wide.” The same gang from Avellaneda, outside of Buenos Aires, came to the capital in Peron’s trucks. Peron’s lieutenants had planned for a general cessation of work in Buenos Aires. But the independent labor unions foiled that plan. A very small percentage of workers took the opportunity to stay away from work, only in the afternoon.
Whereupon Peron put more appetizing bait on the hook. The government, widely known to be Peron’s clique, issued a decree on December 20 ordering a general increase in wages for almost all employees. For those in minimum income brackets the increase could amount to twenty-five per cent. And a nice juicy Christmas bonus equal to a month’s pay was to be given to every employee before December 31.
Who can deny that this was a devilishly clever electioneering move on behalf of Peron, presidential candidate of the fake Argentina Labor Party? Immediately the employers raised a howl. They called conferences to decide on action. Many agreed to disregard the decree and not to pay the wage increases nor the bonus. Others decided to pay the amounts into the courts for safekeeping until the constitutionality of the decree is decided. Of course, legal action is being taken to prove the decree unconstitutional. By their opposition to the wage increases and bonus the employers are doing Peron a good turn. Don’t you see him as the champion of the workers against the bosses? On the other hand, in cases where the employers should happen to pay the increases ordered by the decree, Peron will get credit for that.
What will become of the decree after election? It has a loophole about increases and decreases in wages according to fluctuations in the cost of living and the prosperity of each industry. Besides, decrees from above can always be countermanded the same way or be declared unconstitutional.
 
Anti-Peron Forces Rally
>But Peron no longer has it all his own way. At long last a Democratic Union of anti-Peron forces has been formed to defeat him and his military clique in the election. The Socialist Party, the Progressive Democrats and the Communist Party have joined with the Radical Party to support the ticket of the last-named party, the largest in Argentina, against Peron. Reporters believe that this united front against Peron will have tough going, in spite of the tremendous popular support it has in Buenos Aires. There are also the provinces, on which the military dictatorship has a stranglehold. There are the pressure and intimidation the government exerts through its Department of Labor and Welfare. Its control over press and radio is an important factor, and above ail the superior brute force embodied in the armed police and the army itself.
However, even should the anti-Peron united front win the February elections so that the processes of democratic government can be re-established, the struggle of the industrial workers, farm laborers and peasants will only begin. For the freedom of the toiling masses will come only when they wrest their rich land from the grasp of the great landowners,, the foreign investors, the exploiting industrial, commercial and banking interests.
In the meantime, all workers can learn a lesson from the trickery of Dictator Peron, turned “labor’s friend” in the same way that the fisherman baiting his hook is the friend of the fish he wants to catch.
 




According to the food experts, there are 500,000,000 people in Europe and Asia who, between now and next harvest, will face dangerous malnutrition or actual starvation. The food shortage will, as always, hit the poorest the hardest.
There are several reasons for this critical scarcity of food, and varied as are these reasons they are all the fault of the capitalist system, with its imperialist wars and its profit motivation.
For the war-devastated farmlands in Europe and Asia made useless for food production, we have the imperialists of the world to thank. For the bomb-ruined docks and transportation facilities which are holding up what food can be produced and could be distributed, we owe our profound gratitude to the same source. For the dislocation of world trade and industry and imperialist politics which, for instance, compels Argentinians to burn wheat instead of the coal they cannot get (U.S. imperialism is withholding fuel from Argentina), we must doff our hats to the war-waging powers of the world.
For the uncontrolled floods that ruined the crops in parts of China, for the drought that blighted crops in India and North Africa, diminishing further the food supplies of the world, capitalism must also, be blamed. Scientists who placed war on the high technological plane of World War II, culminating in the atom bomb, could devise controls for floods and counter-measures to droughts to save crops from ruin and – people from starvation – if these scientists served a system dedicated to human needs and not to power and profits.
Finally, the operation of private enterprise in this country, where food is most bountiful, has led to withholding from human consumption millions of bushels of wheat and other grains. In July, 1945, there were an estimated 1,404,000,000 bushels of wheat on hand in the United States. Six months later, half of that stock pile simply “disappeared.” It will reappear when higher prices have been forced, or, better still, when the powerful farm lobby has induced Congress to end all price controls. Another 205,000,000 bushels of precious wheat were fed to animals and fowl because there was more money in meat, eggs and poultry.
The 500,000,000 hungry humans in the world are, therefore, the tribute we pay for continuing the capitalist system, the price for allowing the ascendancy of the power of money over the needs of man.
 
UNRRA Doesn’t Deliver
Back in November, 1943, the United Nations created the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, ostensibly to stem the ravages of disease and hunger among the war-torn peoples of the world. But, as always when it comes to human needs, the governments talk big and do little. UNRRA has functioned insufficiently, furthermore coupling food and medicine with politics. For the first quarter of 1946 UNRRA was to have been provided with 1,200,000 tons of wheat for use abroad, considered necessary for a minimum safety diet of 2,500 calories a day. Only half of that tonnage was delivered, while more than half of the people of Europe are subsisting on 1,500 calories a day and less. Of much needed food, oils and fats, UNRRA has shipped practically nothing to speak of.
The recent gestures emanating from the White House are a mockery of the urgent needs of the hungry. On February 6 the President promised to send 6,000,000 tons of wheat to feed 2,000 calories a day to 50,000,000 people – only one-tenth of the estimated needy. His plan was to divert grain from alcoholic beverages and beer, to increase the extraction rate in making flour, to control inventories against hoarding, to stop feeding grain to animals, and so on. Then for three or four weeks nothing happened, because, after all, Mr. Truman is not hungry.
Next we heard that ex-President Hoover, mixer of food and politics of post-World War I fame, was called in by the President. The former President was going to go Truman one better. He would ship 8,000,000 tons of wheat to feed 67,000,000 people – still a long cry from what is needed. Mr. Hoover’s idea is to put famine relief on a voluntary basis. Let the American people pull in their belts to the extent of twenty- five per cent of their present consumption. They eat too much, anyway, thinks Mr. Hoover. Whereupon Mr. Hoover prepared to go to Europe, leaving the problem exactly where it was, except for the fact that UNRRA representatives from all participating nations are scheduled to meet for a talk-fest this month.
 
Price of Grains Goes Up
No, begging your pardon, it is not correct to say that the problem remains exactly as before. The government has decided to increase the prices of grains. Reporting the glad news, the New York Times wrote:
“The government announced tonight increases in the prices of six major grains as a step to carrying out the country’s program to help feed hungry people.”
It would be very hard for a starving Italian or Hindu to figure out how making food dearer will make it easier to feed him. Nevertheless wheat is now up three cents a bushel, corn similarly, oats two cents, barley four cents, and so on.
Still another steal is in the making up on Capitol Hill. The question of renewing subsidies to big business is coming before Congress. The administration, including ex-OPA head Bowles, is urging the continued underwriting of big business to the extent of well over two billion dollars. Of this sum more than half has been paid to the big food interests. This gift of the taxpayers’ money to big business was presumably to keep prices down. But by Bowles’ own admission last year, the consumer benefited by only $378,000,000 out of a $1,250,000,000 subsidy paid the food industry, which means that prices did not stay down to anywhere near the extent warranted by the subsidy. The government wants this outrageous graft to continue.
This is the way a capitalist government evades the life-or-death problem of feeding 500,000,000 people, hungry and starving. Feeding profits to the capitalists is hardly the way.
The working people of America should be concerned about the famished of Europe and Asia, especially since the great majority are their class brothers. Between now and next harvest, instead of spring and summer rejuvenation and bloom, millions will die of starvation and disease unless they receive immediate help.
What must be done? Hoards of grain held for higher prices must be seized and released for shipment. The government seized plants to break strikes. Let it seize food to prevent starvation. The Army and Navy must be made to disgorge food from their overstocked warehouses to provide relief abroad. The black market supplies must be unearthed and similarly utilized. No time can be lost. This IS a matter of life or death. Labor has to make these reasonable demands from the government at once.
Also, let the working people save what food they can and send it to their starving brothers. But let them do so on their own – not, as Hoover plans, through the medium of the capitalist government, which has evaded and stalled and increased the profits of the profiteers, while human lives hang in the balance. Let the unions organize a drive to send food to the stricken abroad, on the basis of humanity, international brotherhood and working class solidarity. These things can be done, and must be done at once.
For a permanent solution of the vital issue of food, for its equitable distribution and for its most abundant production, the big farm and food corporations must be nationalized and placed under workers’ control, all according to the plan and guidance of a workers’ government.
 




The ex-GI tramps from store to store in search of a suit in which to reconvert himself from a soldier to a civilian. But unless he is willing to pay black market prices, his search is in vain. Yet there are reported to be nearly a million suits on manufacturers’ shelves, being hoarded for higher prices.
Women are patching and mending men’s shirts to make them last a little longer because this essential bit of haberdashery is either not obtainable in retail stores or is priced so fantastically high as to arouse indignation. However, many millions of men’s shirts are kept in warehouses for higher prices, while the black market asks and gets up to $10 for a shirt worth not more than $1.98.
Butter production is at the lowest level in twenty-five years. All over the city long lines of women and children wait for a hand-out. Wholesalers take advantage of retailers, making the latter buy much they don’t want in order to get the coveted tub of butter. Retailers follow the same practice, compelling the housewife to shell out for a considerable order before surrendering that quarter of a pound of butter.
What is it all about? The dairy corporations are frankly declaring to Congress that they will not produce more butter until the price is increased by at least ten or twelve per cent, and some corporations are demanding the end of all price controls on dairy products. These same interests are asking for higher milk prices, on top of the heavy subsidy the government is paying them, and they threaten to cut down the supply of the basic food of children, the sick and the aged, unless they get what they want by July 1.
In the big granaries of the nation, feed for animals, corn, soy beans and other grains are held from the normal markets—for the same reason. The powerful farm interests are pressing for the passage of the Pace bill, which would advance farm prices; so food for man and animal is being hoarded for expected higher profits. This immoral practice is permitted at a time when millions throughout the world are undernourished and actually on the verge of starvation.
Women’s hosiery in rayon or cotton is as hard to find as the needle in the haystack, because manufacturers are holding out for price increases. Nylon hose is released in dribbles and people wait in endless queues to buy a couple of pairs all packed up like a pig in a poke, without any choice of color and at whatever price is asked. But commentator Drew Pearson reveals that big hosiery firms like Kayser and Gotham actually have millions of pairs in stock, reserved for a more profitable ceiling set-up.
With millions of new housing units absolutely imperative and with the capacity to build greater than ever before in history, private enterprise is holding back construction. Construction companies speak of a few hundred thousand units, and they are in no hurry to get started. They are pressuring Congress for an end to all rent and price controls. They want to be able to take advantage of the shortage in housing to charge all the market will bear.
 
Contrast This with Labor’s Stand
Contrast these obstructive actions of the capitalists with the strikes of workers for higher wages. The capitalists use their position as owners of industry for antisocial purposes. On the other hand, workers strike to get adequate food, clothing and shelter; to give their children an education; to maintain the purchasing power of the whole people and provide an outlet for production; to keep employment high. The obstructionist tactics of the capitalists for higher profits at the expense of the people is an irrefutable argument for the nationalization of industry under workers’ control.
The powers in Washington naturally do not take this view of the difference between capital and labor. The pace has been set by the $5.00 per ton boost in steel. Without losing a minute. Stabilization Administrator Bowles tells the House Banking Committee he would favor a rise in ceiling prices on clothing to “sweeten up” the manufacturers and “encourage production.” In this connection the reader will be interested to know that the before-tax profits of the textile industry in 1944 was 772 per cent above the pre-war levels.
Mr. Bowles is also said to be in favor of raising meat prices regardless of the facts that meat packers’ profits in 1944 were 424 per cent higher than in 1936–39; that the government pays a meat subsidy of $595,000,000 yearly; that this subsidy may be upped by $125,000,000; and that the consumer actually pays these subsidies with the taxes deducted from his pay as a worker.
Again, House Administrator Wyatt shows a willingness to placate the construction interests by advocating a subsidy for them too, and this will be another reason why our pay envelopes will continue to feel the clutching grasp of the tax department.
 
Facts Point to Only One Conclusion
What then is the difference between Mr. Bowles, who stands out as the chief administration advocate of price controls and who wants the OPA to be continued beyond June 1946 and the National Association of Manufacturers, which campaigns with full-page advertisements for the end of OPA and of all price controls? One may well ask the question in light of the fact that since V-J Day Mr. Bowles, as OPA Administrator, allowed price advances on 4,982 commodities and altogether exempted from ceilings 1,300 other items or groups? One may well ask the question in light of the additional fact that President Truman has placed Mr. Bowles UNDER Reconversion Director Snydeh, whose leaning toward the position of the NAM is notorious. But perhaps in light of these facts the question answers itself!
The failure of both government and industry to meet the needs of the people for adequate supplies of the needs of life at prices low enough to make them available to all, is indisputable. Patience on the part of the working people is no longer a virtue. The demand for the nationalization of industry under workers’ control to plan adequate production and a fair price set-up, can no longer be deferred. It is the issue of the day, and it involves the formation of an independent Labor Party and fighting for a workers’ government to carry out the nationalization of industry and place it under workers’ control. This is the conclusion to which commodity shortages and price gouging leads.
 




ATLANTIC CITY, March 27 (By Phone) – At 4:15 p.m. today, Secretary-Treasurer Addes, as chairman of the convention, introduced Walter Reuther as the new president of the UAW-CIO. Reuther was elected by a comfortable majority. Reuther spoke, pledging himself to unifying the organization. In a speech after the election, Thomas repudiated his charge that Reuther was seeking to lead the UAW out of the CIO.
*
ATLANTIC CITY, March 25 – When the readers of Labor Action get this report, the 1,700 delegates to the tenth convention of the UAW-CIO will have made their choice for president. Be- [sentence incomplete]
The test came when Delegate E. Murphy, Dodge Local 3, touched off a pro-Reuther demonstration. She made a motion for a closed night session to discuss the issues involved between the rival candidates for president. For almost fifteen minutes an undoubted majority of the delegates let loose with cries for Reuther, with whistling, clapping, waving of Reuther placards.
The Murphy motion has a background. Earlier in the day Reuther issued, in leaflet form, a challenge to Thomas to debate the issues raised in the campaign at “a night session of the convention with press and public excluded so that no punches need be pulled.” Thomas responded with a written rejection, also in leaflet form, calling Reuther’s challenge a stunt. However, the majority of the delegates disagreed with Thomas, for a motion to table the Murphy motion was defeated. The Murphy motion would have carried had not Secretary-Treasurer Addes, chairing the meeting, made crafty use of the rules on procedure by calling for a two-thirds instead of a majority vote.
This show of Reuther strength came after CIO President Murray, though he entered the convention hail in the company of Reuther this very morning, lavished praise on Thomas and pleaded not to “endanger the future of your own organization,” bringing in, of course, the “more than a million men and women, kids, bread and butter, living standards, life.” Such pleas are, from time immemorial, tantamount to support of the status quo. However, the majority of the delegates are convinced they need a change in leadership, because Reuther has shown himself to be more progressive and more aware of the needs of labor in this post-war turbulence.
 
Irresponsible Charges
While at this writing the convention is only getting under way – the big questions of the General Motors strike, of the union-emasculating company security clauses, of the new crop of anti-labor attacks by both major parties raising the issue of independent political action, having not yet reached the floor of the convention – the fight for the presidency of the union is at its height in the corridors, in caucuses and in press conferences. The fight is not a pretty one. It smacks of the campaigns of capitalist politicians, and any fair- minded person would have to admit that the low in this respect is reached by Thomas, who is supported by the Addes-Stalinists.
At an Addes caucus last night, to which Thomas was invited, in a typically Stalinist distortion of history, Addes gave – for the benefit of first-time delegates – such a review of the UAW-CIO as to make Reuther appear as the all-time menace. On his part, Thomas, like a man made unscrupulous by his desperation, accuses Reuther of the fantastic nonsense of trying to lead the UAW-CIO into the AFL because, forsooth, he took money from Dubinsky’s union in support of the GM strike. Shaken in his position, Thomas identifies himself with the CIO and shouts that the contest is not between Reuther and himself, but between Reuther and the CIO. And, throwing all responsibility to the winds, Thomas Stated his new-born belief that Reuther learned from Hitler, called attention to the fact that Mussolini was once a Marxist, and warned that “it can happen here;” Thomas thus did both himself and the union he still heads a great disservice.
In a, labor union at all times, and especially at this time, a campaign should be waged around issues, around a program that each candidate supports. With new wage increases already melting in the heat of mounting prices, a program to maintain and raise the standard of living is imperative. While neither Reuther nor Thomas has been too definite on program, Reuther still declares his stand – as made by the GM strikers – for wage increases without price increases. Thomas relies on inadequate and discredited “support of price control” which has resulted in ceaselessly climbing prices.
On the demand to open the books of the corporations, which made the necessary link between wages, prices and profits, Reuther seems to have cooled off, claiming that the demand was made simply to put the company over a barrel. Thomas, however, ridicules this most progressive idea coming out of the GM strike.
 
Reporter Questions Reuther
On the burning question of independent political action by labor, Thomas in his opening speech reaffirmed his belief in rewarding labor’s friends and punishing its enemies within the old parties, tacking on an “or else.”
Reuther, on his part, is riding two horses, a practice which can lead only to breaking one’s head. In the UAW-CIO Leader of March 24, carrying what purports to be Reuther’s program, his political action is to remain “within the existing party structure.” But also: “We stand for independent political action.” Asked by this reporter whether he considers an independent Labor Party in the cards, Reuther answered, “Not in the immediate future.” Just what is he waiting for? Furthermore, Reuther’s idea of an independent Labor Party resembles the Socialist Party hodge-podge, and is quite different from an independent class party based on the unions, leading and giving programmatic unity to the great masses.
The majority of the rank and file, as reflected in this convention, recognize and support Reuther’s leadership. However, he owes the rank and file some forthright explanations on different aspects of the GM strike, about which there have been accusations back and forth. He owes the rank and file a clear-cut stand on the “company security” betrayal.
On the one resolution coming before the convention on which Reuther took the floor, namely, the issue of equal pay for women, he made, a decided contribution, proclaiming the need not only to fight for adequate legislation, but to strengthen union machinery to attain equal pay through collective bargaining. “We cannot hope for a panacea out of Congress,” sounded a note for reliance upon union strength and action.
 
Dues Raise Referred Back
Thus far three significant disputes developed in the report of the Constitution Committee. In spite of high pressure from Secretary-Treasurer Addes and the mass of literature on the subject, the convention sent back to the committee an amendment to raise monthly dues to $2.00 from the present $1.00. The sentiment of the body was for a compromise of $1.50 (since adopted by the convention – Ed.), based on a conviction that a 50 per cent increase in dues would adequately finance the plans of the union to organize the unorganized and so forth, while a 100 per cent increase might give the leadership too much money to play around with.
Another amendment overwhelmingly lost was to extend the term of office of international officers to two years instead of one. Again, the body rejected a minority report for the creation of a post on the General Executive Board to be filled by a Negro. This inverted Jim Crowism was sponsored in the Daily Worker and by the Stalinists in the union. The body did vote to create within the international union a department to be known as the Fair Practices and Anti-Discrimination Department, making it mandatory as well for each local to set up such a committee.
(The above was written before the Reuther caucus meeting, at which he presented his program. This will be reported in the next issue of Labor Action.)
 

Green: Victory Certain as N.Y. Teamsters Strike Nears End (23 September 1946)



Susan Green Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Susan Green
Victory Certain as N.Y. Teamsters Strike Nears End
(23 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 38, 23 September 1946, p. 1.






Bulletin
NEW YORK, Sept. 18 – The teamsters’ strike, which stopped virtually all New York truck movement for sixteen days, neared its end today, with victory in sight for the strikers. Operators are rushing to sign individual contracts with the union, granting a $7.40 weekly wage increase and improved working conditions. Though some big truck operators are still holding out, it is expected that the employer front will be entirely broken by the end of the week. Some trucks are already rolling, carrying placards “Signed Up.” Today was the first day in over a week that New York City newspapers approximated their normal size.



*
So strong are the ranks of the striking New York City truck drivers despite Daniel J. Tobin’s calling off of all sympathy strikes, that rift has developed among the trucking employers. A large section now believes that it will have to make substantial concessions to the strikers. This is the latest development.
Politicians, labor leaders and bosses involved in the strike, now in its third week, were alike scared stiff by the almost complete tie-up of the city’s hauling business.
Mayor O’Dwyer was panicked into signing up 2,000 emergency police. Then, the strikers defying their local leaders and refusing even to consider the Mayor’s proposal for an 18 cent an hour increase, O’Dwyer appealed in desperation to Daniel J. Tobin, international president of the teamsters, to insist on arbitration. Having thus exhausted his limited resources, the Mayor appointed a committee to take over, which committee, by the way, has on it not one representative of labor.
 
Tobin Intervenes
Dan Tobin, though he rebuked the Mayor for asking him to interfere in the strike, let his actions at least partly belie his words, for he took measures to weaken the strike. He ordered all sympathy strikers back to work. Thousands of sympathy strikers of the twenty-four other New York City locals, as well as 10,000 Jersey drivers, had joined the 15,000 men of Locals 807, 282 and 816 of the AFL International Brotherhood of Teamsters. Thus Tobin tried to break the solidarity of all drivers in the metropolitan area. A New York Herald Tribune reporter described the effect of Tobin’s order as follows: “Instead of spreading like a prairie fire, the stoppage dwindled in scope.”
However, that word “dwindled” is a gross exaggeration. At the beginning of the third week of the strike 486 A&P stores are closed, as are 276 Safeway stores and 78 smaller food shops. The Roulston, Reeves and Bohack chain stores are almost out of stock. The textile, garment, construction, printing and publishing industries of the city, all feel acutely the effects of the tie-up in their lack of supplies.
The adamant attitude of the strikers has caused the Master Truckmen’s Association, representing about 200 truck owners, operating some 3,000 trucks, to repudiate their for mer spokesman, Joseph M. Adelizzi and to inform the Mayor’s committee that they wish to negotiate their own contracts with the locals involved. Tight-fisted Adelizzi, still representing the other two employers’ groups, the Motor Carriers’ Association and the State Motor Truck Association, had offered the strikers all of a $3.00 increase a week. His latest word was: “We will take the men back to work, paying them retroactively in conformity with arbitration, or they may stay on the streets if they so choose.” In the 1938 truck drivers’ strike, this same Adelizzi was the last to sign up, but he did have to.
 
Strikers Reject Offer
Those employers who have seen a little light have indicated a willingness to accept the proposals of the Bohack grocery chain, employing about 110 drivers, and backed by Daniels & Kennedy, general trucking concern hauling newsprint for two morning papers in the city and hiring the same number of men.
The Bohack offer is for $62.40 for a forty-hour week to take the place of $55 for a forty-four-hour week in the former contract. It also provides for time and a half for Saturday work, with the promise of at least four hours of work on Saturday if a driver shows up for work. Two weeks’ paid vacation and the elimination of certain wartime rules objectionable to the men will likewise be conceded.
On September 12 a meeting of strikers howled down these proposals when Bohack drivers presented them. Another meeting of strikers has been called for September 17. John E. Strong, president of Local 807, will urge the approval of individual agreements, giving up the demand for industry-wide contracts which the men were still insisting on at their last meeting.
The union president will also pressure the men to accept the $7.40 weekly increase for the forty-hour week, as offered by Bohack. As Local 807 decides, so will decide Locals 262 and 816, which represent only 3,000 of the 15,000 striking drivers.
City Hall has issued optimistic reports to the press. Basing himself on the expressed willingness of the A&P and Safeway chains to accept the Bohack terms and thus bring into line the other employers in the Master Truckmen’s Association, the Mayor hopes to see trucks moving in the city on September 18. The Adelizzi group of employers, though representing owners of 15,000 trucks doing long-distance hauling, are not as vital to distribution within the city as the smaller group. Union leaders claim that the policy of “divide and rule” will ultimately force even Adelizzi to grant the same wage increase and make the other concessions. The ranks, as indicated, are inclined to doubt the effectiveness of this policy.
The original demand of the strikers was for a thirty per cent increase, for a forty-hour week instead of forty-four, for industry-wide agreements, for paid vacations, better rules, etc. The Mayor’s proposal would have meant an average weekly increase of $1.50. The Adelizzi offer was for a $3.00 weekly raise. The splendid effectiveness of the strike forced the present bid of a $7.40 average weekly raise with a forty-hour week.
 




For a week or ten days in London the rights of human beings triumphed over the “sanctity” of private property. Thousands of homeless people marched into vacant luxury apartments and tried to make them their homes.
These people, forgotten by the labor government which had made nice-sounding election promises for peoples’ housing as well as many other unfulfilled promises, took matters into their own hands. They came from one-room “dwellings,” from cellars, from abandoned air-raid and other makeshift shelters, into the swank West End district of Kensington, the nearby Marylebone district and other neighborhoods where rents are not measured to workers’ wages. They came and camped in luxurious apartments reconverted from war use to rent from $42 A WEEK in the Duchess of Bedford House to $80 and $96 A WEEK in Abbey Lodge in St. John’s Woods.
The homeless took over these plush apartments, but not on the same luxuriant and individualistic basis as do the rich. Each four- or five-room apartment was shared by two families of the poor. Into the home of one lord, Lord Ilchester, in the Marylebone district, twenty families moved, and began immediately to grow food in the four-acre flower garden. Exclusiveness was not the keynote of the new tenants. On the contrary, they set up community kitchens and nurseries, and organized guards to keep the forces of “law and order” away from their doors.
 
Many Are Veterans
The squatters got whole-hearted support from all sections of the community. In the first place, when the caretakers of the invaded buildings called upon the police to turn out the squatters, the police instead helped the latter makes themselves more comfortable. Nearby restaurants supplied food. From the Kensington barracks arrived large urns of tea. When, as days went by and the squatters remained, the government began to get tough, trying to cut off food supplies from the invaded apartments, sympathizers threw food through the windows and made it apparent to the authorities that the squatters would not be allowed to starve. When the government cut off water and light in its repeated efforts to force the squatters out, delegations from factories called on the cabinet ministers demanding that all utilities be provided the squatters. A group of workers marched down Whitehall bearing placards: “Full Facilities for Squatters.”
The squatters movement started soon after the war. As long as the homeless moved into cellars, abandoned army camps and air-raid shelters, dilapidated prisons and other such miserable quarters, the government did nothing to suppress it – nor very much about providing housing for the poor. But when the territory and property rights of the rich were involved, that was another story. However, the homeless liked the new idea. It spread to Birmingham, Coventry and other cities. In Scotland at least one picturesque tourist-delight castle was taken over by the homeless, and from all reports, these squatters refused to obey the eviction orders of the government – and apparently are not bothered by the ghosts of past owners.
Though not all of the squatters are veterans, many are. A veteran who took part in the invasion of the Duchess of Bedford House wore his full battle dress with campaign ribbons from France, North Africa, Burma and Italy. He told reporters: “I came back to find my wife living with our two children in one room, doing her cooking on a gas ring (single burner). After serving throughout the war I expected more than this.” The issue was clearly drawn between the rights and needs of the class represented by this veteran and the vested property rights of the class represented by the well-dressed woman who pointed to a wash line hanging from the stately Duchess of Bedford House, and exclaimed with horror and despair: “Look – nappies!” “Nappies”, be it understood, is English for diapers.
 
Government Gets Tough
The labor government took sides against the “nappies.” Having failed to cut off supplies of food for the squatters, the government stopped the supply of water and light. Then it ordered the police, sympathetic to the squatters, to get tough, and it made use of the more formidable mounted police to break up meetings of squatter sympathizers. Next, five Communist Party leaders were arrested and arraigned on accusation of “conspiracy ... to incite persons to trespass on property and to aid, abet and direct such trespass ...” Finally the squatters obeyed the writs of injunction issued by the government and left their temporary havens.
The role of the Stalinists in the squatters movement is a revealing one. Undoubtedly they led the homeless into the luxury apartments. The London district of the CP issued a statement: “We have been waiting long enough for places such as this to be taken over for housing the homeless.” The Stalinists organized a huge meeting in Hyde Park and a march through London ostensibly to gain support for the “Luxury Squatters.” The Stalinist party also issued a call to working men to “make their full power felt” in support of the squatters. And Harry Pollitt, General Secretary of the British CP, threatened the government: “It is necessary to issue a warning to those who so glibly talk about evicting squatters from their temporary homes. Let there be no mistake. If the government wants reprisals they will get them. The working class is in a fighting mood. It will not stand idly by and see its fellow-workers thrown out of their present abodes.”
 
Stalinists Pull Back
But all this was sound and fury signifying nothing. For the Stalinists capitulated to the government, did not call on the workers for action, in fact provided the buses to remove the squatters from their short-lived luxuries.
Thus we see that the Stalinists used the squatters movement to place themselves in the limelight. They utilized the movement to coin in for themselves. Pollitt was right about the workers being in a fighting mood. Besides the workers’ support of the squatters mentioned above, shop stewards came out with sympathetic statements and demands on the government to requisition the buildings taken over by the squatters. But Pollitt and his colleagues pulled back at a strategic moment. Perhaps the Kremlin ordered them to go so far and no farther.
As a side line, let me say here that the ruling class of Russia would certainly deal more quickly and summarily with the leaders of a squatters movement on Russian soil – and also with the squatters. The millions of Russian homeless, to whom one small room for a family has become a scarce luxury, are not being invited by the ruling bureaucrats to share their spacious city apartments nor their ample summer homes. Anybody in Russia daring to suggest such a partial solution to. the housing problem would be immediately purged as a “Trotskyist traitor.”
 
Much Was Gained
Though the squatters did not carry their action to a conclusion, there was much gained by their bold defiance of the rights of private property and of the government protecting those rights. Not only in England, but throughout the world those suffering from the critical housing shortage applauded the invasions by the poor of the houses of the rich. Not only the so-called labor government in England, but all governments have well noted the angry mood of the homeless, and perhaps these governments will bestir themselves to speed their altogether inadequate housing programs.
The political lessons emphasized by the squatters movement are two. First, the so-called labor government which the British working people voted in to effect a socialist solution of their problems, proves itself the protector of the vested interests in domestic matters as it does in international matters. Second, the Stalinists, the trusted agents of the Kremlin, prove themselves again untrustworthy leaders of the working people.
The squatters movement is by no means over. The British government, of course, promised to provide shelter for the decamping luxury squatters. Here is how the government is keeping its promise. Some of the squatters were assigned to a building in the East End, of course not the West End. When they arrived at the assigned place, they discovered that the hostel was occupied by building workers who at first defended their homes against the invaders. Finally, however, the building workers decided to accommodate the squatters for the night. The outcome was a decision for joint action with the squatters in sending a deputation to the government and the London County Council demanding the fulfillment of “the undertaking made to the squatters.”
Thus the whole working class is drawn into the housing crisis. They will have to solve it on a class basis.
The Workers Party of the United States demands for the United States: (1) A 250 million dollar five-year program to provide decent housing at low rental for all and an. extensive public works plan to provide schools, hospitals and other needed community facilities; (2) a national plan to begin work immediately on the erection of 25 million permanent low-cost housing units.
The working class principle behind these demands of the Workers Party is that if the capitalists could spend hundreds of billions for demolishing homes and cities and people, they should be made to spend as substantially for the peacetime needs of the people. The greater conclusion, however, is this: the people require a Workers’ Government to carry out the legitimate demands of working people.
 




“That wasn’t so terrible, was it?”
This was the surprised comment heard here and there in the theater after the presentation of the newsreel of the second Bikini test explosion. People had expected something truly terrifying. What did they see?
From the screen had come first an ominous boom. Then the reel showed a great fountain of steam and water, gradually mushrooming out with astonishing grace – a truly beautiful spectacle. The only alarming feature was the noise. Flashing back and forth between the explosion area and the observation ship, the camera caught the Navy’s finest watching through field glasses. Later came views of ships listing or sinking, with close-ups of the destruction on those still afloat. All was small potatoes compared to the scenes of awful war devastation we are used to seeing. Finally we saw the scientists nonchalantly testing for radio-activity – almost as if on a fishing trip.
 
Navy Flim-Flam
To be sure the commentator informed the audience about the two-mile height of that fountain of steam and water, and of the millions of tons of water displaced. But the picture is more to be believed than the words and “That wasn’t so terrible, was it?” So now we can snuggle down contentedly to enjoy Ginger Rogers in Heartbreak or Mark Stevens in The Dark Corner or some other figment of Hollywood imagination having nothing at all to do with those terrible A-bombs, which aren’t so terrible after all.
This entirely false impression is, of course, exactly the one that the Navy Department wanted to make on our minds. The admirals were out to “prove” that the atom bomb is only another weapon which the admirals can handle – with some necessary improvements in submarines and aircraft carriers. No mere atom bomb would be permitted to demonstrate that navies are obsolete. So the tests were arranged to “prove” their point. They did not represent the conditions of real war, especially in respect to placement of craft and in respect to number of bombs exploded. The resulting propaganda is: “The A-bomb is not so terrible. Leave it to the admirals.”
A few scientists and journalists, deeply worried at the threat of complete human extinction contained in the A-bomb, did not keep quiet about this Navy flim-flam. However, nearly all other agencies of capitalist publicity helped create the impression: “That wasn’t so terrible, was it?” The newsreel, accidentally or otherwise, turns out to be more of the same minimizing of the deadliness of the fission bomb.
But those moviegoers who also read the papers a bit thoughtfully must have been jolted into some sense of reality by the Navy announcement on August 11 that it had perfected a pilotless plane for carrying bombs. This bomb-carrying projectile will enable the snuffing out of “the prescribed target with no help from human hands or brains.”
With a bit of imagination one can see future warfare with all its real horror: Jet planes moving faster than sound, dropping not one but a series of perfected A-bombs on teeming cities. That’s the prospect for World War III – not the test at Bikini!
 
Beware of Apathy!
We must fight the complacency that is developing in the minds of people. The awfulness of the Nagasaki and Hiroshima bombings alerted the elementary feeling to preserve ourselves from such a fate. But since then, while making the A-bomb more destructive and its conveyance to a target more exact, the war makers have succeeded in lulling our sense of alarm. This is a prerequisite to World War III, now in preparation.
Perhaps people unreasoningly believe that it can’t happen here. But there is no immunity from atom bombing. New York, Washington, Pittsburgh and Chicago are as vulnerable as London, Paris, Moscow. While the American war makers are more open in advertising what they have by way of instruments of horrible destruction, the other major powers are not asleep. The projectiles recently bursting over Sweden, emanating from Russia, give evidence of tests by that nation, if such evidence is needed. A Russian physicist attending the Bikini show told reporters that the Stalin government will also, before very long, be making tests of its atom bomb.
Certainly Washington has no illusions about the danger of the A-bomb to the United States. For instance, the Army-Navy Munitions Board is busy planning a type of wormlike existence. This board is surveying natural caves and man-made caverns, such as mines, to find those adaptable for “vital industrial production and other military purposes” – even though it is known that such hide-outs give no protection from a direct atom bomb hit.
Again, Representative Trimble of Arkansas introduced to the last Congress as amendment to the Constitution – not acted upon – to provide for a substitute President and Vice-President in case an A-bomb were to destroy Washington and with it the President, Vice-President, all members of the Cabinet, of Congress and of the Supreme Court. Mr. Trimble not only rightly considers the A-bomb as a very terrible physical menace, but he apparently thinks it would also destroy the need for democracy. For his amendment would empower the top officers of the Army, Navy and Air Force arbitrarily to choose “a civilian to act as interim President.” This interim President would then call a meeting of all state governors to choose from among themselves a President and a Vice-President.
The serious point, of course, is that everybody in the know realizes that there is no immunity from the A-bomb.
Furthermore, everybody who is anybody has learned, as Hanson Baldwin summarized it in the New York Times after the Bikini show, that “the offense has gained a tremendous lead over the defense – one that the defense may never be able to overcome.” This is another way of saying that the belligerent that dumps its load of A-bombs first will be the victor, because there will be very little left of the enemy after the first offensive.
That is why the world-wide intelligence services of all the nations are feverishly snooping out each other’s secrets. That is why work goes on in army and navy laboratories night and day. That is why scientists who should be serving mankind are giving their talents to create more fabulous means of annihilating mankind.
 
War in the Making
What this extensive and intensive research is producing are atom bombs that will make Hiroshima look like a bad joke; pilotless planes to carry these bombs faster than sound; radio, radar and television to perfect precision bombing of targets. What the laboratories are concocting are biological weapons to make life impossible for those who might escape bombing and the effects of radiation – bombs to spread epidemics among people and deprive them of food by poisoning animals, crops and water.
This is the kind of war in the making. Let not the propaganda of the Navy nor the gracefully mushrooming fountain that the screen shows as the Bikini explosion, dim the reality.
What, then, is to prevent the destruction of civilization? What is to prevent the reversion of the remnants of the human species to a cave-dwelling existence? In a word, what is to prevent World War III?
Not the United Nations, where the rival imperialist interests cannot possibly find a humane solution of the question of atomic energy. Not the so-called Peace Conference, where the wearisome verbal contests have been correctly called “an extension of war by political means.” Not the handful of scientists who protest the use of atomic energy for war. Nor the few radical intellectuals who make similar protests.
Our doom is sealed if we say of the A-bomb: “That wasn’t so terrible, was it?” and leave it to the admirals. The fight against World War III is the fight against capitalism and imperialism – to destroy them before they destroy humanity. The choice must be made between socialism and annihilation. This is a job for the masses, with militant organized labor in the forefront.
 




Very often we hear the idea expressed that Russia would have been no different today if Trotsky had remained at the helm of the State instead of Stalin. This ideas is expressed in several forms. One hears it thus: “Trotsky would be the same as Stalin” – a positive statement made by people who lost faith in Socialism and have become cynical. These people seek to color the world with the brush of their own cynicism to make it appear that there is no such thing as a true revolutionary Socialist.  
However, there are workers moving closer to Socialism, hot away from it, who honestly seek information and understanding. They wonder whether Trotsky in power would have been different from Stalin. They wonder because they want to be sure where they are going. They do not want to engage in a revolutionary fight against capitalism only to find themselves in a Stalinist type of prison-society. It is for these workers moving toward socialism that this article is written.
Let me say at the beginning that this article is limited in scope. It will just give one illustration of the difference in Trotsky’s conceptions and those held by Stalin. The illustration pertains to the ideas of these two men on how to increase the interest of the workers in their own work, in production as a whole, in economic planning. This is a most important problem; being nothing less than the question of how to draw every worker into an active, interested, efficient participation in the construction of Socialism after power has been wrested from the capitalists.
 
Exploiting the Worker
How Stalin solved this all-important matter is fairly well known. His was not a Socialist solution, but one that served the needs of the new ruling class, the bureaucrats. Thus Stalin used falsification, force, intimidation, and terror against the workers. All political and economic democratic rights were taken away from them. They became veritable slaves of the new regime.
The main ruse for raising the productivity of labor in Stalinist Russia is called Stakhanovism. A group of above-average workers in a plant are set to work under the most ideal conditions. For example, all auxiliary work in production is done for them. Naturally they make a production record. This record then is made the norm for the whole plant and for all workers notwithstanding the real conditions of the plant. If workers cannot make the grade, they simply suffer wage reductions.
This is how bureaucrats “solved” the problem of production. They add new wrinkles to exploitation, such as labor cards which enable plant superintendents to blacklist workers. It also prevents workers from leaving one job for another like serfs tied to the soil.
Another Stalinist method of dealing with the production problem are so- called trials for absenteeism and tardiness. If the biased judges of the secret police find a worker was not ill enough to warrant absence or tardiness, the punishment is a sentence at slave labor. This last is, of course, the crowning infamy of Stalinism, and nobody knows exactly how many tens of millions of prisoners of the secret police toil as slaves for the Stalinist bureaucrats.
Thus have Stalin’s conceptions been put into practice.
In contrast, Trotsky was deeply concerned with the problem of drawing every worker into active, interested and efficient participation in the construction of Socialism, not only by increasing his productivity but also by raising his standard of living, his cultural level and his understanding of what kind of a society he was working for. Trotsky spoke and wrote on this subject many times. In this article I want to take up some of his ideas on this subject as he presented them in his book Problems of Life, in the first chapter entitled Not by Politics Alone Does Man Thrive.
 
What Should Be Done
In the first place, Trotsky’s aim was to strengthen the workers as the ruling class, not to subjugate them once more. “The problem in Russia at the present moment is the constructiveness of the working class. For the first time in history the working class is doing constructive work for its own benefit and on its own plan ... All our separate and minor problems ... are parts of the general plan which will enable the ruling working class to overcome its economic weakness and lack of culture.” This is Trotsky’s basic approach: the advancement of the workers in their own behalf, for their own benefit.
He was concerned about the workmen who did not belong to the Communist Party, before its degeneration, when it was still a living, active party of the Russian working class. These “unpolitical” workers were on the side of the revolution. Some had fought on different fronts in the civil war; some supplied the Red Army with the needed munitions. But in peacetime they were primarily interested in their particular jobs. Trotsky showed his great respect for these workers, even though they did not join the party and were tired of political speeches. He wanted to reach these workers, whose primary interest was in their jobs, on their own level and to show them that their job was contributing to the building of Socialism.
Trotsky made several suggestions to accomplish this end. He emphasized the need for a series of new handbooks that could be given to the locksmith, the cabinet maker, the electrician, to appraise him of the up-to-date technics in his own trade. But these workers must also learn that the then existing poverty of the whole country affected their own jobs, and that the great possibilities under Socialist planning could be realized only by common effort. Trotsky did not conceive these handbooks as dry, routine stuff to be written by hacks removed from the problems of the workers who were supposed to read the handbooks. He saw them as living, educational material that would increase the technical knowledge, skill and productivity of the worker, and also deepen in him the feeling of community in the larger economic task. The authors of these handbooks, according to Trotsky’s plan, would be three in number for each: a specialist familiar with the technical conditions in the trade, a skilled worker in the particular trade, and a Marxist with political, industrial and technical understanding and knowledge.
These details are all very significant. They color the whole approach No fraud, force, intimidation, terror: but education, deep and true, to raise the cultural level of the worker and thereby his worth as a producer, and thereby his stature as a responsible member of the proletarian ruling class.
Trotsky also felt the responsibility of the Soviet Government to the workers: “The most telling political arguments, however, for the workers of that type are our practical achievements in industrial matters ...” Again, Trotsky did not consider dissatisfaction with conditions in the workshop and factory a matter for the secret police to handle, but a matter for earnest attention and correction. Nor did he place within the jurisdiction of the secret police the ill- feeling that workers harbor toward those in authority, who “get off with idle talk.” Trotsky’s ideal was a completely give-and-take relationship between the workers and those whom they had chosen as leaders.
 
A New Ruling Class
One final point as revealed in this one chapter of this little book. Trotsky aimed at the closest cooperation between the new generation, developing into qualified, devoted Socialist workers, and “the old men” skilled in their trades. The latter, though outside the party, would yet help build Socialism in all ways, including training the young.
But Trotsky didn’t carry these ideas out. That is true. Could he have carried them out in Russia as it developed after 1917? That is difficult to say. These ideas are Socialist ideas and could have been put into practice only if the forces for Socialism had advanced in Russia instead of the counter-revolution that triumphed. The crux of the situation then was that the European revolution did not succeed and did not come to the aid of backward Russia. Thus the exhaustion of war and civil war and the backwardness and the poverty, gave stimulus to the self-seekers to grab what little there was, at the expense of the masses.
 




The only defense that the principals in the wartime munitions scandal brought to light by the Mead investigating committee appears to have is “heart attack.” First Murray Garsson, one of the Illinois munitions profiteers, runs away to Havana with a “spasmodic heart,” where he nevertheless enjoys his daily swims. Then Representative Andrew J. May, Democrat from Kentucky, chairman of the important House Military Affairs Committee, the political link in the graft chain, suffers a real or convenient “heart attack” that prevents him from appearing before the Mead committee. What else is there for such people to do but try to escape responsibility for their loathsome deeds?
Murray Garsson and his brother, Dr. Henry M. Garsson, received a war contract of $5,000,000 with an advance payment of $1,000,000 before they had even organized a corporation to produce anything. While the ordinary workers in munitions plants were minutely investigated, apparently war contracts were handed out to anyone who knew the right people. From nothing, the Garssons organized not only their first corporation on money advanced by the government, but they built a combine of nineteen interlocking companies which received $79,000,000 in government contracts.
In this network there was plenty of room for shifting assets and for all kinds of tricks to reap the fullest harvest from the war. The Garssons and their associates paid themselves salaries up to $500,000 annually, with lavish traveling expenses as well as dividends from the profits of their nineteen corporations. While workers’ wages were frozen below the cost of living, while they were paying heavy taxes but of these frozen wages, wartime millionaires were born.
 
Greasing Their Way
The expense accounts of these war profiteers tell the story of how they greased their way in Washington. There are items of $10,000 for Murray Garsson’s entertaining in Washington; of $2,213 for gold fountain pens, pen and pencil sets, cigarette lighters; of $10,822 for liquor; of $16,000 for a banquet to celebrate an “E” award wangled through Representative May. Then there was what has come to be known as “Operation Pierre.” Representative May and generals and top men in the Army left the jobs for which they were being paid to join the Garssons in an extensive and expensive celebration of the wedding of a daughter at the Hotel Pierre in New York. This absenteeism cost the honored guests nothing, for even their hotel bills were paid by the generous Garssons.
However, crossing the palms of the right people cannot be done unless the would-be millionaires get an “in” to the right people. Here’s where Representative-of-the-People May enters the picture. He was the “guardian angel,” the political link between the aspiring Garssons and the War Department. As chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee he is powerful enough to ask officials handing out war orders to “scratch his back” because they knew they might want him to scratch theirs.
So May used his influence to get the Garssons those $79,000,000 in war contracts, beginning with the $5,000,000 contract and $1,000,000 advance. He kept these profiteers in liquid funds. He obtained an Army “E” award for a Garsson plant against the opposition of the Army Ordnance of the district, simply by telephoning Under-Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson, now Secretary. The award followed, and with it more large contracts, for an “E” award was not valued for sentimental reasons but for what tidbits of war business it brought.
Representative May also did other favors for the Garssons. When Captain Joseph H. Garsson, son of Murray Garsson, was under court martial for disobeying a command, May went straight to Eisenhower to get the charge dismissed. The May touch was felt throughout young Garsson’s army career. Drafted as a private, within a month he was in officers’ training. Young Garsson also revealed that his Army superiors were under orders to keep him from dangerous combat duty.
 
How Much Did May Get?
These are no puny favors that May extended, and for such favors the rewards must be commensurate. Just what May took for himself may never be known. However, one dirty deal has come to light in the Mead committee. The phantom Cumberland Lumber Company was organized in May’s district in Kentucky by these very Garssons, with May as fiscal agent, and some $46,000 went through May’s hands for lumber that was never delivered. Of course, all parties concerned deny “with vehemence.” It remains to be seen how May will explain this non-existing lumber transaction if and when he testifies before the Mead committee. At any rate there is a record of at least one telephone conversation with the Washington agent of the Garssons in which May demanded his “cut.”
Though the Garsson-May scandal produced a front-page furor, it is really small potatoes. For here is involved only $79,000,000 of contracts out of a total expenditure for war materials of somewhere around $325,000,000,000. Two-thirds of all the juiciest war contracts went to one hundred of America’s leading corporations, not to upstarts like the Garssons. Big business had its fists in the fleshpots of war. How far is the Mead committee willing to go in exposing the pillars of American industry – as , well as more of its own political brethren?
Here the intricacies of smelly politics come in. Senator Mead will be running for Governor in New York State this fall against Governor Dewey, of crime-busting fame. A little war graft exposure by Mead will serve him well as campaign material. But there is something more definite.
 
A Political Scandal
Wayne Johnson, attorney for the Garssons, is active in New York Democratic Party politics – and has been opposed to Mead for Governor. In fact, Johnson, former assistant treasurer of the Democratic National Committee and manager of O’Dwyer’s successful campaign for New York City mayor, is reported to be a potential candidate for Governor on the Democratic ticket.
Is this perhaps why the small-fry Garssons were chosen – so that discredit might fall tin a political opponent? And is this as far as Mead cares to go in exposing war contract scandals? At any the, the Republican Party members of the Mead War Investigating Committee want to push on, feeling that the more scandals are exposed the more will the Democratic Party suffer – and forgetting that the people may remember such post-World War I scandals as Teapot Dome under the wings of Republican “guardian angels.”
In the meantime the Democratic Party is running this same Andrew J. May for re-election in the primary in his Kentucky district on August 3 with no opposition – just as if nothing at all had happened. Again this same Andrew J. May is permitted to remain as chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee – as if nothing had happened – and as such is engaged in no less important business for humanity than legislation on atomic energy!
 




I Chose Freedom
by Victor Kravchenko
Publisher Charles Scribner’s Sons. Price $3.50
Every person in whom capitalism has not dried up the fountain of human feelings cursed the Nazis from the very depths of his soul. In the same way one hates the Stalinist gang as one reads this detailed record of Stalinist barbarism. Victor Kravchenko’s book is additional proof that Hitler learned his first lessons in Stalin’s school, making a few improvements compatible with a country of more advanced technology.
Those who have consistently followed the advance of the Stalinist counter-revolution and the crystallization of the new exploiting class of bureaucrats will not learn any basic political truths from I Chose Freedom. The annihilation of the old Bolsheviks, the false amalgams, the mass purges, are common knowledge. The disappearance of the last shred of workers’ control and workers’ democracy, the use of slave labor, the thin line which separates slave labor from the rest of labor, the gulf between the poverty of the masses and the well-being of the ruling bureaucrats, all these features of Stalinism have not been concealed even by the “iron curtain.”
 
Forced Collectivization
Kravchenko shows us how forced collectivization looked to the peasant whose cow, pig and broken plow made him a dangerous kulak to be liquidated by the government. To the Stalinist policy-makers the peasants who resisted collectivization were no obstacles. They had no human value to the commissars who tortured them into submission or exiled them to a living death. Thereafter these commissars boasted of one hundred per cent collectivization. And what a success that was!
The Kremlin-created famine which resulted needs a Dante to describe it, though Kravchenko does pretty well. He does not forget to compare the heaps of corpses with the heaps of food available to Russia’s new ruling class, to recall for us that butter was being exported out of Russia to show how prosperous this Russia was, when actually thousands upon thousands of children perished for lack of milk, to record that while peasants could get no grain to eat, the grain they had harvested was stocked as reserves in government granaries.
Of all the vile effects of the police-spy system which honey-combs every apartment house, every street, every factory, the vilest is what it does to the human feelings of friendship and loyalty. In most cases, the urge to protect one’s own skin from the purge surmounts all other considerations. Should the NKVD become “interested” in an individual, he becomes at once a social leper, turned away by his erstwhile friends.
How does the intricate spy system seep into all the crevices of life? Here is a father purged and exiled to a labor camp. His frantic family knows nothing about him, whether he is alive or dead, or where he is incarcerated. The NKVD keeps the family on tenterhooks. There may be a grown daughter that the NKVD wants to press into the spy system, or maybe the wife, or perhaps both. Finally a visit is arranged and the loved ones see with their own eyes what a human wreck has become of their husband or father. In return for a measure of mercy, the daughter or wife, or both, do anything asked of them.
 
The Author’s Background
Who is Victor Kravchenko? He was sent to Washington by the Russian government as a member of the Soviet Purchasing Commission, and chose freedom on April 4, 1944, by abandoning his post, fleeing to New York, and seeking whatever protection American publicity might give against the agents of Stalin’s NKVD? Kravchenko describes himself as a member of Russia’s ruling class. He climbed to the topmost rungs of the bureaucratic ladder, not so much by choice as from an inevitable sequence of events.
As an engineer of note and many accomplishments, he finally found himself behind a desk in the Kremlin as Chief Engineer of one of the departments under the Council of Peoples Commissars. Though the picture of Stalin under which he sat was not as large as the one under which sat his immediate superior, still there he was in the Kremlin. However, Kravchenko is one of the few who retained enough personal integrity to let his hatred and enmity for the regime dominate him. His one aim was to get out of Russia to be able to write what he knew about it. He finally maneuvered himself into a foreign appointment. I Chose Freedom is a personal history. He hopes to write a more political work next.
As an engineer at the head of factories and combines he had occasion to see many ramifications of Stalinism from the inside. The misrepresentation of the Stakhanovist speed-up system by the Kremlin did not take in Kravchenko. When this plague descended upon him, he was at a plant where he had been sent to increase production that had reached only thirty-five or forty per cent of the goal set. After superhuman effort he and his colleagues, despite obstruction from the NKVD, had succeeded in reaching eighty-five per cent of the goal. However, in Moscow it was decided that a bit of Stakhanovism would bring production not only to the top but over it. All the technical staff at the plant knew this was impossible.
Soon those sent by Moscow also saw the impossibility of raising production, but instead of rendering an honest report, they sought to protect themselves. The stock piles of the plant were treated as if currently produced and added to the normal production to make up the one-hundred- per-cent-plus that Moscow demanded. In spite of this fraud the “new norm” was taken as standard, the production required from the workers was increased, and since they could not produce the new norm, they suffered wage decreases. This is Stakhanovism in action.
 
Disillusionment Sets In
This incident shows, in part, the status of the workers in Russia. They are the slaves of the bureaucratic state. The “unions” are agencies of the state. Each worker has a card on which his record is kept, and is at the complete mercy of his superiors. This ties him to the factory like a serf to the soil in old Russia. Sometimes the difference between the ordinary worker and the slave laborer is twenty minutes. For if a worker is late by twenty minutes and if his excuse is not considered good enough by the factory doctor – the only excuse is sickness – then he is submitted to “trial” and is sentenced to slave labor. The slave labor camps throughout Russia include many millions of “purged” people who no longer resemble human beings, so unspeakable is the treatment they get. The NKVD hires these wretched beings to industry under contracts making wages payable to the NKVD for its own use.
There is no reason to doubt the authenticity of Kravchenko’s report. He was a member of the new ruling class and was in a position to know intimately the workings of the Stalinist regime. He came from a working class family, with a revolutionary father who fought against the Czar, but without joining any political party. And with a mother whose pure and deeply religious spirit influenced the son. Kravchenko’s background merged with his own disillusionment from the ideal he had seen as a young Communist immediately after the revolution. In Russia he could do nothing; outside Russia he tries to make known the gruesome facts.
Kravchenko can hardly conceal his contempt for certain American liberals, well-meaning and otherwise, who praise Russia. For Davies and his Mission to Moscow he has a scathing rebuke. Whitewash of the Wilkie and Wallace variety is naive and dangerous. The usual dribble seeking to excuse the Stalin-Hitler pact can’t stand up against Kravchenko’s facts. The pact was not, as the Kremlin claimed after Hitler’s attack on Russia, an expedient the Russians used in order to prepare themselves better against Hitler.
The Kremlin took the pact on trust, believing in Hitler. If this were not so, the propaganda machine would not have stopped grinding out anti-Nazi propaganda as completely as it did. Not only that, but there was positive pro-German propaganda, including songs of praise for the culture of the new Germany. From his position in industry, Kravchenko could see that war preparations were halted, defense works lagged, no preparations were made to meet invasion from the west. Instead industry exerted itself to fulfill the trade agreements with Hitler and supply him with the sinews of war, while the Russian masses wanted for ordinary living needs and remained exposed to attack.
Of course, the complete astonishment at the Kremlin and the utter rout of the Russians when Hitler attacked, evidenced the mistake the Stalin gang had made. Then, to cover up its mistakes, it instituted a most ruthless purge against a so-called “fifth column.”
 
In a Blind Alley
There is much more of absorbing interest in this book which remains indelibly on the reader’s mind. For example, the panic in Moscow as the Germans approached; the evacuation of the rulers in their fine cars, with their fine luggage, while their household furnishings got space on the overloaded railroads. In contrast, the panic-stricken poor, confused, dazed, mulled around the railroad stations, unable to get a toehold on a train, unable to get food in Moscow, left by their rulers to forage and pillage to survive. Kravchenko declares that Hitler could then have entered Moscow and taken it practically without resistance.
As to Kravchenko’s political development, his book reveals that he has been “taken in” by American democracy. This is understandable. The contrast between the Stalinist police-spy system and even capitalist democracy is to him like the difference between hell and heaven. Furthermore, the absurd picture of capitalism that Stalinist “education” has given its citizens finds little justification even on a surface acquaintance with American capitalism. Perhaps Kravchenko’s future political education will bring to him a truly scientific evaluation of capitalism and capitalist democracy in this period of the decline of that system, and thus lead him into the path of socialist revolution – a path now made surer since the Stalinist pitfalls are well marked.
 




There sits in the Casa Rosada, the White House of Argentina, President Juan D. Peron. This military dictator, strongly influenced by the Nazis, using Nazi methods to down labor and all opposition, was actually elected president by popular vote in February 1946. Freda Kirschwey in her Report on Argentina, The Nation of March 30, wrote: “Peron is a fascist and a demagogue, but the poor people of Argentina have elected him President.” This is the consensus on the election.
Certainly these poor people of Argentina voted against their basic interests in supporting Peron. How did this come about? What lessons can be learned from this mistaken action of the Argentine masses so that the working people and the poor masses everywhere can be saved such expensive mistakes?
The career of Colonel Juan D. Peron to date must be considered in two parts. The first part, from the seizure of power by the colonels in June 1943 to October 1945 when Peron was forced to resign temporarily, was characterized by the wrath he aroused in every section of the population. The second part started within forty- four hours from his resignation with a decided improvement in his political position and culminating in his election. The reason for this change can be summed up thus:
The situation required a mass revolutionary party to lead the struggle of the workers and peasants against dictatorship and oppression. This was wanting, and the anti-Peron opposition was in the hands of those afraid of radical changes. This weakness gave Peron the springboard he needed to win the election.
 
Labor Only 5% to 10% with Him
Prior to his resignation the Nazi-inspired Peron had only a small minority of the people with him. This has been amply attested to. The CIO Latin Affairs Committee branded as a falsehood the claim that Peron had the support of labor. Jacob Potofsky, head of that committee and secretary-treasurer of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, pointed out:
“... that the few unions that Peron could really claim for himself were dominated by appointed henchmen and goons acting in connivance with the regime’s secret police ... So-called pro-Peron labor demonstrations are usually staged in strategic areas of Buenos Aires by imported hoodlums, and sympathetic police concentration provided theatrical effects that caused them to be noticed by the population.”
Ray Josephs wrote in American Mercury of November 1944 that most of the workers were not much impressed by Peron’s promises of low- cost housing, reduced food costs, better wages and conditions. Harry B. Kurkland, in October 1945 Current History, wrote: “But, to the eternal credit of Argentine labor, he [Peron] was able neither to bribe nor to frighten enough of it into his camp to give him the authentic character of ‘people’s choice’.” Dr. A.M. Berraondo, a Buenos Aires lawyer seeking aid for the democratic forces of Argentine in this country, estimated labor’s backing of Peron at from five to ten per cent.
While the estancieros (rich ranchers) and industrialists at first looked expectantly for benefits from the military dictatorship, by the fall of 1945 these classes were also openly hostile. A Bonapartist dictatorship, ruling by decree, without a congress to account to or be hampered by, the colonels increased military outlays until, in the fiscal year 1945, expenditures were five times the 1942 figure – the last pre-Peron year. While the estancieros and commercial and industrial owners were not unwilling to have the working people regimented into stooge unions and deprived of political rights, nor even to wink at anti-Semitism, they were not willing, at this stage at any rate, to support a spendthrift bureaucracy rapidly separating itself from their control. The ruling classes were being subjected to decrees, their businesses interfered with, and their taxes increased as never before. On the question of neutrality in the war, the estancieros and businessmen felt that while it was profitable to do business with both sides as long as possible, the break with the Axis was delayed too long after the outcome of the war was apparent, thus jeopardizing business interests.
So in June 1945 nearly every important business and financial organization subscribed to a widely-published attack on the Peron government. Three days later the large cattle interests expressed their “absolute solidarity with the manifesto and commerce.” Thus the anti-Peron revolt included all classes.
 
On the Verge of Civil War
The popular uprising against Peron verged on civil war. Workers demonstrated and struck. Teachers and students came out on the streets. Lawyers and professionals of all kinds participated. Women marched on the government palace. On September 29, 1945, in Buenos Aires, 500,000 turned out for the “March of Constitution and Freedom.” There were 100,000 more people at the demonstration than voted in the 1940 elections in that city, as alleged by more than one reporter from the scene.
Even the military was split wide open. When Peron emerged as the leader of the group of colonels who had taken power, he boasted the support of all but 300 of the 3,600 army officers, and told a Chilean newspaperman that “Their undated petitions asking for retirement are on file and can be enforced at a moment’s notice.” But two years later it was the army that offered up Peron as the sacrificial lamb to allay the wrath of the population and thus save itself from a people’s uprising. On October 9, 1945, the Minister of Interior announced: “Peron, deferring to Campo de Mayo [military headquarters in Buenos Aires], has resigned his offices, as Vice-President, War Minister and Secretary of Labor and Social Welfare.” During the previous night military planes and cars had swarmed into Campo de Mayo bringing officers from all over the country, a means of convincing Peron he had to resign.
At this point the anti-Peron forces revealed their weakness. The politically heterogeneous opposition was distinguished by its spontaneity and courage in demonstrations, but had no program for unified action, no unified leadership, no ability to form a government. There was a revolutionary situation, with nothing revolutionary transpiring. It was reported in The Nation that as soon as Peron was out; the street fighting was abandoned. The struggle was slackened in the crucial days, before anything was accomplished. “All parties wanted Peron out, but there was little agreement on who should be put in his place or how to do it,” is how Newsweek described the inadequacy of the anti-Peron forces. The mountain labored and brought forth a mouse in the form of a demand that the Supreme Court assume power until elections could be had. The anti-Peron masses had been let down.
The Campo group of course had no intention of relinquishing power. After arresting a group of army rebels who also wanted the Supreme Court to take over the government, it resumed power through the triumvirate of President Farrell, General Avalos heading the Campo group, and Admiral Luna. Nothing more revolutionary than this having transpired, Peron was back in Buenos Aires within forty-four hours. Without taking any government posts, he again put his hands on the controls of the military machine as the power behind the throne. Everybody knew this, from the most ignorant to the most politically conscious. After his momentary eclipse, Peron returned with the halo of leadership around his head – the only leader in a leader-loving country. His opponents had shown their weakness; Peron his strength.
 
Peronista Terror Sweeps Argentina
Few people realize what a reign of terror was let loose in Argentina after Peron’s come-back, and while it was not the only factor that swung the election in his favor – to which we will come later on – it was a factor of tremendous importance. After strengthening his position in the army by putting his men into strategic posts and increasing its numbers, as reported by Ray Josephs in PM; Peron went to work on the population.
Under date line October 17, several New York papers reported that Peron was bringing thugs into Buenos Aires from the suburb of Avellaneda. The police provided truck transportation, weapons and pesos for services rendered. Among the services they rendered was to force all passers-by to shout for Peron under threat of violence. With police help they attacked the Jewish quarters. They were wined and dined at public expense, housed in theatres and public buildings and given the free use of brothels.
Wide publicity was given in this country to the attack by Peronistas on the great mass meeting in Plaza del Congreso by the Democratic Union on December 8. There were many wounded and several dead. Cortesi reported that there was a many times greater crowd at this meeting than Peron “has ever been able to assemble.” It was broken up by Peron’s police who charged with armored cars and machine guns after the Peronista thugs had failed to break it up. A result of this meeting was that the police was ordered to search everyone for arms, which meant the anti-Peronistas. This was not the first police raid in search of arms. Cortesi reported a similar foray on October 26 when all arms were also removed from gunsmiths shops. In one form or another the Peronistas used terror throughout the election campaign up to a couple of days before election when the army took over to “assure free elections.”
The workers and country poor were not prepared to resist this terror. Neither the Socialist Party nor the Communist Party and certainly not the Radical Party, the bourgeois party to whose leadership the two former bowed, had organized the masses for self-defense.
While Peron employed violence to purge the population, the government proceeded to shift the scenery for a “democratic election.” It issued a series of “liberal” decrees. Elections were called for April 1946 and later advanced to February. The ban against political parties was lifted. Some political prisoners were freed. Newspaper suspensions were cancelled. Universities were reopened – where, by the way, bloody struggles broke out anew. All this was done to get Peron elected “democratically.”
(Another article on Argentina will appear next week)
 




The great mass of people in this country are arriving at the unanimous conclusion that prices will not be held down by the government. After June 30, workers and housewives demonstrated, demanding a return of the OPA. Now that “dear Harry” has signed a worse OPA bill than he first vetoed, the people begin to see they must rely on themselves. For the very first thing that happened after the President signed the zombie OPA bill, was a rise in prices.
Shoes and coal led the list. Then came men’s shirts, shorts and pajamas, followed by men’s clothing. On foodstuffs, prices of the not so important items were, officially speaking, rolled back to June 30 levels; but meat, dairy products, poultry, eggs are decontrolled until August 20 at least. The price of coffee will go up, and of course bread has gone up. Clothing will be even dearer. Vacuum cleaners, washing machines, refrigerators, furniture, these will be beyond the reach of even more people than now. The auto companies which already got two price boosts this year, are slated to get $100 more on a car. In a word, Congress passed, and the President signed, not a price control bill but a deal between politicians and capitalists for higher prices.
 
What Are Fair Prices?
More and more people understand that this is what was put over on them. Therefore, workers and housewives have taken to mass action in the form of a buyers’ strike, picket lines and similar steps.
But the question of the hour is, WHAT ARE FAIR PRICES? How are they to be arrived at? If consumers are not to buy overpriced merchandise and foodstuffs, they must know what prices are right for buying.
When OPA lapsed on June 30 and prices escalated upward, there were some people depraved enough to say that these prices were fair because they were less than black market prices. The cock-eyed conclusion to be drawn was that the cost of living was actually going down. Of course, this was fantastic. The mass of consumers did not pay black market prices because they couldn’t afford to. They simply did without the things monopolized by the black market.
However, most people aroused by price pyramiding do not take the black market as a measure of fair prices. Most people seem to think that the pre-June 30 levels, that is, OPA ceilings before the OPA lapsed, would be fair enough. But here is where most people are dead wrong. They are wrong because the only way to fix fair prices is to relate them to profits and wages.
 
Related to Profits
This is exactly what the General Motors strikers did last year. They demanded a thirty per cent increase to bring their wages to cost of living levels – and they coupled this demand with the one that the prices of cars not be increased. The UAW-CIO proved, in a documented brief, that the auto companies could grant this thirty per cent wage increase without raising prices, and that the companies could actually decrease prices and still make more than pre-war profits.
Facts and reason did not, however, triumph. The auto workers got only 18½ cents an hour raise, far less than the thirty per cent needed to parallel the cost of living. And car prices were not held, but from the time of the strike to June 30, OPA granted the auto barons two unwarranted price increases.
Can it be said, that the June 30 prices of cars are fair prices? Indeed not; they are profiteering prices. The auto workers and the car buyers are the goats for the auto companies.
The same situation prevails throughout industry. At about the time of the auto strike at least two government surveys informed the President that manufacturing industries could afford to grant wage increases of around twenty-five per cent, without boosting prices to the consumer and without any loss in profit. But, by and large, workers got only 18½ cents an hour increase instead of the twenty-five per cent that industry could afford to pay without raising prices. And, instead of holding the price level, between the settlement of the steel strike in February 1946 and June 30, OPA director Paul Porter approved no less than five hundred industry-wide price increases.
There is no disputing these facts. The conclusion is that June 30 price levels are not fair. Relating wages, profits and prices, June 30 levels are profiteering levels.
 
Open the Books!
The nation has obviously arrived at a pass where fair prices have to be fixed. Prices today reflect wartime profits, government cost-plus contracts, National Association of Manufacturers lobbying, big business in government, black market. A new evaluation must be made in order to fix fair prices at which the masses can buy and feel warranted in buying.
There is only one place where the facts and figures for fixing prices fairly can be found. That place is the books of the corporations. In the books of the companies is kept the information as to cost of raw material, cost of labor, wear and tear on machinery, profits per article, profits in bulk, backlog of orders, new orders in prospect, and so on. Here is hidden the secret of fair prices. The books of the corporations must be opened. But to whom?
Certainly it will not do much good to open them to the capitalist government or any of its agencies. More information will not alter the class character of the capitalist politicians. The whole history of war and post-war prices shows that even those politicians who stood for price control, developed weak knees when the capitalists bellowed loud enough for higher prices and bigger profits.
The logical group to whom the books of the corporations must be opened are the workers. The General Motors strikers made this demand. It is the basic answer to the question of how to fix fair prices and fair wages. The principle here is that profits are the concern not alone of the profit-grabbers but of all the people. In each corporation the interests of all the people can be represented by Price Fixing Committees of workers, democratically elected. This is how price levels can be fixed that will be fair. And then the neighborhood committees of workers, consumers and housewives can see to it that these democratically fixed price levels are actually adhered to.
So while Labor Action and the Workers Party support the buyers strikes, the picketing of price gougers, the shopping committees and mass demonstrations, we must point out that the questions of what are fair prices and how they are to be fixed still remain for solution. For that we go to the point of production, by Price Control Committees of workers using all the information that the profiteers keep hidden in their books.
 




(Continued from last issue)
As pointed out by Freda Kirschwey in her report and by Ray Joseph in Argentine Diary as well as by other writers, the conditions of the working people in that country had improved during the war.
There were more jobs and higher wages, which many workers attributed to the Peron regime. However, this had not been enough to bring the masses into Peron’s camp because they feared the regimentation and dreaded the terroristic measures they saw all about them, i.e., the imprisonment of labor leaders, the disappearance of militant workers, the reports of inhuman torture in concentration camps, etc.
Peron had made further bids for mass support by establishing, at the end of 1943, the Secretariat of Labor and Welfare with himself at the head, consolidating under his control about ten government departments having to do with social welfare. He demagogically declared for “social justice.” He was responsible for wage increases for a few workers, gave unlimited use of gasoline to taxi drivers, announced improvements for migrant workers on the estancias, and promised all kinds of social benefits such as hospitals, maternity care, etc. However, these gestures were still not sufficient to win the masses. For they knew that Peron also had the uncontrolled power to withhold benefits from those who displeased him, the power of deportation, of levying taxes such as those paid by all working women, even if single, to take care of them if they should happen to become mothers. It was no secret that Peron was using the funds of the Secretariat of Labor and Welfare for his own political career.
However, in spite of the doubts and misgivings of the masses, when Peron returned after his opponents had demonstrated their weakness and he his dramatic flair for leadership, he was able to capitalize upon his previous “measures for the people,” and to reach new demagogic heights.
 
The Worker’s Shirt
Before Peron’s resignation, the colonels had functioned without a party. They had hoped to win adherents from existing parties and concentrated their efforts against the Radical Party, the largest in the country, with some success. For the election, however, a government was formed: the Argentina Labor Party. With Peron as candidate for president and the whole slate filled by colonels, a national flag from whose pole hung a sweaty workman’s shirt, was cynically chosen as the party emblem. Peron became the powerful leader returned to his people.
The Farrell government, as electioneering bait for Peron, issued decrees for wage increases of from 10 to 2 per cent together with year-end bonuses of a month’s pay. To further prove that he is “for the poor” and “against the rich,” an excess profits tax was levied for the first time in the history of the country. To the land-hungry peasants he also gave promises of dividing up the large estates. Touring the northern province of Juyuy, he assured the poor peasants that a decree was in preparation to divide the 800,000-acre estate belonging to a much-hated landowner. Because the landlords and capitalists and all employers opposed these measures, the poor were led to believe that Peron must mean well by the masses.
 
Church for Peron
Kirchwey wrote:
“Peron had all the advantages of a dictator bent upon making himself President. In addition he had the church. With few exceptions – the more remarkable because they were so few – the clergy supported Peron’s candidacy, some openly from the pulpit, most of them quietly among their parishioners. Many democrats with whom I talked believed the church was their most dangerous and determined adversary.”
The part that the church played in getting Peron elected cannot be overemphasized. Many priests had a strong Falangist and fascist bias, and when they realized there was a chance of the Democratic Union winning over Peron, they used their influence on their followers. It must be understood that the masses are still very much under the domination of the Catholic Church.
Cortesi reported on November 25, 1945, in the midst of the election campaign, that the priest of the Church of the Immaculate Conception told his congregation:
“If in the explanation given you feel there is a pronouncement favoring dictatorship, you must know you must shut your mouths because Jesus Christ himself was a great dictator.”
The Catholic weekly Accion published instructions to Catholics not to vote for candidates of the Democratic Union. The Argentina Episcopate addressed a pastoral letter to the clergy and the faithful reminding them of their duties in the approaching election.
Now let us look at the anti-Peron forces which had missed the bus and had given the masses no leadership when Peron was forced to resign.
After much negotiating, the anti- Peron opposition unified itself for the election. The Socialist and Communist parties and the Progressive Democrats agreed with the Radical Party to support the Radical Party candidates for President and Vice-President, Tamborini and Mosca. Thus the parties in the election coalition ran the gamut of the classes, i.e., die-hard reactionary, democratic, liberal and working class parties.
 
Opposition Lacked Program
While Peron was making his demagogic campaign among the masses on promises of social improvement and on his so-called record in this respect, the Democratic Union offered no concrete program. It ignored the crying need of the country and city masses for social and economic changes of a radical nature. Kirchwey describes the campaign carried on by the Democratic Union:
“The election was fought on a negative rather than a positive platform; it was fought to defeat dictatorship at home and a pro-Axis policy abroad; it was fought against Peron. The Blue Book only served to document charges already made over and over by the democrats. They campaigned to rid their country of the shame of Nazi domination of the army, Nazi control of major industries, Nazi control of foreign affairs. At the final huge Radical rally before the election the excited crowd chanted over and over, ‘Argentina, Si; Nazis, No’ and ‘Li-ber-tad, Li-ber-tad.’ The speakers enlarged on the same theme.”
This was no match for the “people’s measures” with which Peron was waging his campaign under the aegis of a Labor Party label, with the banner of a worker’s shirt, with his own “leader” charm and influence, with the persuasiveness of the police and the church and with the logical retort to his opponents that the war is over and that the Yankee imperialists should mind their own business.
But the Democratic Union, led and dominated by the capitalist Radical Party, could offer no program of radical change for the masses because that party stands for the social and economic status quo, minus the Peron dictatorship.
There is some doubt as to who benefited by the Blue Book issued by the United States Department of State. Plainly presented as an anti-Peron electioneering document, it gave Argentinians no information they did not already have and at the same time gave the Peronistas the advantage of being able to point to foreign interference in the election.
 
No Working Class Party
There was no mass working-class party to make the fight against Peron on the basis of a revolutionary program for the landless peasants and for the country and city workers. The Socialist and Communist Parties subordinated themselves to the capitalist parties. The former, though the third largest party in the country, was not willing to separate itself from the ruling class and lead the working class. As to the Communist Party, it was, as usual obeying orders from Moscow. So much so, that soon after the election, it supported a strike of packing house workers called as a warning to the world that it had better recognize Peron, or else, no meat! This turncoat move may be understood in terms of the plan of the Kremlin to recognize Peron.
To return to President Peron who will have an overwhelmingly Peronista Congress behind him. What measures will he take? In foreign policy, undoubtedly he is seeking a working arrangement with the United States. He has plans for the industrial and military development of his country. He covets American money, the only money to be had, and superior American products. As for internal policies, the nationalization of the Bank of Argentina by no means presages a program for nationalization of industry. What he did was to assure his control of the financial resources of the country to carry out his plans. During the war he was also responsible for nationalizing certain communication systems, but this also had a specific purpose.
As far as the working classes are concerned, the pre-election demagogy will, if precedents can be relied upon, reveal itself in full. Then the anti-Peron struggle is due to take on new form and vigor. The wording people and peasant masses will have to break away from the Radical Party and repudiate the misleadership of the Socialist and Communist Parties for collaborating with the rich landlords and capitalists organized in the Radical Party. It must build a party of its own – an independent revolutionary Socialist party.
 




The St. Johns River Shipbuilding Corporation of Florida parted to build ships for Uncle Sam with a capital investment of $600, on which pittance the corporation reaped a profit of $2,080,000. By quiz kid figuring, or any other, this is a yield of about 3,500 per cent on invested capital. Sweet indeed are the rewards to capitalists taking big wartime “risks”!
Spectacular as this rate of profit is, the amount of profit is only chicken feed. Nineteen shipyards that “risked” at most $22,979,275 of their own money, made a wartime profit haul of $356,006,612. Something like a 1,600 per cent profit on invested capital for these paytriotic shipyard operators, these merchants of death!
This happened – and it is not all, for wartime profits for all capitalists pyramided to a new historical high – right under the nose of that most idealistic of all presidents, Franklin D. Roosevelt. Perhaps the workers will recall that FDR made a pledge to the American people: “Our present emergency and a common sense of decency make it imperative that no new group of war millionaires come into being as a result of the struggles abroad. The American people will not relish the idea of any American citizen growing rich and fat in an emergency of blood and slaughter and human suffering.”
These words were only dust in the eyes of the people being mobilized for a war they didn’t want to fight. Mr. Roosevelt was too shrewd and worldly a capitalist and politician not to understand that World War II would – just as its predecessor had, only more so – make many new millionaires and turn millionaires into billionaires.
A little more proof of this wartime transformation was given at the hearing before the House Merchant Marine Committee, at which the Maritime Commission was exposed by the General Accounting Office of the government and from where come the above profit figures. You see, when the politicians fall out among themselves, the people get a few revealing facts.
Ralph E. Casey, representing the General Accounting Office, told the House Committee: “At no time in the history of American business, whether, in wartime or in peacetime, have so few men made so much money with so little risk – and all at the expense of the taxpayers, not only of this generation but of generations to come.”
And why not, according to capitalist standards of morality! The biggest war in history, the most soldiers wounded and dead, the most civilians killed and made homeless and diseased, the most cities demolished, the most war atrocities – then why not the most money for the fewest, by capitalist standards!
How was it possible to make such huge profits on such picayune investments, since modern industrial equipment for the production of ships costs a pretty penny? Well, there was good old Uncle Sam. Shipyard operators invested $22,979,275, or rather, as Marvin Coles, counsel for the House Committee, stated: “This money of the operators was the capital which they had available and was not actual investment in the shipyards themselves.” But let’s not quibble. On the other hand, for shipyard facilities which enabled the private shipyard operators to collect $356,006,612 in profits, yes, the government spent $424,250,694.
No wonder Mr. Casey testified that the taxpayers “not only of this generation but of generations to come” will be paying the bill – and that means us workers being docked each week out of the pay envelope.
 
Horatio Alger Kaiser
The testimony given before the House Merchant Marine Committee on September 23 revealed that the companies owned or controlled by Henry J. Kaiser and his associates made the most money on the least investment. The Kaiser companies, namely, California Shipbuilding Corporation; Kaiser Company, Inc.; Kaiser Cargo, Inc.; Oregon Shipbuilding Corporation; Permanente Metals Corporation and Walsh-Kaiser, Inc., had a total capital investment of $2,510,000, and made profits estimated at $192,237,284.
This seems to be a yield of about 9600 per cent. Henry J. Kaiser certainly did all right by himself out of ships in which American boys went to their death. Of the nineteen companies under inquiry, Mr. Kaiser’s group, with about one-ninth of the capital invested, took home more than one-half of the bacon.
Up for questioning before the House Committee, Mr. Kaiser, smart industrialist that he is, developed a convenient case of extreme ignorance about his companies’ affairs. “I don’t know,” was a stock answer. However, he claimed that his losses in his steel mill must be charged against his profits in shipbuilding. Funny he said nothing about his profits in other wartime projects such as aircraft, aluminum and the eighteen different industries he was engaged in. He protested that he was being singled out as a scapegoat and wanted to know why the Pew family, also engaged in wartime shipbuilding, was not being investigated. Why, not?
 
A New Theory
Kaiser also developed a new theory of profit, in his testimony. He thinks that profit should be figured on the basis of production and not invested capital. He said that on this basis his profits were “Less than one-tenth of one per cent of the total volume of work done for the Maritime Commission,” whereas General Motors netted 6.0 per cent on production and du Pont 12.7 per cent in 1945.
In this nice scheme for concealing real profits, what, Mr. Kaiser, becomes of the claim of you and your class that you are entitled to profits because of the “risks” you take in investing your money? As, indeed, what becomes of that claim when a $600 “risk” brings $2,080,000 in profits, and your own “risk” of $2,510,000 brought your companies $192,237,284 in rewards?
To the contention of the shipyard operators that they were being paid for “know-how,” Mr. Casey said’ it sometimes appeared that “the only know-how covered by government fees to shipyard operators for engineering and other technical skills was knowing how to secure a contract from the Maritime Commission.”’
 
Limit to Gullibility
During the hearing, an uncomfortable listener was Admiral Emory S. Land, chairman of the Maritime Commission throughput the war. It is reported That as his conduct of the commission was being assailed, he nervously rubbed his chin and stared into space. This is the same anti-labor Land who in October 1942 told a convention of investment bankers in New York that “As far as any (union) organizers are concerned, for the duration, in my opinion, they ought to be shot at sunrise.”
Between the Roosevelts and the Lands, and capitalist war, what else could the outcome be but, on the one side, the Kaisers, du Ponts, Pews, the merchants of death, with fantastic profit yields; and on the other side, ex-war workers and ex-soldiers without any savings, with a lowered standard of living because of high prices, facing a famine situation in meat and other foods, in clothing, and in housing.
And when World War III approaches, the war President will then also pledge to the American people that there will be no “new group of war millionaires.” But there is a limit to human gullibility.
 




A fascist front is forming again in this country. Fathered and financed by the backers of the fascistic America First movement of pre-Pearl Harbor days and by the ultra-reactionary leaders of the Liberty League, the offspring American Action Committee bows on the political stage.
This is no mere “crackpot” movement any more than Nazism was a product of Hitler’s “psychopathic genius.” Just as top capitalists of pre-war Germany (though now exonerated by the Allied judges at Nuremberg) projected the Nazi movement to break the labor front and to prepare for global war, so here today a sector of the capitalist class organizes to attack labor. This the American Action Committee literature openly states.
The connection between the American Action Committee and the America First Committee is so close that General Robert E. Wood, head of the mail order firm. Sears, Roebuck & Co., who was chairman of America First, is likewise chairman of the new outfit. Wood sent out confidential letters to a selected group, on his own letterhead with the company’s address, asking for checks or “transfer of stocks.” The $200,000 paid in or pledged toward the $750,000 sought to be raised did not come from small fry. Listed among the financial backers of the new organization are Joseph Pew of Sun Oil and other interests; Ernest T. Weir, the labor-hating steel magnate; Lamont du Pont, of the family that owns such big chunks of America; Samuel Weldon, Chicago banker; W. Homes Hartz, former head of the Illinois Manufacturers Association; Robert K. Christenberry, president of the Hotel Astor; publisher Robert R. McCormick of reactionary fame.
 
McCormick’s Two Cents
McCormick foreshadowed the new organization when, in an editorial in his Chicago Tribune some weeks ago, he wrote:
“The America First Committee disbanded too soon. Some pro-American organization is necessary, because of the extensive influence of the Reds in the Democratic Party and of the British in the Republican Party, especially on the eastern seaboard.”
Enrolled as charter members are some well-known reactionary, anti-labor propagandists. There is Merwin K. Hart, head of the National Economic Council, noted for its inventiveness in making anti-labor propaganda. Hart has been denounced by Justice Robert H. Jackson for “his pro-fascist leanings.” He has openly defended Franco. There is Upton Close, who speaks the views of the National Economic Council on its Mutual Network program. There is Robert M. Harriss, Queens County associate of Father Coughlin and the Christian Front and friend of former Congressman Hamilton Fish.
 
The Reactionary Ratholes
It is no fantasy to say that the American Action bunch aim to rally, organize and strengthen the fascist front. The connecting strings radiate into all the reactionary ratholes. For instance, the above-mentioned Hart is also one of the founders of the Tool Owners’ Union run by an army veteran from a Park Avenue address, following the political line of Frank E. Gannett’s ultra-conservative, anti-labor League for Constitutional Government. (You guessed it; the “tool owners” are the capitalists.) Again, Eugene M. Flitcraft, publisher of the anti-Semitic Gentile News of Oak Park, Ill., hailed. the new organization both in its news columns and editorially. There are still other irons in the fire.
Talmadge’s outfit in Georgia with its KKK tie-up could be interested; similarly with former Senator Reynolds’ supporters in the American Nationalist movement. Officially Gerald L.K. Smith may not be accepted by the American Actionists because of his ill-repute, but it goes without saying that many of Smith’s followers will be on deck. It is reported that rabble-rouser McWilliams wants to be counted in. And the Christian War Veterans, headed by Frederick Kister, deems itself qualified to become the fly-paper for catching discontented veterans for the fascist front.
Furthermore, the American Action Committee boasts of much support of the reactionaries in Congress. Chairman Wood, in his confidential letter to a selected group, wrote:
“The movement has been discussed with and has the blessing of the topmost Republican and Constitutional Democratic leaders in both houses of Congress and the support of many people you know.”
The “Constitutional Democrats,” be it remembered, are the Byrd-Bilbo-Rankin branch of the Democratic Party.
The American Action Committee makes its bow on the political stage at this time to try to swing the Congressional elections its way. General Wood informed his chosen group of men with money:
“The thing I like about it (AAC) is that it is not just another organization of propaganda, but one of direct political action within Congressional districts where there are good chances for success, and as fast as funds are sufficient to do a thorough job, it is expanding to other districts where real American Congressmen are being threatened with the PAC purge.”
Captain Edward A. Hayes, a former national commander of the American Legion, who has been put in charge of organizing the activities of the Wood outfit, says:
“We are in the process of developing doorbell-ringing organizations in Missouri, Oklahoma, Illinois, Wisconsin, New York, California and Washington, to assist Congressional candidates opposed to communistic tendencies in this country.”
 
Its Alleged Purposes
In the literature of the American Action Committee its purposes are stated to be: To organize the great majority of the Right more effectively than alien-minded radicals have organized the vociferous minorities of the Left. To meet head-on the CIO-PAC and its anti-American collaborationists by openly challenging and exposing their terroristic tactics, their smears and their deceits. To purge both major parties of opportunist leadership that sells out American principles for minorities’ votes. To protect from smear and political reprisal party leaders and public officials who uphold American principles and drive out those who compromise American principles.
It requires no long exposition to make clear what this super-nationalism means. We have the fascist and Nazi examples. When such as these talk about the “terroristic tactics” of their opponents, it is a virtual admission that they themselves are thinking of terror. Everybody who does not comply with their reactionary conceptions of what is good for the capitalist system will be dubbed “alien” and “communistic” – and driven out.
The one point that can be taken on its face value in the AAC program is that it is out to smash CIO-PAC. If the workers are not yet fully aware of the potentialities of PAC as a working class weapon to be turned into an independent Labor Party, the die-hard capitalist layers certainly feel it in their bones. For the present the fascistic AAC will train all its guns on target PAC.
The consolidation of the fascist front can and must be prevented by the workers. The activities and meetings of the American Action Committee will have to be picketed and exposed. The AAC is a renewed and strengthened effort at fascist organization. It will require the prompt, united, all-out effort of labor to prevent it from getting even a toe-hold.
 




The impasse of artific1ally created shortages and of fantastic prices to which the profit system has brought this country, poses the need for nationalization of industry as an imperative problem of the day. This is no time for pussy-footing. Labor must come out for a clear-cut program for the nationalization of industry under workers’ control, within the framework of the widest possible democracy for the masses. If labor does not assume militant leadership for attaining this goal of democratic nationalization, it will lose a great opportunity.
The above remarks are made urgent by the first plank of the seven-point program of the Packinghouse Workers Union, CIO, on the meat crisis. This plank calls the meat industry “a public utility.” In the October 7 issue of Labor Action the lead article assumed that this plank amounted to a call for nationalization, and very correctly added a most vital amendment, namely, that a nationalized meat industry must be under the control of qualified committees of packinghouse workers in order to protect their interests as producers and the interests of the people as consumers.
However, since then, judging by statements made by the president of the union, Ralph Helstein, declaring the meat industry “a public utility” does not mean nationalization to him. His interpretation is that the meat industry requires “regulation.” This throws a piercing light on the meaning of the plank and makes it clear that the words “a public utility” were chosen by the union leadership with reason – though not a good reason from the viewpoint of the interests of both workers and consumers.
 
The Public Utility Lure
What is “a public utility”? In this country that designation has specific meaning. Gas and electric companies, telephone service, natural gas suppliers, water works, these and a few other industries are considered public utilities. As such they are subject to a certain amount of so-called “government regulation.” Mr. Helstein, presumably, wants the meat industry included in this category and subjected to the same kind of regulation.
At the same time he thinks that “such regulation ... would insure reasonable profits to the packers, reasonable prices to the consumer and producer, and jobs to the workers.” We, of course, have no quarrel with the objective of reasonable prices to the consumer and jobs to the workers – though we are not too much interested in insuring what is called “reasonable profits” and prices for the monopolists. However, we must ask what justification Mr. Helstein has for thinking that by placing the meat industry in the category of the public utilities monopolies and subjecting it to similar regulations, will protect the interests of worker and consumer. Does he not know that “government regulation” has in no way broken the monopolistic powers of these sectors of industry? As a matter of fact, the public utilities maintain powerful lobbies both to boost rates and to prevent the development of government projects that might interfere with their private interests. They are responsible for holding up the development of the magnificent potentialities for hydro-electric power.
Such achievements as the Tennessee Valley Authority, with its cheaper rates for electric current, show up the extent to which the “government regulations” have allowed the public utilities to mulct the public, the consumer. Until very recently the public utilities have held the workers in the vise of company unionism, and are still the tireless opponents of workers’ initiative and power. In a word, public utilities are the very warp and woof of the banking and industrial monopolies of this country. They have thrived on “government regulation.” At the expense of the workers and the consumers. It is not for nothing that public utilities are Wall Street favorites.
For a labor leadership to come out for this kind of “regulation” is pussy-footing. It is half-hearted recognition of the spreading public sentiment that such a vital industry as meat production should no longer be left to the mercy of the profit system. It spreads confusion instead of clarity. For the words “a public utility” sound good, but really mean no lessening of the powers of the meat monopolists.
 
What Kind of Solution?
Would Mr. Helstein apply the same kind of plank to the other vital industries? How about the dairy industry with butter $1 a pound, eggs eighty cents a dozen, milk twenty cents a quart (under the counter)? What are these prices doing to the health of working class children? How about clothing and blankets and textiles, all so vital to life and health with winter approaching? How about the steel and construction industries, the essentials for building homes – which are not forthcoming? Do we demand that all these industries, which most intelligent workers see should not be owned by private monopolists and squeezed for profits at the expense of human life, do we merely demand that they all be placed in the category of the telephone, gas, electric and other public utilities? And, is this a solution?
It is even less of a solution than the very deceptive nationalization program of the British so-called Labor government. The deception there is that the government issues bonds to the capitalist owners, and then pays interest on the bonds amounting to more than former profits. Thereby the income of the nation is mortgaged to the bondholders and the problems of the people remain unsolved. Neither does the British government disturb the capitalist management of the nationalized banks, mines, etc. Instead of the workers taking control, the same old exploiting outfit is left in charge to so run the enterprises to net big salaries and the increased interest on brand new bonds.
To declare vital industries “public utilities” and place them under “government regulation” as with the gas, electric and telephone companies, does not even go as far as this profitcontinuing British plan. It does not even disturb private ownership by exchanging stock certificates for government bonds. And the kind of “regulation” the public utilities have “suffered” have made their monopolistic powers greater so that the government has been regulated more than the monopolists.
As stated above, labor should stand for a program of nationalization of industry of a kind that will oust the monopolists from production and place the controls of each industry where they belong; namely, in the hands of democratically elected committees of the most capable and responsible workers of each industry, combining on a national scale to plan production for use instead of for profit. Implied in such a defeat of the capitalist monopolies, is of course a change of government. For such a program can be carried out not by a capitalist government but only within the framework of a Workers’ Government, assuring the widest possible democracy for the masses.
 




An inspiring demonstration of the absolute indispensability of labor has been given in the great strikes that have swept the country since the latter part of 1945.

The General Motors workers struck, and the plants of the greatest corporation in the world became useless, empty buildings.
 
The steel workers walked out, and the furnaces of Bethlehem and U.S. Steel went cold.
 
The electrical workers made the plants of Westinghouse, General Electric, Allis Chalmers as dead as morgues.
 
The coal miners demonstrated once again that only they can mine coal.
 
The seldom noticed tugboat workers showed their indispensability to the port of New York.
 
The maritime workers reduced thousands of ships to the status of helpless hulks cluttering up the harbors of every coast.
 
And the teamsters of New York gave proof positive that trucks are useless* vehicles unless there are drivers on them and that even the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company can be put out of business.

What irrefutable evidence of labor’s controlling position in production! Labor is the heart of it all. If it fails, there is paralysis. If it stops, there is death.
Compare this indispensability of the workers with other classes in society. Not all the gold in the treasury of the United States could bring a glow to the steel furnaces. Not all the stocks and bonds in Wall Street – certificates of ownership of the means of production – could dig one lump of coal. Not a capitalist – whose so-called risk-taking and so-called management are supposed to be essential – could produce even a nut for an automobile.
 
When Plants Shut Down
When a corporation closes down its plants and stops production, it is no proof of the indispensability of capitalists in the production processes. It only points up the folly of the workers in allowing capitalism to stand between them and the plants of which labor is the heart.
Such a demonstration of labor’s might as we have seen in recent strikes also makes clear the relation between engineers, scientists, technicians and the masses of workers. Absolutely necessary as these brain
workers are, without the mass of workers all the engineering, scientific and technical know-how would be wasted. It is toil that makes reality of new ideas. Even if scientists conceive a push-button civilization, it will still be labor that will manufacture the push-buttons. Therefore, both by their all-controlling position in production and by their overwhelming numbers the workers are the mightiest class in modern society.
 
Who Are the Workers?
This mighty class is by no means numbered by industrial, mining and transport workers only. The agricultural and dairy workers, without whom we would all starve, are part of the working class. So are the various categories of white collar and wage-earning professional workers, all necessary in our intricate society. The middle class people whose security capitalism has completely shaken, is also dependent on the mass of workers for a better future.
So, to repeat: By its all-controlling position in production, by its vast numbers and by its relation to other elements in society whose security has vanished under capitalism, the working class should be up on top, in political leadership, as well as controlling production in the interest of all the people – and, by no means incidentally – directing the efforts of engineers, scientists and technicians away from atom bomb into life-preserving channels.
However, the working class is not on top, it is not in political leadership and it is not controlling production. While the splendid strikes of this period have shown so clearly that without labor there is nothing, the same strikes have shown what limited use the workers make of their power.
The workers have struck for wage increases, shorter hours and improved conditions. Their militancy and solidarity have been beyond reproach. In some cases, as with the General Motors strikers, they won the support of whole communities. As in the case of the New York truck drivers’ strike, thousands of unaffected drivers went out in sympathy so that bosses, politicians and labor leaders were frightened stiff at the working class solidarity.
 
What Happens Next?
All this is splendid and it has won the workers part of their demands. Then what happens?
The workers put away their might in dead storage! Production is turned back to the capitalists whom the workers just fought with such militancy. The government remains in the hands of the capitalist politicians of the major parties. Then what happens?
The capitalists ask for higher prices. The government, anxious to relieve the capitalists of every “hardship” and mindful of the “risks” of profit-making, grants price increases. The cost of living climbs. The wage increases won in militant struggle are nullified. White collar and professional workers who have suffered in silence see their standard of living reduced. All those who have the wrong end of the rope feel it tighten around their necks. And the capitalists, rubbing their hands, shout: “Produce more, boys, and everything will be okay!”
 
A Labor Party Needed
As we see the absolute indispensability and overwhelming might of the workers demonstrated in their strikes, the question to be asked today is this: “Why does labor not make permanent use of its strength to break through the vicious circle of capitalism and take with it all
the exploited and oppressed?” Strikes are necessary and splendid weapons for definite objectives and for limited periods. But permanently, the affairs of the country are settled through government. Labor . must use its strategic industrial position, its tremendous numbers, its logical position of leadership of all the oppressed, to control the government of the country – so as to be able to plan and control production in the interest of the people of the country.
From its industry power, labor must project a mighty independent Labor Party, aiming at the establishment of a workers’ government. This is the way to break the crazy and vicious capitalist control. If labor makes up its mind to do this, nothing can stop it.
 




And lo, a miracle was wrought. Monday night, October 14, at 10 o’clock, President Truman took controls off meat, and before dawn the empty stockyards of Kansas City, Chicago and elsewhere were filling up with cattle and hogs. Far outstripping all the wonders of nature, hordes of cattle and hogs were “raised” over night. And Tuesday morning, bright and early, city butcher shops and retail markets, up till ten the previous night displaying only their white enamel trays, became filled with juicy red meats of various kinds.
Such is the magic the President performed by capitulating to the meat industry in its anti-social demand to get all the profit the traffic will bear. The livestock and stored meat held for higher profits were rushed to market at prices making a new world record.
 
All-Time High
Choice steers were selling at the all-time high of $38.50 a hundredweight against the OPA ceiling of $20.26; medium cattle were bringing $35.25 a hundredweight; top hogs went for $27.50 a hundredweight, $11 above the OPA ceiling. In the early dawn of Tuesday, October 15, trucks carrying this diamond-studded livestock stretched for two and a half miles before the major stockyards, and special traffic police were engaged to control the undammed flood.
From the cold storage warehouses, till ten o’clock the previous night inhumanely closed against the needs of the people, trucks carried to the neighborhood butcher shops and retail markets ample supplies of porterhouse steaks, veal cutlets, lamb chops, pork chops, calves’ liver and even bacon. All this toothsome meat i was lured from its hiding place by the prospect of bringing prices something as follows: For steak, $1.00 to $1.25 a pound; for veal cutlets, $1.00; for lamb chops, $1.50; for pork chops, $1.00; for calves’ liver, $1.50; for bacon, $1.16.
What a blatant, unabashed display of the rottenness of the profit system was this over-night, magical appearance of livestock and meat—and the sudden skyrocketing of prices still keeping meat beyond the reach of the meat-starved working class family!
 
Buying Resistance
In the first rush on Tuesday morning, some housewives, famished for meat, who could afford a “treat” for their families, as it were, paid phenomenal prices. But soon buying resistance developed. The government having thrown the reins to the profit-motivated meat industry, the housewives tried using their power as consumers to stop galloping meat prices. This happened all over the country.
In Brooklyn, groups of women organized as if spontaneously. They entered butcher shops, asked the prices and meats, and deliberately walked out without buying. In Boston, flying squadrons of housewives organized picket lines before butcher shops. In Pittsburgh, the opposition almost reached the proportions of a buyers’ strike. In Buffalo, choice cuts were “going begging” because they were too expensive. In Omaha, Neb., the Iowa-Nebraska CIO Women’s Auxiliaries picketed meat shops with large placards and procured pledges from shoppers to boycott meat prices.
By the end of the week a slight rollback in prices was evident. In New York, for instance, steak could be had at 85 cents a pound along Ninth Avenue, and chopped beef “compounded of mysterious ingredients,” could be bought for 40 cents a pound. In Philadelphia, reductions of from five to ten cents below Tuesday’s high were reported, but beef roasts still sold for 80 cents a pound.
 
Rounded Program Needed
Retail butchers in some localities, notably Seattle, fraternized with the housewives, advising the latter not to buy at existing prices. In other places butchers went on a buyers’ strike of their own, refusing to pay exorbitant prices, as in Dallas, Texas, and in New Jersey. Butchers rebelled against buying poultry they didn’t want as a condition for getting meat for their counters.
The militant stand of housewives and the cooperation of retail butchers can, however, act only as an expedient and not as a cure. The meat situation for some time to come will be chaotic and at the mercy of private profiteers, unless a more comprehensive program is adopted by the people. The reckless slaughter of immature cattle and of breeding sows, together with other factors, will keep the supply of beef and pork below normal demand. The government having given the meat profiteers a free hand, prices will remain prohibitive, even if not at last Tuesday’s peak, unless the people step into the situation themselves.
The demand for the nationalization of the meat industry, under workers’ control, must be taken up by workers and housewives alike, as also the formation of their own committees to control prices effectively.
These measures are imperative throughout the food industry. While the release of meat, caused poultry and butter to drop a little in price, inflationary prices in general remain substantially the same. In line with the President’s announced policy to abandon the consumer to the tender mercies of the food profiteers, price controls are rapidly being removed. The question is whether the profiteers shall dictate what and how much we eat and at what prices, or whether the people will themselves take over the business of feeding themselves.
 




A Real War But a Phoney Film
WOMEN IN WAR
So this girl Pamela, whose father is a general and a Don Juan – for which reason her mother (Elsie Janis) divorced, him and went to be a matron in a war hospital – is a problem child and kills a man. She pushes him right through a staircase banister, which before then looked very substantial. Presumably she got the strength to do this because the man meant no good by her. The trial is going against her because the dead. man was a lieutenant or something, when her worried mother connives to get the girl enlisted as a nurse. As between the two uniforms, the jury favors the nurse’s. So Pam goes to war. And what a pretty war it is!
There are air raids but only so that the heroine and the hero can meet in an underground shelter. There is the gay café life which everyone knows is the important part of every war. In fact so gay is this war that if you go into a shoe repair shop, you wi1l pass the time not in one of those funny little booths, but dancing in your stockinged feet with the hero. The Germans won’t get you as you cross the English Channel in a transport ship, and when you get into an honest-to-god bombardment it will be from your own guns so that some one can run out and tell them to please stop. An obvious advantage of a war is that if there’s another girl in the case, she will be the one and only casualty so that the hero will be yours. Finally, if you are a problem child, war will make a woman of you, you bet.
 
“Mr. Goebels” Steps In
Ed Kuykendall, president of the Motion Picture Theatre Owners of America, went into conference last week with War Department officials and. major film executives. immediately afterwards nine thousand film houses throughout the country were asked not to delete any part of newsreels on national defense and so on. The individual theatre has heretofore been free to edit a newsreel as might best suit its program schedule.
The big propaganda tanks are in line for action.
 
Love and the Cost of Living
SATURDAY’S CHILDREN
If you married men want to know how you were snared into the trap, this film will reveal to you the secret maneuvers to which you fell victim. And you women who are still hoping, can get the absolute low down on how the snaring is done.
However, the war of the sexes is not the main theme.
It is a story of love flying out of the window when poverty enters at the door. First the young wife loses her job. Then the husband gets a cut in wages. They resent their sordid existence and let it out on each other. The situation is saved by an understanding father-in-law.
The comic and the humorous are so much in evidence that this serious theme becomes merely very good entertainment, backed by a touching story. Holly wood does not produce a Grapes of Wrath every day.
John Garfield steps out in a new role. Usually he is the cynic. Here he does a good job as an ambitious, inventive chap.
 
Drama Ends in Let-Down
REBECCA (from story by DuMaurier)
The struggle of a human being against adverse circumstances should be dramatic and important. This film misses the mark, and this reviewer does not think it deserves the great praise it has received.
A poor, naive girl becomes the second wife of an unhappy wealthy widower and the victim of his past. The huge estate and corps of servants overwhelm her. The continued domination of the first wife, the dead Rebecca, unnerves her. She is tortured by a crazy housekeeper who resents her corning. The poor thing begins to doubt her husband’s love, believing he married her merely to forget the wonderful Rebecca. She struggles to assert herself, but fails. Her liberation comes when she learns that her husband actually hated Rebecca and was instrumental in causing her death.
At this point one expects the new Mrs. de Winter to take up her job as mistress of the manor and make a go of it. However, the story ends with the crazed housekeeper setting fire to the place, leaving the young wife nothing to do but to stand and watch the fire. It all works up to nothing.
Lawrence Olivier as de Winter gives a rather wooden performance. Joan Fontaine’s acting is monotonous though she does succeed in evoking sympathy for the tortured young wife.
 
Recruiting
Newsreels of recruiting show lines of flat-chested, round-shouldered youths. This puts into visual form the damning facts presented in the papers; namely, that 64% of the applicants have so far been rejected, and that the huge number rejected for physical reasons is connected with “the high number of applicants attempting to join the army because of long unemployment”. If you add to the above the further fact that the recruiting quotas have not been met, you will have in a nut-shell the whole story of who joins up and why, and you will understand why conscription is already the order of the day.
 




Sing, You Sinner, Sing!
THE STAR SPANGLED BANNER
If you get to the movies when the theatre opens for the day, the first thing you will see is Old Glory waving in technicolor. The words of the national anthem are flashed before you and a chorus opens up at you. Everybody in the audience rises and begins to sing. If you are a bit slow on the pickup, you will begin to feel eyes of disapproval boring into your back. Rather than have someone grab you by the scruff of your neck, you perhaps get up, making yourself as small as possible. Old Glory continues to flutter in the breeze, bombs burst in air, the chorus booms from the screen, and the audience does the best it can. You hope nobody is noticing your lack of enthusiasm, If you think you’re being noticed, you begin blowing your nose, wiping your eyes, coughing and indicating in various other ways what a bad cold you have.
Again Wall Street wraps itself in, the American flag.
 
Film on Russian-Finnish War
SKI PATROL
Back in 1936 the first, second and third Olympic prizes for skiing are won by a Russian, Finn and American. These three are not only great skiers but good friends. The recent Soviet invasion brings the American to Finland. He joins his Finnish friend in a small company of skiers who are holding a strategic mountain against great odds. The company goes out in a desperate effort, to prevent the Russians from blowing up the mountain. All are killed except the Finnish friend. He is hit but not killed. His friend, the Russian skier, is sent out to bring him in as prisoner. Instead they fraternize, The Russian helps the Finn to escape, takes the death penalty for it, and in dying, unconsciously completes the task his Finnish friend set out to accomplish.
Such a story affords material for an excellent anti-war film: the brutality and futility of war in bold relief against the good fellowship of international sports. However Universal Films has turned out merely a run-of-the-mill production. The action is unconvincing, the dramatic possibilities are ignored, the acting is perfunctory. The only compliment that can b,e paid the film is a negative one. Because of its weakness it also fails to whoop up a war spirit on behalf of poor little Finland. Perhaps we should commend Universal for producing a weakling.
 
Humor in the French Manner
THE MAYOR’S DILEMMA
A French film with English subtitles
A good French film of rural life, is one of the most pleasing things to, see. No matter what the theme, whimsicalities of everyday existence are so cleverly woven into it that the humor is an integrated part of the whole. One does not take time out to laugh, but is continuously delighted. The Mayor’s Dilemma belongs to this category.
The setting is the last world war. The Germans occupy a small French village. A German soldier is killed by a villager. The German commander threatens to bombard the village unless the murderer is turned over by morning. The Mayor knows who the murderer is and that he will never be surrendered ... In an effort to save the village from destruction, he makes a deal with the commander. Five hostages are to be taken. These will be destroyed instead of the village. Sadly, the Mayor explains the situation to the villagers. As the leading citizen he volunteers to be hostage No. 1. The rich landowner hotly disputes the Mayor’s title to leading citizen and himself volunteers as hostage No. 1. The competition for the honors becomes keen . Even the drunken poacher demands to be taken, protesting that the rich get all the privileges. Finally lots are drawn. In the morning the French army reoccupies the village, so the ending is a happy one – and very amusing.
While this is a war story and contains a light sprinkling of anti-war sentiment, these factors are lost in the milieu.
 
If You’re in the Mood
BUSK BENNY RIDES AGAIN
A very silly love story is used as a skeleton on which to hang a good show of songs, dancing, wise-cracks and goofy situations. When you have a yen for this type of Broadway special, go see Benny ride.
 




KEARNY, N.J. June 9 – The CIO leadership is now using the “time cure” to complete the process of demoralizing the workers of the Federal Shipbuilding Co. plant in this city who returned to work last Monday.
Defying their leaders and the vicious propaganda against them, the workers had completely tied up naval construction here in an attempt to improve wages and conditions, but after a few days, yielded to the pressure of the CIO leadership and the government. A mass meeting was held this morning to receive a report from the negotiating committee which had been at work for a whole week. According to John Dempsey, president of Local 16 of the Maritime & Shipbuilding Workers, to which most of the strikers belong, there are no developments.
I called up Dempsey to find out what had happened at the meeting. He was polite but brief, saying there was nothing to report. Pressed by my questions, he grudgingly stated that the meeting was a good one and that the men would continue to work pending negotiations.
“But,” I said, “that is exactly the situation the men were in a week ago. What progress has been made? What has the negotiating committee done?”
He hesitated, then informed me that the committee has made no progress.
“Are the men satisfied with that?” I asked.
“Under the present set-up they are,” he answered.
“What set-up?” I asked.
“The set-up of national defense. The men are satisfied to go along.”
 
Men Say Different
I know from personal conversations with men at the plant that they are not satisfied.
The press releases given out by the union a week ago stated that men were returning to work with an increase of 2½¢ to 4¢ an hour, against the demand for 10¢. However, one worker after another told me this is false; they are working for the old wages pending the completion of negotiations which are now being prolonged to heaven knows when.
Workers expressed disapproval of the leadership and stated that the mass meeting last Sunday at which the strikers had supposedly voted to return to work, was a steamroller affair.
At 4:30 last Wednesday, I waited at the plant gates to speak to the men changing shifts. The effects of the propaganda barrage against the strikers showed itself by the fear to speak on the part of’ some. But many did speak.
Six workers going home together in a car stopped when they saw me talking to the men. “We’ll give, you a story,” one of them shouted. He described last Sunday’s meeting with bitterness.
“Haywood – he’s a big shot from the CIO – gave us a long speech on national defense and how we must not interfere. Then, all of a sudden, he shouted: ‘And I move that we go back to work on Monday. How many are in favor?’ A bunch of workers raised their hands. Then he shouted: ‘Any opposed?’ Another bunch raised their hands. Then .Haywood shouted: “We go back to work on Monday.”
“Is that right?” I asked the other men in the car. They nodded that it was so. The speaker continued:
“The workers didn’t know what they were voting for. It was all mixed up. There was no resolution from the floor. A bunch of workers tried to get a re-vote and a reading of the resolution. But they were told not to create disorder. The publicity was already bad enough.”
 
Strike or No Strike?
Two of’ the men in the car had some faith in the negotiating committee, They probably don’t have much faith after today’s meeting. I asked if they would strike again if the terms submitted were unsatisfactory. The worker who had described the Sunday meeting thought they would. The others seemed to think the strike sentiment was over.
A Negro resting on the grass while waiting for his bus, told me he is a drayman in the yards. When I asked why the men went back without any gains when they had a 100% strike, he would not answer. But when I asked if he thought the men would go out again, he said simply: “The men got to get theirs; if they don’t they’re going to strike.”
Several workers were definitely afraid to talk. First they wanted to know what kind of paper Labor Action is. I assured them it was 100% behind the strike. They seemed on the verge of talking, but then changed their minds; “Better go to union headquarters for your story.”
Three men whom I approached had nothing at all to say. Whether it was merely a coincidence or some thing more, all three spoke with a foreign accent. Have these men been intimidated by the vicious “fifth column” propaganda?
A young pipe-fitter was anxious to explain to me that their strike had nothing to do with the national defense program. “The trouble is,” he said, “the leadership is weak.” To the question whether the men would go out again he answered: “The publicity is too strong against us.”
A bleary-eyed middle-aged worker became very sober when I asked him why the men went back to work without getting anything, though they had the plant tied-up completely. He answered: “The men are crazy. They didn’t know what they were doing.”
 
“Something Stinks”
I also had the good fortune – or misfortune – to run into a company stooge. After a conversation in which he heaped discredit on the CIO and said he preferred the AFL, he declared a shipyard could never be organized as an industrial union except by the company.
“That’s a boss union,” I exclaimed. “Between you and me, I’m a company man,” he answered.
Going back on the bus I sat next to a shipyard worker who began to talk to me. He said he’s a ship’s fitter, which means he tells other workers what parts go together. He commented upon the heat and explained that when the temperature is 90° outside, it is 115° in the shipyards because the metal retains the heat. Shipyard work, he said, is no joke in the summertime.
About the strike, he said: “It got off on the wrong foot because of the leadership. When leaders start to break strikes something stinks. These boys have got a lot of explaining to do.”
 




We Wish to Cooperate
“GOD BLESS AMERICA”
A new national anthem has been born. In any movie theatre it can be heard issuing from Kate Smith's booming bellows. Accompanying this Irving Berlin song, the screen has shown snow-capped mountains and billowy waves, New York City from an airplane, the white house, battleships with guns blasting away, marching cadets, and the like.
We suggest that the next round of film show a tenement house in the slums of New York or Chicago in the summer – the hovels of southern sharecroppers – a negro being lynched by a mob – the wards of a hospital for the maimed and crippled of the last war. We will be glad to cooperate in changing the words of the song to harmonize with the suggested pictures.
 
A Mother in War
“FOUR SONS”
“I want that baby!” shouts the agonized Czechoslovakian mother in the story. She is referring to her infant grandson. She has lost three of her sons in the Nazi invasion. She holds in her hand an iron medal for the life of her youngest. Her husband also dies in war. Outside, on the road, the Nazis are training mere boys in the use of guns and gasmasks. She must save her grandson from military regimentation and death in war. So, she leaves, with her daughter-in-law and grandson, for America where her fourth son lives.
This excellent film of the ravages of war on the heart of a mother is, in its ending, a bit behind the times since America can no longer be considered a haven from military regimentation. This Czechoslovakian mother would find herself in a new America fevershly hurrying into a rigid military regime. She and the small remnants of her family would be fingerprinted as aliens, and before her horrified eyes she would see the beginnings of the very thing she came here to escape.
Since the story is about the Nazi invasion of Czechoslavakia, the Nazis, and not war itself, stand out as the villains of the piece. So that this mother's tragedy does not make the powerful anti-war appeal it should. All of which does not detract from the dramatic story or the gripping quality of the film. The acting is competent, the honors going to Eugenie Leontovich as the mother; Don Ameche as one of the sons actually loses his usual look of round-faced well-being.
 
Did You Know About
RACE DISCRIMINATION IN HOLLYWOOD?
Thanks to an article by John Woolfenden, in a recent issue of the New York Times, on how and where Hollywood makes its race track pictures, certain enlightening facts come out. Most of the jockeys who ride for pictures are actually ex-jockeys. For some time now Negro ex-jockeys have not been employed in Hollywood. It seems there are rules barring Negroes from racing on tracks in democratic America. Without so much as a peep of protest, Holly wood complies with this race-discriminating ruling in making its race track pictures. The result is that many noted Negro ex-jockeys can find employment only as exercise boys.
 
Where Angels Fear to Tread
“SUSAN AND GOD”
Joan Crawford goes to town, and how! She creates an uproariously funny role of the smart-set female who suddenly finds “god”, pins on a pair of wings, and flaps around in everybody's affairs – maliciously messing them up. There are two actualities that tend to clip her artificial wings: (1) a husband who drinks and from whom the godly Susan withholds his marital rights; (2) an unhappy daughter, Blossom, with spectacles on her nose and a brace on her teeth:
While Susan gives loud-mouthed devotion to her god-movement – even insisting that the snickering help call her by her first name – she takes the heart out of her husband and begrudges her daughter even a little attention. However when husband Frederic March is almost gobbled up by another woman, Susan becomes sadder and wiser.
This rapid revolution in the soul of a venomous vixen is hard to accept. Trickery to keep another woman from getting her husband would be more in character. Furthermore some of the best parts are where March lets her have it – she deserves plenty. So, for her to end up in the arms of her husband, who we know sees right through her, is very unsatisfying.
Nevertheless as entertainment it is tops. Anyway, nobody takes seriously the lives of people who do nothing but ride, play tennis and drink cocktails. Besides the excellent performances of Joan Crawford and Frederic March, Rita Quigley, new in films, is swell as Blossom.
 




Workers Excluded
“OUR TOWN” (from Thornton Wilder's Pulitzer Prize play)
If you had been a worker in Grovers Corner, N.H., in 1901, you would not have been included in the population of “Our Town”. Those who lived down by the railroad and worked in the mills did not live in “Our Town” but in Polish town. Your existence would be admitted by frank Craven, the kindly narrator of film, and then you would be brushed aside as of no further importance. So you see “Our Town” is rather exclusive. It is populated by such people as the Gibbses and the Webbs, the families of the town doctor and editor, the people in the “right” part of the town.
Furthermore, a charmed circle is drawn round the purely personal things – birth, love, marriage, death, and excluded from it are the nasty economic things of life. A strike that might have taken place in Polish town is strictly kept out of this charmed circle.
This limited population and their limited personal affairs are treated with extreme tenderness and absolutely uncritically. Ah, wasn't life touching, beautiful, simple, unchanging; choir singing and moonlight evenings; sons thinking their mothers perfect; and daughters paying their fathers that compliment. And isn't it just too bad that the automobile came to disturb it all.
On this sigh for idealized small town life, United Artists has lavished a truly beautiful production. The scenes the dialogue, the actors, all strike exactly the right note to produce the effect Thornton Wilder desired. The narrator, who ambles along with the story, giving the audience bits of town history and gossip, fits in perfectly and in fact becomes the embodiment of small town goodness,
In a word, we have here perfection of form but where, oh where, is the substance?
 
Fanning the Flames of War
“THE MORTAL STORM” (from the story of Phyllis Bottome)
In 1933 a non-Aryan scientist who stubbornly held to the fact that blood cells show no racial distinctions, was killed by the Nazis in a concentration camp. His two stepsons and his favorite student became Nazi. His wife and youngest son escaped to Austria. His daughter, in love with an anti-Nazi, was killed trying to flee across the border. Thus the Nazis wiped out a home and family of culture and refinement.
Seven years after the event, Hollywood comes forth with this film of the unspeakable barbarism of Hitler's advent to power. The direction is so skillful that the burning of books, the beating of an old school teacher, the unreasoning, cruel conduct of the Nazis in general, seem like contemporary happenings, almost like a newsreel. As a result the audience responds as it does to events of the day, with hissing and muttered curses at Hitler. Whether or not Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer meant “The Mortal Storm” to be pro-war propaganda, the fact is that it can serve no other purpose at this time.
It should be noted that the story does not concern itself at all with the burning of union headquarters, the wrecking of labor presses, the murder of revolutionists.
 
Just Plain Repetitious
“MY SON, MY SON” (from Howard Spring's novel)
Literature is replete with slum dwellers who climb to fame and fortune either by becoming great novelists, playwrights or actors. These escapists also become a little tiresome.
Apparently United Artists has a different opinion because it presents the public with a long story of how a young man pulls himself out of the slums. of Manchester, England, into the bright lights of Trafalgar Square, at the same time making. a thorough job of spoiling his son. In his determination to give his son all the things he himself missed in youth, he does not see that he is bringing up a reptile and a rake, until the son tries to make free with his own stepmother. The vile fellow also causes the death of a beautiful young actress, his childhood playmate. Then comes remorse.
The ending is one you have seen many times before: The no-good skunk becomes a hero by the simple process of single-handedly disabling a German machine gun during the last war. So the sad. father collects the medal for the dead son, and all is well,
Except perhaps the acting of Brian Aherne as the father. His limpid sweetness is too too much.
 
Roses vs. Rackets
“BROTHER ORCHID”
Edward G. Robinson, a gangster down on his luck, crawls wounded into a monastery where the monks raise flowers for a living and to aid the poor. When he gains consciousness and opens his eyes on his surroundings, he exclaims: “I made it. I'm in heaven.” His conceptions of life soon make themselves felt at the monastery. For instance, the cow begins to yield more – though very much thinner – milk.
If you take this one in its stride, you will have some fun watching it.
 







The Republican Convention again proves that every American boy can become president some day. If he first gets to be head of a big utilities outfit, if he shows Wall Street that he is just the man to do its bidding, why then it doesn’t matter how lowly his beginnings – he’s a cinch to be nominated, at least, for the presidency.





Senator Charles McNary’s nomination on the Republican ticket as Willkie’s running mate is very obvious political strategy: McNary will serve as perfume to dispel the bad smell created in the public nostrils by Willkie’s business connections. Mr. Willkie is so unmistakably Wall Street’s darling that a counterbalance was necessary.
McNary has supported the NRA. the AAA, Social Security, the Stock Market Control law, the Labor Relations Act. While such measures have been much greater in promise than in fulfillment, as far as the masses are concerned, McNary’s support of them has given him the reputation of being progressive. His record will be utilized in the Republican campaign to gain mass support for the Wall Street ticket.
As the representative of the well-to-do farmers and small business elements to whom cheap electric current is important – McNary has opposed private utilities. After the World War he was for government operation of Muscle Shoals and during Roosevelt’s administration he has supported the TVA and the Utilities Holding Company law, all of which was very distasteful to private utilities including the Commonwealth & Southern group, of which Wendell Willkie is president.
The Republican manipulators furthermore hope that McNary will serve as the link between the farmers and Wall Street’s candidate. For not only has McNary been behind the AAA, but back in 1926 he sponsored the McNary-Haugen farm bill which, if not vetoed, would have been of benefit to the big grain farmers.
 
Can Wise Up Willkie on Political Ropes
As minority; leader in the Senate McNary is known for his parliamentary shrewdness. It is said that he rarely wastes time on long speeches on the floor – fifteen minutes at a clip being about his limit – but his skill is felt in cloakroom negotiations. He has been in the Senate since 1917 and knows his way about in Washington’s labyrinthine politics and in the well-oiled Republican Party machine. In comparison, Willkie is a mere· political rookie, which is another reason why McNary was chosen his running mate. If occasion arises, he will show his chief the ropes.
He is reported to have been reluctant to accept the vice-presidential nomination. Second place on the ticket did not appeal to him as against his important and successful job as minority leader in the Senate, in which capacity he served will the interests he represented. However, if he had any principled objection to himself, a so-called Progressive Republican, sharing the ticket with a WaltlStreet candidate, he did not voice his objection.
Teh New York times, mouthpiece of the top capitalist class which wants things tightened up towards a totalitarian regime, expressed its pleasure at the Willkie nomination. but is not enthusiastic about McNary, who represents the well-off farmers and the bosses a rung or two below the top. The Times said the Republican convention might be making “a deliberate attempt to resort to the old game and the old folly of making a party face two ways at once.”
Labor Action, speaking for the class interests of the workers, opposes McNary, as it does Willkie, Roosevelt and all politicians who act for the exploiting bosses – big and little alike.
 




Mrs. Charles Shipman Payson is going to take into her home three children from war-threatened England. You don’t know who she is? That is because when Mr. and Mrs. Payson celebrate their wedding anniversary each year, you and I are not invited. But some five hundred members of high society are. The frolic lasts until dawn. Imagine what such a swanky party costs and you will know immediately that these Paysons are not on relief.
I also read that Mrs. Payson is the owner of one of Long Island’s famous stables. It is not unusual for a stable of the first rank to cost $1,000 a day upkeep, which is more than millions of American families get to live on for a whole year.
We can safely conclude that these refugee children will not be a financial burden on Mrs. Payson. Nevertheless her “noble” conduct has received a good deal of publicity.
These society women who are taking refugee children belong to the class that thrives on WAR.

I have been scanning the news items about refugee children to discover whose children are being brought here. I see that at Tuxedo Park, New York, a wealthy country resort, “children and their nurses” will be cared for until they can be taken into homes elsewhere. Poor children do not have nurses. The wealthy people here are interested in the refugee children of their own class. The American Association of University Women has agreed to find homes for 3,000 to 6,000 children of British university graduates. Here we see middle class people looking out for the children of their own class.
At the most, only some thousands of children can be taken out of England. The millions of children of the workers will undoubtedly have to remain within range of Hitler’s dive bombers.
If the mothers of these children leave their protection in the hands of the British boss government, they will be dead wrong, The French government was more afraid of the French workers rising to get their freedom than it was of Hitler. That is why the French defense was so weak. The British rulers – and the American too – are no different.

While $1,000 a day for the upkeep of stables is normal for high society, nearly four million people in New York City, the largest city in the richest country in the world, are so poor that they are entitled to free care in city hospitals. Yes, there are so many single people whose income is less than $17 a week and so many families whose income is less than $28 that it sums up to more than half of the population of the city. That is what Dr. S.S. Goldwater, Commissioner of Hospitals, said and he ought to know.
But these people don’t get what they are entitled to. The demands of women in childbirth, of sick children, for hospital care cannot be satisfied. There aren’t enough hospitals – there is bad overcrowding – and this situation is getting worse.
New York City is the home of Wall Street where the wealth of the nation is centered. It should be easy to raise money to build hospitals for half of the city’s population. But no. Dr. Goldwater bluntly stated that “the city has reached the limit of spending for new hospitals”.
Instead, he spoke of a scheme to make these people, who the City admits are too poor to pay for medical attention, actually pay for it themselves.
This is the set-up that the bosses have made for us:
No money for hospitals – but twelve billion dollars for howitzers, tanks, bombers, battleships – so that high society can lavish $1,000 a day on their horses.
Women of America, we are going to reverse this set-up!

In her flitterings here and yon Mrs. Roosevelt alighted the other day on the roof garden of the Educational Alliance, in New York City’s lower east side, and helped send two hundred young people off to hunt for their first jobs.
She very graciously gave these children of the slums a few tips on how to behave before the lords of the earth, the bosses. She said:
First you must remember that there is a fine line between being too aggressive and being confident of your own ability. You must never seem to feel afraid that YOU, or those whom you represent, can’t do the job. But you must also be careful not to give the impression that you know more than your employers.
Armed with this magic formula, these two hundred went out in the morning to find work. At 2:30 p.m. they returned to headquarters. Did they have two hundred jobs? No. Did they have one hundred jobs? Again no. They had exactly no jobs. Twelve had been promised, and thirty-five concerns indicated they would want people two months from now. That was all.
The first lady of the land with the fine line technique, didn’t think it necessary to tell these young people the simple truth. The youth of this country has no future under capitalism except in the huge war machine being built to kill, to be killed, or to produce the instruments for killing.

R.G., Chicago, sent to this column a very valuable communication. She wrote that no matter how ignorant and dumb the working girl may be, she knows she is being exploited. R.G. believes that what is needed to reach these girls is simple beginner pamphlets and not “ahead of the mob stuff” which they can’t understand.
Both Labor Action and the WORKERS PARTY are trying to meet this demand for simple education to create class-consciousness and an understanding of socialism. The Workers Party is issuing 1¢ pamphlets, and Labor Action is starting a department in simple fundamentals. We hope to improve with experience and the suggestions of our readers.
 




The season is here when the underprivileged children are getting free outings to the country or free boatrides. These children from the slum tenements of the nation are dependent upon public or private charity for a peek at nature and a whiff of fresh air.
Officials, big and little, come into the limelight on these occasions, make speeches and have their pictures taken. Mayor LaGuardia’s picture with a group of children appeared the other day under the heading “Mayor bids bon voyage to slum children off for day’s outing”. These cocks of the roost act as if this charity is something to boast of.
As far back as I can remember, and I am sure even before that, such free excursions were handed out to hundreds of thousands of slum children. And every year the Mayor LaGuardias shamelessly advertise the fact that there continue to be great numbers of parents too poor to live in decent homes, to say nothing of sending their children on a summer vacation to the country.
The poor are always with us. But the nation becomes wealthier and wealthier as the years go by. Some years ago unbiased statisticians made interesting estimates of what the people of this country could enjoy – IF THE WEALTH WERE RELEASED FOR THEIR BENEFIT. It was stated as a conservative estimate that every family of the land could live on a basis equal to a $5,000 a year income.
There is no necessity for slums – nor for poverty nor for charity, They are inflicted upon us by the sixty families who grab most of the wealth of the nation and what is left over they have their boss government waste in wars for their profit. For them and for their lackeys poverty is a good thing – it enables them to stick out their chests and strut about puffed up with their “generosity”, when they throw the poor dog a bone, or a boatride.

At the Democratic Party Convention held in Chicago last week, not a hair-pulling match, but a political fight took place among the women delegates.It was over the adoption of a plank in the party platform, calling for a vote on an Equal Rights for Women amendment to the constitution.
The group in favor of such a plank – which by the way lost the fight – argued that there are still many inequalities between men and women that should be remedied. They pointed out that in Oklahoma women are barred by law from holding important public office; that, in Wisconsin, Minnesota and other states women are prevented from enjoying the same rights as men with respect to making contracts, inheriting property, etc.
It is plain that this group was interested in getting restrictions removed for women of the propertied class. The working woman worries about other things than holding public office, making contracts and inheriting property.
The opponents of this group argued that as a matter of fact an Equal Rights amendment would act as a boomerang against working women. The women trade unionists at the convention were pretty solidly against it. David Dubinsky, president of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, also participated in the dispute. He stated that an Equal Rights Amendment would result in wiping out all existing legislation in favor of women. He went further and predicted that “Wages, work hours and general working conditions, not only of women, but of men as well; would show an immediate deterioration and would tend to depress labor standards in all industries”.
That is absolutely right. If an Equal Rights for Women Amendment were passed, the bosses would waste no time in fighting as “unconstitutional” all existing laws providing some protection to women in industry. Clever well-paid lawyers would get busy showing that “equal rights” does not mean “special privileges”. This crooked procedure was followed by the bosses with the Fourteenth Amendment to the constitution. This amendment was passed after the Civil War to protect the Negro from harmful state legislation. The bosses have ever since been using it to have labor legislation declared unconstitutional.
Yes indeed. The women trade unionists at the Democratic party convention were absolutely right. They know what scoundrels the bosses are.

Since these trade unionists are so wised-up on the nature of the bosses and distrust them so profoundly, they must answer a very important question. WHAT WERE THEY DOING AT A CONVENTION OF A BOSS PARTY? The Democratic party, like the Republican party, is a boss party. The acts of the Democratic administration speak for themselves. It rounded up fourteen billion dollars to prepare for a bosses’ war; it has passed tax laws putting the squeeze on the masses, at the same time making war profits a sure thing for the bosses. It has pushed the movement to enslave labor by compulsory training and conscription. And it is just warming up for further action against the workers.
Trade unions are working class weapons against the class enemy – the bosses. What justification is there for trade unionists joining with the class enemy in politics? Such class collaboration is treason to the cause of working men and women.

Today in Hitler-dominated France the mothers, wives, sisters, daughters, sweethearts of 1,500,000 dead Frenchmen weep. Their tragedy can be traced back to the same kind of class-collaboration treason that trade unionists here are guilty of. In 1936 the workers of France were practically ready to sweep the bosses out of existence. But they listened to the beguiling voice of class collaboration. Instead of forming an independent workers’ government, they joined with the bosses in the Popular Front government. That was their great mistake.
Correct working class politics now will save the working women of America tears later on.
 




On July 9 the directors of Packard Motor Car Co., in spite of their avowed anxiety to be “of public service”, struck against the government’s armament program by refusing to sign a contract for the manufacture of 9,000 Rolls Royce airplane engines.
On July 10 the Administration conceded all their demands. And there were no loud whispers about Packard directors being fifth columnists as has been the case when 7,000 shipyard workers recently struck for a better living.
When it refused to sign the contract, the company issued a vague public statement that there were “many matters that require further study.” But it was quite clearly understood where the understanding was necessary. Packard wanted assurances from the Administration that the company’s “take” will not be interfered with. Specifically they wanted higher profits under government contracts and larger reimbursement for capital outlays in expanding their plants for war orders.
 
FDR Clears Road
President Roosevelt, who only recently declared that the American people will not tolerate the making of huge fortunes out of war, held a conference with representatives of the Treasury, the Federal Loan Administration, the National Advisory Defense Commission and Congressional leaders, and flashed on the green light to indicate to the bosses that the road is clear. Now it will be full speed ahead to unprecedented profits out of the 14-billion-dollar military program.
The White House conferees promised to lift all profit curbs on war contracts. Up to now a so-called cost-plus-8% profit limit had been placed on contracts for ships and aircraft. In a previous article, Labor Action showed how cost of production has been made to cover a multitude of profits, so that the 8% limit became a farce. Now, however, even this pretense at controlling profits will not be made.
The Treasury Department has been checking on contracts given out by the War and Navy Departments. This check will now be removed, so that the war profiteers will not be inconvenienced by too much supervision.
 
Huge Allowances
On the question of capital invested in expanding plants the administration agreed to legislation allowing corporations to write-off such capital as depreciation over a period of five years. Depreciation has heretofore been allowed for wear and tear, for plant and equipment rendered unusable, etc., and even so there was plenty of room for chiseling. But now every cent invested on plant enlargement will be deducted from profits, and after five years a company may have perfectly good plants and machinery which will cost it nothing at all.
The New York Times, reporting this matter, concluded that “the sole check on possible profiteering will be the excess profits tax”. With the enormous allowances for depreciation, among other things, Packard and the rest of them will see to it that the peaks of their profits are levelled off before the tax collector gets to them.
Wall Street’s mouth waters in anticipation of the thick cream it will soon be licking up. Its comment was: “News that the Administration has abandoned limitation of profits on war orders in favor of adequate depreciation schedules which will protect companies against loss on capital invested in quasi-temporary armament plants was welcome in financial circles.” The above is a gem of understatement.
 
Borrowing Money Cheaply
Another important concession to Packard – and this will undoubtedly hold all along the line – is that the Reconstruction Finance Corporation will lend the company around $30,000,000 to expand its plant. It should be recalled that the RFC was organized to help out concerns hit by the depression and on the verge of bankruptcy. It was not meant to finance wealthy corporations facing a coming war boom. Nevertheless the favorable terms and the nominal interest rates of the RFC will be enjoyed by the war profiteers.
Being thus satisfied on all scores Packard will now go ahead and tool its plants for the production of 9,000 airplane engines. Of these 6,000 are to go to England and 3,000 to the U.S. government. It is estimated that the total amount involved is $130,500,000.
Packard now has absolute certainty that there is plenty in it for Packard. At this point its patriotism begins.
 







We herewith present a few items of special interest to our women readers. It is our intention to regularly publish material on the effect of Roosevelt’s arms program on the working woman, what the women can do in the fight for socialism and against war, and so forth. You are invited to submit your own contributions. – Ed.





Do you realize what an important part Eleanor Roosevelt, the President’s wife, is playing in preparing this country for war?
Of all the first ladies of the land, she is the most active in public affairs. She is here, there and everywhere; talking at this convention, at that dinner, at another celebration.
At the same time she has been played up as a woman among women, with ordinary womanly interests. Perhaps you have heard her on the air for the makers of Sweetheart soap, telling about the simple meals served in the White House; about where she buys her clothes, or how beautiful a sunset is from an airplane. In this way she gets herself liked by many women who serve not simple meals but skimpy ones, who can’t afford a dress a year, who never get nearer to an airplane than a tenement house window.
Now that her husband is No. 1 war monger, she has become his first lieutenant, but all within the role of the kindly, understanding woman.
She agrees that war is “the most stupid thing on earth” and is very sad about it, but we must be pre pared to fight. She hopes that “youth will always feel that war is a horrible thing,” but anyway they should go to war this time. She under stands why those who haven’t received much out of life don’t want to die, but a little “mental preparation” (Hitler-Mussolini style) will help them meet “today’s peculiar conditions.”
Behind her, kindly smile, the first lady hides the grimace of death.

The newspaper correspondents leaving Paris with the fleeing people, have reported heartbreaking stories. William Bird, writing in The N.Y. Sun, tells one of the most horrible ones I have read. His car was progressing slowly in the stream of slow-moving people and vehicles and he got well acquainted with his immediate neighbors in the procession. He writes:
A pregnant woman afoot begged a lift to the next railroad station. She told us she had had no news of her husband since the offensive began. She hoped that she was going to have a girl so that she would have company during the next war.
This woman has lost all hope. She can visualize nothing but a life of continuous wars. All she wants is that her child should be a girl so as not to have a son to send to the next war.
It is a great tragedy when people lose their fighting spirit and submit to a ghastly fate that others make for them. That is why this story is so horrible to me.
I hope the working women in America will be such brave fighters against the bosses’ war that they will inspire new hope in such hopeless people as this French woman.

Since President Roosevelt started the national defense hysteria, several women’s organizations have been formed to prepare for war. The National Legion of Mothers formed what they call “home defense rifle clubs against parachute troops.” In New York a so-called Defense Corps of women is taking shape. They will wear black-blue uniforms with red doughboy hats, and will be “available at two hours’ notice in case of an emergency” to be ambulance and bus drivers and armed watchmen, to replace the men drafted into the war.
The moving spirits of such organizations are women of the boss class. Mrs. So-and-So from Westchester, a swanky residential section of New York, and Miss This-and-That from Long Island, a Wall Street bankers’ hang-out. With these women Labor Action has nothing to do. They are helping prepare a war which will benefit their own class.
The working girls and woman who may fall under the influence of this national defense hysteria and join up with such war organizations would be helping to send their brothers, fathers and sweethearts, their husbands and sons, to waste their lives in bloody slaughter for PROFITS for the bosses.
 




As far back as October 5, the Kiplinger Washington Agency was writing to its big-shot clients: “Whether we are ‘in the war’ is a technical borderline quibble. Certainly we are close to it. Not necessarily by days, or even by weeks, but perhaps by months.”
Since the above was written, the aforesaid big-shots have tasted the war appetizer of the enormous profits of intensive war preparation. Their appetites are sharpened now for the grand feast. That makes “whether we are in the war” even less than “a borderline quibble.”
The workers must think seriously about this situation. On greased wheels they are being rushed into the world conflict. What will THEY get out of it? WHAT THEY GOT OUT OF THE LAST WAR IS SOME THING TO GO BY.
 
A High Price
The workers of’ the world have a rough idea what the last war cost them. The 20,000,000 dead came mainly from their class. The overwhelming majority of the 10,000,000 wounded were workers. The millions who were wiped out by the epidemics following in the wake of the war were poor people. In short, the workers were uprooted, murdered, wounded, smitten by disease. That’s what they paid.
That they did not collect “democracy” for the high price they paid, is a fact that does not need proving. Definitely, the blood of the workers of the world flowed in vain when it comes to “democracy”. And this is true in America as elsewhere. To cite only one glaringly revealing fact: in the United States in 1940 there are poll tax laws keeping 10,000,000 citizens from exercising their “democratic” right to vote. We all know that the “ideals” of the last war were a fake.
 
REAL Wages
What, then, about the less “idealistic” side of things? There was plenty of CASH in it for the bosses. Was there any cash in it for the workers? Did those who were not slaughtered in the war find themselves better off economically, if not politically?
The shrewd propagandists in the service of the imperialists circulated the idea that during the war the workers were literally rolling in money. Factory hands were pictured as going to work in $20 silk shirts. Every working woman ,was supposed to be the proud owner of at least one fur coat. Two or three chickens were said to be flapping around in every pot. These clever propagandists discovered a fictitious river of milk and honey in which they said the working people were raving a lot of fun.
What wages did the workers REALLY get during the war?
It is not generally known that, at the beginning of the last world war, the wages of the workers had declined so that they were less than they had been in 1900. In a word, the standard of living the workers were asked then to “defend” had been bombarded successfully right here to such an extent that they were worse off in 1914 than they had been in 1900.
One of the many attestations to this fact was made in May 1920 by no less an authority than E.B. Wood, economics professor of Dartmouth College, speaking before the eminent American Academy of Political and Social Science.
The professor went on to say that in 1917 and 1918 – THE YEARS WHEN THE UNITED STATES WAS IN THE WAR – there was “a further shrinkage in the position of the American industrial worker.”
The truth of this statement, affirmed in many magazine articles after the war was over, is again affirmed today by no less an authority on things economic than United States Assistant District Attorney Thurman W. Arnold, in charge of “trust-busting”. The following passage is quoted from his latest book, The Bottlenecks of Business:
“What happened to the ordinary consumer in the boom which followed the outbreak of the war in 1914? When the war first broke out there was a drop in prices and general distress. Then came the war inflation which robbed productive industry for war boom industry, resulting in complete unbalance of prices. We were confronted with the spectacle of the southern farmer going hat in hand to the newly-created millionaires and asking them for charity’s sake to buy a bale of cotton. There were no controls. REAL WAGES WENT DOWN ONE THIRD WHILE THOUSANDS OF NEW FORTUNES WERE MADE.”
You can bet your last button that during the last war the silk shirts and fur coats were not on the backs of AVERAGE working men and women, and that the chickens in AVERAGE workers’ pots somehow turned into cheap lamb stew. That’s how much propagandists of the boss class can lie.
The shameful truth is that the workers not only sacrificed their precious lives, but also the equivalent of good hard cash. Real wages went down one-third, says Mr. Arnold. It does not take an Einstein to figure out that during the war, when they were supposed to be living high, the workers on the average were getting only two-thirds of what they had before.
What happened to workers’ wages when it was all over – when the trumpets stopped blaring and the flags were furled? Hold on to something: The prosperity that befell the laboring man may be too much for you.
In the fall of 1919 weekly earnings actually overtook the retai’ price of food, and at the beginning of 1920 real wages appeared on the average to have risen to their 1914 level, which, as stated above, was less than in 1900. However, economists were hopeful that this “loss since 1900 might also be retrieved.”
Summarizing labor’s position at the end of 1919 – (and again he is only one of many who made statements like the following) – the same Professor Wood, in a speech before the same eminent American Academy of Political and Social Science flatly stated:
“American labor has prospered during the past five years IN A NEGA’TIVE SENSE, in that, in spite of high prices, IT EMERGED AT THE END OF 1919 NO WORSE OFF THAN BEFORE.”
He said in the same speech:
“This is being achieved in a period of full employment and insistent labor demand; any widespread falling off will mean lower wages.”
He did not say, but it is nevertheless true, that even full employment would not have brought the workers the “negative prosperity” he described, if the WORKERS HAD NOT FOUGHT FOR IT. The year 1919 was one that stands out in labor history. It was a period of great strikes. Labor had to FORCE even this “negative prosperity” from the thieving bosses who had made fabulous fortunes out of the war.
 
War? What For?
Therefore, pushing aside all the ballyhoo, what actually did the workers collect for their sacrifices in the last war?

During the war their average standard of living was ONE THIRD LESS than it was in 1914.
 
After the war they got back to the 1914 level, but only by fighting hard for it – not in Flanders but in the USA – not against German workers but against American bosses.

Workers may well ask: “WAR? WHAT FOR?”
Today, as before the last war, the propagandists are hard at work to create the illusion that the workers will get prosperity out of this, second world war. There comes the story from Bridgeport, Connecticut, that the sales of champagne have already increased 300% due to purchases by workers in industries that received war orders. This time the propagandists will discover a river of champagne that the workers are going to be splashing around ill. DON’T BE FOOLED.
In the same book by Mr. Arnold is a chart of the United States National Income from 1850 to 1940. Referring to this chart, Mr. Arnold says:
“The end of the chart (for the year 1940) shows our national income BELOW THE LEVEL OF 1920 in spite of the fact that we have a much larger population and a greater productive capacity than we had twenty years ago.”
The workers’ share in this de creased national income is of course proportionately less than it was in 1920 – not that we need a chart to tell us that. In a word, on the eve of the United States entering the new world war, the workers’ position is worse than it was twenty years ago – just as on the eve of the last war, the workers’ position was worse than it had been in 1900. And to carry through on the statements of the economists in 1920, as shown above, the workers’ position in 1920 was no better than in 1900. Again the workers are asked to “defend” a standard of living that has been progressing like the cow’s tail – downward.
When it’s all over this time – if the workers allow themselves to be dragged into it – professors of economy will make speeches before eminent bodies like the American Academy of Political and Social Science, and as after the last war, will flatly state: “American labor has prospered during the past five years IN A NEGATIVE SENSE.” In 1945, after great sacrifices in a barbarous imperialist war, labor will be no better off than it is in 1940 – which is pretty bad.
And perhaps the professors will not even be able to say that.
Again referring to the Kiplinger Washington Agency’s letter of advice to its big-shot clients, I quote the following warning to them:
“The nation’s new industry, the war industry, will stimulate, will give a lift for a while, but it is unproductive and destructive, and A FEW YEARS HENCE WILL COME THE TIME OF RECKONING!”
This should be a double warning to the workers. When the time of reckoning comes, the workers are the ones to suffer. The after-the-war depression already casts its shadow before it. Workers may well ask: “WAR? WHAT FOR?”
 




Oriental Vengeance
“The Letter”
Director William Wyler has made a remarkably good picture out of a somewhat hackneyed plot. It has to do with the murder of a native by the wife of a rubber planter in the Malay country. Her plea is self-defense. But up pops this letter which puts an altogether different light on the case. Her life depends upon procuring and suppressing the incriminating evidence.
Wyler has the very able assistance of Bette Davis in the part of the white woman. With admirable skill she runs the gamut from the wily murderess seeking to save her neck to the unhappy woman who has made a mess of her life. James Stephenson is also a decided asset. He does a wonderful job of the lawyer, honest and unwilling to purloin evidence, yet risking. his reputation for his friend. And my hat is off to Sen Yung who plays the part of a native clerk in the office of lawyer Joyce a slippery, conniving, but always polite Oriental.
To me this clerk is the important character in the story. Not only is he the intermediary through whom the incriminating letter is finally procured, but he expresses with refinement and subtlety the hatred that Orientals have for the intruding occidentals. As against his oiliness, the violent revenge of the dead native’s widow, seems a bit ineffectual.
Wyler has surrounded this tale of murder and vengeance with the heaviness of jungle vegetation and the smell of mystery. All in all, it is melodrama at its best.
 
The Nazis Didn’t Get Her
“Escape”
Emmy Ritter, an American married to a German and in her day a very great actress, has been clapped into a Nazi concentration camp, and, incommunicado, awaits her execution. The Nazis got her when she returned to Germany from America to sell the estate of her dead husband. She needed the money to carry on anti-Nazi propaganda.
Ironically enough, an appendicitis operation successfully performed by the concentration camp doctor, held up the execution. This enabled Emmy’s son, worried by his mother’s silence, to get to Germany, find out about her imprisonment, and plot for her escape. He was aided by an old German servant, a countess, a young boarding school girl – and by the doctor in the concentration camp. That is absolutely all I’m going to tell you about the exciting escape from the jaws of death.
But this is not a shallow chase story. The people who finally help the young man save his mother go through intense emotional struggles. The countess, a widow, an American before she married, is now the mistress of the important General Kurt Von Kolb. She dreads the consequences of getting mixed up with the young American’s plan. Inch by inch she rises to the occasion, and finally does what is required of her. Dr. Ditten is torn between his political allegiance to the Nazis and his doctor’s passion to save a life that he had already saved once by his skillful operation. Also, the great actress Emmy Ritter had stirred his deep admiration when he was a young man.
Conrad Veidt gives a perfect performance as the tight-lipped, vain, cruel General Von Kolb. Nazimova’s style of acting is excellent for the role of Emmy Ritter. Unfortunately, Norma Shearer, as the unhappy countess, displays her limitless limitations. But she does not spoil an excellent picture.
 
Kiss and Make Up
“Mexico”
The latest issue of The March of Time will tell you how very displeased the American imperialists have been with their neighbor to the south. The film shows how the landless peasants were getting land, how education and medicine were being brought to the villages, how the unions were getting strong, how demonstrators carried slogans of “Down with American Imperialists”. The commentator says that the American imperialists didn’t like any of this, nor did they like having Leon Trotsky down there, nor having Mexico’s rich oil resources taken back by the Mexicans. The picture broadly hints that General Almazan was the candidate of the displeased northern neighbor for president of Mexico, and shows how he was defeated by the Cardenas political machine.
The film makes clear, what has been very evident in the newspapers, that Camacho, Cardenas’ man, will play along with the United States, and indicates that Mexico is compelled to take this course for the reason that it is in a bad way economically. The war has cut off practically all its European trade, just when it was making the change to the public ownership of its important oil industry – a situation favoring a crushing “neighborly” embrace from the colossus of the north.
Besides all of which, the film has some excellent shots of Mexican people, and one of Trotsky in his study.
 




The Rising Cost of Living:– So I order two containers of milk and a half-pint container of sweet cream. I put fifty cents on the counter. Two quarts of milk 23¢ – 16¢ for cream – total 39¢. Must get 11¢ change. But I get only 8¢.
“What’s this?” I ask, looking at the 8¢ and at the grocer.
“PRICES UP AGAIN,” he says. "Milk two for 25¢ – cream 17¢."
“For the love of mike!” I say, because I don’t swear in public, and at the same time I remember that I need eggs too. "Let me have a dozen white eggs, grade B,” I say.
I count out 27¢; that was the price last time I bought white eggs, grade B. “Four cents more, please,” says the grocer.
“I want the grade B,” I say, thinking he made a mistake.
“They are grade B. Today they’re 31¢ a dozen. PRICES UP AGAIN,” he says.

A general idea of why the storekeeper keeps telling you and me: “PRICES UP AGAIN”, is given in a report to the Department of Justice which points oat that the “food industry functions badly for both consumers and farmers”. Not being a poor farmer nor a poor housewife, the Department of Justice needed a long, report to learn about that.
This report on the food industry contains some very damning information. It shows how rich corporations keep food from starving people – so that the rich can become richer. Here are some of the facts.
Big associations of bakers have destroyed small independent bakers by price cutting. Having a monopoly in the field, they then fixed bread prices to suit themselves.
By cornering the market and preventing competition. certain meat slaughterers have increased prices an average of five cents a pound.
Poultry prices are fixed at make-believe auctions where the stooges of the poultry dealers make abnormally high bids which become the standard for “normal” prices.
Boss associations of fishing boat owners and fish canners control certain varieties of fish throughout the United States and fix their prices. The entire catch of one variety of fish is handled throughout the country by one group of brokers, and they fix the price at their own sweet will.
By the practises of dairymen’s associations they can maneuver increases as high as 3¢ in the retail price of milk, without the farmer getting anything out of the increase – while the poor have to consume less milk because they can’t pay the increased price.
One company already controls 80% of the national market in processed cheese and is making an effort to control the rest of the market.
Such is the greedy use of their power practised by the bosses of the nation’s food – without a “national defense emergency”. Imagine what they will do now when they can pile up their profits under the folds of the flag.

So now, on the basis of this report, an investigation is going to be made which will cover “all the major items in the family food budget”. Particular attention will be given to bread, milk, meat, fish, cheese, canned fruits and vegetables, and fresh fruits and vegetables.
Nobody but a chicken just hatched out of an egg will believe that an investigation by the Department of Justice will put the food industry on a basis so that it will function for the benefit of the consumer and the farmer. We’ve heard that one many times before.
Government files are full of reports exposing just such flagrant frauds as the above. Millions of dollars have been appropriated in past years for investigations which showed up greedy corporations maneuvering the milk out of the mouths of babes. Thousands of hours have been consumed by legislators discussing and passing more and more laws, presumably to make such terrible practices impossible.
Such “crusading” reports, investigations, legislation have a habit of coming to the front pages of the press when housewives all over the country look a certain way at the grocer when he says, “PRICES UP AGAIN”.

But what has been the result of all these “crusades” against profiteers? Have the reports, investigations, legislation done any good? If so, this year 1940 ought to show it. Let a statement by the Department of Justice of the boss government itself give the answer:
“At one end of the food industries lies wholesale malnutrition among consumers due to their inability to afford an adequate diet. At the other end lies a population of producing farmers who must sell an abundance of food at distress prices so low as to threaten them with bankruptcy.”
This is another way of saying that the bosses and the banks, which have a stranglehold on the food industry, as they have on all other industry, reap a double harvest in 1940 as in 1930, in 1920, in 1910 – only more so. This is the result after decades and decades of “trust busting”, of “fighting monopolies”. All the reports, investigations, laws and “crusades” are like water on the backs on the profit-grabbers.

Do you want to know why you housewives who stare with malevolence at the innocent grocer when he says, “PRICES UP AGAIN”?

Because their stranglehold on industry is not taken away from them – THEY REMAIN THE BOSSES;
 
Because the government that is supposed to curb their greed is their own government – A BOSS GOVERNMENT.

This system of boss-owned industry and boss government has proved itself a complete failure. All it can say for itself in this year 1940 is the following:
“More than FORTY-FIVE MILLION PEOPLE are limited to diets so poor that they lack essential food elements. These families are below the safety line. Not all of them feel hunger and not all have clinical symptoms of deficiency diseases such as pelagra, beri beri or scurvy. But those who must live on such a diet for prolonged periods suffer from chronic fatigue, lethargy, various digestive disorders and divers, aches and pains, and have a lowered resistance to disease.”
What can be a greater insult to the intelligence of these POOR people than to offer them another futile investigation!
What can be a greater insult to their spirit than to think they will continue to put up with the system of boss-owned industry and boss government!
 




Printed in leaflet form with the title Workers’ Education in a Nut Shell, the following pointed story went the rounds of the CIO convention:
A teacher in home economics eloquently described how to make the most nutritious soup by boiling cheap bones. After a detailed account both of the methods of stewing and the good results obtained thereby, she paused for questions. The silence finally was broken by a gaunt Scotch lady, who arose at the back:
“PLEASE, CAN YOU TELL ME WHO HAD THE MEAT OFF THOSE BONES?”

I add an imaginary sequel to the above pointed story:
Mr. Moneybags sat down to his sumptuous breakfast in the sunny dining room of his luxurious home and opened the morning paper, called The Boss Press. His brow wrinkled with anger as he read the headline: SUBVERSIVE ELMENTS DISCOVERED IN HOMECONOMICS CLASS.
Eagerly he scanned the news item: “A housewife rose and indicated her desire for meat when the Instructor had just ably given detailed directions on how to cook bones to be soft, tasty and nutritious. Such wayward desires must be ruthlessly suppressed. They signify an alarming lack of patriotism in the national emergency. The national defense calls for sacrifice, not for meat. Such subversive tendencies will be dealt with as the national emergency requires.”
Mr. Moneybags’ brow cleared. A smile of contentment spread over his fat pan. He looked with interest at his plate of thick brown lamb chops with the rich juices oozing out of them: He opened his vest to allow for expansion, and started to eat.

While the CIO held its sessions during the day, the wives of delegates who had come as representatives of the Women’s Auxiliaries of the CIO unions, met in the evenings and planned for the growth of the women’s contingent of the CIO movement.
The members of the Workers Party and the staff of LABOR ACTION remember with admiration the important part played by the mothers, wives and daughters of CIO men in the great strike struggles that accompanied the birth of the CIO. The moral support and active participation of the women in labor’s fights with the boss class are indispensable. The organization and strengthening of the Women’s Auxiliaries are indeed needed.
What surprised me was the basis on which the future work of the Women’s Auxiliaries was being planned.
There was a tendency to regard the period of militant participation in labor struggles as over. Speakers used language something like this: “Now that the CIO unions are stabilized and agreements are entered into by negotiation rather than by striking, we must consider how to function when there are no strikes”.
Insofar as this was meant to be a declaration that the Auxiliaries have work to do in the most “normal” times, it was perfectly correct. But insofar as it expresses a tendency on the part of some of the women of satisfaction with the status quo it was out of tune with the whole spirit of the convention.

The whole outlook for the immediate future of the CIO is certainly not merely to maintain the status quo.
At the convention sessions, every reference to organizing Ford and Bethlehem was cheered to the rafters by delegates and visitors. So was every declaration to organize the other masses of unorganized workers and to bring the membership of the CIO up to the 10,000,000 goal set at the San Francisco convention. So was every demand not only to resist attacks on the workers’ standards but to fight for improvement of those standards. Inevitably such action at any time, and certainly in these times, will mean struggle. I believe the Women’s Auxiliaries must prepare themselves for participation in this struggle.
They have had experience in militant action and will have to give their assistance and leadership to the wives and women relatives of the unorganized men, whose recruitment into the CIO may be accompanied by bitter struggles with the bosses. Where there are strikes to maintain or improve standards, the women will have the double job of helping the men and of using their influence in communities to get the people behind labor in these struggles – so that people will not be on the bosses’ side, carried there on the wave of national defense hysteria. Such are some of the important tasks before the Women’s Auxiliaries of the CIO. This is no time to recline upon the laurels of the past.

One of the most heartening sights at the convention was an old Negro woman, delegate from the tobacco workers union in the Richmond area. She sat right up front and gave earnest and undivided attention to everything that went on. At a point in the proceedings she stepped up to the platform and, in a voice just audible even through the microphone, spoke of the problems of her union of 300 tobacco workers, who are being discriminated against by the bosses.
The next day I saw her in the lobby pointing out to another Negro delegate where her little speech of the previous day appeared in the printed proceedings. She was proud. That evening, after the Thanksgiving banquet and show given to the delegates and visitors, I met her outside of the hotel. She said she had had a lovely time. She was happy. Among her brothers and sisters of the CIO, this Negro woman, coming from the most exploited and brow-beaten of the land, felt like a human being.

It was no easy matter for this worker to arise from the lowest depths of social being to where, through belonging to the CIO, she now has a small measure of control over her life. She had to overcome the tradition of slavery behind her, the intimidation and brutality used by the southern bourbons, the habit of waiting for someone else to do something for her. She risked her life and limb. But she fought and is fighting to better herself, her people, and the whole working class – IN THE ONLY WAY IT CAN BE DONE.
Labor Action and the Workers Party are also engaged in this fight. We join with the CIO in its militant struggles against the bosses and the boss politicians. BUT WE FIGHT ALSO FOR A SOCIETY WITHOUT A BOSS CLASS.
As this Negro woman has learned from her union experience, both in industry and in government, THE BOSSES stand between the workers and the good life. We will gladly risk life and limb so that the workers may finally own all industry and have A WORKERS GOVERNMENT.
 




“If the hours of work were increased, without a further increase in wage rates and without overtime pay, the general standard of living could continue to increase for some time to come.”
Here, in a nutshell, is the basic policy towards labor of the 8,000 American industrialists, represented by 1,000 of them, at their convention just held at the ultra swanky Waldorf-Astoria in New York City.
Surrounded by glamor and comfort – wining, dining, cocktailing, banqueting – the sated industrial plutocrats decided that the workers will be better off if they toil longer hours for little more than they are getting now.
At the same time – pulling down their vests over their bulging bellies – they pompously and unanimously voted for “Recognition of the value of the profit motive as a powerful incentive to productive effort, and of the economic need for profits in industry sufficient to maintain and expand productive enterprise.”
In a word: Nothing more than is necessary for the workers – everything for the bosses. UNLESS THE WORKERS CATEGORICALLY REFUSE TO ACCEPT THIS ARRANGEMENT.
Their attitude is etched in all its baldness by their own special report that when the armament program, and the profits therefrom, reach their peak in 1942. “THE STANDARD OF LIVING WILL START A DOWNWARD SLIDE AS IT DID IN EUROPE DURING REARMAMENT”. This decline will be due to the fact “that some productive resources must be diverted from consumption goods to armament”.
 
Warn Government
Henry W. Prentis, Jr., outgoing president of the association, defiantly warned the government that he wants no appeasement of labor:
“Whether the urgency is such as to demand industrial output on a twenty-four hour, seven-day basis, and the removal of all restrictive factors for the fullest possible armament production, government, and only government, can say.”
If the boss government wants planes, tanks, guns and battleships, the pay-triotic bosses in turn want the privilege of handling labor in their own sweet way – without restrictive acts and unions. These defenders of the “good American way” demand, instead, a good healthy ANTI-STRIKE LAW.
The sharp warning was hardly necessary. For the government has already loosed its darts against labor. William S. Knudsen, National Defense Advisory Commissioner, and General Motors man, quite properly representing the boss government at this boss conclave. According to Knudsen the forty-hour week, won by labor after decades of struggle, constitutes a “blackout”. He said:
“Friday night has become the big night in most of our industrial picture. Is used to be Saturday night we have cut 20% off our machine time. Can we afford to do this? Can’t we stop this blackout, this lack of production from Friday to Monday. and get more out of the equipment?”
Not to mention getting more out of the workers’ hides, without paying them for it.
The day after Knudsen’s speech, the New York Times, licked its editorial lips in anticipation:
“We must put our industry on a twenty-four hour basis ... Mr. Knudsen has now dealt with the country with courageous realism and candor. It is in conceivable that it will fail to respond to his challenge.”
The campaign of the bosses of the country for an anti-strike law is well under way. These good “democrats”, having the utmost faith in the “American way” of doing things, have made “an independent survey of public opinion”. Naturally they wouldn’t think of having an anti strike law passed unless even the workers themselves want it. We don’t know of any coal diggers, plane builders or auto workers who were consulted but their survey reveals – if you want to believe it that
“only 40% of the people think that the loss of the right to strike would curtail their liberties. Many reasons for this may be advanced. One may be that some people still look upon organized strikes as a legalized privilege rather than a basic right. Another may be that workers themselves have been through strikes and are not so keen about preserving their right. What ever the reason, the fact is that even among factory workers they do not hold the right to strike as dearly as some politicians have led the public to believe.”
Thus the propaganda machine has begun to grind out its filthy lies. At a fake women’s panel broadcast from the convention hall, the question was asked as to whether industry or government red tape was holding up the war program. Lewis Brown, president of the Johns-Manville Corporation (which supplies notorious Tommy Manville with the where withal of a “useful” life), replied that it was too soon to tell as to industry and government, but it was quite certain that labor is holding up the program. This so-called panel, supposed to represent American women, was participated in only by women of the upper class. They read their questions from prepared texts and were answered from prepared texts. Had a needle trades worker woman been there, the panel would have been treated to some shocking and extemporaneous statements!
The program of the NAM would reduce the workers to the status of industrial serfs – slaving long hours, at low pay, without the right to strike. But that isn’t enough. These colossal exploiters aim also to pass onto the backs of the masses the cost of the vast imperialist war machine, out of which THEY will be making unbelievable profits.
Thus John W. Hanes, who was under secretary of the Treasury in 1938 (and like so many ex-government officials, has received his reward from private industry), spoke on paying for the war as follows:
“That the personal income tax base be broadened to INCLUDE AS MANY IN THE INCOME TAX SYSTEM AS IS PHYSICALLY POSSIBLE and that there be a moderate increase in the rate of normal tax.”
THAT MEANS THE MEAGER WAGES OF NEARLY EVERY WORKER SHOULD BE TAXED.
These bloated bellies also aimed a broadside at the unemployed. They are setting up a hue and cry for reduction of “non-defense expenditures”. They didn’t say it right out in the convention, but what they want is to cut out government appropriations for WPA and general relief.
On the subject of education, it was revealed that the NAM has engaged the services of Ralph W. Robey, Professor of Economics in Columbia University, to abstract all textbooks in the field of history, civics, sociology and economics in general use in the public schools of the country. Then the members of the NAM will be instructed on using the weight of their influence to remove from the schools those books found “prejudicial to our form of government, our society or to the system of free enterprise”. Professor Robey is peculiarly qualified for the job. He is such a blind conservative that the Roosevelt administration looks like socialism to him.
The members of the NAM are in the future “to cooperate wholeheartedly with their local educational authorities to analyze sound means by which the concept of private enterprise and the details of its operation may be taught in the schools”.
This vicious and comprehensive program of the NAM to dictate the wages, hours, liberties and thoughts of the workers, MUST BE FOUGHT OUT OF EXISTENCE BY THE WORKERS.
 




A MOVING ANTI-WAR APPEAL
“That They May Live”
A French film with English subtitles
Censors pounced upon this French film immediately upon its production. It was never seen anywhere in Europe. And no wonder. It is an international appeal to the peoples of all countries not to forget the millions of the dead and wounded of the last war.
The story begins on the last day of the last war – just before the armistice. Twelve men go out on a death patrol. The same day, the armistice is declared. But for these men it comes too late. Eleven of them are brought back dead to a town crazy with the joy of peace. The twelfth, who lives, is so moved. by the tragedy of the useless death of his eleven comrades that he pledges to devote his life to the cause of peace. He will see that people will never forget the war dead.
He:is an inventor of some note and sets up his work shop on the edge, of the huge war cemetery. At this point the story becomes weak and unclear. There is an unmixable mixture of pseudo-science with the supernatural. Apparently the inventor works on mechanical contrivances to render ineffective all instruments of slaughter, and at the same establishes communion with the dead. He becomes a little crazed and totally blind.
When he regains his vision and his mental clarity, it is 1938. The country is again feverish with war preparations. His own inventions have been turned to the uses of slaughter. He has no recourse now except to the supernatural. He goes to the cemetery at Verdun and appeals to the war dead to arise and walk the earth as a warning to the people.
Here is the powerful part of the picture. Victor Francen, a very fine actor, puts everything he has behind his role. He appeals, in French, in English, in German, to the international brotherhood of the war to arise and save the living from the horrible death they knew. The emotional stir of his appeal is tremendous.
 
ON THE INFORMATIVE SIDE
“The Maginot Line – West Wall” – a short
Major Eliot, NY Herald Tribune writer on military matters, appears in this movie short explaining the fortifications on the western front. With diagrams and actual pictures his explanation becomes very graphic. If you don’t already have a good. idea of the maze of death traps comprising these fortifications, watch for this short.
In comparing the Maginot Line with the West Wall, Eliot states that the French built theirs in eleven years without stint of materials, whereas the Germans hurried theirs through in four with great economy in the use of materials. For all that, the Nazi got through.
 
SWELL ENTERTAINMENT AGAINST A REALISTIC BACKGROUND
“Primrose Path”
Elly May does not want love. She dresses like a boy and acts like a boy just to keep the boys away. But love finds her just the same. Then her troubles start. Elly May is the poorest of the poor. Her father is a drinking weakling with scholarly pretensions but no earning power. Her mother keeps up the. slum existence of the family by giving gentlemen what they want. How can poor Elly May win her man if he knows the truth about her? So she lies. She pretends her family is not poor.She pretends it is respectable. She gets her man. Then comes the day of reckoning.
Ginger Rogers as Elly May is good. to see. She does the part of the tomboy without any unnatural underscoring.
The gags are lively. As an illustration: “We paint the ham on with a brush”, Elly May informs the customers, Also on the humorous side is Elly May’s kid sister. Her recitation “Don’t Swat Your Mother” is worth the price of admission.
 
IF YOU LIKE ACTION
“Dark Command”
The worst crudities of the usual western are missing from this one. The background is the struggle between the North and the South for the state of Kansas, just before the civil war, Walter Pidgeon does well as the villain, a soured school .teacher who turns bandit, and practises his art under the uniform of the confederacy. The hero, a two-gun cowboy from Texas, is very attractive in the person. of John Wayne, and fully deserves to win the southern girl, Claire Trevor. You pay your money, and if you like this sort of picture, you’ll get your money’s worth.
 




You Ought to See
THE GRAPES OF WRATH
This movie is an honest interpretation of Steinbeck’s novel. It turns a powerful spotlight on democracy as it is practised in that foreign country called California. Newspapers have followed its lead with stories on the misery of the migrant workers and the tyranny of the fruit-growers. The LaFollette Civil Liberties Committee is investigating the situation.
You can bet that the workers themselves are not going, to let the fight rage over their prostrate bodies. If these migrant workers are anything like the character Tom Joad, they won’t.
His face scarred for life by the club of California “law and order”, he is bidding good-bye to his mother, perhaps forever. He tries to explain .to her how he feels about life. He says:
“Wherever men are fighting to get food for their children, I want to be there. Wherever cops are beating up strikers, I want to be there. Wherever hungry children are laughing the kind of laugh they have when, they are going to be fed, I want to be there. And when human beings are living in the houses they build, are eating the food they produce, I want to be there.”
Tom has become a rebel. Ex-preacher Casey also becomes a rebel, a fighting rebel. He leads a strike and is killed by a company gangster,
The movie shows how Tom and Casey got that way. Tractors crash through homes, pushing sharecroppers off the land, leaving wrecks behind them. Homeless families trek across the country to the “land of promise”, only to find wretched camps full of émigrés like themselves, without money, homes, jobs or hope. When they get a job they become the serfs of the fruit companies for the duration of the work, under the clubs and. guns of the vicious tin-star deputies.
The realism of the picture has its effect on the audience. The writer heard a woman gasp to her husband: “It can’t be true”. He said it is true. A young girl whispered to her boy friend: “It must be propaganda”. He answered that he read about it in the papers.
 
Don’t Waste Your Money on
VIRGINIA CITY
You have seen this one lots of times under other names. The hero, Errol Flynn, rides right off a cliff, down, down, down. His horse breaks its neck. Errol, unscratched and quite debonair, appears at a telegraph station which miraculously arises in the middle of the desert.
Before this fall, he has already fallen in love with a Confederate spy Miriam Hopkins. You have guessed by now that the hero is a Union spy. Bandits, of course, hold up the stagecoach in which our lovers meet. Humphrey Bogart as the bandit chief dons a cute little mustache and an accent. The hero and the heroine are torn between love and duty. The girl goes to President Lincoln. He says some fine words and everything becomes all right.
 
You Ought to See
THE FIGHT FOR LIFE
Paul de Kruif’s book is the basis for this story of the fight for the lives of slum mothers during childbirth. It affords an eyeful of the grand and glorious American standard of living, dug out of the lowest depths. In face of the odds, what a miracle that these men of medicine don’t throw up the sponge. If one places their heroic struggle to save but one life, against the background of war in which even minor battles take hundreds of thousands of lives, the miracle of these men becomes even greater. Some statistics are presented in the course of the story. For instance, as many mothers die today in childbirth from preventable causes, as did twenty-five years ago.
 
You Could Take a Chance on
YOUNG TOM EDISON
First you disregard the blurb about the typical story of a courageous American boy. It certainly is not typical, not even of Tom Edison. After that you may enjoy Mickey Rooney as he fights his way through the first stages of being a genius. His antics are amusing and some scenes are dramatic. The climax comes when he uses the whistle of a train to telegraph a message of danger to another train as it rushes on towards a washed out bridge.
 
Don’t Miss
OF MICE AND MEN
This is a story of bindle-stiffs from Steinbeck’s novel. Bindle-stiffs, the writer understands; are migrant workers, loaders of grain, etc. The hunger of these lonely workers for a shack and patch of land of their own, gnaws its way out of the screen into the guts of the audience. But the emphasis in this story is on the unshakeable friendship between George and Lenny. Lenny is a gentle-hearted half-wit whose uncontrolled physical strength brings George nothing but trouble, and finally tragedy. The story is gripping. Lon Chaney, Jr. does fine acting as Lenny.
 




You Almost Smell The Salt
“The Long Voyage Home”
It is an old woman’s tale that sailors go to sea to find peace for their souls on the briny deep. Yet the tale persists, and even a usually clear-sighted reviewer like Bosley Crowther of the New York Times falls into the fallacy of referring to this entirely unsentimental saga of the sea as “the never-ending story of man’s wanderings over the waters of the world in search of peace for his soul”.
This film version of four of Eugene O’Neill’s one-act plays, knit together to make one fascinating story, leaves no illusions as to why Drisc, Yank, Axel and the other land-loving seafarers on the old tub of a freighter, the S.S. Glencairn, added sequel after sequel to that never-ending story of man’s wanderings over the waters of the world. They were caught in a vicious circle, only one of whose arcs is the lure of the sea itself. After a long lonely voyage fraught with danger, they are easy prey for the first brothel-keeper they meet – and then go away with empty pockets. What is there to do but go back to sea? But in this story the old-timers at ieast have the satisfaction of rescuing young Ole Olson from their own fate. He returns – with his money – to his mother on a Swedish farm.
Thanks to the good sense of director John Ford, who knows when he has the stuff out of which a realistic film can be made, there isn’t even a smell of make believe about the S.S. Glencairn and her tough crew. It’s all there. The dreaminess of a moonlight night in the Caribbean. Fist fighting over the daughters of the devil who come abroad to smuggle rum and sell their favors. The merciless fury of a storm, out of which Yank comes with a fatally punctured lung – and no doctor on board. The filthy system of shanghaiing sailors. The cruelty of the men, matching that of the sea, when they suspect the reticent Smitty of being a German spy. Also the healing balm of a calm sea and a sun-drenched deck. It is all there:
On the S.S. Glencairn of 1940 the forecastle is not as wretched a hole as the one I remember in the O’Neill play. Also, it seems to me that in the play the men were much more rebellious when they learned that the ship had loaded a cargo of explosives for England. But these points, however interesting, are still only minor criticisms of a film in which the story, the directing, the acting, the photography are tops.
 
Gimme Too!
Or Hollywood Pulls Out a Plum
A recent item from that cultural centre of America brought the glad tidings that the motion picture industry has turned over its entire facilities to the army for the production of films to be used in the training of the conscripts called under the Selective Service Act. A nice, big-hearted, altruistic thing for Hollywood to do, no?
Yes – until you get down to the end of the item, where it says that Gordon Mitchell, manager of the research council of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts, who will be in active charge, has just come back from conferences in Washington with a government allotment of $250,000 of the $5,000,000 Hollywood is to get in connection with the first group of conscripts. The implication is that more millions are to go Holly-ward as more conscripts go camp-ward.
Unless you are a conscript, you will not have the pleasure of seeing any of these pictures to be produced solely to meet the “national emergency”. They will not be released for the general public, but will be used only as a visual “educational” course for new soldiers. Of course, the army will be working hand in glove with the motion picture industry.
Needless to say, this lucious plum is being shared by all the Hollywood big shot pay-triots: Paramount, Twentieth Century-Fox, Columbia, Warner.
 
Definitely, To See
Walt Disney’s “Fantasia”
You have probably some time or other yawned through a movie short which attempted to visualize music for you. Don’t let that prejudice you against going to see Disney’s Fantasia which has been described as “seeing music and hearing pictures”. It is a work of great beauty and imagination, and accomplishes its purpose of bringing to an audience fine music together with the color, movement, characters or what-have-you that might be imagined to fit that music.
Our good fortune, of course, is that we get here not the color, movement, characters, etc., that might occur to anybody, but those that occurred to Disney and his co-artists. So Fantasia is made of the Disney sense of humor, his sense of the drama of color and movement, of rhythm and synchronization. We have here his clever use of the similarities between entirely dissimilar things, his affectionate attention to minutiae, his exploitation of the unexpected.
The show begins as a concert does. The orchestra tunes up. Leopold Stokowski appears, and under his music-molding hands the orchestra gets to work. First comes a Bach selection and with it fascinating patterns of color and. motion that catch every nuance of the music as well as its spirit. Then Tchaikovsky’s Nutcracker Suite, in which the Chinese Dance is done by mushrooms, the Russian Dance by thistles and orchids. Mickey Mouse later appears as the best in the world, and never in all my experiences at dance recitals, have I seen better dance rhythms than in Disney’s Sorcerer’s Apprentice or in his Dance of the Hours – that old-time ballet, which Disney burlesques by using ostriches, hippopotami, elephants and. alligators as his corp de ballet. To Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring, with its exploding discordances and its weighty, thumping rhythms, Disney gives us the convulsions and upheavals of the earth as it molded itself into land, mountain and sea, millions and millions of years ago, together with the evolution and demise of the formidable dinosaur. The effects are as awesome as the music.
Beethoven, Moussorgsky and Schubert are the others on the program of eight selections, all beautifully complemented by Disney’s imagery. There is unfortunately no space here for more detail.
The one thing I regret is that Fantasia can, as yet, be seen only by a very limited audience. It is being shown at few theatres throughout the country. The evening prices of admission in New York range from 75¢ to $2.20, with very few seats at 75¢. Whether it will ever get to the local theatres at regular prices is a matter of doubt, because its showing requires special theatre equipment.
 




See It by All Means
“THE GREAT DICTATOR”
Charlie Chaplin has ventured into politics apparently without knowledge of the fact that in that field time is of the essence.
He started making this picture about the little Jewish barber who resembles Hitler five years ago. Well meaning liberals, who did not and do not understand that fascism with its filth and barbarism is a natural development of the capitalist system and that Hitler is the personal embodiment of this development, at that time regarded Hitler as nothing more than a psychopathic case. Five years ago, before German imperialism went on the rampage under Hitler’s guidance, even though Chaplin’s estimate of the fuehrer was wrong, his satire of the crazy man in Berlin, who needed to be put into a straight jacket, would have been more acceptable. Today, everybody realizes that Hitler is more than a flower-smelling, piano-playing, posturing and posing violent maniac. Furthermore, the Nazi war machine has proved itself so damnably efficient that the scenes which represent everyone of Goering’s military finds as nothing but duds fail in their intended humor.
 
The Humor Is Still Chaplin’s
However, Chaplin is a master laugh-producer and he doesn’t fall down in The Great Dictator. Nothing tickles the funny bone so much as to see the supposedly superior guy made to look small and ridiculous. So the fuehrer’s elbow slips off the desk when he is trying too look impressive; he takes away a hand full of something after holding a baby; he absentmindedly puts English mustard on his strawberries instead of cream. But the most superb piece of deflation is a speech in which Hitler rants in a combination of German, Jewish English and gibberish. Even the microphones curl up in fright, but the fuehrer winds up with a series of coughing, puffing animal sounds signifying nothing.
However, in the process of deflating Hitler, Chaplin makes another mistake of proportion and politics. It is unconvincing and unreal to allow Mussolini the privilege of making Hitler look like a flat tire. (By the way, Hitler is known in the film as Adenoid Hynkel, Dictator of Tomania, and Mussolini as Napaloni, Dictator of Bacteria.) Napaloni sweeps into Tomania like a tornado and keeps Hynkel fluttering around in the breeze. But it is no argument against dictators to have dictator Mussolini clap dictator Hitler down.
The film is at its best when Chaplin plays the funny little fellow with the turned out feet and baggy pants. Some of the funniest sequences are at the beginning of the film when the little Jewish barber is a dazed German soldier who lets a hand grenade slip up his sleeve and wanders into the enemy lines.
After fifteen years in a soldiers’ hospital getting over mental shock, he returns to his barber shop and the reign of the Nazi. His uncomprehending indignation reaches a humorous high when, having been given the works by one storm trooper, he turns to another, saying: “Are you a policeman? Arrest that man. He assaulted me.”
There are clever bits in the true Chaplin manner where he rhythmically shaves a puzzled customer to music by Brahms; where he polishes off a customer’s bald pate to use it as a mirror; where he sneaks home through the emptied ghetto street, on tip-toe, nervous1y dropping bat and stick – what he is sneaking away from is Hitler’s voice thundering anti-semitic threats over the radio.
 
His Much Disputed Last Speech
In the end the little Jewish barber, who is the spittin’ image of Hitler because they are both played by Chaplin, is mistaken for Hitler and finds himself before the massed Nazi troops after the conquest of Austria. He must deliver a speech of conquest. Instead the little Jewish barber makes an impassioned appeal to fight for kindness, humanity, the end of greed, the end of national hatreds, for democracy. The Nazi troops applaud – probably because they applaud anything the fuehrer says. And Paulette Goddard, the poor Jewess from the ghetto, hears the beautiful words over the radio and sees the dawn of a new day.
Reviewers criticize Chaplin for departing from his art to present his political views in this speech. My criicism is that his politics are inadequate. Beautiful words have to be implemented successfully before a new day dawns – and not by the implication, however reserved, that the way out lies in the “democratic” fight of Churchill and Roosevelt, in their own way as able representatives of national greed as is “The Great Dictator”.
A word about the acting. Chaplin is great in both roles. Jack Oakie struts beautifully as Mussolmi. Paulette Goddard acts more like a Tenth Avenue kid than a Jewish daughter of the ghetto.
 
Hollywood Didn’t Let Them Have It, But
“THEY KNEW WHAT THEY WANTED”
To use the head is the important thing to Tony Patucci. What if his Amy is with child because of an indiscrete interlude wtth his ranch foreman, Joe. If Tony uses his head he knows that he loves Amy, that he wants her to marry him and stay with him on his ranch. But Amy is not big enough to accept Tony’s forgiveness. She goes away to get over it all.
But this is not the ending in Sidney Howard’s original play, which won the Pulitzer prize in 1925. In the play Amy, the waitress who was courted by Tony via correspondence, knew she wanted Tony with his ranch and his $10,000 in the bank. When Tony forgave her, she stayed to marry bim. That gave justification for the title They Knew What They Wanted. Hollywood, however, had to make Amy collect the wages of sin.
Altough there are deviations from the original play, the film is good in its own right, and one that this reviewer recommends, Several of the scenes are among the best to be found anywhere. One such is the fiesta where Tony is showing off for his Amy. Another is where Joe, the foreman, stands up and takes his punishrnent when Tony finds out what he has done.
In spite of the fact that Carole Lombard is a bit too glamorous for the role of the practical waitress, she acts the part with true understanding and shows what a good actress she is. Charles Laughton’s acting is uneven. At times he seems to get the very essence of the expansive, big-hearted Italian, but often he falls into being just Charles Laughton. The only really bad bit is the dulcet sanctimoniousness of Frank Fay’s padre.
 




When the food stamp plan went into effect in Brooklyn in September, Welfare Commissioner William Hodson made the following optimistic statement:
“From every standpoint it is helpful and constructive; and we are certainly grateful to the Federal Government for making the experiment possible. My hope is that it will prove so successful in Brooklyn that we can extend it throughout the city without too much delay.”
That the optimism of Hodson has not been realized in the eight weeks that the plan has been in operation in Brooklyn was attested to at the meeting of the Unemployed and Project Workers Union on October 29. One home relief client after another got up and told about the abuses of the food stamp plan.
The complaints tell into three categories: (1) families taking the stamps were deprived of cash for even the most elementary needs; (2) they were not getting the full value of the stamps because of change difficulties; (3) housewives going into stores with stamps were ashamed, and store keepers took advantage of’ their shame.
It will be remembered: that, under the plan for each member of a home relief family $3 is deducted from the semi-monthly checks. In return the family gets orange stamps, with a face value of $3 for each member, good for any type of foodstuff, and blue stamps, with a face value of $1.50, good only for foods designated as surplus by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 
Imposes Hardships
Because the whole family has to participate in the plan, and not only one or two members, it results in great hardship by taking a huge slice out of cash payments. As it works out, for example, a family of five, will get only $20 instead of $35 in cash.
It was pointed out at the UPWU meeting that, with so little cash, participants in the food stamp plan have no money for such things as haircuts, stockings, an occasional movie, or even a ride on the city’s subway. The barber will not accept a bunch of carrots for payment, nor will a head of cabbage fit into the slot of the subway machine. Smokers to whom an occasional pack of cigarettes is almost indispensable feel the pinch. Housewives, who before the food stamp plan could squeeze a few pennies off the food to patch up the electric bill when it got beyond the $1.50 allowed, are now at a loss, and the same is true on a larger scale when it comes to paying rent above the allowed scale.
 
Storekeepers Chisel
Storekeepers are supposed to give a signed credit slip for the change when a purchaser does not buy for the full amount of the stamp. However, there has been chiseling and great inconvenience on this score, according to speakers at the UPWU meeting.
The story was told of a Negro woman at a butcher shop. The butcher refused to give her a credit slip for change. Finally, because she kept insisting, he tore off a bit of newspaper and jotted down something hardly legible. It was obvious he had no intention of honoring the slip in the future. Often grocers refuse outright to give the credit slips, demanding that the customer buy more merchandise, stuff she does not want and which may go bad on her before she needs it.
At the open air markets, where business is done on pushcarts and stands, it is almost impossible to get credit slips for change. The result is that women buy an extra bunch of this and an extra head of that. They don’t need it and it gets stale before they get around to using it.
Many women feel stigmatized and set apart as second-class citizens because they have to buy for stamps instead or cash. They will wait around a store or a pushcart until there are no customers before going over to make their purchases. One stamp user said he gave up buying in a butcher shop where he bought for seven years because he was ashamed to go in with stamps. This feeling of shame and inferiority also accounts for some of the loss stamp users suffer because of the stamps. They are hasty, are afraid to insist on their rights, and when there are other customers around they will go away without getting satisfaction.
It is not only in the UPWU that complaints are voiced. Complaints have seeped through to the capitalist press. Some papers have carried the story of Mrs. Felloruis of the Red Hook district. With her husband sick and a family of seven children, the stamp plan badly restricted her purchases of necessities other than food. She said the cash which is being deducted from the relief check would be more welcome since they need shoes and other things, and even soap has to be paid for in cash.
A representative of Local 17 of the UPWU in Williamsburgh said that there the small grocer will often give actual bits of cash change, even though it is illegal. He does that in order to compete with the chain store, but gets it out of the customer in some other way. A woman told how storekeepers would not accept stamps, of either color, for goods on special sale. They simply brush aside a stamp customer with the comment, “Sales is for cash customers”.
The false idea is current that the acceptance of food stamps is entirely voluntary. The fact is that very real pressure has been used by the Welfare Department. Relief clients eligible for stamps, who do not take them, are also deprived of the privilege of going to the surplus commodity depots which was their privilege before. Thus it is a case of either taking stamps or doing without surplus food altogether.
 
Complaints Ignored
Four times this matter has been brought before Commissioner Hodson by the Unemployed & Project Workers Union, but nothing has been done. The UPWU, therefore on the basis of the evidence presented by its members, adopted a resolution at the Oct. 29 meeting which condemned the stamp plan as a step towards putting relief families entirely on the card system. The resolution called for the abolition of the plan for the re-opening of surplus food depots and for more cash relief. The meeting also passed a motion for its Central Committee to implement the union position by the use of picket lines and whatever other means seem advisable.
It is estimated that there are in Brooklyn 28,000 relief families, a total of nearly 70,000 persons, who have taken food stamps. It becomes evident that many of these people did not realize the full implication of what the stamp plan meant, especially that nothing but food can be bought for the stamps. As the Department of Agriculture is planning to introduce the food stamp plan in 200 cities by the end of the year, the stand of the UPWU is one of extreme importance. We will comment further on it in a coming issue of Labor Action.
 




In a tiny item tucked away in an evening paper I read that the Department of Agriculture in Washington states that food costs are going to rise during 1941, which is only a few weeks off. Evidently the boss papers do not think this news important enough to give it a head line and put it where people can see it.
The Department predicted that the prices will go up on meats, dairy and poultry products, fruits and vegetables. It seems. to me that includes nearly everything we eat, except cereals and fish. So when we housewives go out with a shopping bag and a dollar to do our marketing in 1941, the bag will be much lighter to carry home than it has been in 1940.

Election is not so far back that we don’t remember what Mr. Roosevelt was promising about maintaining the standard of living of the American people. I’m not going to say a word here about that mythical “standard” nor about the one-third of the nation whose standard is even less than a myth. All I want to say is that the most powerful microscope could not have found anywhere a statement from the President that should read something like this: “In view of the fact that my own Department of Agriculture has predicted a rise in the cost of living for 1941, I will immediately propose legislation providing for increases in wages in private industry, on WPA and all government enterprises, as well as increases in home relief allowances. This will be necessary to maintain existing standards of living, which I have promised to maintain.”
Are you laughing? Indeed it is very funny. No boss politician ever acted like that and none ever will. Certainly not Mr. Roosevelt, who allowed thousands of workers to be thrown off WPP while appropriating billions for imperialist war preparations.
Anyway we have it on excellent authority that he won’t. The President’s wife knows something about the President. She goes about making speeches on what great sacrifices we all have to make. For the worker that means he is expected to accept a lower standard of living and like it. Mrs. Roosevelt will make sacrifices by collecting huge fees for her speeches, while the big industrialists pile up war profits, but we working women will have to carry home LESS FOOD in our shopping bags. UNLESS –
We refuse to be bamboozled by the “national defense” hysteria – manufactured so that the bosses may not be bothered by workers’ demands during the period of war profits – and FIGHT to protect and improve our conditions.

I was listening on the radio when the fate of millions of young men was decided by pulling bits of paper out of a fish bowl. The fish bowl symbolized the whole procedure. These young men are the “poor fish” conscripted into a military machine to make the American bosses the most powerful in the world.
The fish bowl also symbolized an important incident that the radio registered. When the first number was drawn – 158 – there came through the air, a sound like a gasp, yell and groan combined. It came from Mrs. Bell, whose twenty-one-year old son holds number 158. It sounded like the cry of a wounded animal.
Mrs. Bell’s spontaneous reaction was immediately hushed up. She was called to the microphone and made a fuss over. Her hand was shaken by this and that big muck-a-muck. The whole situation was twisted to look as if Mrs. Bell was just about the luckiest woman in America because her son is among the first conscripts. And one smart alec wished that her son would “enjoy” the year’s training – as if he were going on a pleasure trip instead of taking the first step into the jaws of useless death.
That’s how it’s done, mothers of the working class. Amid bombast and ballyhoo the true feelings of grieving mothers are submerged, so that the money-bags can take the young men to die in a cause that is not theirs.

These days it is fashionable to be sympathetic to the Chinese. High society, ever on the scent for some thing novel to keep it from being bored with its life of unearned luxury, went oriental and held what it called the “Bowl of Rice” Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York. This gave the Park Avenue ladies a chance to get rigged out and strut about in oriental costumes especially made for the occasion at great cost. Incidentally the bloated rich parted with a little loose change for “those poor Chinese”.
The class represented at this ball, showing off in oriental dress and throwing chicken feed to “those poor Chinese”, has a greedy hand in the bloody Chinese war. It has pocketed plenty of profits from American sales of huge quantities of scrap-iron to the Japanese bosses, who, made guns and bombs with which to kill “those poor Chinese”.
Nor has the President’s prohibition of the export of scrap metal to Japan changed the situation. True the export of SCRAP is restricted, but the export of NEW metal goes merrily on. So the Japanese gun-makers have wisely increased their orders for new metal, and the American steel barons have equally wisely accepted the profitable orders. This comes from no less an authority than the secretary of the Institute of Scrap Iron and Steel, Inc.
“Those poor Chinese” are shot down with guns made out of American metal – sold for the profit of American bosses to the Japanese imperialists – the American profit-grabbers then give a little charity to “those poor Chinese” at gaudy balls – where Park Avenue ladies cavort in expensive gowns – all, you understand, for the benefit of “those poor Chinese”. This is the insane asylum that the bosses have made out of the world we live in.
It is up to the women who do not attend fancy balls at the Waldorf-Astoria to help the Chinese masses – as well as themselves – by putting up a fight against a boss-run world.
 




BROOKLYN, N.Y., October 28 – Immediately upon the counting of the votes last Thursday showing that an overwhelming majority of the employees of the Leviton Manufacturing Company wished to be represented by Local 3 of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, union officials sent a telegram to Leviton requesting an immediate conference on wages and conditions.
The boss’s reply was that the company would wait until official certification of the election results came from Washington. Such certification came from the National Labor Relations Board Saturday morning. However, following through on his dog-in-the-manger policy, Leviton is now taking advantage of the five days allowed him to protest the election if he wishes.
I was informed at strike headquarters that there is absolutely no ground for a protest, and Leviton knows it. The NLRB officials who supervised the balloting stated that the Leviton workers participated in the most orderly election they ever witnessed. In the first hour, 1,000 workers cast their votes. Of the total votes cast 1,299 were for Local 3, 70 were against the union, and 16 votes were challenged by the company.
In the meantime, the strikers are attending to the grim business of keeping the plant tied up tight. Every morning, between 700 and 800 and more pickets are on the job at the plant. Amply protected by from 200 to 300 cops on motorcycle, on horseback and on foot, nine private cars enter the plant – carrying strike-breakers. Were it not for the tremendous police force that the city government so generously supplies the boss in this struggle the strikers could prevent even these few scabs from functioning.
 




Sure Cure for “Reds”
“HE STAYED FOR BREAKFAST”
If I were Mr. Roosevelt, I would put over a brand new kind of conscription. I would draft a few thousand beautiful rich girls to vamp the male “Reds” of this country, and enough handsome rich gentlemen to divert the female contingent from politics. That, as was proved by Ninotchka once before and is now equally well sustained by He Stayed For Breakfast, is what ails the “Reds”. Bountiful living and the blandishments of a wealthy admirer will make a supporter of Roosevelt out of any “Red”. What are you waiting for, Mr. President?
The conscripts would have to receive some training in political philosophy. For instance, Loretta Young, the beautiful vampire in this leaden story, absolutely vanquishes Melvyn Douglas and undermines his entire faith in communism, when she argues: “You are always talking about the poor and the rich. There are only two kinds of people – male and female”. Obviously such profundity is the outcome of deep study.
In case you don’t know it, unions are for the sole purpose of employing barbers as plumbers so that they can pull that old one of piping the water into the kitchen gas range – while the greatest crime that a banker commits is to curl his pinky when he drinks his coffee, or maybe to make love to his secretary.
 
Stand Up Fast – Or Else
“FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT”
The foreword leads you to expect a realistic piece about reporting the news from war-torn Europe. What you get is a thriller-diller from the land of make believe, along the lines of pulp detective stories.
A mere police reporter is suddenly promoted to the rank of foreign correspondent and lands on all fours in the midst of an international plot. A gang of Nazi spies kidnap the leader of a peace organization who for some inexplicable reason carries in his head the terms of an important international treaty, no less. The amateur-detective-reporter smells out all the clues, dashes in and out of the jaws of death, and arrives in the nick of time to save the inhumanly tortured pacifist (done expertly by the German actor Albert Basserman).
All this time the foreign correspondent sends no story to his paper. When he finally has his great scoop, he doesn’t wire it, but boards a plane for America. Naturally the plane is torpedoed by the Germans. He and his glrl are almost drowned, but aren’t. They wind up in a London broadcasting station, sending to America a hurry-up-and-get-your-guns speech, while German bombs burst all around them and the Star Spangled Banner booms forth.
I was so overcome by it all that I was a bit slow on the pick-up. Whereupon a patriotic neighbor shoved me. “You stand when this song is being played,” she hissed.
 
Land of Opportunity
“BOOM TOWN”
This here Clark Gable is an oil prospector, a wildcatter, in Texas around 1918, and he partners up with Spencer Tracy. After one or two tries they strike oil and get rich. Everybody else does too.
Clark goes and marries Spencer’s girl. Well, says Spencer, if that’s the way she wants it, it’s all right with him. But when Clark does some wildcatting with Hedy LaMarr, Spencer thinks it’s time to protect his beloved Claudette Colbert. There are a lot of shady oil deals by Spencer to bankrupt Clark and send him back to Claudette’s arms.
Well, anyway, Clark gets himself mixed up with the Sherman anti-trust law. There’s a trial, and boy scout Tracy comes to the rescue with a homespun speech on “Americanisrn”. He says that a man like Clark is really helping “these here United States”, and by gad, if such a man is not entitled to his million dollars earned by brain and hand, then it is time “to rewrite this here land of opportunity stuff”.
Thus the anarchy, waste, greed and corruption that were midwife to the oil industry aborning receive a complete whitewash with the brush of “Americanism”. And not even a whisper issues from the screen on how “this land of opportunity stuff” has long ago been rewritten for the working class.
 
Migratory Workers Again
“GOLD RUSH MAISIE”
The trouble with producing a good picture is that so many bad ones are modelled after it. The Grapes of Wrath has started an epidemic of lousy pictures about migratory workers. The hope that one box office success. will lead to another is not alone responsible. The unvarnished truth of Steinbeck’s story left such a bad taste in the democratic mouth of America that Hollywood is now administering sweet-tasting gargle. Migratory workers must by nook or by crook be maneuvered into “prosperity”.
In Gold Rush Maisie a bunch of migratory workers go prospecting for gold when they can’t find work. The gold they strike is of such poor quality that it isn’t worth the labor. So that they may not be destitute a confirmed misanthrope makes a quick change of character, becomes suddenly philanthropic and starts a cooperative venture for the benefit of the jobless workers. Hollywood doesn’t know that Santa Claus is dead.
Primarily this cheesy production is a vehicle for Ann Sothern as Maisie. Maisie with her low-cut dress and valise, on the trail of that elusive singing job, is a likeable character. She knows the facts of life, and when they come into her bedroom, she outwits them. She’s a two-fisted, wisecracking gal with clean skirts and a heart of gold. Maisie is all right and so is Ann Sothern. It’s not their fault that MGM hitches them to a bunch of migratory workers whom they have to pull into a happy ending.
 




Crooked Politics of the Past
“THE GREAT McGINTY”
In a lively action film with plenty of verbal and fistic give-and-take, Paramount has produced a humorous satire of the days when political graft was less streamlined than it is today. The party czar, who in this case is also at the controls of the other party, has in his hands everything worth having. Business men squirm but have to pay the heavy tributes he demands. The taxpayers’ millions go into unnecessary and defective buildings and bridges contracted to the political boss’s companies.
McGinty enters this scheme of things as a pugnacious and pugilistic bum on an election-day breadline, where it is whispered to him he can earn $2 if he votes for so-and-so for mayor. McGinty votes 37 times at a gross earning of $74 plus the attention of the political boss who is convinced he can use such a pushing piece of humanity, McGinty rises from alderman to mayor to governor as a shield for the boss crook – and the monuments of graft rise in multiple proportion. Tamiroff plays the political boss with gusto and skill. Brian Donlevy as the cluck whose brains are in his fists is cut out for the part.
The Great McGinty falls as did Adam – he listens to his Eve who wants him to go in for reform. There follow a fight between McGinty and the boss, the arrest of the boss for attempted assassination of the governor, the arrest of the governor for fraud, and the escape of both to a banana port in Central America, where they live in perpetual combat – the boss as the owner of a bar and the great McGinty as the bartender who has an aversion to ringing up sales.
Since Paramount has made such a good start in the field of political exposé, it is suggested that national politics of 1940 offers rich material. But of course that may. interfere with the “national defense program.” It is indeed more patriotic to “expose” only the past.
 
Pro-English Propaganda
“THE SEA HAWK”
If you want to develop an inferiority complex about yourself and our time, go see Errol Flynn and his sea pirates carry on for two solid hours. Nothing is too much for these supermen of the sixteenth century and their Captain. Thorpe, one of the sea hawks or privateers who with their pirate ships were, according to Hollywood, the main naval defense of the England of Queen Elizabeth. This Thorpe sinks Spanish ships, crosses the Atlantic to rob the Spaniards of gold pilfered from Central America, survives betrayal and a sojourn in the deadly jungle, frees himself and all his men from the chains and irons of a Spanish galley just in time to get valuable papers for his queen, and wins knighthood and a bride.
But more important these days – if you want to see how subtle pro-English propaganda is put over, have a look in on The Sea Hawk. In this sixteenth century struggle between England and Spain for dominance on the seas, the British were of course the heroes and: the Spaniards the villains: The Spaniards used galley-slaves to propel their vessels, but the freedom-loving English relied on the free wind in their sails. When the sea hawks plundered a Spanish vessel, the first thing they did was to free the galley-slaves. The Spaniards were intriguers and maintained a fifth column right in the court of the queen, while she, dear lady, thought only of maintaining peace for the good of her subjects. The Spaniards plundered the Latin American Indians, but the English privateers plundered the Spanish ships to get gold for their queen, to build a navy, to put an end to Spanish plundering. Catch on?
 
Counterfeit
“THREE FACES WEST”
The Grapes of Wrath quite obviously inspired this imitation. Except for some excellent shots of dust storms and of a town half buried in its own top soil, the back bone of authenticity is pretty weak. The Grapes of Wrath portrayed people, whose fathers and grandfathers had owned the land, being forced off it and into the unhappy status of migratory workers. This later edition of the dust bowl tragedy makes it appear that only the “worthless” sharecropper became a migrant. Folks who owned the land could pick themselves up, just like that, and start all over again in Oregon where prosperity waited with open arms.
Not only is the dust bowl tragedy twisted, but the interesting situation with which the story starts is twisted into artificial contours. An old German. doctor and his daughter, refugees from Hitlerism, come to live and work in this dust bowl town, only to become refugees once more – driven out by nature. Handled with respect for the likelihood of developments; there are possibilities here for gripping drama. However it all deteriorates into trimmings for a love story between the German girl and the young dust bowl farmer, whose romance is needlessly complicated by the reappearance of the girl’s old sweetheart.
The struggle of the young farmer to keep the towns folk from despairing is good stuff, and John Wayne is o.k. in that role. Sigrid Gurie, a newcomer to Hollywood, very naturally fits the role of the girl refugee, except when she tries to be kittenish. Charles Coburn plays the old German doctor, who loves doctoring, as if he enjoys acting such a part.
 




If people in London who still have houses to live in have to get along without electricity, it is easily understandable.
But many families in New York, Chicago, Philadelphia and other cities, towns, and villages in America, which still enjoys “the blessings of peace”, also have to get along without electricity, Why?
In some districts the people are so poor that the utility companies do not even bother to supply current there. But in many places where there is current, people are too poor to pay their electricity bills, so the company shuts off the current.
This was the case the other night in the home of the De Lugios – father, mother and two children – living in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. Both mother and father worked. But the boss paid them so little that they could not afford light, one of the basic necessities of life,
Thus, there is something in common between Hitler bosses and American bosses.
And to add insult to injury, the boss who exploits the De Lugios is the powerful Leviton Mgf, Co., manufacturer of electrical appliances.

The De Lugios are now on strike for decent wages and working conditions – along with the 1,700 other workers in the Leviton plant. More than half of the strikers are women.
Many of them have never been on strike before. Some are mothers. Nearly all have dependents. Yet in the third week of the strike they were unwavering. The men have nothing but praise for them, saying that the women are even more militant, more determined, than they are.
The fight against the Leviton Mfg. Co. is only one battle in the great struggle of the workers for freedom from poverty, insecurity and war. That struggle will be over when there is no more boss class. Women are brave fighters. They will do their part.

Laboratory tests of poultry purchased in various parts of New York City, revealed that great quantities of diseased and decomposed birds, unfit for human consumption, are sold to unsuspecting housewives.
Mrs, Morgan, Mrs. du Pont, Mrs, Roosevelt, Mrs. Willkie are not among these housewives. The stores at which this rotten poultry was bought are located in the poorest sections of the city, where these grand ladies do not live.
Working women are the ones from whom good money is taken for rotten poultry. They are also the ones from whom good money is taken for shoddy shoes and clothing for their families.
Because they can afford to buy only the cheapest clothes and the cheapest food, the value they get for their money is even less than the dollars and cents of their husband’s miserable wages. They have to buy shoes that hurt the feet and can’t withstand a drenching – clothes of bad cut and material that can’t take wear and weather – food that does not nourish the body but poisons it.
Here we have more proof of the saying: “Those who have get – the have-nots get it in the neck.”
As for the poor workers eating rotten poultry and undermining their health thereby, the Health Department of the City of New York believes that is none of its business.

Imagine the feelings of 650 women in Chicago whose families have suddenly been evicted from comfortable Federal Housing apartments. Having for a short time enjoyed the conveniences of modern kitchen, bright airy bedrooms, easier work involved in keeping such apartments clean, they are now thrust back into the dirty crowded tenements they came from,
The joke of it is that their plight is due to the economies practised by the Federal Housing Authority. The cost of running the housing projects was reduced. So rents were also cut. This sounds like an awfully good thing, but –
Families whose annual income is more than five times the annual rent, are not poor enough to live in the Federal Housing buildings. After the reduction in rent, the incomes of these 650 families were more than what the regulations require. So they were evicted.
These families may not be poor enough to live in government houses, but they are not rich enough to pay the rents for decent apartments owned by private landlords. So back they went to where they came from – in the slums,
The misfortune of these 650 families proves how little has actually been done to provide adequate housing for the working people.

The death last week of a 22-year-old expectant mother who jumped from the fourth floor of a blazing Manhattan tenement which did not have fire escapes, also shows up the loud-mouthed lies of the politicians. Daily the proof multiplies that, in spite of all the sound and fury on the subject of housing, the real accomplishments amount to a drop in the bucket.
Democrats or Republicans, old dealers or new dealers, whatever the boss government calls itself, it gives the workers a false deal. There is never enough money to build the houses that the working people need. But, in the twinkling of an eye, sixteen billion dollars are appropriated and the best men of the country are conscripted for the bosses’ war.
To the women who suffer most bringing up families in the unsanitary fire-trap tenements, I say that NO boss government will EVER get around to supplying even the most elementary needs of the workers. We need a workers’ government for that.
 




BROOKLYN, Sept. 23 – In the fourth week of their strike there has not been one defection from the ranks of the 1,700 workers of the Leviton Mfg. Co. in Greenpoint, strikers assured me this afternoon. Production in the plant is still at a complete standstill.
There wasn’t much doing inside the strikers’ cafeteria between two and three this afternoon, but the cheerful spirit of the strikers was much in evidence. The radio was playing, the women around were humming the tune, and one of them began to swing it, to the delight of all present.
Everything now waits upon the outcome of the hearing before the Labor Relations Board, ,which has been set for September 30.
 
Leviton Dodge Fails
In the meantime, Leviton has invited the strikers back to work on the same conditions for a thirty-day period. After that time, he will generously allow them to vote on whether they want the AFL, the CIO or a company union to represent them.
“What is there to vote on?” one striker said. “We’re organized in Local 3, AFL and that’s our union.”
“Leviton wants us to give up Local 3 and then he’ll have us where he wants us,” a woman commented.
The story is circulated among the strikers that Leviton has threatened to spend $12,000,000 to break the strike, and if that doesn’t do it, he will give up the plant altogether.
To this a young striker retorted: “We’ve got 20,000 organized electrical workers behind us. They are contributing to our strike fund from their wages. We can take whatever Leviton has to give.”
 
Wages and Conditions
Wednesday is the big day on Greenpoint Ave. The workers come for their strike benefit of $7 a week. On that day the cafeteria does a rushing business. As a woman at the counter put it today, “Two thousand out of the 1,700 strikers all want to eat at once.”
I was treated to a cup of coffee and a cheese sandwich. As I stood at the counter enjoying them, a man working in the bakelite department of the plant talked to me about, wages and conditions in his department.
Only men work here. Winter and summer they wear nothing but light trousers, the heat is so great. This. worker stands between two steam presses operating at from 125 to 150 pounds of pressure. He fills the moulds in one press, then turns around and fills them in the other. By that time the gadgets in the first press are finished and ready to be removed.
Many different kinds of electrical appliances are made in the presses in the bakelite department. The tiny sockets for lights on Christmas trees are made 130 at a time. The pay is as low as 14¢ for a thousand, so a worker has to be pretty spry. The plates for wall outlets are moulded only 14 at one time. The rate of pay is $1.80 per thousand. That means about seventy press operations before a worker earns his $1.80.
I was told that the wages on this piece work basis fluctuate from week to week, depending upon what work the men are put on. One week, a man may bring home $23 and the next week only $16. Workers often are compelled to waste time because of the condition of the presses.
 
Hate Piece Work
Last week’s story in Labor Action explained how in the women’s departments many serious accidents happen because the company does not allow the guards to be used on the machines and because the machines themselves often operate defectively. The men also complain about the condition of the presses.
They say that with presses going at top speed in mass production there are constant break-downs. But the company does not employ enough mechanics to take care of repairs quickly. The result is that the men have to stop work until a mechanic can get around to fixing their machines, and thus they lose time.
The workers hate the piece work system. Leviton has mastered the art of getting the most out of them. No sooner does a worker begin to earn around $23 a week, than his rate of pay is cut. He has to speed up or bring home less money.
Leviton’s mastery of the piece work method of exploitation is illustrated by a woman employed there for eighteen years. She has been given such a run around on piece work that after all these years she earns only $13 a week.
What the strikers want is a scale of wages with time and a half for overtime, and the end of this vicious piece work system. The workers get into such nervous tension the way Leviton drives them that they even hesitate to leave their machines to go to the washroom.
 
Old Goods Moved
One of the developments since last week is that the police department has comfortably installed itself in the Chevrolet service station across the street from the Leviton plant. Last Monday the sergeants were on the street. Today they were sprawling in the office of the Chevrolet station which commands an excellent view of the Leviton plant.
So far a man and two women on the picket line have been hurt when trucks were moved out of the factory. But the strikers no longer offer any resistance to the movement of trucks, The trucks come through with motorcycle cops in blitzkrieg formation, and the men and women can do nothing about it.
While the company continues to move out several truckloads a week, the goods is not new but surpluses that had accumulated in the plant. The trucks are not Leviton’s and the truckmen are not Leviton employees.
 
Scabs in Plant
For the assembling and loading of the goods moved Leviton has smuggled into the plant about a score of scabs. They are fed and housed in the plant, according to a strike sympathizer living across the street from the plant.
A bunch of workers invited me to a fumigating party. They say the first thing they will have to do when they get back to work is to cleanse the place of all traces of these scabs. They are not afraid of this handful of rats, they say. They understand that Leviton is moving trucks simply to break the strikers’ morale. He has failed. The strikers know that not a nickel’s worth of goods is being produced.
 




Franklin D. Roosevelt has tried to make it appear that his militarism is something created by Hitler’s militarism. Most people have this impression. It is entirely false.
Not only has this self-styled defender of democracy always been the advocate of a huge army and navy, but years ago, when no one else was even thinking about it, he came out in favor of universal military training – that is, PEACE TIME CONSCRIPTION.
If one wants to be amused these days, there is a laugh in the fact that the Sir Galahad of Democracy, Roosevelt, was fired with enthusiasm by the army of the Kaiser in the last war. He thought the German junkers had the right idea: CONSCRIPTION IN PEACE TIME.
 
Started a Long, Long Time Ago
During the last war Franklin D. Roosevelt began to hammer away to get what he wanted. While the war to end all wars – you remember – was raging in Europe, he wrote the following:
“Is it not time that the people of the United States should adopt definitely the principle of national government service by every man and woman at some time in their lives? ... This means service in times of peace as well as in times of war and means service in the civilian branches as well as in the military branches. The day will soon be at hand when the army and the navy of this great republic will be looked upon by its citizens as a normal part of their government and their own activities.”
The principles of democracy did not bother Mr. Roosevelt then any more than they bother him today. The fact that “this great republic” was built by millions of Europeans who came to these shores to escape the slavery of compulsory military training in their native lands, has not registered in his junker mind.
 
He Wasn’t Fooled for a Moment
Nor was Mr. Roosevelt’s advocacy of universal military training due to war hysteria on his part. After the war he kept right at it. At a Victory Dinner in 1919 he said:
“While a let-down was bound to follow every great national action, I hope that there will still be some kind of training or universal military service. That is the surest guarantee of safety: I think this ought to follow no matter what the result of the peace negotiations.”
Franklin D. Roosevelt was not fooled, as were the American masses, by the promise that the last war was fought to end all wars. On October 11, 1919, at the New York State Convention of the American Legion, he again proposed universal military training in the army and navy.
In 1940 it is very clever of the simon-pure democrat in the White House to scare the wits out of the American people by picturing Hitler’s dive bombers blasting the streets of New York. By frightening the people he hopes to put over conscription without any resistance, But the record is clear. For more than twenty-five years, Mr. Roosevelt has been awaiting his chance.
He has no regrets about what military conscription does to the human being. As a matter of fact he thinks it is just too grand for words. Back in 1912, soon after he became assistant secretary of the navy, he said:
“We want the country to feel, too, that in maintaining a fighting force of the highest efficiency we are at the same time educating thousands of young men to be better citizens.”
 
But the Object Is Clear Enough
The kind of citizens that military conscription manufactures was much more truthfully described by General John F. O’Ryan when he advocated conscription before the last war. He said:
“The first thing that must be done is to destroy all initiative, and that with the training will fit men to be soldiers ... We have to our men trained so that the influence of fear is overpowered by the peril of an uncompromising military system often backed up by a pistol in the hands of an officer.”
To the idealist In the White House “better citizens” are those without any initiative whose fear of war is overcome by their fear of the pistol in the hands of an officer.
If there are still folks foolish enough to think that this slavery under a military regime is worthwhile to ward off “invasion,” let me again quote Mr. Roosevelt against Mr. Roosevelt.
“Invasion is not what this country has to fear ... Our national defense must extend all over the Western Hemisphere, must go out a thousand miles to sea, must embrace the Philippines wherever our commerce may be ... We must create a navy not only to protect our shores and our possessions but our merchant ships in times of war, no matter where they may go.”
The present occupant of the White House, seeking the support of the masses as candidate of the Democratic Party for another term, has dirty work to do. He must make a nation of conscripts, without initiative and driven by a pistol in their backs, to defend capitalist profits all over the face of the earth,
The other presidential candidate, Wendell Willkie, in a loud voice says “ditto” to the above plans of Mr. Roosevelt.
 




Twenty years ago the Woman Suffrage Amendment was passed and, ever since the “better half” of the human race in these United States has had the right to vote.
Many of the women who participated in the suffrage movement now boast of their accomplishments. They point with pride to the number of women judges, congressmen, governors.
Women functionaries in a boss government does not make it less a boss government. Nor does war become any sweeter because women politicians are helping to prepare for it.
One of the promises made by the suffragettes was that when women got the vote they would never again allow the country to get into a war. The mothers of the race, they claimed, would no longer stand for the wholesale slaughter of human beings. They would prevail upon the men to turn their swords into ploughshares.
But on the twentieth anniversary of women in politics, Congress celebrates by passing a conscription law, and war .has become the engrossing industry of the country. Today, more than ever before, human beings are destined for a short life of training for violent death.
The most important promise made by the suffragettes has not been fulfilled, and it could not have been. War is simply boss politics carried to the nth degree. The fight against war can be nothing else than a fight by working men and women against the boss class of both sexes. Politics is a matter of class not of sex.

Nearly everyone knows of Lillian Waldo She spent almost half a century “helping the poor”. Now she is dead.
She was the brains and spirit of the Henry Street Settlement on the Lower East Side of New York. The visiting nurses service for the sick people of the slums was her idea. She started the movement for playgrounds for children to take them off the crowded filthy streets. Almost any humanitarian endeavor that did not require the poor to overthrow their masters got her support.
However, she leaves behind her as much, if not more, poverty than existed when she started her social work. There is still plenty of it on the Lower East Side of New York – more in Harlem – in New Jersey – in Chicago – in the south – in the west. In the fifty years of devotion to the poor, Lillian Wald did nothing towards the abolition of poverty.
She herself came from a well-to-do family. She had nothing against the rich who exploit her beloved poor. The militarist Franklin D. Roosevelt, in his so-called reform program, got her wholehearted approval. But she never gave backing to the idea that poverty can be ended forever by abolishing the boss class which is responsible for it.
Like the doctor who puts an icebag on the fevered head and salve on the festering boil but does nothing to drive the disease from the inner organs, Lillian Wald spent her life applying icebags and salve.

The latest intensified Nazi raids on London brought destruction to the densely populated workers’ district.
The British government itself admits that many hundreds were killed and wounded. The actual casualties are probably much greater.
The question is pertinent: What were the provisions made by the government to protect the workers, their women and children, from the EXPECTED blitzkrieg? We know there are modern air raid shelters in the business and government sections of London. But what about the tenement districts?
An insight into the kind of protection the British government has provided for the people was given by one of the New York evening papers recently. It printed a picture labelled This Was a Home Before the Bombing, and underneath was the explanatory note:
“British woman, holding her child’s money box and her shoes, views wreckage of her home inflicted by Nazi bombing planes in southeast England. SHE HID UNDER STAIRS WITH HER FOUR CHILDREN WHILE BOMBS BLASTED AREA.”
Here is an example of the provision made by the British boss government for the protection of women and children. The stairs of a building which is demolished by bombs is hardly a shelter from those bombs.
In contrast to this exposure of women and children to horrible death, comes news of the tremendous and expensive efforts being made by the British government to preserve the foreign markets during the war. So effective have these efforts been that the incredible has happened, and throughout the war period England has been able to maintain her export trade. All the avenues for bosses’ profits must, of course, remain after the war. But a few million lives – what of that!
Here you see the boss regime in operation.

Mrs. Roosevelt is one of the ablest spokesmen for the war-makers in these crucial times, one of the cleverest pullers-of-the-wool over the eyes of gullible people. What everybody does not know is that she earns a pretty penny doing this despicable job.
It is estimated that since she became first lady to the end of this year she will have scooped up around $1,200,000. When she flitters here and yon, it is more like a scavenger than the dove she is supposed to be
Every time she lectures she pockets $1,500 – there are millions of families whose total annual income is around one third of that. Her lectures alone net her $75,000 a year – one hundred and fifty of such families live on this amount, which is only a part of Mrs. Roosevelt’s pin money.
She writes for magazines at the rate of one dollar a word; her articles have so far brought her another $75,000. Her newspaper columns have put $21,000 more a year into her sock. This year – probably because she is in great demand to help railroad the country into a militarist regime – she will net even more from her newspaper columns.
For fifteen minutes on the air her charge is from $3,000 to $4,000. It is said that she gives to charity her earnings from radio – undoubtedly as soothing syrup to her conscience.
This woman of the boss class, the wife of the President of the boss government, pockets as pin money enormous sums fleeced from the labor of the workers. Her relation to the working woman is that of the buzzard to the barnyard fowl.
 




BROOKLYN. Sept. 16 – Except for the forelorn tapping of a typewriter in the office, no sound issued from the buildings of the Leviton Manufacturing Co. on Greenpoint Avenue this afternoon. Production of electrical appliances, which is its business, has been completely stopped by the strike of its 1,700,workers, They have been out for three weeks. Local 3, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, is organizing them and conducting the strike.
It’s hardly believable that human beings have endured the conditions existing at Leviton’s, and not gone out on strike before. Weekly wages of $8, $9, and $10 are common. The aristocrats of labor earn $17, $20 and $22 at Leviton’s. The great majority make $13 or $14.
 
Accidents Common
Industrial accidents are an every day occurrence. The machines have guards, but the guards are down only when the inspectors come around. Otherwise the workers operate the machines without any protection because the guards slow up the work. Women have suffered the loss of finger tips, half fingers, whole fingers. I was informed that at times there are as many as ten accidents in one day.
Often a machine operates imperfectly and endangers the operator still more, but a foreman will seldom call a mechanic until it is too late to save a finger. The workers them selves hesitate to report defective machines because while a machine is being repaired they lose that much time, and the pay envelope is that much lighter.
The last time Leviton workers struck was seven years ago. They say the strike was something of a fizzle. They were not organized; had no union backing; and only one department went out, Nevertheless they won a slight rise in wages and a nurse, Before then, I was informed by a woman who worked in the plant for fourteen years, a piece worker had also served as nurse.
Now the workers feel strong. The plant is completely shut down. They seem to have faith in Local 3 and in their strike committee. Those entitled to strike benefit have been receiving $7 a week. They run a 24-hour service cafeteria where coffee and sandwiches are obtainable. This is quite different from seven years ago,
In the evenings, the picket line is swelled by union electrical workers from all over the city. I understand that at night the strikers carry an illuminated sign reading: “Lincoln Freed the Slaves. Leviton Never Heard of Lincoln.”
This afternoon, lines of pickets patrolled the buildings covering almost two square blocks. There was a liberal sprinkling of cops around the plant, and I counted two police inspectors.
Across the street from the plant a group of women, bright strike but tons on their coats, scanned the windows to’ see if there was any activity within. They had been told that one of the bosses brought in a few scabs in a tax this morning.
 
No Scabs Allowed!
A thin little elderly woman who has been slaving at Leviton machines for twelve years, pointed to the windows and said: “See these windows. There won’t be a one left if they bring in scabs.”
Another woman explained that they didn’t want trouble, they want harmony, but they wouldn’t stand for scabs.
The women complain bitterly about the unsanitary conditions in the plant. There aren’t enough toilets and these that are there, are out of order half of the time. On a floor where 200 to 220 girls are at work there are six toilets. And on the average only four of them are useable at one time. This means long waiting.
It is nothing at all, I was told, for the superintendent to go right into the women’s toilet room to get the girls back to their machines when they are gone any length of time. Foremen, Who are more decent, send another girl to call those who are necessarily detained.
“We are faithful workers”, declared a woman who had been on the job for thirteen years. “Those factories we really built. At least they can give us decent toilets.”
It was explained to me that there is a maximum daily wage above which no one can go. This is the munificent sum of $3.80. After they had earned their maximum, they would continue to work for nothing, so that the boss could fulfill his rush orders.
Very few workers earn the maxi mum. Those who get up to the top try to stay around $3.00 a day, because once they make the $3.80, they can expect that the rate will be cut again.
 
Where Charity Begins
The Leviton Manufacturing Co. is one of those family corporations. Isidor Leviton is the president and treasurer, his son Bernard is vice president, and Jack Amsterdam, his son-in-law, is secretary. It is a $2,000,000 concern and one of the largest in the field, selling to Woolworth, Montgomery Ward and Sears Roebuck sockets, switches, wiring, etc. Some workers told me that the company has bought up more property recently and plans to expand.
Mr. Leviton Sr. is supposed to be quite a philanthropist, handing out big donations to charity with smug self-admiration. The workers don’t admire him. I was told that he has given jobs to some two hundred refugees, but at the expense of two hundred other workers. They don’t consider that charity either.
A group of automatic pressmen, semi-skilled workers as they call themselves, said. it is impossible to get along on what they were making. They were convinced that they needed to be organized, that in no other way could they get a decent living.
 
Protected by Law
They told me that fifteen trucks of finished material had been moved out of the plant during the three weeks of strike. Normally at least fifteen truckloads leave the plant each day. They said that when a truck is moved out since the strike began, it is protected by a line of motorcycle cops, and the streets and nearby roofs are thick with blue-coats. They said there were more cops than strikers.
One of them declared: “Mr. Leviton breaks all the laws and he gets the protection of the law.” He assured me that if it were not for this overpowering police force, no trucks would move out of the plant.
Women in the cafeteria, anxious to present their reasons for striking, told me that many are the times when workers go back to work on the same machine that caught them, immediately after being bandaged up in the hospital, with a finger pierced or the tip of a finger gone. They can’t afford losing time being sick.
Once a girl got caught and it took a whole hour to extract her hand from the machine. The girl lost a finger. She was supposed to get her job back. But a year has passed and every time she comes to the employment office she is told there is nothing for her, although new workers are being taken on all the time.
 
Very Efficient
The efficiency experts at the plant follow a crude and cruel system. A new worker is put on piece work at a lower rate. She has to speed like all hell to make a wage worth carrying home. This reflects upon the older workers who are paid more. Sooner or later they are tired. Several women kept repeating: “We are striking because we want security.”
A big blonde woman explained how she works a dangerous machine all by herself putting material into the pockets of a revolving die turning at the rate of 85 to 90 revolutions a minute. She said even the most experienced sooner or later gets caught. As little as one cent is paid tor filling 100 pockets.
Eight weeks ago this woman injured her leg by slipping on the oil drenched floor. The company took five weeks before it put in her claim for compensation, and to date she said she has not received a penny.
About two years ago some of the women staged a sitdown strike when one of the more human foremen was laid off. He got his job back. But two of the women, avowedly leaders of the affair, lost theirs, These women, though technically not employees of Leviton, have joined the strikers. They told me that this same foreman is now scabbing inside of the plant.
Mr. Leviton refuses to have any thing to do with the union. He tries to make it appear that he doesn’t know whether to deal with the CIO or the AFL. From what I could learn today, this is transparent hocus pocus. Only Local 3 of the Electrical Workers, AFL, as involved. The matter is now before the Labor Relations Board.
The strikers are very positive about what they will not put up with any longer.
 




Daughters Without Ducats
“PRIDE AND PREJUDICE”
To have had a family of five marriageable daughters in middle-class provincial England of the early nineteenth century, was no joke. Husbands had to be found somehow. The competition of other families with daughters on their hands was as deadly as economic competition can be. When an eligible bachelor with money appeared on the scene, normal competition broke out into open warfare.
Thanks to Jane Austen’s honesty about her era and to MGM’s good sense in sticking to her realistic slant, this story about long ago does not ooze nostalgic longing for the “good old times”, as is usually the case with such pictures. Instead you get a bit of what was what. The struggle of Mrs. Bennett to marry off her petticoated brood, is no pretty thing to see – even through the kindly spectacles of Jane Austen’s sense of humor.
The kick of the story is concentrated in Lizzie Bennett, the oldest of the girls, who had beauty, charm, wit and a healthy resentment for the haughty aristocrats who looked down their noses at her own class. Her poisoned arrows were directed at the unbending Mr. Darcy and the verbal contest – in spite of the king’s best English – is a wow. In the happy end she overcomes her prejudice and he his pride.
Greer Garson easily takes the honors as Lizzie, in a very well-casted piece. She is beautiful, and not at all dumb. She knows her stuff all right.
 
Heil, Heel!
“THE MAN I MARRIED”
One can expect a long list of anti-Nazi films just to push along the “moral” armament program. Here is one of them, and it is really better than routine – though you must beware of the patriotic overtones.
A German in America and his American wife are summoned to Germany by the man’s father. They start with a disbelief in what they have heard about the Nazis. When they get there, their reactions are diametrically opposed. He becomes such an enthusiastic admirer of the “energy" “of the “new” Germany that be joins the Nazi party, decides to remain there, to divorce his wife for a Nazi woman, and to keep his American-born little boy in the fatherland.
She on the other hand, has he eyes opened to the starker realities of Hitlerism by an American journalist in Berlin – he puts in a scare or two by alluding to Hitler’s intentions in America. After witnessing wanton cruelties practised on innocent Czechs and being herself arrested by the Gestapo, she salutes her Nazi husband with a “Heil, Heel!”, to the great delight of the audience.
The ending has an unexpected twist. In order to get his grandson back to America, the old man reveals that his wife was a Holland Jewess. He had bribed the proper officials to have the records “fixed”. The Nazi woman, in whose presence this revelation is made, runs off to tell the Gestapo. The would-be Nazi hero is in for it. The torments he was willing to inflict on others, he will enjoy himself.
Consistency not being too important to film-makers by and large, we must not ask if taking care of his business was a good enough reason for this anti-Nazi father to bring his son back into the clutches of the Gestapo.
 
Oh Wonderful Democracy!
“ANDY HARDY MEETS DEBUTANTE”
There are possibilities for an uproariously funny film based on a situation where a small-town adolescent goes nuts over America’s No. 1 glamor girl. Naturally, it must be kept strictly on the flippant side.
However, in the interest of preparing youth to defend democracy, Hollywood recognizes no limitations. A flying leap is taken into a solemn sermon on the nobility of America’s great, the meaning of the Statue of Liberty. and, of course, equality of opportunities. Judge Hardy, Andy’s old man, lectures Andy on these brightly original topics – and is plenty boring.
To prove that democracy is not a matter of words alone, Judge Hardy wins a case against a slick Wall Street lawyer and an orphanage is not taken away from the poor orphans. Andy, who has been complaining about his lowly station in life, is of course convinced that he is the equal of any society girl.
Such are the problems of youth and thus are they solved.
Mickey Rooney should be given better things to do.
 
Hitler Struts
GERMAN NEWSREEL
At the Garden Theatre, 86th Street & Lexington Avenue, in the centre of the German population of New York, audiences applaud pictures of the German blitzkrieg, of Hitler, of anything German.
A recent newsreel showed Hitler as the French surrendered at Campiegne. First there was the monument set up to commemorate the French victory over the Germans in the last war. The Nazi flag rolled down over it. Hitler and his delegation marched into the railroad car. The French delegation entered and signed on the dotted line. Hitler left the car looking like the cat that has licked up the cream – he all but patted his belly in satisfaction. Yorkville admirers gloated with him.
Uncritical, misguided patriotism is, however, not the monopoly of Yorkville Germans. There is the 100% American variety as well.
 




Sidetracked
“THEY RIDE BY NIGHT”
Wisecracks, sexy and otherwise, falling thick and fast, the story starts off at a fast pace and creates an interesting situation. Two brothers, George Raft and Humphrey Bogart, are trying might and main to become independent haulers of produce. They get a break which enables them to pay off the installments on their truck. But luck doesn’t stay with them. One night Bogart falls asleep at the wheel. The truck plunges off the road, is completely wrecked, and Bogart loses an arm. So there they are. No truck, no money, three arms between them instead of four, and one-armed Bogart bitter and discouraged.
So far, pretty good. There is plenty of excitement, drivers falling asleep at the wheel, trucks crashing to destruction. The rough camaraderie of the road runs generously through the story. The problems of the drivers who want to be “their own bosses” instead of working for the owner of a fleet of trucks, provides social interest.
But for some mysterious reason the script writer decided to ditch all this and to start off somewhere else. Enters the beautiful conniving wife (Ida Lupino) of a boss truckman. She loves George Raft, but he scorns her. Follows a murder, a trial, and nemesis creeping up on Ida in the form of madness.
Thus the film gives us the wreck of a good story, along with the wrecked trucks – all for the same price.
 
For the Good of Their Souls
“GIRLS OF THE ROAD”
In the deep depression years of 1931–1932 we were reading about the vagrant girls who had left or been driven out of poverty-stricken homes. They were found sleeping in railway stations and riding the subways all night because they had nowhere to go. They were bumming their way on freight cars and thumbing their way on the highways. They congregated in hide-outs where they led a jungle existence until the local sheriff jailed them. Released from one jug, they soon got herded into another. Girls of the Road are these girls.
But, alas, in the film they are not girls at all but merely types that, move about like marionettes. And the treatment they get at the hands of the script writer is as routine and unimaginative as the grub they ate in the town jails. Furthermore they have thrust upon them a governor’s daughter who believes in their souls and wants to save them. (Lady bountiful is played by that perennial pollyanna, Ann Dvorak). And, to add insult to injury, the governor’s daughter gets them a “home” where they can become “rehabilitated”, instead of the jobs they really need.
In spite of these handicaps and the additional one that the film comes about a decade too late, the plight of the girls still stands out as something very real.
 
Enough is Enough
"ALL THIS AND HEAVEN, TOO”
(From Rachel Field’s novel)
To sit for two hours and twenty minutes watching Bette Davis being noble and Charles Boyer being self pityingly sad, adds up to having had about one hour and ten minutes too much. Movement from one situation to another is required of a good film. Here you get scene after scene of the same situation: the governess being wonderful to the children; they loving her; the duke and the governess yearning for each other; the duchess crazed with jealousy. The result is stuffy and depressing.
The sameness of the scenes also prevents Bette Davis from giving full range to her powers. When the opportunity to give comes her way, she does give, but there is not enough of it.
Though the story dates back to the pre-revolutionary period of 1846 in France, the producers have made practically no use at all of this historical background. So that we get nothing more than a hot-house triangular tragedy, about which this reviewer did not get very excited.
 
The Staff of Life
“THE BAKER’S WIFE”
(A French film with English subtitles)
If it’s acting of the first order that you want, Raimu supplies it in the role of the fleshy middle-aged baker whose good-looking young wife has deserted him for a muscular young gypsy. In a comic role and a comic situation, Raimu must tread carefully on this side of the ridiculous, for his wayward wife is very dear to the baker and her desertion no joke to him. Raimu succeeds. He makes you laugh at the baker and feel sorry for him at the same time.
The baker’s wife becomes the concern of the whole village. For the unhappy man has let the fire go out in his oven. The village has become breadless. He promises to bake such bread as they have never eaten before, if they will only find and bring back his wife. The wife-hunt is on, and a delightful funny thing it is.
The hostility between priest and scholar, the family feuds of generations, neighborly fights over poverty, all become grist to the mill producing droll situations and witty dialogue.
Decidedly a “don’t miss” film.
 




“At the most, only some thousands of children can be taken out of England. The millions of children of the workers will undoubtedly have to remain within range of Hitler’s dive bombers.”
This statement, which appeared in Labor Action on July 15, is fully borne out by the developments of the past month.
The so-called “mercy ships” bill that just passed the House of Representatives and will soon appear for voting in the Senate, provides an amendment to the neutrality law so that American ships may enter combat zones to remove children. But the steamship companies will collect a fare for every child. The children pay – or they stay as targets for Hitler’s bombs. Such is the quality of this “mercy”.
The American Committee for the Care of European Children assures the public that there will be no class distinctions and that children will come “from the homes of Welsh coal miners and Oxford dons”. That sounds very good in a speech.
But since no child can come over unless his transportation is paid for, those whose parents have money will naturally be the lucky ones.
 
Class Distinction
The matter of class distinction has reached the British Parliament where the government has been questioned on its intentions regarding parents who are willing to evacuate their children but haven’t got the price of a boat ride. The government spokesman declared that it would be unwise to encourage evacuation by financial assistance in the present stage of the war.
That makes it pretty clear as to where the poor children will be when the bombs begin to rain down from the skies.
The impression has been created that 200,000 children are all set to come here as soon as ships are sent for them. The fact is that these 200,000 children are merely registered for evacuation, which means that their parents are willing to let them go. It is estimated, in those sections of the news items that are not so commonly read, that only 32,000 are actually on the paid-up list and ready to leave.
However, even if the whole 200,000 eventually get here, this is still a mere fraction of the millions of youngsters under sixteen who will be left in war-torn England. These will mainly be the children of the masses, not of the upper classes.
 
Helping Whom?
The American Committee for the Care of European Children has opened a money-raising drive. Although a flock of society women are on the committee and it has been underwritten by literally scores of bankers and business men, only $5,000,000 is the goal for the whole country. The share for New York City – Wall Street’s bailiwick – is a mere million and a half. The profits in the offing from Great. Britain’s war orders warrant greater “generosity” from the American profiteers.
But not even this small sum will leave the reluctant pockets of the millionaires. Most of the money will come from ordinary people whose sympathies have been aroused enough to send their donations. Little do these people realize that the society women who are making a great noise and doing so very little to relieve the sufferings of war are themselves the beneficiaries of war.
The funds of this committee are not to be used for transporting children across the Atlantic. When the children have already arrived here, the committee will see to it that they get to their temporary homes in this country. That is all.
The committee’s talk about making no distinction between the Welsh miner and the Oxford don is deceptive. The committee does not choose who comes here. That is determined solely by who has money.
The conclusion is inevitable that the great to-do in this country over the refugee children, is mostly sound and fury signifying very little against the great problem of the millions of children who will have to stay where they are. The safely of these children depends upon the British masses themselves.
The first thing they must decide is whether the defense of their homes and families against Hitler can be entrusted to the British boss government – that government which winks understandingly at the fascist Mosley and allows him to live like a prince instead of a prisoner.
 




“There’s hardly anything left of that large chunk of meat I put into the pot. What has become of it?”
You are absolutely wrong, madam. All the meat is there. The trouble is that you paid for a little meat and a lot of water – at the same price. You bought meat into which water had been pumped to increase the weight. The water has naturally evaporated.
This racket, which cost housewives many millions of dollars each year and nets the wholesale meat houses these additional millions of profits, is openly practised in the City of New York. The newspaper PM recently conducted an investigation. Reporters bought at random thirteen samples of meat. Seven out of the thirteen were flooded.
One sixteen pound brisket cooked for analysis lost ten founds of weight. That was a loss of $3 on a $4.80 purchase.
Oh, yes! There is a law against watering meat. It provides a fine of $2,000 and a violator can be sent to jail for a year. But —
So daintily has this law been applied to the crooks who steal money out of the housewife’s pocket that the crime is repeated again and again by the same concerns with virtually impunity.
One concern has been’ convicted thirty-three times in the last thirty-one months, or more than a conviction a month. Why should it stop watering meat when it can get away with a nominal fine of $5. Breaking the law pays – to the tune of $5,000,000 a year in the City of New York alone.
The benevolent attitude of the democratic law enforcers towards the boss law breakers was expressed by the Health Commissioner in charge of these cases, “Watering meat hasn’t made anybody sick. It just means you don’t get your money’s worth.”
In a word, the housewife owes a vote of thanks to the racketeers because they pump harmless water into the meat and not arsenic.

It may seem like small potatoes to complain about watered meat at a time when most working women are worrying about how soon their men folks will be swallowed up in the war machine. But it all connects up.
The whole boss system is a profit-making racket from top to bottom. This 100%-American democracy serves as a cover for it all. Let the boss class fight for their own system. Why should the workers get mixed up and mangled in THEIR war machine?

We working women will now be saved the trouble of going to Paris for our Molyneaux originals. The New York garment centre is buzzing with preparations to make the American metropolis the successor of Paris in the production of exquisite fabrics and fashions. And since we working women will be saving the price of the trip across the Atlantic, we will be able to pick up an extra gown or two in some exclusive New York couturier’s. What luck!
Talking about gowns, I have my eye on a pearl-studded creation designed and executed by Hattie Carnegie of New York. It is of eggshell slipper satin, and is covered with 61,000 cultured pearls and 102 real pearls employed in a stunning motif. The cost is a mere $75,000. I’m starting to save up my pennies.
Hildegarde, who modeled the gown, wore the Cabach on Mabe pearl, one of the largest in the world and valued at $50,0000. I may not be able to afford the trinket, even though it goes so well with the gown, especially if junior needs a pair of shoes.

“I went to the back garden to get some diapers from the clothesline and found one so riddled with machine gun bullets it was useless.”
This, according to one newspaper story, was the complaint of an English mother while bombs were raining down from the sky above Croydon.
Another paper showed a picture of three girls wearing bandages for injuries received from German bombers, but happy and smiling as if they were enjoying themselves at a summer picnic.
Still another story goes that two charwomen emerged from a pub when the all-clear signal was sounded, wiping their lips, pleased that Hitler’s air raid had given them an excuse for a “quick one”.
This most deadly, most horrible, most devastating war of all time is reduced by the capitalist press to a matter of torn diapers, superficial bandages, “quick ones”.

These stories are part and parcel of the dishonest method employed by the boss press in reporting the war. Battles have become engagements between planes, tanks, big guns. Military objectives are hit or they are not hit. But the people —
Oh, the people – well, they are taking it calmly, going about their business as usual. What is a mere war to them? They take it as a competitive sport of some kind – a tennis tournament perhaps. But somewhere in a corner is stuck away an inconspicuous item about the human slaughter.
The mass murder of war is being minimized. The war makers are trying to teach people to take war as an ordinary occurrence. Otherwise the horror of modern warfare would be more than human beings could stand or stand for.
It will take more than crooked boss journalism to make women believe that a mother whose baby is within reach of falling bombs will – except in dazed panic – talk about a torn diaper. Though the boss war makers of the world wish it, women cannot forget every human emotion and accept as an every day matter mass annihilation of their flesh and blood – for bosses’ profits and world markets!
 




Mussolini and Hitler did everything they could to turn the unfortunate women of Italy and Germany into machines for producing the human victims of their war policies. The rulers of this country are building a war machine second to none. A warning that we can expect a similar campaign for babies here was given by Professor Carle C. Zimmerman, Harvard sociologist, at a conference on Tomorrow’s Children.
He stated that of the 30 million American families only 3 million have more than four children, about 7 million have three or four, and 20 million have two or less, According to the Professor, this is very bad for “American ideals”. Each woman “must bear between three and four children on the average to sustain a population, presupposing greater losses some years than in normal times”. This is indeed a delicate way of referring to the mass murder inflicted by war.
On the question of “American ideals” he was more outspoken. He said “NO MATTER WHAT WE THINK WE ARE, THE FACT IS THAT WE HAVE ADOPTED AN IMPERIALISTIC WORLD MOOD.” Except for the “we”, the Professor agrees with what Labor Action has been hammering home for weeks, namely, that, to day “American ideals” equal bosses’ profits. He concludes that “We must either keep up our population and keep it in shape to support the policy, or give up the imperialism.”
The bosses and their politicians of both parties are not willing to give up imperialism. That is as clear as the nose on a face. Therefore, for America’s women, Professor Zimmerman’s speech assumes the importance of hand-writing on the wall.

As the opposition to compulsory military training becomes more pronounced, the propaganda of those supporting it becomes more unscrupulous. The following from the pen of the First Lady of the land is an example.
“We rarely bear any objection now to the fact that we are compelled to pay taxes for the support of the public school systems, and yet that is a good example of the kind of a compulsion all of us enjoy without protesting every day. In view of the necessity for mobilizing our country why should we not compel ourselves to do a little more?”
Mrs. Roosevelt puts education and war on the same basis. No working woman agrees with that.
Education is for life – boss war is for useless death.

In democratic England, where everyone is supposed to be making sacrifices for the war, a committee of the Labor Party reports that there is considerable resentment among the poor. They assert that poorer households only are called on to make real sacrifices in war-time food rationing. Well-to-do families, able to afford more expensive food, “can get as much as they can pay for”. Real restrictions are placed only on the working class housewife.
Who says only the working women are making sacrifices?
Doesn’t the queen make daily tours of the hospitals to smile at the wounded?
Don’t the duchesses sell their trinkets for the war chest?
Aren’t the wives of munition manufacturers rolling bandages while they sip their tea and chat?

You have heard it said scores of times that in this country labor is not a commodity or article of commerce. In other words, we, the workers, are supposed to be human beings. But this idealism about the worker dwells somewhere up in the stratosphere above these United States. Down here on earth, there is no smell of it. Witness the case of 1,000 hostesses who until a week ago worked in the taverns of Newark.
Suddenly they are without jobs, due to an ordinance passed by the Newark City Commission which prohibits women employed in taverns from accepting beverages or food paid for by customers. This makes it unprofitable for tavern-owners to employ hostesses. So they are fired.
I can think of much more suitable work for women to do than to be hostesses in taverns. But the point is that these hostesses are not potatoes or shoelaces or bathtubs. They have to eat to live.
When the Newark City Commission took away their present jobs – for moral reasons presumably – why were they not moral enough to provide these women with other means of livelihood?

From Boston, from Los Angeles and from cities in the 3,000-mile span, come reports of a great increase in applications for marriage licenses. The city registrar of Boston, canceled his vacation because of the rush, surpassing even that of 1917. In Los Angeles “the increase has been becoming more noticeable with each day.”
The bridegrooms are between 21 and 30, the age group from which conscripts for the Army will first be taken.
We can imagine what happens in the minds of these young people. Many of them were not planning to and are not prepared to marry. But the death-mask of war haunts them. They hope marriage will afford them a little protection. Many of them will have families, prematurely, without the means or the wish for children.
In this way also the capitalist war-makers are shaping the destinies of men, women and children. Socialists do not submit to this tyranny. WE ARE. FIGHTING THAT PEOPLE MAY BE ABLE TO CONTROL THEIR OWN LIVES.
 




Monogamous Mormons
“BRIGHAM YOUNG – FRONTIERSMAN”
Just why Twentieth Century Fox should want to paint Mormonism in heroic colors at this time is hard to say. Perhaps it wished to make a plea for religious tolerance. The impassioned speech of disciple Brigham Young at the trial of head-prophet Joseph Smith would indicate something of the sort.
So as not to offend the admission-paying public, the film pushes to the background the polygamy of the Mormons. Young’s first wife has the show all to herself. She is his inspiration and pillar of strength, in good conservative fashion, and the only indication of other wives are a few nondescript and vague females scattered about.
According to this version by Louis Bromfield, the Mormons believed in a community way of living. As Joseph Smith explains it to young Brigham, each should work for all and all for each, the needs of all should be supplied from a central store house, the old and the sick should be cared for by the community, there should be no social distinctions. Undoubtedly this principle of equal-sharing was carried out during the trek to Salt Lake City and the building of the first settlement. But, as we all know, the ideal of community living was lost in the shuffle of capitalist development; and Salt Lake City in its beautiful mountain setting is today just another American city embracing the haves and the have-nots.
The story of westward-ho, on the usual grand scale, is still impressive. A caravan of covered wagons moving across frozen rivers or flooded ones. Man against nature in the raw, bitter winter with weaklings falling by the wayside. The variation from the usual pioneer picture is that Brigham Young, now in Joseph Smith’s shoes, is guided by revelations from god. The final crescendo is the arrival of the famous flock of sea gulls to eat the hordes of crickets attacking the growing grain.
Thus are saved the food of the settlement and the reputation of Brigham Young as a prophet.
Would you believe it – Tyrone Power plays a secondary role, the main role being very well performed by Dean Jagger.
 
A Pretty Soupy Business
“PUBLIC DEB NO. 1”
After a while you catch on that this is an anti-communist film. At first it gives the impression of poking fun at capitalist justice. A bunch of communist demonstrators are arrested, and the judge gives them all the maximum punishment. When he is informed that one of the prisoners is the rich heiress of a soup company, turned communist, in great panic he releases her. On her threat to expose him for his bias in favor of wealth, he consents to let the others go too. Not bad from Hollywood on the subject of justice as it is practiced under capitalism. But from then on, you get something that the cat dragged into the soup.
The heiress is supposed to have been duped by comrade-the-butler who is after her fortune, for himself of course, though he makes her think it is for the cause. Enters the hero, a fearless all-American waiter, who spanks the heiress in a restaurant for her communist beliefs or something. This optimistic hombre is against communism because he wants to hold on to his one-in-a-million chance of becoming a millionaire. Though he does not quite make that grade, he does get to be vice-president of the soup company and marries the heiress, which is as good as anyone can expect.
There is a silly mix-up about saving the company from bankruptcy because the heiress’ political views have made her soup distasteful to the pure American stomach. To the rescue comes Elsa Maxwell – of whom the less said the better – with a costume ball at which nearly everyone is dressed as Abraham Lincoln, to add just another touch of true Americanism. Mischa Auer and Charles Ruggles are pathetic swimmers against the soupy current. And if this is the best Hollywood can do by way of demolishing communism; capitalism is in the soup – but definitely.
 
When Are Atrocities Atrocities?
“PASTOR HALL”
This English film is based upon the story by Ernst Toller, said to have been written. from the experience of Martin Niemoeller, the Nazi-hounded priest. Without bothering to toot the English horn, it simply sets forth the ruinous march of the Nazi storm troopers into a contented German town and the heroic fight of its pastor against them. Except for the Oxford accent of the storm troopers, the story bears the stamp of authenticity. The conclusions are left to the public. And such is the unjustified moral gain to imperialist England from Hitler’s hated savagery, that it is supposed the public will naturally draw the pro-English conclusions.
Though by now Nazi methods are pretty well-known and heartily hated, this story is still stirring. There is the great misfortune of a fourteen year old girl who is violated in a Nazi labor camp and comes home with her misery. And the wanton atrocities of a concentration camp where only the lash is liberally used instead of bullets that cost 12 pfennig each. The spiritual strengthening of the pastor to put up a fight is realistically developed. His final choice to speak openly against the Nazi and take his punishment of death, rather than escape from the country, comes as a natural climax.
James Roosevelt; the American distributor, did not feel as confident about the conclusions of the public as did the English- producer. He has had his mother appear on the screen, in new gown and with schoolgirlish accents, to deliver the usual blah-blah, Perhaps the Roosevelts remember, and think the public may, that Hitler’s atrocities went on from 1933 to 1939, with material aid from England and the United States, and that it was only when Hitler’s imperialism began to tread on the pet corn of the British imperialists that his atrocities became something to write home about.
 




Spread over a half page in the New York Times the other morning was an advertisement of a collection of natural mink coats – “very Saks Fifth Avenue – beautifully worked – silky soft – sorrel shining – Remember too that each takes the place of a whole wardrobe of coats – you may slip contentedly and assuredly into one – for any daytime occasion – for any evening occasion – simple elegance – marked individual chic – AND ONLY $1,650.”
A quarter of the page contained a picture of a glamorous debutante cuddling up in her natural mink.
Opposite me in the subway sat a shabby woman, without hat or gloves, clutching a paper bundle and cuddling up in her seat, for her coat was nothing to cuddle up in. It was of some muddy hue, all color having long ago faded out of it – threadbare – buttons gone – buttonholes torn through – pinned at the throat with a safety pin.
And soft, sikly, natural mink coats – “AT ONLY $1650.00.”

Malcolm Macdonald, English boss politician who is Minister of Health, broadcasting from London the other night, vividly described a gripping scene in a subway during a heavy air raid:
“In one arch more brightly lit than others by the spot-lamp hanging from its ceiling, the group of people appeared like a company of actors on a stage raised above the slumberers below. Some standing, some crouching. some lying full length, they formed a circle around the central figure of a powerful young girl.
“She stood almost motionless, her head bowed, a coil of her hair fallen forward over her face, while, with strong sweeps of her arms, she conjured from a giant accordion a whole series of soldiers’ songs of the last World War.
“Her concentration was so absolute that it seemed as though nothing in the distraught world mattered but the gay, light music.”
What a shame that a young woman of such stoical character should be wasting her strength and talent! She plays soldiers’ songs of the last World War – songs created for the murderous purpose of putting men in a mood to go to useless destruction cheerfully. She plays them so that more people may bear useless destruction cheerfully in the present World War – which the last one was supposed to have made impossible.
There will come a day when such women will use their strength and talents to rally the people to fight for emancipation. They will sing revolutionary songs of the workers fighting for class freedom, They will then be easing the birth pains of a better world.

Mrs. Herbert Lehman, wife of the governor of New York State, talks like some Rip Van Winkel who has just awakened from a long sleep and doesn’t know what’s going on. Rubbing the sleep out of her eyes, she expresses her faith in the future in these words:
“A people that is just beginning to create its own music, its own paintings, its own particular form of the drama, its own architecture, can’t possibly be losing its vitality. The young people I know are keenly aware of this and instead of giving up, because the physical frontiers of our country are exhausted, they are thinking how lucky they are to be living in an area which is bound to see intensive cultivation of our mental frontiers.”
Evidently Mrs. Lehman has not yet heard about the outstanding event of the day, namely, that the youth of the country is now subject to military conscription. She certainly was asleep when a certain General John F. O’Ryan, advocating conscription, declared: “The first thing that must be done is TO DESTROY ALL INITIATIVE.”
 




BROOKLYN, N.Y., October 7 – About a week ago it seemed that the first step had been taken toward settling the strike of the Leviton electrical workers, now in its sixth week. At a conference of National Labor Relations Board, Leviton Mfg. Company and Local 3, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, a settlement of the case was reported arranged.
The union agreed to drop its charges against Leviton; the company agreed to notify all the employees that it would abide by the Wagner Act and would reinstate Joseph Mahler, who was discharged for union activity; and an election was to be conducted by the Labor Board. The question on which no agreement was had was whether working foremen should be included in the union. The union insisted on this point and the company refused to agree.
 
No Election Held
Today at union headquarters in Greenpoint I was informed that no election has as yet been held. A union official stated that he had no doubt at all that the workers would vote for Local 3, which organized them, led them in the strike, and is paying them strike benefits as well as giving other relief where necessary.
Again it was impressed upon me that the union feels it is not the board hearings nor the election that is important, but the strength of the strike. The Leviton plant is still one hundred percent tied up.
There are indications, I was told, that Leviton is anxious to resume work, but he is a hard nut to crack, and his generosity towards the idea of unionism and of a higher standard of living for the workers is rather microscopic.
The union sees the possibility of a protracted struggle, perhaps extending into the cold weather. Towards that end, all the strength of the workers is being mustered. Also a supply of food for the strikers’ free cafeteria will be procured. Overcoats, blankets and other cold weather necessities for pickets and for needy strikers will be obtained.
 




Mothers who have brought up sons in poverty, and worry over their bad health, may now throw their worries overboard. The army is going to take their sons regardless of their bad health, and fix them up. We have it from such an eminent authority as Dr. Hugh H. Young, medical consultant in the American Expeditionary Force during the last war.
He is of the opinion that the army examination of the conscripts will result in “the detection of diseased tonsils, adenoids and decayed teeth” and will “not only lead to their prompt cure”, but will “prevent future rheumatism, heart and arterial diseases which so often come from these simple infections”. He believes that military training will “be of incalculable benefit to our young men, increase their vigor”, and so on.
Yes, mothers, even if Dr. Young overstates the case, in the interest of his unworthy cause, your boys’ chests will expand, their muscles will be toughened, their diseased tonsils may be removed and their decayed teeth may be treated. The minimum health that capitalist society did not allow them for peaceful pursuits, will be theirs as soldiers for the ruling class.
All you will have to worry about is whether or not they will come home alive from the battlefields.

Mrs. Godowitz, a housewife living in the Bronx, and her family are on relief. You know what that means. When she markets for the family’s meagre supplies, she is careful to save every possible penny. She buys her groceries in Goldman’s, but she goes to Schoenbach’s for milk. In Goldman’s it is 11 cents and in Schoenbach’s only 10 cents.
Suddenly Mrs. Godowitz found herself involved in a court proceeding.
An injunction was out against Schoenbach to restrain him from selling milk for less than 11 cents. The wholesale milk dealers were banding together to fix the price. They argued before the Bronx Supreme Court that if whiskey can be price-fixed under the law, so can milk. To them milk is not the basic food for children and sick people, it is simply something out of which to make money. So, milk and whiskey are the same to them.
How did Mrs. Godowitz get mixed up in the law suit? Some swindler fooled her into signing a paper ASKING THAT THE PRICE OF MILK BE INCREASED TO 11 CENTS. When told the meaning of what she had signed, she became furious. "My husband is sick and out of work six months. I have two children: Why should I want to Pay more for milk!”
And why should greedy profit-makers be allowed to control what women need to keep their families from starving?

A bright-faced lad of twelve was chosen “Typical American Boy” at the World’s Fair in New York. I saw his picture with neat shirt and striped tie, flanked by Mayor La Guardia and James Marshall, president of the New York Board of Education, both gentlemen heartily in favor of the military conscription of the older brothers of typical American boys.
In Germany, Italy and now in France, such lads are part of the huge military regime. They are trained not only in the use of guns at this early age, but in such unquestioning allegiance to their rulers that they would even kill their parents if commanded to do so.
Do I hear someone say: “That can’t happen here”? Why not? Military conscription has happened here – as it has happened everywhere else.
Why not? Hitlerism and fascism, which regimented lads of twelve, were devised by the boss class of Germany and Italy to save its hide at home and to expand abroad. Why should we suppose that the bosses of this country are any different?
It can’t happen here, mothers of typical American boys, only if we throw out the boss class – and THAT must happen EVERYWHERE.
 




BROOKLYN, N.Y., Sept. 30 – Parked in front of the strike headquarters in Greenpoint this evening stood a tremendous truck entirely covered with placards setting forth the strikers’ case against the Leviton Mfg. Co. Every evening, with a band to attract attention and illumination so that people can read the placards, this truck is driven through the streets to arouse public sympathy in favor of the strikers.
Some of the placards read: “When Leviton girls lose their fingers at his machines, they lose their jobs.” – “Can Mr. Leviton tell us how human beings can live on coolie wages of $11 and $12 a week.”
In the headquarters, Mr. Broach of the International Union of Electrical Workers, Local 3, spoke to me about the hearing today before the Labor Relations Board. He was puzzled by Leviton’s attitude. He said that the man is either the dumbest ass imaginable or else a wise old fox. Leviton acts as it he doesn’t know what it’s all about, is afraid of the court procedure, doesn’t answer questions, and appeals to his lawyer to take him out of it all.
The workers testifying at the hearing acquitted themselves very well, according to Mr. Broach. They were enjoying their boss’s discomfiture. Some of them thought he should go to the union school to learn something about unionism in 1940 and such things.
Mr. Leviton is before the Labor Board charged with firing workers for union membership and in other ways interfering with the unionization of the plant. The hearing is to continue.
At the strikers’ cafeteria an addition has been made to the menu of coffee and sandwiches. A nutritious stew is now being served.
I met Kitty, one of the girls who organized the Leviton workers. She is a member of Local 3, working in a unionized plant. She gladly gave her evenings to further the cause of unionism among the exploited Leviton workers. She said that nearly all the organization work was done by volunteers from the union, workers who had benefited tremendously through the union.
Such is the power of unionism and so great the bosses’ fear of it that Mr. Leviton has, since his Greenppint employees went out. given a slight wage increase to the workers in one of his out-of-town plants, as a sop.
The Greenpoint plant is still at a complete standstill. As in the first weeks of the strike, an occasional truckload is moved out, especially on Wednesdays when the strikers all come to headquarters for their strike benefit. But this stage setting does not bother them. Four weeks of strike has made veterans of them.
About the hearing, a union man commented: “A strike is never won at a hearing.” By which he meant it is up to the strikers themselves.
There is nothing wrong with these strikers.
 




The welkin is ringing with loud-spoken advice to “diet for national defense.”
Free, gratis – and for nothing – you get information about food for which, before the “national emergency,” you had to pay a stiff fee to a good doctor familiar with the latest discoveries of biochemistry.
You must have your iron and calcium and so-and-so many international units of vitamins A, B, C and D. Especially must you have your vitamin B-1 – FOR MORALE.
These minerals and vitamins are supposed to make you SO TOUGH that the horrors and sufferings of modern warfare will roll off you like, water off a duck’s back.
THAT’S WHY YOU’RE GETTING THE INFORMATION FOR NOTHING!

All the food markets are very cooperative. Price signs bear notations as to the mineral or vitamin content of the articles. Thus, you, are informed, that tomatoes – at somewhere around 20 cents a pound, for those that have not been in storage for several years – are an excellent source of vitamins A and C. And beef liver – which has gone up from around 18 cents a pound to 29–33 cents – has practically all the vitamins needed.
A working class housewife could really give her family a beautifully balanced diet these days – except tor the small matter of prohibitive prices!

The German housewives were also well fortified with information on proper nutrition. They too could serve faultless meals except for war shortages and high prices!
Still the dietary information broadcast by Hitler has been far from wasted.
The Voelkischer Beobachter, official Nazi daily, recently advised housewives to get their vitamins the way the wild animals do. It urged them to spend Sundays with their children in the woods, gathering daisies and other wild plants – not to decorate their homes but TO EAT THEM: These wild flowers; it was suggested, have more vitamin C, more health-giving minerals and more nourishing salts, than most domestic vegetables. For soups, gravy and vegetable dishes, chickweed, nettles, dandelions, butterburs and caseweeds are highly recommended.
The United States government – which is following Hitler’s example in other matters – may also soon extol the virtues of the modest daisy. That voluptuous strumpet of a tomato – bah! – who wants it!
So you, see how grand it is to know all about diet!
War shortages and ballooning prices may put FOOD out, of your reach: But VITAMINS you can always get – by going native!
All you will have to worry about is the doctor’s bill. Your stomach may have an understandable preference for tomatoes.

Talking about prices and shortages, some figures pertaining to World War No. 1 are in order.
The very reliable economic journal knbown as The Annalist published a composite of the prices of various article representing the cost of living from January 1916 to January 1918. It revealed that there was almost a 100 per cent rise in the price index for those two war years.
The treasurer of one of the Middle West railroad lines; cataloguing his business for the same two years, reported that his road carried 331/3 per cent less goods representing the normal purchases of the people; and 331>/3 per cent more munitions and other war supplies. This was typical of the whole country.
This gives you, an idea, Mrs. Working Class Housewife, how scarce your normal needs became and how much they cost during the last war – which in comparison with this one is like a summer cottage alongside of the Empire State building!
Imagine, if you can, THE HARDSHIP IN STORE FOR YOU!

Of course, there is Mr. Leon Henderson, chairman of the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply. He is supposed to put “ceilings” over prices. But his “ceilings” will not put a roof over your head!
Mr. Henderson’s fancy title doesn’t scare the war profiteers one bit. When he recently announced a “ceiling” over the prices of various kinds of cotton yarns, he was vilely attacked in debate in the Senate by representatives of the cotton kings. The mildest abuse he got was to be called a “socialist.” Senator Taft asserted he would put out of business entirely both Mr. Henderson and, his Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply, The senator said that the OPRCS was acting “without the shadow of any legal authority.”
It’s a sure bet that Mr. Henderson’s “ceilings” will have to have big holes in them – TO LET WAR PROFITS COME THROUGH ON THE WAY UP!

But you yourselves know that April prices all along the line were higher than March prices, and that May prices went above April prices.
Impartial investigators in this field predict that in the fall the cost of most ordinary commodities will be much higher. Men’s hats and suits, women’s handbags, cloth coats and cotton dresses, all shoes and underwear, blankets, sheets and furniture – this is a partial list!
Another way in which the working class housewife will be robbed is by the sale of inferior merchandise. Already there is on the market a new and bigger supply of poor quality goods in men’s shirts, women’s shoes, coats and gloves, upholstery and home appliances.
Industry run for private profit is very “accommodating.” You can’t pay the higher prices? Well, well! Here’s something within your price range, madam. But don’t complain if it falls apart, after the first tubbing and loses its shape in the first rain! The loss is all yours, my dear madam – the profit all the capitalist’s!

Labor Action stresses the tremendous importance for workers to demand wages to keep pace with the rising cost of living and not reduce them to the necessity of eating daisies and wearing shoddy. And the workers must not make up for low wages by working long hours that will make them old before their time.
Labor Action also urges the working class housewives to organize militant consumer’ committees through which to demand a steady flow of the things they must have, AT PRICES THEY CAN AFFORD. Such committees must be ready to boycott, picket, and do everything necessary to protect the standard of living of the working people.
Statistics show that among the poor the death rate rises along with the cost of living. No thank you!
WE, WORKING WOMEN, DON’T WANT DAISIES – EITHER INSIDE US OR ABOVE US!
LET’S GO!
 




NEW YORK CITY – The latest move in the splendid fight of the Transport Workers Union for its continued existence in New York City was a tremendous rally at Madison Square Garden on May 21. If Mayor LaGuardia still thinks that, by going into the business of running subways, he and the Board of Transportation can break up this powerful union, he has missed the significance of this great gathering of the pro-unionists of the city.
Unionists and supporters of the union cause in New York City, numbering 22,000, jammed the Garden to endorse the life and death struggle of the TWU. An estimated 20,000 could not get into the Garden and many thousands remained on the streets to listen to the speeches as they came through the loud speakers.
 
Parade from Hall
Even more impressive and stirring than the enthusiasm reigning inside the Garden, was the well-organized parade of members of the TWU from their headquarters on 64th Street down Eighth Avenue. They did not go to the rally as individuals to assemble within the protection of four walls. They came through the city streets guarded by police on foot and on horse, and lined by sympathetic or curious people. They came as a UNION, as ONE, giving life to the placards they bore, “UNITED INVINCIBLE.”
The marchers were formed in companies, each with a captain and each with the banner of the division of the TWU to which they belong. There were car inspectors, lamp trimmers; signalmen, carpenters, locomotive engineers, switchmen, ticket agents, office workers and all the other categories. Men, women and children marched together. Banners, and placards were carried by women and children – even by little ones of five and six.
The BMT, IRT and Independent subways were represented, as were the bus and trolley lines. Workers of the Harlem Paintshop came by. The Women’s Auxiliary of the TWU marched in a company of its own.
The band at the head of the parade played Solidarity Forever and other union songs. Bands of bagpipers were interspersed along the line. The marchers shouted greetings to their friends on the sidewalks and invited them to join. And from the sidewalks came shouts of “Atta boy!”
It was a sight to see. A young woman member of the State, County and Municipal Workers Union said to me, with deep emotion in her voice: “This makes me feel that labor has a chance to get anything it wants.”
The keynote of the huge demonstration was the demand for collective bariaining. Slogans displayed in the parade and inside the Garden called for genuine collective bargaining. Speakers declared that the state and federal laws granting workers the right to collective bargaining do not say “except workers employed by the Board of Transportation of the City of New York.”
The Mayor, now outstanding as No. 1 union-buster, contends that, by taking over the subways, the city has automatically made civil servants of the 32,000 transit workers and ended their right to be represented through their union. The transit workers, whose conditions have been tremendously improved through the TWU, refuse to accept this autocratic, reactionary ruling. The TWU had made advantageous contracts with the BMT and IRT subway systems before the city bought them ten months ago. Since then the ranks of the union have been swelled by the workers on the Independent system, always city-owned. But the Mayor refuses to deal with the union to negotiate a new agreement to take the place of the old BMT-IRT contract expiring June 30th.
There is no other word for this refusal of the Mayor than UNION BUSTING. The answer of the transit workers and their supporters at the Madison Square Garden rally was: “TRY AND·DO IT!” At the beginning of the meeting, Chairman Hogan, president of the New York local, asked the electrician to put on all the lights so that everybody could have a good look around. The place was packed to the rafters. The builders didn’t make the Garden big enough for the TWU, commented the chairman.
Philip Murray, president of the CIO, came to the rally to pledge the support of the 5,000,000 CIO members to the fight of the TWU. He said that for one man or for a small group of men to have power to regulate the lives of thousands of men, women and children – as LaGuardia and the Board of Transportation propose to – was too much power.
Other speakers were more vigorous in their attacks on the Mayor and the Board of Transportation than Murray. Joseph Curran, president of the National Maritime Union, said that along with acquiring the rolling stock of Rockefeller and Morgan at the rate of $320,000,000 for $l00,000,000 in value, the city took over the Rockefeller-Morgan labor policies – for nothing. He said the Mayor wants to return to the Middle Ages where serfdom was the condition of labor. The Mayor, he declared, has three big jobs now, but he isn’t big enough for the job of destroying ’the TWU.
Michael Quill, international president of the TWU, referred to the big three of the Board of Transportation – Delaney, Sullivan and Keegan – as the three old men called “Winkin’, Blinkin’ and Nod,” and predicted: “They’re going to miss our bus again.”
Ewart Guinier, vice-president of the State, County and; Municipal Workers of America, CIO, exposed the lie that civil service employees don’t need a union’ He said 13,000 civil service workers in his union find it necessary. He said the tactics of the government with its workers are just like those in private industry. Such tactics can be met only by the CIO. He promised the support of his union and of his people, numbering half a million Negroes in the city of New York, in the fight of the TWU.
Mrs. Mollie Grogan of the Ladies Auxiliary of the TWU, presented a bouquet to Philip Murray and Mrs. Murray. In her short, speech she said the wives, mothers and daughters of the transport workers know what the union has done for them. “We want the union!” she shouted, and received thunderous applause.
A very enjoyable feature of the rally was the singing of songs written by union members. One was about the scab train that never came back. One was Let’s Roll the Union On over the Delaneys, LaGuardias and all others who stand in the way. The choruses were taken up by the whole assembly.
This meeting was a superb massing of union strength. The TWU members and their supporters have self-confidence and good cheer. They have the promise of Philip Murray that the whole strength of the CIO is behind them – UNTIL VICTORY IS THEIRS. They are giving union-busting LaGuardia something to think about.
 




On May 24 the biggest battleship in the world went down to its watery grave. It took with it, to a useless death, over 1,300 unfortunate men, trained, and skilled in the arts of war instead of peace.
There now lie in utter, irretrievable waste, at the bottom of the sea where the Hood sank, tens of thou sands of tons of materials desperately needed by human beings all over the world for such peacetime essentials as DECENT HOUSING.
In exactly five minutes there was wiped from the face of the earth what was built in many years by the toil of men. A concentration of labor and material costing some $50,000,000 was thus destroyed in the war between the imperialists of the world.
Three and a half days after the sinking of the Hood, the bomb-battered Bismarck nosed into the sea and disappeared forever. The creatures of the sea have by this time devoured, without any national preference, some 1,500 Germans along with the 1,300 Englishmen.
 
Battleships vs. Housing
It took German workmen three years to build what was the newest and strongest floating fort, which nevertheless went down in no time. All this labor has been absolutely lost to human use. All the splendid building materials that made up the Bismarck will now serve the sharks in a game of hide and go seek. An absolute waste of another $50,000,000 and of human lives!
Thus the sinking of the Hood and the Bismarck has dramatized for the working people of the world the tremendous, criminal, human and material waste of imperialist war.
During the days when the Hood and the Bismarck incidents occupied the place of honor in the daily press, one could have learned, by careful scanning of items considered less important, that a new housing project is now under way in New York City. In the Fort Greene area of Brooklyn, near the Navy Yard, where even more modern editions of the Hood and Bismarck are being constructed at top speed, 28 city blocks are sprouting the groundwork for buildings which will house, in comparative comfort, over 3,500 families.
This building project, which will serve the very useful purpose of taking perhaps 17,500 people out of tuberculosis-breeding. fire-trap, old-law tenements will cost a mere $22,000,000 – roughly, about ONE FIFTH of the cost of the Hood and the Bismarck, which in no way furthered the well-being of human beings and took more than 2,800 men down to the bottom of the sea.
The working people of every nation on earth for years and years have been in need of clean, healthy places in which to live. In Rome and London, in New York and Berlin, in Istanbul and Madrid, there has been a monotonous, depressing and significant similarity.
THERE HAVE BEEN THE SHOW PLACES WHERE THE RICH RESIDE AND GET RECREATION, and just as inevitably THE SLUMS WHERE THE POOR EXIST AND RECREATE. Alike in “democratic” England and fascist Italy, in “democratic” America and nazi Germany, the vital need of the Working people for DECENT HOUSING has – along with their .other vital needs – been ignored. If not entirely ignored, it has been most inadequately dealt with. This goes equally for all the capitalist countries.
But not so with the needs of the imperialists of all nations for the instruments of war! No half-way measures in Germany when it came to war preparations. No putting off for another day in Italy when it came to airplanes and tanks. Time is of the essence, and: neither men nor materials are spared in England to gear the country for war. And in the United States the most tremendous sea, air and land forces of all are being built with blitzkrieg speed.
 
What the Facts Show
The striking contrast of capitalism’s stupendous, unstinting building for destructive war, with its puny provision for peacetime needs of working people, is brought into focus by a few figures pertaining to the United States.
The United States naval program alone calls for the expenditure of billions of dollars. Super-battleships, doubling the cost of the Hood and the Bismarck, are being laid. The incredible sum of $100,000,000 will go into each of these ocean monsters, which – with an “unlucky shot” – may go to keep the Hood and the Bismarck company at the bottom of the sea – a total waste!
EACH of these naval units to be produced by workers for the war use of their imperialist masters embodies in itself enough wealth to build nearly FIVE housing projects like the one at Fort Greene in Brooklyn. About EIGHTY-SEVEN THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED men, women and children could be provided with a healthier, freer, gayer life if that wealth went into building DECENT HOUSING instead of ONE super-battleship.
There are in democratic New York City, about 500,000 old tenement apartments – in buildings 60, 80 and 100 years old – without heat and hot water, without proper toilets and baths, without sufficient ventilation, without fire protection. In this city alone about 2,500,000 people are on this sub-level of existence – WHILE, OF COURSE, BEING EXHORTED BY THEIR EXPLOITERS EVERY MINUTE OF EVERY DAY TO GO “DEFEND THEIR WAY OF LIFE.”
 
Five Years or 133 Years
How long do you think it would take the American capitalist system to clear the shameful slums of New York City alone? Not in your life will it be done. Not in the lifetime of a new-born babe. Not in the life of generations to come. For, at the rate of building allowed by the present allocation of funds for such projects as the Fort Greene houses, IT WILL TAKE 133 YEARS! This is the speed with which capitalism takes care of the elementary needs of’ human beings!
But the building of the two-ocean navy – THAT IS ANOTHER STORY – in a mere FIVE OR SIX YEARS it will be completed – as will be also the army and air forces amounting to many more billions of dollars. The American imperialists won’t have to wait 133 years for the murderous weapons they want! Neither did the German, Italian or English bosses have to wait 133 years.
The boss-imperialists of the world are today debating the lessons FOR THEM of the sinking of the Hood and the Bismarck. Some of them think that bombers are better than battleships. Some think otherwise.
To the workers of the world the sinking of all this wealth that the workers of England and Germany produced for no good purpose, and the the loss of life, pose another question:
WILL THEY CONTINUE TO WASTE THEIR LABOR AND THE RICHES OF THE WORLD?
OR WILL THEY JOIN HANDS AROUND THE WORLD TO END ALL WARS AND FOREVER STOP THE BUILDING OF BOMBERS AND BATTLESHIPS!
On to socialism, under which fine houses, robust health, abundant happiness FOR THE WORKING PEOPLE will be the aim of labor!
 




NEW YORK – Continuing its fight for recognition by Mayor LaGuardia as representing the 32,000 subway workers of the city of New York, the Transport Workers Union will hold street corner meetings in all the boroughs of the city. In the next two weeks it will use this means to intensify its drive for full public support. That the TWU already has wide public support in its struggle was amply attested by the enormous turn-out of tens of thousands at its Madison Square rally on May 21.
So reasonable is the TWU demand that the Board of Transportation enter into collective bargaining agreements covering wages, hours and conditions of employment on the subway lines that only the rankest reactionaries can withhold sympathy and support.
 
Answer Union-Busters
In the meantime the battle of facts against fakes rages. The union’s weapons are the facts – the union busters’ weapons are fakes.
Thus a report of the executive committee of the New York Civil Service Reform Association, on the union-busting side, states that the transit workers brought into civil service through unification of the subways have lost the right to strike and to engage in collective bargaining.
Harry Sacher, attorney for the TWU, retorts:
“Why this loss occurred was not explained. This action was taken notwithstanding that other government agencies engaged in similar enterprises not only have recognized the right of collective bargaining, but have accepted other procedures, including impartial arbitration of grievances, which exclude employer absolutism from, industry.”
“These practices,” continued Mr. Sacher, “have not commended themselves to the three commissioners who comprise New York City’s Board of Transportation, who, appointed by the mayor for six-year terms, constitute an autonomous body responsible to nobody. The board’s powers over the transit facilities and employees who operate them are virtually absolute.”
The crux of the whole matter Mr. Sacher stated very well in the following:
“The board is vitally concerned with operating the transit lines at a profit. This aspiration necessarily must come into conflict with the ambitions of its employees for better wages, shorter working hours and improved working conditions.”
Thus the TWU gives notice that the class struggle between the bosses and the bossed must continue – even if the boss happens to be the government.
 
In the CIO Way
Labor Action has compared the anti-union position of Mayor La Guardia with that of Ford – before the Automobile Workers Union picket line made him change his mind. This comparison is more than justified by a letter just released by the TWU, sent by La Guardia on March 16, 1940, to the New York City chapter of the National Lawyers Guild.
The mayor wrote:
“The right of employees to genuine collective bargaining has not, is not and will not be denied ... I expect to confer with representatives of all labor organizations having membership among the employees of the operating companies coming into city operation under the unification plan. Therefore, I cannot understand why an issue which does not exist is continually made the subject of discussion.”
Ford also “could not understand” the issue. He also was willing to “bargain collectively” – with his own jerry-built, phony union, but not with the Automobile Workers Union, which truly represents the Ford workers. Ford now UNDERSTANDS.
LaGuardia also “expected to confer” – but not to make an agreement with the TWU, which truly represents the 32,000 transit workers of the city. LaGuardia can also be made to understand – in the CIO way.
 




I think a good memory is the human faculty most needed today. If your memory is functioning, you win be able to see through the colossal cheating that goes on to put the war over on the people.
Before Congress dared pass the conscription law – because of the great popular protest against it – Mrs. Roosevelt had all kinds of arguments in its favor. She could think of nothing – absolutely nothing – more beneficial to the mental, moral and physical development of the youth of the land than a year of training in the use of instruments for wholesale slaughter. Her column and her speeches bogged down with voluminous vaporings about the “cultural and social gains” to be had by young men torn away from their normal lives.
SHE WAS CHEATING. She didn’t believe that any more than we did or do. But —
The conscription law had to be passed for the American imperialists, didn’t it! Conscription having been put over. Mrs, Roosevelt quickly forgets the lies she employed to help accomplish that end.
In a recent column she unwittingly throws a beam of illumination on the “mental, moral, cultural and social benefits” of army life. She quotes from a letter sent to a friend by a major at Fort Lewis in California.
“The off hours” are a problem to the conscript, says the letter. At Fort Lewis, it costs 20 cents and about an hour’s time to get to town. But, having reluctantly parted with this sum out of what is left him of his $21 a month pittance, there is little for him to do in town “BUT STAND ON A STREET CORNER.” If he stays at the camp, he can lie on his bunk and SWAP YARNS WITH THE BOYS. If he goes to the battery recreation rooms, he’ll find light and heat, “BUT LITTLE ELSE.”
And all the dear first lady has to say about this street corner-loafer level of existence the boss government provides for its conscripts is – please won’t you send books and magazines to the dear boys!

The latest make-believe scheme for a “brand new world” was formulated by Dorothy Thompson at a dinner given in her honor a week ago.
There is really no need to go into her ten-point piece of deception. The company she keeps is enough to stigmatize her in the eyes of all intelligent workers as an enemy of their class.
At this dinner was Governor Lehman, member of a family of bankers. There was Wendell Winkle, ambassador-at-large for the combined Morgan interests estimated to be worth about $30,000,000,000. Greetings and praise were sent to her by Winston Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt, the joint chairmen of the profit-grabbing concern known as British & American imperialism.
This gives an idea of Dorothy Thompson’s comrades-in-arms. The ruling class has taken Dorothy to its bosom. A new world for the working people will not be made by the present rulers and their clever word-slingers. It win be made AGAINST them.
But Dorothy Thompson also condemned her “new world” out of her own mouth.
“Tell the people to hold on to what they have – or haven’t – and they are at least bored,” she said. “Yes, bored to death. Tell them to seek what they want – what they dream of – and THEY WILL GO TO DEATH FOR IT.”
The yearning of the masses for a new and better world is so real, so compelling, that the rankest misleaders have to cater to it in order to carry out their deception. To break down the stubborn anti-war feeling of the people and get them “to go to death," Dorothy dangles a “brand new world” before their noses. This is an old trick – IT WAS USED TO PUT OVER WORLD WAR NO. 1.

The list of rising prices grows longer.
To dairy products, meat and lard, have been added dry groceries such as sugar and flour. The cost of clothing shows an increase. Rentals are on the way up.
These mounting prices are not only in comparison with a year ago. Butter, for instance, is 8 cents more a pound than a year ago and eggs 6 cents and more up on a dozen. But every month shows prices a little higher up on the moving escalator.
While this unceasing ascension of prices continues, wages are being “frozen.” Wage contracts entered into at the present time cover a year at least, and often longer. Practically none of the new contracts provides for any adjustment of wages as the cost of living rises.
This does not mean that the workers will. not demand a decent living wage. In spite of contracts outdated by the march of events, workers will fight for their needs. Worker’s do not have undue respect for contracts that operate against them. But strikes and negotiations for higher wages take time.
Therefore, the fight must go on ON ALL FRONTS.
Day by day the working class housewives of the nation must beat back the assaults upon their insufficient dollars. THEY CAN DO THIS BY BANDING TOGETHER INTO CONSUMER COMMITTEES FOR MILITANT ACTION.

You don’t have to go to the library and hunt up the vital statistics to know that there has been a great jump in the birth rate since the war broke out. Anybody with open eyes cannot haves failed to notice on the city streets the greater proportion of pregnant women and the in crease in the baby carriage traffic. Because married men with children have more chance of being left at home, people have gone in for babies.
These men and women, in the privacy of their homes, have decided that THIS IS NOT THEIR WAR. The women are bringing babies into the world – very often when they cannot afford them – to keep their men in this world. These women belong to the anti-war camp and should be first-line anti-war fighters. If in private they thus oppose the War and in public support it, they are the kind of hypocrites for whom the dictionary has no adequate adjective.
But it is not any old anti-war camp they should join – not the Communist Party turncoats now allied with the Stalin-Hitler side – nor the Lindbergh-Wheeler bunch which merely wishes to take care of the capitalist interests their own way.
These war mothers belong in the anti-war camp which is opposed to both warring gangs and to the boss imperialist system that breeds wars. They belong in the camp which fights for the establishment of a workers’ society in which there can’t be any more wars.
They owe this to the children to whom they are giving life. A recent editorial in the New York Daily News predicts a post-war world whose “NORMAL STATE IS WAR WITH ABNORMAL INTERLUDES OF PEACE.” What kind of normal life can children have in a world where PEACE will be ABNORMAL!
The WORKERS PARTY calls upon the war mothers of America to join it in its struggle to overthrow the boss-imperialist system. The WORKERS PARTY fights for a society in which PEACE and PLENTY will be NORMAL.
 




Since its outbreak in September 1939, the criminal imperialist war has been reaping a harvest of dead and injured workers from the factories of this country, presumably at peace.
In 1940, according to National Safety Council statistics, 17,000 workers were killed on their jobs. This figure for 1940 is way above the industrial deaths of the preceding year.
Also in 1940 there were injured in American factories 1,400,000 toilers. Some are permanently crippled; others were temporarily disabled. These industrial wounded in “peaceful” America in 1940 alone amount to more than 10 per cent of the wounded in World War No. 1.
The Red Cross explain the increase in industrial deaths and accidents by the “increased tempo.” The New York Times refers to them as “a consequence of rearmament.” The magazine Business Week frankly states that “when emphasis is strong on production at any cost, safety precautions are likely to be relaxed and accidents rise accordingly.”
Thus there is absolute agreement from all sources as to the cause of the increase in industrial deaths and injuries. THE WORKERS ARE PAYING WITH LIFE AND LIMB FOR THE FRANTIC WAR PREPARATIONS OF THE IMPERIALIST ROOSEVELT ADMINISTRATION AND FOR THE HUGE WAR PROFITS OF THE BOSSES. These dead and injured workers are the victims of the bosses’ war just as are the civilians bombed from the air, the sailors torpedoed at sea, the soldiers slain on the battlefield.
 
More to Come
The industrial casualties of the war for 1940, high as they are, indicate only the beginning of the ravages of the war on the workers. Already for the month of March 1941, the workers needlessly sacrificed at their jobs numbered 7 per cent more than in March 1940. But this is a mere pimple on an elephant’s hide compared to what is coming.
This prediction is made by no less an authority on death and accidents than Norman H. Davis, chairman of the Red Cross. Says Mr. Davis: “Mass hazards are greater and will without doubt continue to increase.” Mr. Davis said a mouthful. THE INDUSTRIAL SPEED-UP IS BEING INTENSIFIED.
Ralph Hendershot, writer of the column Wall Street in the New York World-Telegram – which denotes for whom and to whom he speaks – attests to the coming intensified industrial speed-up. He is not satisfied with the results thus far. He comments that “despite the step up in the work week, American workmen are still considerably behind the general average in EUROPE in point of hours.”
In speaking to and for Wall Street, Mr. Hendershot does not have to pretend. EUROPE IS NOW DOMINATED BY HITLER. As far as ,hours, wages, working conditions and the general enslavement of labor are concerned, HITLERISM IS AN IDEAL WHICH THE WALL STREET INTERESTS STRIVE TO ATTAIN.
Already tool workers are putting in an average of 52 hours a week as against 42 hours when the war broke out. Some tool and die workers are even on a 60-hour basis.
Pressure is exerted on workers to forego their hard-earned vacations. For instance, throughout the Curtiss Wright Corporation, employing 38,000 workers, there will be no vacations this summer – except, of course, for the directors, officers and stockholders.
The president of the company softsoaps the workers by calling them “loyal” and boasting of the 60 airplanes, 280 engines and 175 propellers that will be produced above the schedule. He does not reveal the profits of the company on this additional production – in which little dent will be made by the vacation pay the workers will get. Nor does he allude to the great hazard to the life and limb of tired workers going at top speed without rest. Nor does he estimate how many deaths and injuries will result. Nor does he pledge to be “loyal” to the workers when he has robbed them of their nervous and muscular energy so that they can no longer make the grade.
 
“At Any Cost”
Plainly, the whole war-mongering fraternity are out to extract the last ounce of labor-power from the workers.
The production belt is geared in high. Hours are lengthened to the limit. Vacations are classified among “subversive” activities. Thus constant tension, enervation, exhaustion, will be added to the causes for industrial accidents in normal times, such as unsafe tools, lack of safety devices, improper ventilation and lighting. As Business Week puts it, “when emphasis is on production AT ANY COST,” payment is made in terms of the flesh and blood of the workers.
As the war progresses with the United States a belligerent – if the workers do not stop it – the 17,000 killed and the 1,400,000 injured in industry in 1940 will become a mere fraction of the industrial casualties. The destructive octopus of imperialist war will stretch its deadly tentacles into the factories mines and mills; and THE NUMBER OF VICTIMS WILL RUN INTO MILLIONS.
The Red Cross – that subservient scrubwoman kept by the bosses to mop up the blood they spill – is pre paring for the shambles it expects in the factories. It is organizing hundreds of volunteer first aid detachments to operate in industries. In accordance with the unalterable policy of the Red Cross at home and on battlefields, it does nothing to prevent the spilling of blood by the bosses. It merely provides more mops.
The workers do not want more mops. THEY WANT TO PREVENT A SHAMBLES IN INDUSTRY! They want to stay alive – AND WITH ALL THEIR PARTS INTACT!
 
Our Program
The Workers Party, believing that in this case the best defensive strategy is to take the offensive, comes out for a 30-hour week with overtime for all work above 30 hours.
Militant workers are putting up a grand fight for wage increases to meet the cost of living. They must fight just as hard against the speed-up and against the lengthening of the working week. They must fight to keep their hard-won vacations.
After ten years and more of lean earnings or none at all, workers are avid for a pay envelope WITH A LITTLE BULGE TO IT. They submit to the long work week and to working during vacation time because of the overtime paid. BUT THIS IS SHORT-SIGHTED.
That the workers should benefit by the present demand for labor is beyond question. But the bulge in the pay envelope should come out of the bosses’ war profits – NOT OUT OF THE LIFE BLOOD OF THE WORKERS. Higher wages, not longer hours, should make that bulge.
DOWN WITH THE SPEED-UP!
WORKERS, PROTECT YOUR LIVES, YOUR LIMBS, YOUR POWER TO LABOR!
 




These days every working-class housewife is plenty hot under the collar. Daily the dollar shrinks in value.
Before you leave the house you figure out what you expect to buy for your money, but when you arrive at the store you find the price once more a lap ahead of you. Right then and there you feel like rolling up your sleeves and fighting against this constant imposition on your right to live.
But here’s something that will not merely make you hot under the collar. It will burn you.
According to government statistics, the GENERAL average of prices has gone up 14 per cent since the war began – which is high enough. But the cost of farm products and textile goods – the very basic necessities of life – is as much as 23 per cent to 27 per cent higher.
Yet these are the very products of which there are unsold quantities “of unprecedented magnitude” according to the New York Times. The unsold surplus of grain alone would pile up to 600,000,000 bushels – a veritable mountain of potential food.
While you are biting your lips and paying profiteering prices, GOODS ARE STACKED UP IN THE WAREHOUSES – UNUSED!
And those things which have gone up most in price are the most plentiful and SHOULD BE THE CHEAPEST.

But the government is against the natural operation of supply and demand.
It pays the corn and cotton kings hundreds of millions of dollars to stack up their surplus stuff in warehouses. And it pegs prices at high levels TO NET GOOD PROFITS TO THE BLOATED MONOPOLISTS OF THE SOIL AND OF THE FRUITS OF THE SOIL.
Investigations have proved that the poor farmer and the exploited: sharecropper gets next to nothing out of this agricultural policy of the government. THE WORKING CLASS HOUSEWIFE IS PAYING 23 TO 27 PER CENT MORE FOR FOOD AND COTTON GOODS – SOLELY TO KEEP THE WEALTHY PROFITEERS OF AGRICULTURE IN THE STYLE TO WHICH THEY ARE ACCUSTOMED!

You are told that the surpluses are piling up because the export market for grain and cotton has been curtailed by the war and by competition from other countries.
You are told that if the huge surpluses accumulated were thrown en the open market, prices would fall so low that agriculture would be ruined and the price structure of the whole country would be upset.
But why should the working class housewife be concerned about the export market! IT IS WHERE THE CAPITALIST SELLS THE GOODS OF WHICH THE WORKERS ARE ROBBED because wages are falling below what the working, class produces.
Why should the working class housewife care about the export market? IT IS THE CAUSE OF THE BLOODY WAR NOW RAGING.
As for the ruin of the corn and cotton kings by the lowering of prices, the poor farmers, the sharecroppers and the workers have no tears for them or for any other gang of plundering capitalists!
The working-class housewife has no use for export markets, for high price structures, for government policies generous to the profiteers. FOR THE WORKING CLASS THESE ARE NO REASONS FOR PAYING 23 AND 27 PER CENT MORE FOR FOOD AND COTTON GOODS.
The workers want an abundance of the products of the land and of the factories!
The bosses of agriculture and industry and the boss-government give the workers CAPITALISTIC REASONS for not letting them have what they need!
Workers’ control of agriculture and industry under a workers’ government WILL DELIVER THE GOODS!
 




NEW YORK CITY – Philip Murray, president of the CIO, yielding to the pressure of the La Guardia government, has entered into an agreement with Mayor La Guardia on the transit situation. In effect, the 32,000 transit workers of New York City are being put in refrigeration, for perhaps A WHOLE YEAR. In addition, the Quill leadership, which is known to be friendly to the Stalinists, may have acted under Stalinist pressure. With their new war line, the Stalinists want least of all to embarrass the government with strikes – especially with a subway strike which would paralyze the financial center of the nation.
For months the, Transport Workers Union has been fighting the union-busting policy of Mayor LaGuardia.
It was preparing to strike on the three subway lines on July 1, if the Mayor and the Board of Transportation did not grant the transit workers their right to collective bargaining. This right has now been definitely denied them by their boss, the city of New York. Instead of going ahead with the fight their leaders, including the “fiery” Michael Quill, international president of the TWU, now tell them to cool off.
The pretext for this retreat is the lawsuit which the Board of Transportation brought in the Supreme Court. The board contends it hasn’t the legal right to bargain collectively with the subway workers. The union has all along claimed that there is no federal, state or local law prohibiting the board from bargaining collectively with the workers. On the contrary, the union’s position has been that the state and federal laws grant ALL workers the right to collective bargaining and do not say “except workers employed by the Board of Transportation on the subways of New York City.”
But Philip Murray consented to await the outcome of this lawsuit obviously brought by the board as part of its stalling tactics. The stalling may now add up to a year, according to those who understand court procedure. First will come the trial, which cannot take place until September at: the earliest. Appeals to the state courts may take more time and then there is the possibility of dragging the case into the federal courts.
Because of the thorough preparations of the TWU, the solid backing of organized labor and sympathetic support from a public, a strike at this time, though necessarily bitter, had excellent chances of success. A transit workers’ victory in New York City would, not only for themselves but for the whole working class, answer IN THE NEGATIVE the question: Can labor be reduced to industrial peonage by the government taking over private industry? The chance tor such a victory has been bartered away.
What did Murray get for the 32,000 transit workers in return?
The status quo will be maintained in the sense that the IRT and BMT agreements which expired on June 30, will be considered extended until the determination of the lawsuit. The closed shop is out and Murray further conceded that the Civil Service laws take precedence over the provisions of the union agreements. Murray asks the Mayor to stretch a point and include in the arrangements the workers on the Independent line, who are not covered by the existing agreements.
Murray also requests that, the Board of Transportation “will not discriminate against any person by reason of his membership or non-membership in TWU nor attempt to encourage membership in any other organization nor to discourage membership in TWU.” However, the Mayor’s statement to Murray is silent on these aspects of union-busting.
The understanding is that the board will meet with the TWU officials immediately as to wages and hours, special grievances and working conditions. However, since the right of collective bargaining is denied, these meetings are simply “to confer,” not to negotiate a new agreement.
Because of the complaint of the TWU that the Board of Transportation is autocratic and unwilling to take up labor grievances, the Mayor intends to create a labor grievance board within the Board of Transportation “to expedite consideration of grievances and facilitate in their adjustment.”
These are the dubious gains that Murray secured for the transit workers.
The correct size-up of the transit situation was made by Harry Sacher, attorney for the union, when he said:
“The board is vitally concerned with operating the transit lines at a profit. This aspiration necessarily must come into conflict with the ambitions of its employees for better wages, shorter working hours and improved working conditions.”
This is the set-up in all industry and it necessitates militancy on the part of the workers to cope with it.
At a union meeting on June 25, Quill declared, amid loud applause, that if the Mayor persists in withholding from the transport workers their legitimate rights, he will have to be treated “THE FORD WAY.”
LaGuardia has persisted – Quill has not.
 




There are no two ways about it now. WE ARE IN!
Peace-loving President Roosevelt, who got his third term on the false promise to keep America out of the war, has stealthily followed in the footsteps of that other peace-loving president who got his second term on a similar broken pledge.
The First World War was also being fought for “great ideals.” But when it was all over ans the little white crosses stood in mass in France and the hospitals were jammed with the remnants of human beings, Mr. Wilson dropped the flimsy veils of morality in which he had wrapped himself. In a famous post-war speech he matter-of-factly declared: “Is there a man or a woman – let me say is there a child – who does not know that the seeds of war in the modern world are INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL RIVALRY!”
IN EFFECT, MR. WILSON WAS CALLING THE WORKING PEOPLE BIG DOPES FOR HAVING BELIEVED THE IDEALISTIC AND MORALISTIC TRIPE THAT SURROUNDED THE LAST WAR.
Certainly today there is no reason why every man, woman and child of the working class, whose war-inflicted tortures are just beginning, should not know what’s what about this war. They do not have to wait for a post-war “revelation” from Mr. Roosevelt who when the present inferno is extinguished and the world and its peoples have been reduced to ashes and skeletons may smilingly, and as if in passing, also state that “the seeds of war in the modern world are industrial and commercial rivalry.” Didn’t you know? My! My!
BUT WHY WAIT TO BE CALLED BIG DOPES A SECOND TIME!
For a score of years tons of literature have been turned out telling the inside story of the last imperialist war. Not only socialists and liberals, but conservative economists and even generals, have contributed to the mountain of proof that economic power was at stake in the last war – not democracy against barbarism!
Not only does the unforgettable lesson of the last war stare the working class in the face. But daily comes proof that the Second World War is not one whit more justified from their point of view than the first. Out of the bag made of fine “moral issues,” the black cat of economic warfare jumps out so that everyone with eyes may see it.
A whole issue of Labor Action could be filled with proof that this is a war for economic domination of the world between the imperialists of the Axis on the one hand and the imperialists of the Allies on the other. But only a little of this proof can here be given.
For instance, when John Cudahy, ex-ambassador to Belgium, interviewed Hitler, a major part of the interview was around the question of markets, colonies, trade – the matters neatest the hearts and the pockets of American and German imperialists alike. German competition in the markets of South America and American exclusion from those of Southeastern Europe were discussed between Hitler and the emissary of American imperialism. The use of gold in international, commerce was another subject they talked about.
Thus, while the blood of German soldiers was flowing for a pure, nordic “race” and the blood of British soldiers was flowing for “a pure democracy,” the head of German imperialism and a representative of American imperialism talked in the language of international horse dealers.
When the German blitz was thundering over the Balkans, the American stock market was hanging onto the ledge about to take a downward plunge. Wall Street was wringing its hands and cracking its knuckles – but not over the calamity that totalitarianism was spreading over Europe. WALL STREET WAS FRANTIC OVER THE LOSS OF THE WHOLE EUROPEAN MARKET IF HITLER DOMINATES THE CONTINENT!
Wall Street had such a bad case of funk that Bernard M. Baruch, formerly on the idealist Wilson’s War Industries Board, and now war consultant for the moralist Roosevelt, gave a special interview to the Wall Street Journal, in which he patted the financiers on the back and told them to take it easy. “There is no reason why we can’t undersell them (the Germans) in important mass-production products provided we maintain a low price structure,” he said. He went straight to the point: MARKETS.
Not a word did he utter about saving democracy. WALL STREET KNOWS THE FACTS OF WAR!
Ernest Hemingway, well-informed, world-travelled and noted writer, reporting from far-off Rangoon, bluntly stated that we must distinguish between the pretexts for the war we are arming for out here and the basic causes. He continued: “If we fight Japan, the pretext for fighting will be that Japan has attacked the Philippines, or the Dutch East Indies, or British Malaya. But the real reason for fighting Japan will be that if she moves south in the Pacific, she will be attacking the control of the world supply of rubber.”
Mr. Wilson’s words are very obviously as true today as they were twenty years ago. The only difference is that in 1941 the industrial and commercial rivalry is immeasurably more intense and therefore the war has encompassed the whole globe.
There are many thousands of workers who did learn the costly lesson of the last war. Many worker-soldiers swore they would never go to fight an imperialist war again. They vowed that if guns were put into their hands, they would know which way to shoot – AND IT WOULD NOT BE AT FELLOW WORKERS OF OTHER LANDS!
But today – while opposed to entry into the war and resentful of Roosevelt’s dictatorial methods – many workers are a bit confused about the issues. The war propaganda is so clever!
Because the German imperialists have instituted a dictatorship more efficient and cruel than anything heretofore known, their British and American rivals have raised the false moral issue: Democracy against Hitlerism – freedom against totalitarianism.
At the same time, while wearing the false front of moral righteousness, the “democrats” themselves are – bit by bit and on cushioned feet – instituting their own war dictatorships and totalitarian regimes BECAUSE WITHOUT SUCH REGIMES THIS SUPER-COLOSSAL WAR CANNOT BE FOUGHT.
This is a matter of method – not of issues. The working people will be the victims of both the war and the totalitarian methods used to fight it.
But the issues of this war remain the same as the issues of all imperialist wars: The protection and extension of markets – the grabbing of colonies for raw materials and for the investment of the profits fleeced from labor – the re-division of the world by the competing imperialists!
TO FIGHT FOR THESE ISSUES IS AGAINST THE INTERESTS OF THE WORKING PEOPLE OF THE WORLD.
FOR THEM, SALVATON LIES IN A WORLD OF SOCIALIST STATES, PRODUCING FOR HUMAN USE AND PEACEFULLY EXCHANGING THEIR PRODUCTS ACCORDING TO HUMAN NEEDS.
 




One of the most shameful acts of the Roosevelt government – which has a perisphereful of such acts to its credit – is the way in which it tore over a million men away from their normal surroundings into drab camps without provision for decent living. It has become notorious that the facilities for amusement, recreation and education at the camps are just about a million times zero.
In “off hours” the conscripts can lie on their bunks and swap yarns, can go to a large bare room with nothing in it to “recreate” them, or can take a long, expensive ride to the nearest town to stand on a street corner. In a word, the government provided for the conscripts a street corner-loafer “level of existence.”
For the officers, of course, it is different.
“DEMOCRACY” HAS ITS CLASS DEMARCATIONS.

Now some smart alecs have hit upon the scheme of the USO to soak the parents, relatives, friends and neighbors of the conscripted boys – the vast majority of whom are opposed to the war and to their boys participating in it. They are paying for what is rightfully a government obligation.
Not only are the working people compelled to give their sons for a war they don’t want, not only are they thus deprived of normal family income, not only do they pay war prices for everything, not only do they cough up more and more taxes at every turn – but by the use of a lot of sentimental hokum they are induced to pay for things that the government should pay for!
“Dear Mom” begins a slobbering advertisement in all the leading newspapers, and under this salutation is a picture of a conscripted soldier typing a letter with two fingers. This is a typical appeal by the United Service Organizations, commonly known as USO, which is out to lift $10,000,000 to $20,000,000 more out of a few pockets that can afford it, and many millions of pockets that cannot.
But all this “Dear Mom” stuff does not alter the facts.
So many billions are being appropriated by Congress for the imperialist war program that one can no longer keep track, However, the government does not think it important to spend a few millions of these many billions for well-equipped club houses for the men drafted into the army.
On the other hand, the same government thinks it very important – and emphasizes its importance – that every war contract yield the boss a “fair” WAR PROFIT.
“DEMOCRACY” HAS ITS CLASS DEMARCATIONS.

At a recent convention of the National Association of Retail Grocers great glee was displayed by speakers at the prospect of employing women as grocery clerks. Indeed women were made by the Creator just for such Jobs – especially since “TWO INTELLIGENT W’MEN CLERKS CAN SELL MORE THAN FOUR MALE EMPLOYEES.”
Here is an indication of the goal the bosses are going to set for themselves. They will try hard to get twice as much out of green women workers as they can get out of experienced and organized men.
Why not? Isn’t it “a national emergency”? Purely incidentally, of course, if they can get as much work out of two employees as they did out of four, they will be paying one-half the wages and making twice the profit.
WOMEN WORKERS GETTING JOBS TO REPLACE MEN MUST ORGANIZE AND DEMAND – AS A MINIMUM – THE SAME PAY FOR SIMILAR WORK. THEY MUST ALSO INSIST ON HOURS AND WORKING CONDITIONS TO PROTECT THEIR HEALTH.

As you know, Senator Wheeler is an isolationist and Senator Pepper is an interventionist.
With these two boss politicians and a convention of women in Atlantic City as dramatis personae, there was enacted an illuminating drama. Senator Wheeler asked for a show of hands of women who did not want to go to war. Practically every hand in the room went up. Whereupon Senator Pepper asked for a vote on the question: “How many women present want to see war kept out of this country?” Again every woman raised her hand.
Here is one of those rare flashes that reveal the marrow and bone of the whole rotten business of war!

Women just don’t want war! They don’t want it fought in this country – they don’t want it fought abroad.
Both the isolationists and the interventionists try with utterly false arguments to win the support of these women.
The former say: "If you don’t want your boys to shed their blood on foreign soil, follow us.” They don’t let on that they belong to that camp of American imperialists who believe their interests will be best served by securing their power over Latin and South America and the Far East, leaving England to fight it out with Hitler. They don’t let on that YOUR BOYS MAY BE “MISSING” IN SOUTH AMERICA OR IN THE PHILIPP1NES, if you follow them!
The interventionists say: "If you don’t want to fight a war in this country, you had better follow us. We’ll settle Hitler over there.” Not a peep out of the interventionists that they represent the slightly more ambitious imperialist bunch which wishes to spread its hold over the entire world, “helping” England to lick Hitler in such a way that the American “Sixty Families” will become heir to the Brrtish Empire as well as the rest of the world. Not a peep out of them that YOUR BOYS “MISSING” SOMEWHERE IN EUROPE WILL HAVE LAID DOWN THEIR LIVES FOR AMERICAN IMPERIALISM – NOT TO KEEP WAR AWAY FROM THESE SHORES.
Women who just don’t want war cannot follow either group of boss politicians. There is only one thing for them to do: FIGHT THE WAR-BREEDING IMPERIALIST SYSTEM!
And that goes for British and German, Italian and Russian. French and Japanese as well as American women who just don’t want war!
 




According to the Gallup poll, 79 PER CENT OF THE PEOPLE WOULD VOTE “TO STAY OUT OF THE WAR” – if a referendum on war takes place.
This is what George Gallup, director of the American Institute of Public Opinion, reports as the latest measurement of anti-war sentiment in this country.
With all the pressure propaganda, with all the false invasion scares, with all the warmongers on the radio, in the movies, in the press, the imperialist war-makers could muster the voting support of only 21 per cent of the people.
Mr. Roosevelt was elected for a third term on the promise to keep the nation out of war. THE OVERWHELMING VOTE HE GOT WAS AN OVERWHELMING VOTE AGAINST WAR.
The platform of the Democratic Party contained an anti-war plank. The vast majority of the American people voted for the candidate of the Democratic Party, who was parading under false colors. IT WAS AN ANTI-WAR VOTE.
THE PLAIN PEOPLE OF THE COUNTRY ARE STILL AGAINST GOING TO WAR.
The Kiplinger Letter to Business Men dated June 21 states: “THE INTERIOR IS CERTAINLY NOT STEAMED UP FOR WAR.” The “interior” is the label Washington gives to the common people of the country.
Hansen W. Baldwin, military expert, states in the New York Times: “THERE IS NO DOUBT ABOUT IT. MOST OF THE GUYS IN THIS MAN’S ARMY DON’T WANT TO FIGHT.”
The workers, the sharecroppers, the tenant farmers, the neighborhood storekeepers and their boys in the conscript camps – ARE AGAINST THE WAR!
BUT MR. ROOSEVELT PUSHES CLOSER AND CLOSER TO THE WAR!
Unknown to the American people, fighting bombers are already operating on the ocean.
Unknown: to the American people, United States troops are already on foreign soil.
WHOSE MANDATE IS ROOSEVELT FOLLOWING IN THESE WAR COMMITMENTS? Not that of the majority of the American people!
HE IS FOLLOWING THE ORDERS OF THE BOSSES, THE BANKERS, THE WAR PROFITEERS, THE IMPERIALISTS! He is President for the sixty exploiting families – not for the masses!
On June 19 Mr. Gallup wrote: “If a national referendum were taken today on the question whether the United States should go to war now, there can be little question that it would show a large vote against entering the war.”
THAT IS WHY THE LUDLOW AMENDMENT HAS BEEN BOUND UP IN RED TAPE AND THROWN INTO THE CONGRESSIONAL DARK CLOSET.
The question put by the Gallup poll was very definite, very specific: “If you were asked to vote on the question of the United States entering the war against Germany and Italy, how would you vote – to go into the war or to stay out of the war?”
TO THIS UNEQUIVOCAL QUESTION 79 PER CENT OF THE PEOPLE WOULD VOTE TO STAY OUT!
That is why troop movements and overseas operations are kept from the American people! THE PEOPLE DON’T WANT TO GO TO WAR!
But in Washington the talk is for open entry in July or August.
The fact that Hitler’s campaign against his erstwhile ally, Russia, to get grain, oil and war materials, means A LONG WAR, does not stop the swivel-chair generalissimos. In Washington. THEY ARE PREPARING FOR A LONG WAR!
The people whom the war-makers force to sweat, to suffer, to bleed, to die, don’t want to get into the war in July or August – or any other time.
The people upon whom the unbearable burdens of war fall don’t want to be involved in this worldwide imperialist blood-letting.
The people are entitled to a referendum on this vital question!
THEY HAVE THE RIGHT TO SAY “NO” TO THE IMPERIALISTS!
THEY HAVE THE RIGHT TO SAVE THEMSELVES AND THE NATION THEY BUILT WITH LABOR FROM THOSE WHO LUST FOR WORLD POWER!
 




I don’t think anybody in the party holds the view that because Hitler had to get the swag in Russia before continuing with Britain the character of the war has changed. It’s still the same bloody imperialist war. It is not necessary to stress this point as hard as the comrades who hold the PC position do.
Rather the question is: In this Imperialist World War, what is our position toward the USSR attacked by one of the imperialists and fighting for its life?
We cannot answer this question by uttering, through tightened lips and from rigid minds: “Imperialist war – QED.” We could not characterize the Russian-Finnish episode by the simple expedient: “Nationalized economy – QED.”
We then applied the test of whether Stalin was fighting a progressive or a reactionary war in Finland. Our opposition to the Stalin invasion was based on our principled opposition to invasion, conquest and annexation of territory as reactionary. We also considered the spread of the domination of the Stalin bureaucracy over more peoples and the extension of bureaucratized, nationalized economy as against the revolutionary interests of the working class. The character of the Russian state did not determine whether the attack on Finland was to be supported by the working class or not. We were merely concerned – to repeat – with whether the war was progressive or reactionary – the yardstick being the revolutionary interests of the workers of the world.
By that yardstick – which has two sides to it: the direct furthering of the world revolution and, by weakening imperialism, the indirect furthering of world revolution – we must now gauge the fight of the USSR against Hitler’s attack. But first I want to show how we apply this same yardstick to Chiang Kai-shek in the war against Japan.
 
The Case of China
We consider that he is waging a progressive war. About Chiang we have no illusions. He is not fighting for the liberation of the viciously suppressed and exploited workers and peasants of China. The butcher of the masses at the height of the Chinese revolution would sooner capitulate to Japan than let power go to the workers and peasants. Today, not threatened by internal revolution but as a matter of fact forced by the militancy of the Chinese people, he and his gang put up a fight against Japanese imperialism.
We know that the criminal Chiang Kai-shek is just as reactionary now as before. This is especially true because the next item on the historic agenda for China is not a pure and simple nationalistic struggle, but the workers’ and peasants’ revolution long overdue. There is no doubt that as between the revolution and Japanese imperialism, Chiang will have no hesitancy in choosing. Yet we consider that the murderer of the Chinese revolution is waging a progressive war.
Our ground is that by curbing the appetite of Japanese imperialism, whose existence depends on gobbling up the Asiatic colonial and semi-colonial countries, Chiang Kai-shek measures up on one side of our yardstick.
In connection with the Chino-Japanese war, it may also he claimed that China, by engaging Japan in a fierce struggle, is aiding British American imperialism. Furthermore, China receives a measure of military assistance – material and personnel – from the Allies. The struggle in China is also part of the worldwide war whose predominant nature is imperialist. But these reasons have not yet compelled us to withhold our military support of the war Chiang Kai-shek is waging against Japanese imperialism.
Suppose, by some fantastic twist, it had been expedient for Japan first to make a fluky treaty of non-aggression with China in order to get China’s assistance in an assault on Indo-China, the Dutch East In dies, etc. Just suppose. And then later Japan had turned on China, as Hitler did on Russia. That sequence of events would not have changed our estimate of the war China would be waging against Japan, even though China at first would have been actually helping Japanese imperialism – as Russia was at first helping German imperialism.
 
Progressive Aspects
With the example of China before us, let us take up the German-Russian war now raging.
It doesn’t solve anything to bring out the whole bag of Stalinist crimes. Yes, Stalin is fighting to retain his power and pelf. Yes; the bureaucracy is fighting to retain its enslavement of the Russian masses and its exploitative hold on the national economy. True. True also that only by the revolutionary overthrow of Stalin can the Russian masses resume their march toward socialism.
But it is also true that :the USSR is not a field of international imperialist exploitation – only a field for exploitation by its own bureaucracy. And it is likewise true that a German victory will transform the USSR into a new pasture for the immediate feeding of the German war machine and for the ultimate division among the ultimate victors in the world war. In other words, the defeat of Stalin at the hands of Hitler can only mean more of vitamin B1 in the diet of world imperialism.
Therefore, measured by the same side of the yardstick that we use for China, the reactionary, counter-revolutionary Stalin today wages a progressive war – even as does his first cousin, Chiang Kai-shek.
Just how much actual help Stalin will get from London-Washington remains to be seen. Kiplinger’s letter of June 28 has this passage: “Will the US aid Russia? On the record, yes. By gestures, yes. By backing up British aid to Russia, yes. But actually, effectively. NO. The physical means for rendering much material aid really do not exist.” (Kiplinger’s emphasis) Of course, England’s aid to countries invaded by Hitler has heretofore been rather flimsy. England will “aid” Russia only when and if it will aid England to do so. In a words, there is a good chance that Russia will be fighting alone.
Of course, whether or not Stalin gets more than lip service from the Allies, the fact remains that, willy nilly, by the mere act of engaging Hitler in a major war, Stalin is aiding the Allies. But so is Chiang Kai-shek.
 
By What Criterion?
Even to a greater extent than a Japanese victory in China will a German victory in Russia strengthen world imperialism. Whereas China before the war was already a feeding ground for the imperialists of all countries, the USSR will only become one if Stalin loses to Hitler. (And by Stalin I mean to include anybody who may succeed him, but be fighting the same kind of war he is fighting.)
I have purposely kept out of this article a consideration of the nature of the Russian state, of the revolutionary importance – if any – of USSR nationalized economy, of the remnants – if any – of the October revolution. These are all very important questions. But I believe that if we were right in our approach to the Russo-Finnish war, and to the Chino-Japanese war, our position on the Russo-German war need not depend on our answers to the above questions. I also omit the beclouded question of a mixed war as unnecessary to my line of argument.
In conclusion, there was a time, now passed; when we admitted that the Stalin bureaucracy, reactionary as it was, was yet performing a progressive role in Russian industry. Today we perhaps have to admit that this same despicable bureaucracy is performing a progressive role in the imperialist war – by fighting to keep the USSR from becoming the happy hunting ground for imperial ism. Within the limits of time and circumstances, a reactionary regime may be performing a progressive role.
 




BROAD AND ALIEN IS THE WORLD
By CIRO ALEGRIA, Winner of Latin American Prize Novel Contest
We have heard a lot lately about the “democracies to the south of us,” about “our good neighbors of the Western Hemisphere.” Therefore very timely indeed is this sincerely written story of how Peruvian “democracy” is applied to the native Indians, the workers and the poor of that country.
The community of Bumi is the hero of the story, so to speak. Living peacefully, cultivating their fields and grazing their cattle in common, building their first school house for their children, these Indians of an Andes plateau become victims of the greed of the rich rancher, Don Alvaro Amenabar y Roldan.
To force free, soil-loving Indians to become slave-workers in his mine, Don Alvaro, descendant of the Spanish conquistadores, adopts the simple expedient of robbing them of their land. He falsely claims to have legal title. Against the machinations of swindling lawyers, against witnesses paid or intimidated to testify dishonestly, against judges and politicians owing their jobs and allegiance to the rich, the poor Indians are helpless. They are altogether unable to cope with such “civilized” practices. Their own lawyer betrays them – after taking their money. Neither can their machetes, supplemented by a few rifles, serve them against the machine guns and mounted ruffians of Don Alvaro Amenabar y Roldan.
So these unhappy people are called together by their Mayor, Rosendo Maqui, to decide in their communal assembly what to do. They agree that they will gain nothing by resisting but must take their movable belongings and settle in the bleak mountainous land still left to them.
There the unfavorable climate, the rocky soil, the scarcity of pasture land, make living so hard that the community begins to disintegrate. To revenge themselves on the rich, some of the men join a bandit, whose exploits are interwoven in the story. A few Indians go to the coca plantations to become peons under the overseer’s whip; to sicken of malaria, to die of poisonous viper bites – and to be systematically robbed of their miserble wages.
The Mayor’s young son departs to work at tapping rubber in the jungle. There he witnesses Indians tied to trees and lashed into senseless bleeding pulp because they do not bring in enough rubber to please the boss. He himself is blinded by boiling rubber, against which he has no protection – not even a warning as to its danger.
But none of the Indians go into Don Alvaro’s mine.
 
He Dies of “Heart Failure”
To break their morale, he has his underlings steal their cattle. Finally, when they find their most valued bull gone, the aged Mayor, himself travels to the corrals of Don Alvaro to claim it. By the dictates of Peruvian justice, the bull remains with the thief while Rosendo Maqui is clapped into jail for stealing cattle. Here one day the old man is beaten to death. Officially, he has died of heart failure.
Finally a ray of hope comes to the Rumi Indians. A new leader appears, the adopted son of their beloved old Mayor. In his contacts with the outside world he has lost many of his superstitions and has acquired knowledge for improving the soil, for building better houses, for communal education. He fights for his ideas against the fears and superstitions of the Indians – and wins.
But their prosperity in their mountain retreat does not please Don Alvaro. His ambition still is to get peons for his mine. So he files an appeal to the Supreme Court to deprive the Indians of their newly built and now prospering village. Once again the swindlers have it their way.
But this time the Indians decide to resist dispossess[ion]. They prepare to defend their land. Their courage fires to revolt the robbed and impoverished Indians of the whole region. On the eve of combat their leader, Benito Castor, makes a stirring speech:
“The fate of the poor is the same everywhere, and we ask all the poor to join us. That’s the only way we’ll ever win. For years, for centuries, many have rebelled and lost. Have no fear of defeat, for it is better to die than be a slave.”
But despite their bravery the crude weapons of the Indians cannot compete against: the machine guns and mausers used by the henchmen of Don Alvaro. Nor are they a match for the truckloads ot trained soldiers that the “democratic” government of Peru sends to assist its most worthy citizen, Don. Alvaro Amenabar y Roldan, despoiler of Indian villages. So this realistic story ends with the defeat of its hero – the peaceful community of Rumi Indians.
 
A Book to Be Highly Recommended
Giro Alegria’s book is highly recommended to the working people of the United States. It will help them understand that they, as working people, have nothing in common with the South American governments run for the rich against the poor. Washington clasps these ruling classes to its bosom as brothers. But the South American brothers of the working class are not in the seats of the mighty. They are in the sacked Indian villages, on the plantations, in the mines.
It is interesting to note that a rival rich rancher who for his own purposes is at first willing to assist the Rumi villagers against Don Alvaro rapidly changes his mind when he perceives they are starting a revolt. The rich never help the poor when they are fighting for their
An American reader may find the story a bit overwritten and the style perhaps florid. But these characteristics are quite consistent with the author’s background and with his subject matter. The publisher states that Giro Alegria was born on his grandfather’s hacienda in northern Peru, but has lived most of his 32 years in Chile.
He has written a valuable story, exposing in one of its most violent forms the rule of might over right.
 




The 46th annual convention of the National Association of Manufacturers – which came to a close on the very eve of America’s becoming a full-fledged participant in this war for world domination – underlined in red the irreconcilable character of that other war, the war between capital and labor.
The undisputed hero of this convention of America’s bosses was Representative Howard W. Smith, whose vile bill aiming to cripple working class power was recently passed in the House of Representatives. When this arch-enemy of labor entered the convention hall in the Waldorf-Astoria, New York, the 2,000 boss delegates sprang to their feet and applauded. The applauses continued while Smith proceeded to the platform and for some minutes before he was permitted to speak.
This poll-tax, lynch-law Democrat hastened to assert that his anti-labor bill was not a move on behalf of the manufacturers but on behalf of “all Americans who believe in good and fair government.” However, the actions of the bosses spoke louder than Smith’s words, judging not only by the enthusiastic reception he received but also by the anti-strike resolution passed by the convention. It endorsed in every detail the oppressive measures of the Smith Bill.
At the same time that the convention urged the regimentation of labor in, true Hitlerian style, it protested against the seizure of plants by the government as “state socialism and a form of totalitarian government’ – the very kind of government this nation is arming to oppose.” From which the conclusion is inevitable that, as the bosses see it, this nation is not arming to oppose the kind of government that uses totalitarian methods against the workers.
 
Knudsen Chimes In Against the Workers
King-boss William S. Knudsen, director general of the OPM – very much at home among the fellow-members of his class – falsely minimized the whole labor problem by characterizing the workers’ necessary struggle for organization and the closed shop as “foolishness.” Said Mr. Knudsen: “I can’t for the life of me understand how in a period of national emergency such foolishness like this can go on.”
No matter what the subject before the convention, and no matter who the speaker, the basic enmity of the bosses for the workers stood out in bold relief. Specifically this translated itself into the desire of the assembled profit-makers to pass the burdens of the war onto the shoulders of labor.
Thus, speaking on the subject of rising costs, Alfred P. Sloan, chairman of General Motors, declared: “Economically prices must eventually increase if cost factors like wages increase, or profits must ultimately be eliminated.” Since statistics prove that wages form only an infinitesimal factor in cost increases, the Sloans apparently want to swell their profits both by the high prices and by freezing wages.
On the question of taxation to pay for the more than $150,000,000,000 war program undertaken by the government, the boss convention came but for “widely spread taxation,” for “borrowing the remainder out of the savings of the country, not from the banks,” and for “a general federal sales tax.” This is a warning to labor that the full propaganda and lobbying power of the NAM will be turned on to get Congress to lower still further the income tax brackets subject to taxation, to authorize compulsory loans to be taken out of the pay envelope as in England, and to put a tax on everything the worker buys – but not to increase taxes on profits.
 
Want to Amend Wage-Hour Acts
A resolution passed by the convention calls for the amendment of the Wagner and Wage-Hour Acts, against the interests of the workers. Another resolution opposes the extension of social security. A third urges “government economies in non-defense expenditures to the extent of $2,000,000,000 and the return of relief to states and municipalities” – meaning still further cutting of WPA and everything else that may benefit people in need.
A feature of the convention was an after-dinner speech by Thurman W. Arnold, assistant attorney general. This noted trust-and-monopoly-buster, whose anti-labor bias must make him a bit cross-eyed, sees trusts and monopolies mainly in the ranks of organized labor. After wining and dining on the best of everything – surrounded by the favored of the nation, who always wine and dine on the best of everything – he chimed in with the general purpose of the convention – TO MAKE LABOR THE GOAT. Said Arnold: “Labor conspiracies in many large cities are preventing consumers from having cheaper houses, cheaper transportation and cheaper distribution of the necessities of life.”
The real monopolists of the nation listening to him must have been laughing up their sleeves.
 




One thing the enlightened partisans of American imperialism are certain of is that it is doomed to play second fiddle if Hitler wins the war.
They know it is not to preserve “racial purity” that Hitler has put all his eggs into the war basket – and that it is not to save “democracy” that Roosevelt is spending almost $2,000,000,000 a month with the prospect of doubling and tripling that amount.
Another thing that this school of thought is agreed upon is that if Hitler wins, the British Empire will be his prize, while if Roosevelt wins, it will be neatly tucked away in the vest pocket of American imperialism. This constitutes the other reason why the American ruling class must engage in an all-out war.
 
“In Their Service”
But American capitalism is not all of one stomach. What is meat for finance capital may be of doubtful nourishment for the hinterland of American business. Mr. Miller obviously addresses himself to those recalcitrant business men who have not associated their own interests with Roosevelt’s plans for total war.
You Can’t Do Business with Hitler, by Douglas Miller, American commercial attaché at Berlin, 1925–1939.
As Mr. Miller writes in his short preface, he wants to do some plain speaking to American business men. He thinks he is in a position to do so because he has spent 15 years in their service at the United States embassy in Berlin, six of them under the Nazi regime. His aim is to put the fear of a Hitler victory into the heart of every two-by-four profit-grubber.
The general outline of Mr. Miller’s book is familiar to most fairly well-read people. Hitler’s unpretty economic, political and social practices, national and international, have been paid the compliment of extensive literary attention, as have also his real and imagined schemes for future world dominion. What distinguishes Mr. Miller’s contribution is that it goes into such details as would especially impress the trader mind.
 
The Complaint
He tells the story of how the Nazis shamefully discriminated against United States exporters of lard – in spite of a treaty. An American oil company, eagerly aiding and abetting Hitler by shipping petroleum to him, was rewarded by being obliged to take 8,000,000 mouth organs as a payment. Again, 200,000 canaries were all the payment an American manufacturing company got for a large auto body press delivered to the Nazi. How, pray, could American walnuts – of which the people here, of course, have a surfeit – be sent to garnish the tables of the Nazi elite when Germany would import $100,000 of the nuts only if the walnut growers would take $300,000 of burlap bags and barbed wire! And just how will American corporations take care of the situation that a victorious Hitler will be the holder of all the European-owned American stock? Will he be allowed to vote his stock at stockholders’ meetings? Now that’s something to worry about!
With implicit admiration Mr. Miller describes the scientific slave state that Hitler, the conqueror, will establish in Europe, Asia Minor and Africa. Its objective – unfortunately – will be to crowd American business off the face of the earth – including that portion known as the “good-neighborly” countries of Latin and. South America. It suits Mr. Miller’s purpose to make this a comparatively easy process, picturing the Nazi as using economic pressure of every kind, Nazi-staged revolutions, personal pressure through family ties a Nazi-controlled Catholic Church, etc.
As to the ability of the Nazis to establish their scientific slave state once they win the war, Mr. Miller has no doubt. In proof of his contention he cites the case of the forcible collectivization of Russian agriculture by Stalin, involving the extermination of millions of human beings. “In the same way, Hitler will not be unduly disturbed if there is widespread resistance to his agents in the conquered countries,” Mr. Miller writes. “It will simply prove to be the worse for the discontented; they will lose their meal tickets and soon pass out of the picture.” According to Mr. Miller, the Hitler empire will be threatened only from the top – not from the bottom – which is only an indication of the “master mind’s” wishful thinking concerning the power of the discontented.
 
Trophies of War
What the American ruling class visualizes as its trophies of war, as described by Mr. Miller, is enough to give every normal capitalist an impatiently itching palm. Says Mr. Miller:
“In thinking about the post-war world, after an American victory, we must imagine Europe almost completely stripped of peacetime production, her peacetime industries shattered, worn out from years of effort without installation of new equipment, and blown to bits by aerial bombs and land artillery ... Only one great country will possess the mechanical equipment, the raw materials, the finances and the energy to rebuild a post-war world. America alone will have the strength, the resources and the leadership which are needed.”
An American victory will furthermore mean that the 9.0 per cent of the world’s gold supply now buried in American vaults will become the basis of international currency – a veritable gold ball and chain shackling the rest of the world, including the British Empire. “We must not worry unduly about the British peace aims,” Mr. Miller assures American business. “By the time this war is over the chief British aim will be their aim to please us.”
With such complete world domination, victorious American imperialism should be sitting pretty. But Mr. Miller has, very sizable misgivings, and this, I believe, is the important section of the book,
To quote a few illuminating passages:
“Whether we like it or not, our whole system of comparatively unregulated free enterprise is temporarily in eclipse, and will not return during our lifetime. I do not say that with any satisfaction – I regret it.”
And so will the hinterland of American business which, to a great extent, will be made the goat for finance capital.
“It must be plain that after this war there will be more hate, less trust and confidence, and more suspicion, less friendship. After this war it will not be a case of getting ting the lambs and the lions to lie down together. The lambs will be mostly devoured. There will only be well-armed but torn and angry lions left. Nevertheless they must cooperate.”
We know too well how this kind of cooperation ends.
“Some people still begrudge the loans that we made to the outside world from 1921 to 1929; but remember we had eight years of prosperity. We increased our own production and our national income many times more during this period than the total amount we lost. Eight years of prosperity were worth much more, than all our defaulted loans together ... We can export again if we will finance the world in a big way. We shall have losses, but good management can minimize them.”
Until a 1929 deluge will once more overtake “good management.”
 
His Alternatives
An American victory with such precarious and short-lived prosperity or a Hitler victory with the establishment of his scientific slave state, are the only alternatives Mr. Miller considers. A stalemate due to mutual exhaustion he rules put definitely with the statement, “The day we declare war will be the day the Nazis know they are beaten.” The revolutionary possibilities inherent in this ruinous war which will go on “for several years more until we win” do not exist for this faithful servant of American business.
 




A week or so ago Miss Harriet Elliott resigned from her twofold job as consumer adviser on the Defense Commission and as associate administrator of the consumer division of the Office of Price Administration.
The Associated Press, reporting President Roosevelt’s acceptance of Miss Elliott’s resignation, stated:
“It was said in defense quarters that she was displeased with alleged sidetracking of consumers’ interests in the defense program. In its present status, her staff members contended, the consumers’ unit has been relegated to virtually hopeless subordination.”
Labor Action has often warned working class housewives – who are the most direct victims of war prices – that the politicos in Washington are not going to do much, if anything, about consumers’ headaches. Miss Elliott’s resignation emphasizes that point.
Labor Action has also called upon working class housewives to form neighborhood committees and to follow a militant policy against war-profiteer prices.
Miss Elliott’s resignation proclaims that there is now no alternative to such mass organization by the hard-hit housewives of the country.
Neighborhood committees of housewives are the crying need of the hour.

Problem of Air Raid Shelters
I have seen women stop and stare in alarm and puzzlement at the crowds of children marching around the streets of New York City these days – in so-called air raid dfills. A teacher takes charge of a group of youngsters and walks them to their homes – where they are supposed to be safe against falling bombs.
In case of an air attack, it would be criminal to send children into the streets on the chance that they could get home before the bombs fall. But even if they escaped from the streets with their lives, they would be going to places where they have just as good a chance of being killed or injured. For in most neighborhoods the houses are very vulnerable to bombing. Rows upon rows of flats, tenements and small houses are about the most dangerous buildings, judging by all reports.
Fiorello LaGuardia, director of civilian defense, urges parents to be calm and to set a good example of self-control. His chief assistant, Eleanor Roosevelt, in her most motherly way, advises mothers to put dark curtains on their windows.
But thoughtful parents cannot get it out of their heads that neither they nor their children are being provided with safe and sanitary air raid shelters. Nor is their uneasiness allayed when the complete lack of civilian defense manifests itself in the most elementary things. Not even an audible siren system is in readiness.
In preparation for all-out war, not a stone has been turned to protect civilian life. THE RICH, OF COURSE, HAVE THE MEANS OF TAKING CARE OF THEMSELVES.

What Happened in London
When the bombs fell in London, the working people suffered the most casualties in life, injury and the loss of their belongings. It was revealed that preparations for war had included no protection at all for the civilian masses. Whereas not only safe but luxurious air raid shelters were available for the upper classes.
Only after the terror-stricken masses flocked into the subways and refused to be driven out did the British government allow them to remain – crowded together like cattle on damp stone floors. Only after there had been mass demonstrations before the palatial hotels where the wealthy were reveling in air raid shelter night clubs did the British government make some attempt to meet the problem – though most inadequately.
The working people here should have learned a lesson from the experience of the working population of London.
Either the military authorities conceive the possibility of air raids in this country – or they do not. If they do not, then why are people being scared out of their wits? If they do expect air raids, then let the Office of Civilian Defense stop fooling around.
Suitable subway stations should be converted into sanitary shelters and people assigned to them in case of raids. Office buildings, skyscraper apartments, vaults, subcellars, all shelters secretly built by the rich for their private use, should be requisitioned. Mass shelters – modern, safe and sanitary – should be constructed throughout the city wherever necessary. Where school buildings cannot provide unquestionable protection, adequate shelters for the children should be provided nearby. This goes for every city in the country that may be threatened.
The government has allotted $150,000,000,000 for the prosecution of the war. That is a lot of money. Many billions will be nestling in the pockets of the capitalist bosses. Some billions are finding their way into the clutches of the “fixers” who use their influence to place war contracts with their “clients.”
How about cutting but war profits and fixers’ fees!
How about using the money for the legitimate purpose of protecting life!
 




Congress, representing “the will of the people,” is now mad at labor. Labor, you see – being only the great majority – is not the people and should have no will.
Anyway the President and Congress have discovered that “the people” want anti-labor, anti-strike legislation. The discovery came about in this manner: The capitalist and war-mongering press, radio and movies filled the eyes and ears of the people with malicious misrepresentations and lies about strikes – whitewashing capital and slinging mud at labor. Then the boss politicians conveniently interpret these misrepresentations and lies as “the will of the people.”
So Congress is on the mat. In this, corner, ladies and gentlemen, are the “champions of democracy.” Some of them come from the “free South” where democracy is handed out in exchange for a poll tax receipt – and where the rights of the Negro are protected by lynch law.
 
In the Other Corner
In the other corner, ladies and gentlemen, are those super-colossal “fifth columnists” – the workers of the country. They “unpatriotically” believe that democracy begins at home – that it must manifest itself in an unshackled working class, unhampered in its struggle for its right. Labor Action is also in this corner. And the fight is on.
As the debate in Congress proceeds, Labor Action will publish articles analyzing the different labor-suppressing provisions of the anti-strike legislation proposed by the boss politicians. The present article deals with the important issue of the closed shop, which was brought into the limelight by the captive mine strike.
Workers on strike have never been smeared by their enemies with such filthy falsifications as were these striking miners. And never was a strike more justified.
The powerful “steal” companies owning the captive mines had no leg to stand on. Being only a small minority of bituminous coal operators, they still blatantly refused to accept the agreement signed by the whole industry. They insisted on maintaining their advantage of an open shop – as a sword over labor’s head, to be let fall at the proper time.
 
No Choice But to Strike
The United Mine Workers had no choice but to call the strike, its agreement with the majority of the bituminous operators provides that the Union cannot give other operators advantages not contained in the agreement. Not to have fought the captive mine operators on the open shop issue, would have constituted a repudiation of the hard-earned closed shop clause in the agreement – and would have given all the bituminous bosses an opening for future attacks on the union.
But no “representative of the people” lifted his voice against the kingdom of “steal.” No war-monger shouted that the captive mine operators were holding up war production. Nobody discovered that the people want anti-capitalist legislation. Instead, THE HIGH-HANDED CONDUCT OF THE BOSSES HAS RESULTED IN A CONCERTED EFFORT BY THE LEGISLATIVE LACKEYS TO PUNISH THE WORKERS.
It is Representative Smith – of Southern vintage – who includes la his vicious anti-labor bill a provision to “FREEZE EXISTING OPEN AND CLOSED SHOP CONDITIONS IN DEFENSE INDUSTRIES.”
HE WANTS LABOR TO SIT ON ITS STATUS QUO.
But labor has no “status quo.” Its status is never “quo.” Labor’s status is always shifting. Either labor is making progress or it is being pushed back – LOSING GROUND.
Therefore, when the rabid anti-labor contingent in Congress proproses the seemingly fair and innocent solution to “freeze existing conditions for the duration,” it is really delivering a punch loaded with lead right to labor’s jaw. And this is especially true on the issue of the closed shop.
Now, the closed shop is no luxury for labor. It is something labor must have. The difference between the closed and open shop is the difference between a double-fisted blow and a pat on the back of the boss. Only by the double-fisted blow has labor won its gains.
The closed shop transforms itself into a better standard of living – higher wages, shorter hours, human working conditions, the health, education and happiness of the worker’s family.
Contrariwise, the open shop is very desirable to the bosses. It divides and emasculates labor, it forms the basis for company unions. It is capital’s weapon against labor. The open shop, therefore, transforms itself into more power and profit for the boss – AND LESS OF EVERYTHING FOR THE WORKERS.
Labor has learned from long struggle that for extending the closed shop – which is synonymous with extending labor’s organized might – certain conditions are favorable and others definitely are NOT.
Today – especially in the war industries – the workers have a chance. Orders are at the peak, labor is in great demand, and profits are in the stratosphere. This opportunity to push ahead, to organize the unorganized, TO EXTEND THE CLOSED SHOP, to win better conditions, MUST NOT BE SACRIFICED. If it is, labor will regret its folly – WHEN IT IS TOO LATE.
For in the post-war period conditions will militate against the workers. The war boom will burst with a bang. There will be masses of unemployed. Jobs will be as scarce as snowballs in hell. The terrain will so decisively favor capital that labor will be bound to lose crucial battles. But only if it foolishly sits on its fictitious “status quo” in this period – when it should be forging onward.
If labor does use the opportunities presented today, it will be able to hold its own in the ominous tomorrow. If the unorganized are organized, if the open shop is dealt its death blow, if company union ism is exploded, if wages and working conditions are put where they belong, the workers will have strongly fortified positions from which to repulse and defeat the bosses’ post-war blitzkrieg. LABOR MUST NOT ALLOW ITSELF TO BE FROZEN TODAY – or rigor mortis will follow in the dangerous period ahead.
 




Last July butter and pork were removed from the list of foods available to food stamp customers. Just before election – FOR NO MYSTERIOUS REASON – these products Were restored to the food stamp list. However, that removal last July was the handwriting on the wall.
For Dr. Thomas Parran, surgeon general of the United States Public Health Service, now come out with a threatening forecast. He predicts that in another few months there may not be enough “surplus food” to permit the continuance of the food stamp plan.
You can guess from this where food prices will be in a few months from now – and also what will happen to the poor people on relief.
Undoubtedly the food stamp system is far from satisfactory to these people. It permits them to buy only CERTAIN KINDS OF FOODS, and does not begin to cover all their food requirements – to say nothing of OTHER NECESSITIES. Furthermore, it has segregated relief clients into a human island of stamp users removed from the body of cash-using consumers. However, the stamp plan, with all its faults, does allow the poor mother to provide her family with more edibles than she could afford on her relief pittance alone.
Now this help will be taken away from her – because of the war.
Dr. Parran states further that the school lunch program, which now gives a small measure of needed nourishment to children suffering from malnutrition, is also in danger. Thus the poorest of the poor will be made still poorer.
And the children will suffer most – BECAUSE OF THE WAR.
The war has created a market for food outside of this country – at a fancy profit. The hungry mouths at home must thereafter remain hungry – according to the standards of the profit system.
But why wait until Dr. Parran’s predictions come true and actual want is here? Cash relief allowances must be increased. Now is the time to make the demand.
And the women must be in the forefront of this fight or they and their families will be trodden upon by the ruthless war profiteers.

The Most Hopeless Girls in the World
Peter Kihss, on the staff of the New York World-Telegram, writing about the spread of delinquency among girls in New York City, has the following to say:
“Through the portals of the Women’s House of Detention pass some of the most hopeless girls in the world – and through them are passing more and more young girls who have taken to drink. The doctors and the sociologists today blamed the WAR for that increase in alcoholism among the young women penal offenders.”
You can be sure that the official lists of war casualties will not contain the names of these victims of war conditions.

Do You Remember the Blurbs: “The Army Builds Men ...?”
More than 60,000 of the first million draftees were rejected by the draft boards because they were infected with venereal disease. The army wants no “damaged goods.” Only the purest are good enough to enter the sanctified services “defending American democracy.”
But beyond those portals for the pure, there is an awful stink, which has been stirred up for the public to smell by the authors of a book called No. 1 Saboteur of Our Defense. Plain Words About Venereal Disease.
Drs. Parran and Vonderlehr, of the United States Public Health Service, reveal in their book that of the more than a million draftees who entered the army as first-class merchandise, a great many have become “seconds” and “as is.” More than eight out of every thousand have acquired syphilis. More than forty out of every thousand have contracted gonorrhea.
Today there are at least as many NEW victims of venereal disease in the army as were originally rejected.

Why Not Face This Problem in a Frank and Honest Way?
It will afford small solace to the mothers, wives and sweethearts of these men to know that by an act of Congress passed last July, the Secretary of War has full authority to designate areas to be cleared of prostitutes and then employ the services of the FBI to get this done.
For this act is meaningless and has not been invoked by the army command – which understands only too well that to be “ENTERTAINED” by prostitutes is the ugly but natural by-product of the abnormal, exiled life of the soldier.
But the mothers, wives and sweethearts of these unlucky men have the right to demand why no protection is provided their men. Why is there no inspection of the “entertainers” – why no prophylactic treatment for the men? Why this criminal negligence on the part of the army command?
IS IT AFRAID THAT BY HANDLING THIS DARK PROBLEM OPENLY IT WILL WOUND THE SENSIBILITIES OF THE WAR-MONGERING HYPOCRITES WHO PREACH THAT WAR “BUILDS BODY AND CHARACTER”?

Don’t the People Themselves Count?
Maddening, and offensive to all honest instincts, is the way in which this scandalous contamination of the healthiest young men of the country has been commented upon in the capitalist press. Drs. Parran and Vonderlehr themselves entitled their book: No. 1 Saboteur of Our Defense. That indicates the color of the comment. Everything is regarded from the point of view of the war interests of American imperialism. THE VALUE OF HUMAN LIFE ITSELF IS NOT WEIGHED IN THE BALANCE AT ALL.
Nor have pro-war commentators expressed any concern over the human problem presented by the vast army of prostitutes following the armed forces. And understandably so!
For these living women – better than volumes of dead statistics – indict the capitalist system. THEY PROVE THAT ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL OPPORTUNITIES SIMPLY DO NOT EXIST FOR LARGE SECTIONS OF THE POPULATION.
By the fortunes of war, the army of prostitutes – THE LOWEST OF THE EXPLOITED – march with the boys drafted to fight for the greater power of the imperialist system of exploitation.
 




Big “ads” in the papers ask: “Do you drink enough milk?” And they inform the reader that milk has vitamin A plus calcium plus an alkaline reaction – in fact, it is “nature’s CHEAPEST complete food.”
But when you read that word “CHEAPEST,” you see red. You punch the “ad” right on the nose, after which you fling the paper down and jump on it.
Your trouble is not that you don’t know all about the dietary virtues of milk. IT IS THAT YOU CAN’T AFFORD TO BUY AS MUCH OF IT AS YOUR FAMILY NEEDS.
For in the past few months the price has gone up NINETEEN PER CENT in the New York area – and an average of FOURTEEN PER CENT throughout the country.
The latest increase in the New York area brought the price of delivered milk up to SEVENTEEN CENTS A QUART. The powerful Borden and Sheffield companies, the main milk distributors in this, district, “explained” – with straight faces – that they had to add another half cent a quart because of the $2.50 a week wage increase granted their employees as of October 25. They spent large sums of money to propagandize their customers, with pamphlets and leaflets. These were sprinkled with so-called statistics designed to “prove” that the poor companies JUST HAD to boost the price of milk TO COVER THE WAGE INCREASE because the poor things chronically operate at a loss or at so slight a profit it’s hardly worth mentioning. You’d think delivering milk is just a hobby they enjoy for its own sake.
 
The Facts Talk
BUT LESS BIASED STATISTICS ON THE SUBJECT TELL A FAR DIFFERENT STORY.
Just taking this last half cent a quart increase – OF WHICH THERE HAVE BEEN FIVE IN THE PAST FEW MONTHS, TOTALING TWO AND A HALF CENTS A QUART, and for four of which there wasn’t even the false justification of a wage increase – it will require the New York customers of these two companies to pay them $495,000 more for milk per month. However, the wage increase granted the, companies’ employees amounts to only $167,505 a month. The consumer, therefore, actually hands over to the companies $326,495 more than the wage increases paid the workers.
Annually this gratuity that the consumers present to the companies runs up to nearly $4,000,000 – AND IS DULY REFLECTED IN THE SIZE OF THE DIVIDEND CHECKS SENT OUT TO THE HARD-WORKING STOCKHOLDERS. This, of course, is in addition to all other profits.
To break these figures down further: It is estimated that the average routeman takes out each morning about 150 quarts of milk. The price increase of half a cent a quart thus amounts to $1.25 on his entire load. Whereas the driver’s wage increase per day is 42 cents, leaving 83 cents for the poor money-losing companies to profit as an extra tidbit.
 
A Pretext for Profiteering
It is necessary to go into such detail because these figures are important not only as they pertain to the criminally high price of milk. They are typical of the part wage increases actually play in the mounting cost of living. That is, THEY ARE THE PRETEXT USED BY THE INDUSTRIAL VULTURES TO GORGE THEMSELVES ON THE CONSUMER MASSES.
Proving this fact on a wide scale, a recent report of AFL economists showed that in a given period, when prices rose THIRTEEN AND ONE HALF PER CENT, wage increases added ONLY TWO PER CENT to manufacturing, costs. This gives an idea how thick the profiteers are laying it on.
Of course the milk distributors also “explain” that they are paying more for raw milk – just as manufacturers “explain” they are paying more for raw materials – and must load this also onto the back of the consumer.
But the worker must remember that the wages of the farm laborer and of the poor farmer are not responsible for the climbing prices of raw materials any more than the wages of industrial workers cause the runaway prices of finished products. IT IS THE FARMING CORPORATIONS, THE RICH FARMERS, WHO TAKE ALL THE WAR-TRAFFIC WILL BEAR IN AGRICULTURE.
 
Big Dairymen Get Theirs
In the milk industry it is the big dairymen who get theirs – Millionaire Farmer Owen D. Young among them. And it must also be understood that Borden’s and Sheffield’s are themselves, directly and indirectly, engaged in the dairying end of the business, thereby profiting twice, ONCE FROM THE HIGH PRICE OF RAW MILK AND A SECOND TIME FROM THE HIGH PRICE THE CONSUMER IS COMPELLED TO PAY FOR DELIVERED MILK.
Nor is this method of profiteering at both ends peculiar to the milk industry as such. The inter-weaving of the capital structure is such that this is the rule rather than the exception. Consider, for instance, the Borden Company’s contention that it pays 20 per cent more for the fuel oil burned in its plants and must take that too out of the consumer’s little black purse. You can bet dollars to doughnuts that the same capitalist interests that benefit from the high price of milk are LIKEWISE LICKING THEIR CHOPS OVER THE HIGH PRICE OF FUEL OIL.
It is this profit structure of capitalist society that is responsible for the cost of living getting out of band. The shrewd lackeys of this inhuman system, in an out of Congress, see in the general worrying over the cost of living a chance to smack labor down. BUT LABOR REFUSES TO BE THE GOAT FOR THE WAR PROFITEERS.
 
True of All Industry
And war profiteering IS the other name for the high cost of living today. Confirmation comes from the Department of Agriculture on this very question of the shamefully high cost of milk through the country in the following words: “Keen competition between the public and the government for dairy products has contributed to a 14 per cent advance in fluid milk prices for most city consumers.” Then the report goes on to explain how large government purchases of cheese and evaporated and dried milk are being made for shipment to Great Britain under the lease-lend program.
What else is this but a way of saying that the milk companies [are] taking advantage of the war demand to raise prices? WHAT ELSE IS THIS BUT WAR PROFITEERING? Not only do the bloated profiteers get fantastic prices, BUT THEY GET THESE PRICES ON THE STUPENDOUS VOLUME OF WAR PRODUCTION.
Again, what is true of milk – which is particularly close to the everyday needs of us all – IS EQUALLY TRUE OF THE PRODUCTS OF ALL INDUSTRY.
The fundamental solution for the high, cost of living IS TO TAKE THE PROFITS OUT OF WAR. That means taking profits out of war industry – which is practically all industry in a total war like this.
Neither the Roosevelt Administration – not any other bunch of capitalist politicians – have the slightest intention of doing this. THAT, FELLOW WORKERS, IS WHERE WE COME IN.
IT IS UP TO US TO DEMAND WORKERS CONTROL OF INDUSTRY.
 




The National Association of Manufacturers, at its convention held last month in New York, embarked on a huge propaganda campaign in the schools. Running along with the more vociferous war propaganda, like Mary’s little lamb, will be this not so vociferous but just as dishonest effort to fill the minds of the children of the country with hokum about the “system of private enterprise”.
The exploiters who squeeze profits out of the workers through the ownership of the means of production – which they innocently name “the system of private enterprise” – feel the ground shaking under them. In frantic haste to win the race with history, they wish to make the rising generations believe that the exploiting system of capitalism is still progressive and is, no less, the best possible social system.
They will lie their heads off in an attempt to do this. Facts will not help them at all. What can be greater proof of the bankruptcy of the capitalist system than its collapsed condition from 1929 till the present war boom? No amount of lying will wipe out of existence the sufferings of tens of millions of jobless, destitute people, while the factories and farms able to produce their needs stood idle.
They will lie a lot more trying to get by the incontrovertible fact that the capitalist system cannot make the machinery of production function for the purposes of peace. Only to produce the means for in human slaughter of millions of people, do the wheels of capitalist production whir full time. And this is just as true for “democratic” capitalism in. America and England as for Nazi and fascist capitalism in Germany and Italy.
 
No Longer Progressive
Socialists gladly admit that in its heyday capitalism was progressive. The lure for profits in the unlimited markets of the world stimulated the capitalist class to expand and mechanize the means of production. It encouraged science and invention to make possible the mass production of an abundance of commodities. It is true that in its progressive stage capitalism robbed the workers of the product of its labor, just as it does to day. But then there was historic compensation for the robbery. The technological means for ultimately abolishing poverty from the face of the earth were being perfected.
This reason for putting up with exploitation no longer exists. Poverty stalks the land – but not because of any technological insufficiency. The Brookings Institution estimated that during the twelve-year period from 1922 to 1934 this country could have produced in goods and services $248,000,000,000 more than it did produce. And, according to other authorities, this figure is altogether too low. Yet, even taking the lowest figure, at least $8,000 in goods and services were withheld from each of the thirty million American families – because the modern means for mass production were standing idle.
Think what that sum for each family would mean. Translated into food, clothing, shelter, education, health, entertainment, it spells the difference between happiness and misery. All this was kept from the masses by “private enterprise” which holds in its octopus grip the machinery of production and will not let it operate except when there is profit to be made. That is how “progressive” the capitalist system has become.
It is estimated that the minimum annual income on which a family of three can purchase a fair share of the output of the productive plant of America, is only $2,500. The wonderful things – from cars to kitchen gadgets – advertised in the better magazines of the country, could be bought by all the people, if the average earnings per family of three were the modest sum of $2,500.
However, the shameful truth is that families with that modest income or over comprise only thirteen per cent of the total population. AND DON’T THINK THE 13% ARE WORKERS! Among that thirteen percent must be included America’s sixty wealthy families with all their sisters, cousins, aunts – presidents of corporations, bankers, politicians, the middle class, etc., etc. Small indeed is the percentage of actual workers who have the golden key to the locked door beyond which lie the necessities of modern life.
 
Smash the Vicious Circle!
Here is the secret of the regressive character of present-day capitalism. THE WORKING CLASS IS PAID IN WAGES ONLY A SMALL PART OF THE VALUES IT PRODUCES. The markets of the world are now so limited that they cannot absorb the huge surplus of which the workers are robbed. So the wheels of industry stop turning and remain practically motionless until the blessings of war descend upon us.
The viciousness of this endless circle becomes ap parent. The youth of the working class is killed in war because their parents were robbed of the product of their labor and so that the capitalist masters may secure a larger share of the world markets in which to dispose of the wealth .of which the working class will continue to be robbed.
It will take more lying than there is to get children growing up in a world of war and poverty to believe that the capitalist system is progressive. They will be asking, with true youthful curiosity, why the existing means for abolishing poverty are not used for that purpose, instead of the destructive war.
The logic of the answer of the WORKERS PARTY is bound to appeal to them: “private enterprise” must be replaced by SOCIALISM – the system which will give to the workers the full product of their labor.
 




I know of at least one incident of his visit to England that Mr. Wendell L. Willkie will not talk about. Morgan’s candidate for President in the last election and Morgan’s personal representative to England will have lots to say to make war propaganda in the interests of the House of Morgan. And this particular incident will not fit in.
Planned to coincide with Willkie’s arrival at a swanky hotel to a luncheon engagement, London women staged a food demonstration. While the poor are rationed and don’t get enough food to keep their souls in their bodies, the hotel larders are bursting with all the delicacies that the pampered palates of the rich require. They eat of these delicacies to their hearts’ content and get their regular rations anyway. But not so the poor!
A food demonstration before this swanky hotel was, therefore, quite in order and certainly Mr. Willkie should report it as part of the London scene. But the demonstration was ruthlessly broken up, and the representative of the great democracy overseas will not disturb his countrymen by reporting the evidences of lack of democracy in England.

We must give the devil his due. When American capitalism is really interested in doing something, it does it up brown.
Take this matter of war, for instance.
Certainly everything is swinging along at a brisk pace. Billions of dollars of orders are being handed out. Plants are being expanded and new ones are being built. The military camps are full of conscripts being turned into soldiers. Congress is debating and will soon pass a bill making an all-powerful warlord of the President. The Treasury Department is cooking up ways and means of extracting every dollar from the masses. There is no monkey business.
But when American capitalism is not interested in the business at hand, how it a-hems and a-haws! There isn’t money and there isn’t the power. Every possible objection is raised. There is stalling and stalling and more stalling.
Take the matter of proper schools far children, for instance.
In the great city of New York, the richest city in the world, you would think the schools are something to be proud of. Same of them are. But plenty of them are a crying shame.
Children, numbering 150,000, go to schools that are unsanitary and unsafe. One out of every three New York City schools is NOT FIREPROOF. Some of the structures date back as far as 1875. The toilets are the worst imaginable.
In some classrooms children sit in their coats all day because there are no wardrobes or because of insufficient heat. Or they work crowded against piping hot radiators because of lack of space. In some schools the gymnasiums constitute a danger to the life and limb of the children using them. In others, children have to go through cold yards to get to the antiquated toilets.
Under the so-called reformer, LaGuardia, as under Tammany’s Walker, these conditions continue. American capitalism as such is just not interested enough in such things to make a thorough job of them. After all, what matter, the lives of 150,000 poor children!
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO FIGHTING FOR FOREIGN MARKETS – why, that’s another story!

Every housewife can understand how nice and pleasant it must be for the gregarious Londoners. Imagine the fun of crowding together on damp, stony floors, surrounded by buckets of excretion from human bodies, with rat’s romping about and water gurgling down the cave roof and walls.
Yet it is being noised about – as reported by Ernie Pyle in the World-Telegram – that the poor people of England actually ENJOY living underground worse than animals. They are supposed to be as pleased as punch, and they will not want to give up their cave-dwelling existence even after the war.
We are supposed to believe such frightful lies because the super-democratic British government does not care to build shelters for the masses that are fit for human beings,

Maybe you are one of the few lucky working women whose family has had a more or less steady income. Maybe you have been so awfully lucky that, by dint of scraping and pinching, you have been able to save a few dollars.
Are you feeling a little bit secure, thinking that if that rainy day comes, you will have something to tide you over? Were you going to a decent doctor about that pain, now that you have the money saved sup? Or, were you planning to buy some much needed furniture?
Whatever you have had in mind to do with your meagre savings, it does not matter any more. The government has decided to spend YOUR SAVINGS for airplanes, battleships, tanks and guns.
It is a capitalist war, but you and you and YOU are helping to pay for it. You pay a tax on everything you buy – and that money goes far war. You and your husband pay an income tax on your miserable wages – if you don’t now, you will soon – and that money goes far war. And now, from the Treasury Department, comes the announcement of a nation-wide drive to separate people from their savings – and that money will go for WAR.
There will be issued by the Government war savings stamps and baby bonds. Tremendous public pressure will be exerted to make the poor people who have been so foolish as to try to save a little money part from it. For the money that was to take you to the doctor or buy a new bed, Uncle Sam will build an army, navy and air force big enough to protect the profits of American capitalists throughout the world.
Yes, your savings will go TO PROTECT THE PROFITS OF PROFITEERS – not to save democracy. You can’t even have the comfort of knowing your money is being used far a good cause. Such an eminent authority on the nature of war as War-President Woodrow Wilson himself let the cat out of the bag when he said:
“Is there a man or a woman – let me say is there a child – who does not know that the seeds of war in the modern world are industrial and commercial rivalry!”
You have every right, working women, to be good and mad!
 




In the Bronx alone there are at least thirty established slave markets. These are street corners where Negro women gather at seven in the morning and wait sometimes all day to sell their labor to some housewife who wants her dirty work done for almost nothing. There are more such slave markets in the Brighton Beach and Brownsville sections of Brooklyn.
The tokens of these women’s servitude are a dark skin and a paper package under the arm, containing their work clothes. They stand around, huddled in doorways and vestibules in the cold, snow and rain of winter, or in the broiling sun and heat of summer, waiting for a customer for their labor. They may wait a half day before they get a break, or they may wait a whole day and go home – having wasted their energy just waiting and no money to show for it.
The condition of these women is just another proof that the capitalist system is absolutely bankrupt. It can no longer take care of the simplest needs of the poor people.
 
Deserve Relief
The slave markets first appeared in the depression, which hit the Negro people a harder blow than anybody else. When unemployed white men began to work for any wage at all, Negro men were forced out of their jobs. That was when the Negro women went out on the streets to look for household work.
It was possible for these jobless women to get work on the streets because many middle-class people found them cheaper than regular maids. For the heavy cleaning and real dirty work, the Negro woman was called in. When it was learned by other housewives that it was possible to hire cleaning women for 15¢ or 20¢ an hour, they began to call in the Negro women to do the most distasteful tasks – scrubbing, window-cleaning, washing, cleaning bathrooms.
The existence of the slave markets also proves the two-faced character of the boss government. It is supposed to be giving relief to destitute people to enable them to get the necessities of life. Many of the women who sell their labor in the slave :market are on relief. But what the government hands out is a mere pittance that does not cover bare needs. It is harder for a Negro family to get along on relief than a white family. The average rent in Negro sections is one third higher than it is in corresponding white districts. So Negro women have to sneak in a bit of work in order to exist at all.
Furthermore there are women in the slave markets fully entitled to relief who do not get it. They refuse to submit to the indignities the relief client is subjected to. They will not sell their souls for relief that does not relieve anyway. But they sell their labor in the slave markets where the housewife picks them up as she does a bunch of carrots or a loaf of bread.
 
Miserable Wages
At these corners, waiting for work, can be seen old women gnarled and bent from a lifetime of labor. But there are plenty of neat, capable-looking women in middle life, as well as young women and girls. Men come to the slave markets and try to lure the young women and girls to their apartments – to perform other tasks than housework. But these women are seriously looking for housework and refuse to go with a man.
The women get paid whatever sum they can command from the individual housewife who hires them. The rates are a bit higher now than they were during the depression. A good worker who has established a reputation for herself, can get 35¢ or 30¢ an hour. Others get 25¢ and less, depending on the neighborhood and the time of day they are hired.
Because these women are absolutely unprotected, they are often gypped. They may be promised 35¢ an hour, when the housewife pays them, she will give only 25¢. Or they will be promised $1.50 for a job and then the housewife will try to take off 50¢ for the lunch the cleaning woman ate.
All the boss politicians are shouting today how American “democracy” has respect for the individual and how we’re all supposed to fight for it. Certainly these women who peddle their labor on street corners don’t get any respect or anything else. Many a Negro girl, fresh from the South and full of ambition, finally lands in the slave market. Here she stands and shoos off what is politely called “immoral advances”, until a housewife picks her up. Girls who thought they could make something of themselves loves their morale as week after week they frequent the slave markets.
And this is true of white house workers as well as of Negro. Even though the white women do not sell their labor in street markets; they are just as unprotected in their work as the Negro. They often work for $5 a week, living in. Their hours are practically limitless – an 80-hour week being quite common. They are employed at one figure and when pay day comes they receive less. Often a white girl takes a household job thinking it will be only temporary. She hopes to go to school in the evening and make something of herself. But she doesn’t get time off and can’t go to school or do anything a human being needs time to do. After a while she begins to think of herself as just a servant and a drudge.
 
A Union Needed
From time to time agencies of the boss government as well as private clubs and associations of boss women, have made a big noise about “doing something for those poor domestic workers.” But all this is a flash in the pan. Workers never get any thing unless they fight for it themselves.
In New York City there are about 200,000 household workers, both Negro and white. But they are powerless because they are not organized. Of this great number of domestic workers only about 400 belong to a domestic workers union. That is the trouble.
These downtrodden and exploited workers have no reason to fight for a non-existing democracy. But they have every reason in the world to fight for one big union of the 200,000 domestic workers in the city. Only with a strong union, of Negro and white together, will the domestic workers be able to talk turkey – to demand union wages, hours and conditions.
That will be the death knoll of the slave markets, of the “immoral advances”, of the gypping, of the demoralization of tens of thousands of women who do honest and hard labor.
 




NEW YORK CITY – Pork prices were 29 per cent higher at the beginning of this month than they were a year ago. Beef prices are up 2½ per cent, veal 16 per cent and lamb 14½ per cent.
Here is something for the working woman to worry about. War profiteering in food has begun in good earnest.
Consumer protest against the high cost of meat came to a head when the president of the Greater New York Hospital Association kicked about it to the National “Defense” Advisory Commission. He claimed that the 25 per cent rise in the cost of meat during the last year was dislocating the budgets of the affiliated hospitals.
The grumblings of housewives have become louder and louder and consumers’ organizations are up in arms. In the poorest districts meat prices have been absolutely prohibitive and already families have been limited to the cheapest cuts of meat and to meat substitutes.
As was to have been expected, the profiteers claim the increase in prices is legitimate and due to “increased consumption arising out of the defense program.” However, Miss Harriet Elliott, consumer member of the National “Defense” Advisory Commission, denies this. She states:
“Consumers should be reluctant to accept price increases attributed to the defense program. Army purchases of meat are not large enough to affect prices significantly.”
What has actually happened is the beginning of the price speculation that always accompanies a war. Producers, processors and distributors of meat are engaging in the lucrative game known as war profiteering.
The millions of consumers who are not receiving larger incomes this year than last and are in no position to pay higher prices, are today poorer in buying power than they were a year ago. The meat packers and the profiteers in other foods are a good deal richer.
The solution suggested by Miss Elliott is really very amusing. She literally advises the consumers to evade the entire question. She says if certain cuts are too high, the housewife should buy cheaper cuts or NO MEAT AT ALL. Miss Elliott generously offers to be helpful and to “supply much valuable information on the preparation of low cost meat dishes or of well-balanced meatless meals.”
 
And Next Year!
Another thing supposed to hold out promise to the gypped consumer is the usual useless “investigation.” The anti-trust division of the Department of Justice has undertaken to investigate trade restraints affecting meat prices. Don’t expect that empty government gesture to put pork, beef, veal or lamb into the empty pot on your stove. Ben W. Lewis, chief economist to the Consumers Division of the National “Defense” Advisory Commission, doesn’t expect that miracle to happen, either.
He reveals the important fact that farmers are keeping cattle for breeding purposes in anticipation of STILL HIGHER PRICES NEXT YEAR.
 




Mothers have been in the habit of thinking that when they gave their kid a hunk of bread and butter, they were giving him something that would build good bone and muscle. For is not: bread me staff of life?
It seems we have been very much in error. Without so much as a we-are-sorry-but-it-is-true, government sources divulge the amazing fact that it has allowed the manufacturer, and subsequent sale to the consumer, of flour and bread deprived of all the vitamins and minerals without which food is a filler, but not a builder of life.
We are assured, however, that all this will be changed. For peace time it is o.k. to fool the public. But now, the government wants every mother’s son to become a healthy soldier.
So the government and the bakers and flour makers of the country are taking a step forward – which will doubtless set the housewife back a few cents on each loaf; From now on flour will be made either without extracting the vital elements from the wheat, or by the injection of certain needed elements.
Yessiree! Only the best for the American boy – to be ploughed under!

Mrs. Roosevelt cooed in her column the other day that the old class distinctions are being wiped out in England.
I wonder if the dear lady was referring to the bunks installed in the underground shelters by the British government.
You may remember that the poor people were kicking up a big protest because of the difference between the way they rotted in the unspeakable shelters and the ritzie underground life of the upper classes. If they couldn’t have cocktail lounges underground at least they wanted a place to lay, their heads.
So the super-democratic government ups and installs these bunks – to sort of even things out. Let me tell you about these bunks.
They are LESS THAN TWO FEET WIDE. They are TOO SHORT FOR A NORMAL ADULT. They are ARRANGED IN THREE TIERS ONE ABOVE THE OTHER.
Many people, after trying the luxuries of these bunks, went back to the solid comforts of the damp floors.

Mrs. Bernard J. Thill of La Crosse, Wisconsin, mother of three children, was chosen by the National Retail Dry Goods Association as “Mrs. Typical Customer.” Of 10;000 entries in 300 cities, Mrs. Thill was judged as most qualified for the title, and, in addition she wrote the winning essay on shopping.
So, as the guest of the National Retail Dry Goods Association in this advertising stunt, Mrs. Thill was flown to New York from her home town; wore orchids in her coat for the first time in her life, was given the key to the city, and even had tea at the White House.
Thus she strutted and fretted across the pages of the newspapers and now is heard of no more. But she stayed in the limelight long enough to corroborate the best economists on the cost of living decently.
She explained to reporters that her husband earns $30 a week, and that she manages by buying the best things at the cheapest prices and BY ADDING TO THE FAMILY INCOME BY DOING COMMERCIAL ART WORK HERSELF. She didn’t say how much she adds to the family income, but she was quite positive that if she lived in Chicago or New York, she would need “AT LEAST $60 A WEEK” for her family of five.
Yes, that about tallies with what economists say is the minimum for a half-way decent standard of living. AND THEY ALSO SAY THAT 87% OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY DON’T HAVE THAT MINIMUM.

Time was when the prize argument an anti-Socialist could pull out of his hat was: “Socialism attacks our hearths and our homes.” Every shyster boss politician, every boss-paid professor, would ominously shake a finger and solemnly lie that Socialism will break up the home, socialize women, make government charges of children.
Since the great depression, however, the silence of the tomb has fallen upon these “protectors of the hearth and the home.” Tens of millions of people – under capitalism – were wandering the length and breadth. of the land, jobless and HOMELESS, old people dying by the waysides, young ones running off so as not to be burdens to their desperate families.
Today, with war raging throughout the World, though plenty of mud is being slung by the boss mudslingers at the idea of Socialism, not a peep comes from them about socialism breaking up the home. They don’t dare call attention to that subject. World capitalism, which has always been pretty good at breaking up homes, has now arrived at the stage where this is the one thing it does best of all. And the less said about breaking up homes, the better the supporters of bankrupt capitalism like it.
But that does not silence us.
We want every working woman of the world to know that not Socialism, but CAPITALISM BREAKS UP HOMES.
German capitalism is breaking up homes in London, and British capitalism is breaking up homes in Berlin. British and Italian and German capitalism are demolishing dwellings in the countries of the Mediterranean; and Japanese capitalism is doing the same in China.
American capitalism has started breaking up American homes by drafting the young men who will soon be ordered to go and throw bombs at people’s homes in foreign lands.
British capitalism has just drafted the first 500,000 British working women to do men’s work in the heavy armament industries. This, one may well say, is SOCIALIZING WOMEN. And for no better purpose than that the British capitalists, rather than the German variety, may continue their stranglehold on India and the other profit-producing colonies.
And Labor Minister Ernest Bevin that despicable lackey of the British war-makers, has just put his final seal upon the broken homes of Britain. He said that with the drafting of women the government “will have to take much greater responsibility for the care of children.” Thus, THE CHILDREN BECOME GOVERNMENT CHARGES – because the home has been completely broken up.
These are the great destructive accomplishments of world capitalism.
ALL OUT FOR SOCIALISM. Socialism will restore the human family to human homes and allow people to live in their homes in happiness and PEACE.
 




The Vinson Compulsory Mediation Bill is this week before the House Rules Committee. IT MUST DE DEFEATED.
The bosses’ hands are hot and sweaty from grabbing war profits. LET THEM COOL OFF!
A strike is a hard, cold reality that no workers undertake hot-headedly. LABOR DOES NOT NEED TO BE COOLED OFF!
The Vinson bill provides for a 25-day cooling-off period after workers have decided to strike and for penalties against workers up to $5,000 and a year in jail if they disobey the law and refuse to “cool off.”
The bosses love this cooling off period FOR LABOR. It will give them 25 days, in which to prepare a sure-fire campaign AGAINST STRIKING WORKERS.
The bosses’ eyes glisten with the fever of greed in expectation of more and better war profits. LET THEM COOL OFF!
When workers vote for a strike they know what they are in for: loss of wages, picketing in all weather and at all hours, hunger and sickness at home, increasing debt, policemen, clubs, tear gas, armored trucks, bullets.
THESE ARE COLD FACTS THAT THE WORKERS ARE WELL ACQUAINTED WITH.
They do not need to be cooled off. THE VINSON BILL MUST BE DEFEATED.
There is talk in Washington about “compromise.” The bill may be amended, leaving out some of the more objectionable provisions.
These are: 1) The right of the bosses to fire workers who are subversive – which means ANY MILITANT UNIONIST; 2) The prohibition against union organization of plants that are now open shop.
These two provisions may be dropped, according to reports. The cooler heads in Congress understand some cold facts, too. They know that workers in their present strength and militancy will not stand for such DIRECT ATTACKS ON THEIR RIGHT TO ORGANIZE.
But these legislators for the bosses will TRY TO PUT OVER THE “COOLING OFF” PERIOD – in the interest of “national defense.”
It sounds so innocent! Why should not labor “cool off” and “mediate” its grievances in the “national emergency,” which is also an innocent way of saying “preparation for imperialist-boss war”!
But this means – in actuality – TAKING AWAY LABOR’S RIGHT TO STRIKE.
In the 25-day cooling-off period the united forces of the boss and the government can be so well organized as to take away from the strikers every chance of victory.
THAT IS EQUAL TO TAKING AWAY THE RIGHT TO STRIKE.
THAT IS EQUAL TO REDUCING THE WORKING CLASS TO INDUSTRIAL SLAVES.
THE VINSON BILL MUST BE DEFEATED – IN TOTO. The workers want no part of it.
The bosses lust for mountains of profit to increase their power and domination over this country and the whole world. It has nothing to do with the necessities of life. LET THEM COOL OFF!
The workers strike to get the NECESSITIES OF LIFE. They fight for a living wage, for decent hours and conditions. THESE ARE NECESSITIES OF LIFE.
That is why workers turn out in mass picket lines. LABOR KNOWS WHY IT HAS TO STRIKE. IT DOES NOT NEED TO BE COOLED OFF.
And labor can go out on picket lines to lick THIS VICIOUS VINSON BILL.
TO LICK THE VINSON BILL is also a NECESSITY OF LIFE FOR LABOR.
 




A new low in lickspittle labor leadership was reached by Sidney Hillman at the convention of the Textile Workers Union held in New York City the week of April 21. After a typical war-propaganda speech, he returned to the microphone and in a voice hushed with reverence conveyed to the delegates the personal greetings of “the President.” The nauseating picture was made complete when Emil Rieve, the union president now serving two masters on the National Defense Mediation Board, requested Hillman “from all of us” to thank “the President” and assure him of support in every effort, etc., etc.
 
But Some Disagree
However, during the discussion on the resolution to support Roosevelt in his war policies, there was evidence that all the delegates have not been caught in the net of imperialist warmongering. One spoke exposing the fable of “war for democracy,” called upon Roosevelt to transport the seven billions of war materials on his own back and ended by reminding the delegates that after the war the international imperialists will again shake hands, but the workers will have paid with their blood for the war.
These remarks received considerable applause from the floor. Another delegate declared that the interests of the working class cannot be served by fighting in this war. He urged the convention to vote down the war-resolution and instead pass one calling upon the working people of the world to stop fighting each other.
But these sound working class sentiments were in a decided minority. The war resolution was passed by an overwhelming vote, amid clapping, whistling and other demonstrations of hearty approval. The speeches of Rieve, president of the union, of Baldanzi, vice-president, of Hillman, of Perkins, all followed the line that the imperialists of Britain and America are fighting for labor’s rights.
Still the resolution bowed to the anti-war feeling of the workers by opposing sending an expeditionary force to fight on foreign soil “at the present time.” There was some op position to the phrase “at the present time.” Someone shouted, “What are foreign lands!” Another delegate called out, “What about convoys?” But the chairman quickly squelched the disgruntled ones.
 
Back Wagner Bill
Another resolution that took much speech-making from above, and received wholehearted support from below, was the one calling for backing Senator Wagner’s bill, now in Congress, providing against post-war unemployment by public works and and so on – the usual drop that capitalist politicians are willing to put into labor’s bucket. With great rhetorical flourish, Vice-President Baldanzi described the miserable aftermath of the last war, the third of the nation without proper food and housing, the doctors without patients and the sick people without doctors. He talked about the democracy the workers want – jobs, security, liberty. He was roundly applauded, and rightly so. But nothing was said about the ridiculous farce of relying on a poor little inadequate bill in a capitalist Congress to provide all that for the workers – to protect them from the stupendous war machine as it collapses and crashes upon their heads when the war is over!
The committee on law submitted a resolution prohibiting nazis, communists and fascists from holding any office in the union and any of its locals, and from being nominated for any office. In the discussion that followed, the nazis and fascists were completely lost in the shuffle and the big guns were turned on the Stalinists. Delegates from the East, Middle West and West recited instances of Stalinist union-busting tactics and accused the CP of carrying out Stalin’s foreign policy against the interests of the workers and their unions.
The passage of the resolution was a foregone conclusion. There was also much talk about putting teeth into it and being wary of the new crop of unknown Stalinists who would be sent into the unions now. It evidently did not occur to the delegates that this same resolution might be used by the bureaucrats against militant anti-war workers.
 
Hit Anti-Labor Bills
The convention let loose against the anti-labor Vinson bill and also passed a resolution calling upon all unions to fight the anti-sabotage bills now being railroaded through the state legislatures throughout the country.
The false position of labor leaders like Rieve, Baldanzi and the others who call for working class support of the “war for democracy” was fully revealed by the facts brought out in the discussion on this resolution. While in Washington plenty of venom is poured on labor’s bead, although no anti-strike bill has as yet been passed, the states are slipping the noose around labor’s neck more quietly. Throughout the South and in Pennsylvania, Maryland and other states, bills, ostensibly to protect the “national defense” industries and to replace the National Guards, are thinly disguised thrusts at labor.
Even on a matter as important as this one is to the whole labor movement, the union leaders were so anxious not to be accused of lack of patriotism that the resolution calls for opposition to these vicious laws only if they do not contain a futile provision “protecting the workers’ right to strike” – which can be very conveniently shoved aside by the other provisions of the law. A delegate from Baltimore, where the Textile Workers Union along with others had fought the anti-sabotage bill which is now before the governor for signature, saw through this farce and wanted the resolution returned to committee for strengthening. However, this was not done.
 
Too “Cooperative”
The resolutions committee also displayed a very “cooperative” attitude in its recommendations on wages and hours. The decision was to do nothing about hours until “after the emergency,” which is yielding a point to the bosses, who want to extend hours “during the emergency.” And, as the cost of living rises and promises to go much further, the resolution on wages was to the effect that since wages have been increased under the wages and hours law until now some textile workers get 37½ cents an hour, the 40 cent minimum should not now be asked for.
On the resolution to organize the unorganized textile workers, a southern delegate disagreed with the statement that the union had made great progress. He said the stretch-out was being ignored by the union, although it has kept hundreds and hundreds of workers from jobs. He expressed his dissatisfaction with the progress made and demanded help on organization, on the stretch-out and speed-up.
At the Wednesday session, Labor Secretary Perkins delivered a long speech on how wonderful everything is and claimed her share of the credit for making it so. She praised President Rieve for using the Labor Department “to keep out of trouble.” She had the nerve to state before a body of union men and women that the Textile Union owes its strength to “law” and not to “the use of force.” The day before, one of the delegates had been applauded when he asserted that the workers had to have the right to strike to make the bosses obey the laws, pointing to Ford and Bethlehem as shining examples. There was no applause when Perkins spoke about her ambition to see labor disputes settled without any strikes.
 
Tightly Controlled
Sidney Hillman’s ascent to power has made of him a most fawning lieutenant of the capitalist class. His constant reverent references to “our great Chief Executive” are disgusting to hear. “Knowing him as I do,” says Hillman about Roosevelt, as if they had been chums on the East Side together. He constantly boasts of his conferences and of his office and of his staff. Hillman has become one of “them” to such an extent that the words “capital,” “capitalist,” and “capitalism” have completely disappeared from his vocabulary.
This second biennial convention of this important CIO union bore all the earmarks of being tightly controlled from the top with the object of putting the Textile Workers Union on record as supporting the Roosevelt war program. This was accomplished. But there was, plenty of evidence of rank and file militancy.
 




“Every station, every mile of track, every car, every powerhouse, every thing is catalogued and planned, OUR STRATEGY IS LIKE THAT OF THE ARMY – we prepare for everything in advance.”
Police Commissioner Valentine of New York City is the author of these war-like remarks.
The military preparations of the police department that he so grimly described are meant to be used against 32,000 AMERICAN WORKERS – workers whose combined labor transports 5,198,000 people every day in the subways of the city. They operate, repair, clean – they tend the powerhouses, the tracks, the cars, the stations. Their labor gives life to the transit arteries of the·busiest city in the world.
These transit workers are the “enemy.” The “hostile act” that they have committed is to demand that the city negotiate a contract with their union – the Transport Workers Union, CIO – covering the three subway systems, the BMT, IRT and Independent, all now operated by the city.
This legitimate demand of the TWU has been met with a barrage of irresponsible slander against 32,000 responsible workers – and with preparations to wage war against them, should they be compelled to resort to a strike.
Appeals to Mayor La Guardia and to the Board of Transportation by the TWU and by Philip Murray, president of the CIO, that the legal right of the transit workers to bargain collectively with their boss be recognized, are ignored both .by the “progressive” Mayor and by his dictatorial Board of Transportation. Union letters remain unanswered.
Instead, the Mayor has tried to discredit the union in the eyes of the workers with such underhanded slurs as: “I know the difference between a real labor leader and just a dues collector.”
 
What Are the Facts’?
Such attempts are laughable.
Transport workers know what they have accomplished through their union since 1937, when it became active. Not only have they forced substantial wage increases for all transport workers, including taxi drivers, bus drivers, surface, elevated and subway workers. The 12, 14 and 16-hour working days used to prevail. During these long hours the men were subject to call, but were paid only for eight or nine hours. This evil has been abolished. The six-day week has also been established where the seven-day week flourished. Vacations with pay have been won.
Transport workers know these things. So when the “progressive” Mayor only the other day made the crack that the city is against the 56-hour week but “inherited” it from the TWU when it took over the contracts made by the TWU with the private owners of the BMT and IRT, the workers understood exactly the method in the Mayor’s madness.
The workers understood even before Austin J. Hogan, president of the New York City local of the TWU, replied that every contract the union entered into was “a great improvement over conditions which existed before.” Mr. Hogan also pointed out that the contract terms the Mayor now sneers at had been determined by a fact-finding committee appointed by the Mayor himself in 1937.
The workers also know a three letter word to describe the Mayor’s assertion that the hours of BMT and IRT workers covered by TWU contracts are worse than on the city controlled Independent. Michael J. Quill,·international president of the TWU, states that on the Independent system, city built and always operated by the’ city, there are towermen and motormen forced to work seven days a week.
The World-Telegram, which is not exactly pro-labor. recently quoted a motorman on the Independent subway as follows: “What we want is what all the men want, grievance machinery, the ability to sit down and talk over the things that are wrong. We’re not getting it now. We never have gotten it. And men who have fought the TWU for years are going over to it. They figure that it’s the only way to get anywhere. In the last few months the TWU has gained tremendously in strength on the Independent division, where the men have always been under civil service. Working conditions on the IRT and BMT are better than on the Independent. The Independent men figure the TWU made them so.”
Before the city took them over, there was grievance machinery on the privately owned IRT and’ BMT. Shop stewards could meet with superintendents to discuss complaints. If these did not agree, union officials could meet with company officials. When the city took over the lines, the Board of Transportation was supposed to set up a similar system. Nothing of the kind has been done. A TWU representative now meets weekly with George Keegan, a member of the board, but the union states these meetings have yielded no results.
In fact, the handbill entitled Our Side of the Transit Story, issued by the TWU, charges that many of the gains made by the union prior to unification by the city have been destroyed during the ten months of city operation.
The Board of Transportation has a very unsavory labor reputation. The World-Telegram, after investigating the record of the Board, stated that it could find no instance in the last eight years when John H. Delaney, chairman of the board and himself a former labor leader, having served as president of New York Typographical Union for one year, received representatives of independent labor organizations to work out a method of adjusting grievances. In many cases the board has not even deigned to reply to requests for interviews from labor organizations.
Jonas A. McBride, vice-president of the ultra-conservative Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen, is reported to have said:
“I have been dealing with hardboiled employers for 31 years and I have never met one as tough as the Board of Transportation.”
But the TWU is hardboiled, too. It insists on the right of workers to bar gain collectively with their boss even if the boss is the tough Board of Transportation of the City of New York. The contract the union had with the privately owned BMT and IRT expires June 30. It insists on negotiating. a new contract with the city covering the BMT, IRT and Independent systems.
The union demands for the new contract include a 48-hour week for those who work more, a 44-hour week for those who work 48 hours, and a 40-hour work for those who work 44 hours. The “labor-loving” Mayor, who stated the city does not approve of the 56-hour week, should have no objections to these improvements in hours.
The union also asks for equalization of pay for the same work on the three subways at the highest levels of pay, and for a flat $1 a day increase for all workers, The Mayor has grossly misrepresented the union’s demands; saying it asks for a 40 per cent increase. He declares, on the basis of this falsification: “There is no such money in sight. Such talk cannot be taken seriously.”
However, there is plenty of money with which to prepare an armed attack on the workers should they have to strike.
The union’s appeals for recognition having been ignored by the city officials, the transit workers have carried their fight to the working public which depends on the 32,000 transit workers to get it where it wants to go. The union’s handbill is being distributed at subway, bus and elevated stations. It expects to increase the number distributed to one and a half million a week. Public mass meetings have been held. On Saturdays there have been demonstrations by transit workers and their families outside the offices of the Board of Transportation at 250 Hudson Street. These demonstrations will hereafter be transferred to City Hall. The union is planning a campaign to gather signatures for a public petition. Another great mass meeting has been arranged for May 21st at Madison Square Garden, at which Philip Murray is to be the main speaker. A tremendous turn out is expected by the union.
 
“Persuasion” Needed
John Santo, international secretary and treasurer of the TWU, has said he believes the union finally will succeed in persuading the Mayor to bargain collectively with it on behalf of all the transit workers, because LaGuardia “is one of the ablest mayors in the country, he knows his job and does the right thing in the long run.”
It must be remembered that Bethlehem and Ford are two of the “ablest” boss outfits in the country, know their jobs and are just beginning to do “the right thing in the long run” – but only after the workers demonstrated their fighting power on the picket lines. Boss La Guardia seems to need the same kind of persuasion.
In the meantime he keeps promising that the city will take care of its “children.” It will adjust wages, hours and working conditions of the transit workers “in good time.” These are “complicated” matters, the mayor declares.
No doubt! Adjustment of wages, hours and working conditions does become very complicated indeed – when the object is to put it over on the workers.
FOR THE TRANSIT WORKERS, THEIR BREAD IS BUTTERED ON THE SIDE OF THE TWU – and “bittered” on the side of Boss LaGuardia. AND THE WORKERS KNOW IT!
 




The two campaign promises of political Big-Boss Roosevelt that got him most votes were: (1) to keep the country out of the war, and (2) to preserve the social gains that his administration falsely claims to be responsible for, but which actually were forced from him by labor’s strength.
The first promise has gone the primrose path to the everlasting bonfire travelled by the great majority of campaign promises. It is about to drag in its wake a bewildered, uninformed, unwilling people into the world conflagration started by the pyromaniac imperialists of the warring countries – IF LABOR PERMITS.
The second promise is fast going the same way. IF LABOR PERMITS, maximum hours and minimum wages, unemployment insurance, laws protecting women and children in industry, government jobs for the unemployed, relief for the destitute – these will all go up in the smoke of that everlasting bonfire of campaign promises, mingled with the denser, darker and more deadly smoke of the war.
 
The Forty Hour Week
Sidney Hillman, now identified with labor only by the mask he still wears, is willing to sap the working class of its vital energy for the sake of producing the means of murder that the boss-imperialists require, and trots out the four-shift 160-hour week plan. But the bosses – as revealed by the New York Times, seconded by boss sheets all over the country – are not satisfied with Hillman’s plan. THEY WANT THE FORTY-HOUR WEEK ABOLISHED.
Said the Times editorially on May 9:
“From no one in the Administration, unfortunately, has there yet come any candid and realistic consideration or the problem of the working week in defense economy and the relation to it of our present wage-hour law. Obviously the law deliberately discourages a working week of more than forty hours by its penalty of a 50 per cent wage increase for any hours above that. IT WOULD CERTAINLY SEEM REASONABLE TO AMEND THE LAW FOR THE PERIOD OF THE EMERGENCY SO THAT THIS HEAVY OVERTIME PENALTY DOES NOT BEGIN UNTIL AFTER A WORKING WEEK OF FORTY-EIGHT HOURS.”
It is not for nothing that the spokesmen for the bosses make such criticisms and suggestions. They indicate that tremendous pressure is being put on Congress – through the many avenues open to the bosses for controlling Congress – to abolish the forty-hour week.
This, obviously, is a simultaneous ATTACK UPON THE WAGES OF THE WORKERS. “Longer hours for less pay” is the slogan of the bosses. And out of the thinner pay envelopes the workers are expected to meet the cost of living which in some sections of the country has already risen by 25 per cent.
Still fancier schemes are being cooked up that will beat to the ground the standard of living of the working people – IF LABOR PERMITS. The question of paying for their war is topmost in the minds of the boss-imperialists. They want to eat their cake and have it. They want to win against the Hitler imperialist camp the cream of the world markets and at the same time to keep the bulk of the profits made in the production of tanks, bombers and battleships. The income tax that will take in the poorest of the poor, and slice off a big chunk of every worker’s pay, is not the only scheme for this purpose. Nor is the plan to sell war stamps and bonds fast becoming almost compulsory – the only way to reach into the sagging pockets of the workers.
 
A Visitor from Abroad
There came to this country the other day Maynard Keynes, bourgeois professor and economist, representative of the British Chancellor of the Exchequer, to teach the American bosses and politicians the methods their British counterparts use to pick clean the pockets of the working people of that unhappy country. He informs the willing students of how to squeeze the workers, that there is still another arrangement they use in “democratic” Britain. This is called “deferred pay:” Piled on top of the staggering taxes in England collected by the bosses from the workers’ pay – and piled on top of all the other burdens borne by labor, a certain additional percentage of each person’s salary or income is also withheld by the employer. This is not called a tax, mind you, but “deferred pay” – because the British government promises to return this money to its owners – after the war. Such promises, you must understand, go to the same bonfire that consumes campaign promises. “Deferred pay” is in store for the American workers also IF LABOR PERMITS.
Professor Keynes bluntly states that “deferred pay” lowers the standard of living of’ the people. With less money, they can buy less of the necessities of life. But the well-fed professor justifies this on the basis that “deferred pay” is the solution for war inflation. This clever economist cold-bloodedly explains that if people don’t have money with which to buy the necessities of life, the lack or demand will keep the prices down! He fails to state, however, that the British bosses hope to make the wartime coolie standard of living the standard for the post-war period also – IF LABOR PERMITS.
Longer hours; less pay, mounting cost of living, unbearable taxes, forced purchasing of war stamps and bonds, “deferred’ pay” – these are the blows about to fall upon the social gains that the “Friend of the workers” in the White House promised to preserve. And in an attempt to make labor defenseless against the coming blows, the Vinson anti-strike law looms on the horizon in Congress. And the state legislatures are busy putting legal shackles on labor’s limbs, as well as preparing military guards, armed in the modern way, to use against workers who fight for their rights.
“IT IS AMAZlNG,” the smart British professor assures the American exploiters, “WHAT REGULATION PEOPLE WILL TAKE IN WARTIME.” That, working men and women, is another way of telling the bosses here that the sooner they declare war, the sooner can these major blows fall upon you – IF YOU PERMIT.
 
Other Gains in Jeopardy
Just as the gains in wages and hours stand in jeopardy, so do all the other measures affecting the welfare of the workers.
Unemployment insurance, one of the brightest plumes the Roosevelt Administration has pilfered for its cap, has received a wallop. In the Empire State of the Union, on April 25th, Governor Lehman signed the Burney Bill. Very quietly the event was buried on the inside pages of the papers. The Burney Bill states that workers who “quit their jobs” will be barred from unemployment insurance benefits. Thus the sword of intimidation has been placed over the heads of striking workers who heretofore have received unemployment benefits, such as they were.
In Connecticut, night work for women has now become legal in spite of a law prohibiting the employment of women after 10 p.m. The governor simply invoked another law giving him the right to suspend this protection for women DURING AN EMERGENCY. There are thousands of such “emergency” laws throughout the country gradually being enforced against the “social gains” labor has made. In Germany too, all social security for the workkers was suspended “during the emergency.”
Destitute people; who subsist now on relief payments, are in danger of having even this crust of bread taken out of their mouths. Representative Doughten, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee; wants the state and local government to “take back” the cost of relief “to ease the federal tax burden.” The state of California, always slow to grant “social gains” and quick to remove them, has already referred the matter of relief back to the counties – where it was before destitute people got any relief at all. While private charities – subsidized by the rich to salve their guilty conscience – fearing the deserted poor will again be left at therr door, are protesting that they have no money either because of “inroads” of increased taxation on war relief appeals.
Lastly, let us hear Representative Tabor from New York. He waxed so enthusiastic the other day over cutting “non-defense” expenditures that he proposed to slash the WPA federal budget allowance from $995,000,000 to $195,000,000 – a small deduction of $800,000,000. According to Philip Murray, president of the CIO, the budget allowance of $995,000,000 for the coming year will at best provide jobs for only 1,000,000 jobless people. Mr. Murray estimates that, even after the war jobs are handed out, there will still be 7,000,000 unemployed during the coming year. SO WHERE ARE THE SOCIAL GAINS FOR THE JOBLESS?
Unemployment insurance, protection for women and children, home relief, WPA – along with the Wage-Hour Act – are on the to-be-fired list of the bosses and their politicians; and will be fired IF LABOR PERMITS.
 
The Fight on Our Hands
The workers have a fight on their hands – and IT IS NOT THE INTERNATIONAL IMPERIALIST WAR NOW RAGING.
THEY MUST OPPOSE THE WAR. It is being used as an excuse, to enslave the workers and beat down their standard of living.
They must fight THEIR OWN WAR – the class war against the bosses.
They must set up a hue and cry against every infringement of workers’ protection in industry, and stand ready not only to defend but to EXTEND their hard-won gains. They must demand government jobs for the jobless with union pay and hours and adequate government relief for those who cannot work.
These are some of the tasks for the workers.
LABOR MUST LOOK AFTER ITSELF! Neither political Big-Boss Roosevelt nor anyone else will do it for the workers.
 




Governor Robert A. Hurley, chief executive of the commonwealth of Connecticut, has, waived the 10 p.m. limit set by law on women’s night work. This will allow the Winchester Repeating Arms Co. of New Haven and the Remington Arms Co. of Bridgeport to establish full night shifts of women workers and, thus make more profits out of the sweat of women in the “national emergency.”
How come that a law passed by the so-called representatives of the people can be so arbitrarily suspended by a governor without the consent of the governed? How come that a law to protect the health of women in industry, forced upon the statute books after long years of hard struggle by the workers, can be nullified by the scratch of a governor’s pen?
Under an emergency provision of another Connecticut law he is empowered to set aside the 10 p.m. limit on night work for women. The emergency now existing is that the Winchester Repeating Arms Co. wishes to increase its weekly output of cartridges from 11,000,000 to 17,000 [sic!] by employing women at night. The Remington Arms Co. also desires to increase its output by using the same method.
So, presto! This emergency provision is taken out of mothballs and put into service.
In the balance of values of capitalists and their politicians, the health of working women has no weight against cartridges and profits.

This attack on labor legislation in the state of Connecticut – only one of many throughout the country – must serve as a warning to all workers, men and women, black and white.
World capitalism, having brought on another murderous war, into which the American bosses want to plunge the nation in order to “get theirs,” a “national emergency” now exists. In every state there is some law somewhere – even though it may be a hundred years old – that can· be trotted out “legally” to suspend hard-won labor legislation.
Every shred of legal protection for labor will be gone in the winds raised by the total war cyclone – unless Labor says NO – and suits its ACTION to its word,

Did you ever hear of William McChesney Martin, Jr.?
You haven’t unless you read the long stories about him and saw the many pictures of him that the boss press was carrying. You wouldn’t have heard of him for the simple reason that you, as working women, don’t have much to do with the New York Stock Exchange, of which Mr. Martin was $48,000 a year president until he was drafted into the army a few days ago.
At the same time William Metrinko, who at the age of 23 is a $16-a-week or $800-a-year page boy at the New York Stock Exchange, was also drafted into the army. His story was combined with Mr. Martin’s – to show how “democratically” the draft law works.
Says who?

Mr. Martin confessed to reporters that he had saved some money – he modestly refrained from saying how much. I would wager my last hairpin that he is a very rich man. To the president of the New York Stock Exchange, the yearly salary of $48,000 is mere pin money. The big dough comes from trading in stocks and bonds, and. from dividends and interest “earned” by the parasite owners of corporations paper – out of the products for which labor is not fully paid. It was also reported that Mr. Martin has plans for the future, involving the purchase of an expensive seat on the New York Stock Exchange.
But what has $16-a-week William Metrinko? Certainly no fat bank account, no stocks and bonds yielding’ him juicy returns. After four years of employment at the same job, he earned only a starvation wage. He told reporters there is no future for him in the work he was doing before the draft got him. He is a poor wage slave without hope of lifting himself above his wretched condition.
Can it be said – WITH TRUTH – that the positions of these two men as draftees in the army are the same?
Mr. Martin definitely has stakes in the boss system. America’s entrance into the war is for him and for his class – as the last World War proved. The army is being built for them. Mr. Martin belongs in the army, as do all the other members of his class. It is THEIR war – let THEM fight it.
But what is $16-a-week William Metrinko doing in the boss army? He. has no stakes in the capitalist set-up. He will get nothing out of the war but a mud-hole in some foreign battlefield. His class will get nothing out of the war but indescribable misery – and more misery in a post-war depression. He does not belong in the army. He is drafted as a SLAVE to serve his masters.
Why do I put this item about two men into a women’s column? I was thinking about the mother of William. Metrinko. I was thinking about the mothers of all the William Metrinkos of the country – for whom the capitalist system holds no future – now about to give up their lives for that enslaving system in a bloody and useless war.
Is it not the human duty of these women to fight the boss system that has robbed their boys of the opportunity for a good life, and now is about to rob them of life itself!
 




When Israel Amter, Communist Party candidate for City Council, almost bursts a blood vessel and the microphone denouncing Tammany Hall Candidate O’Dwyer as receiving the active support of “every reactionary and pro-Hitler force in the city,” it’s time to dial another station.
Similarly does the program get boring when this same political acrobat melts into sweetness and almost kisses the microphone in his enthusiastic love for LaGuardia.
No doubt O’Dwyer wouldn’t mind getting some of the “reactionary and pro-Hitler” votes. Neither would LaGuardia be overcome by moral revulsion if some of the “reactionary and pro-Hitler” forces should get a brainstorm and cast their votes for him.
But just as in the presidential election both Roosevelt and Willkie saw eye to eye on the matter of ramming the imperialist war down the throats of the people, so do Tammany Hall Candidate O’Dwyer and Wall Street Candidate LaGuardia have the identical view on the momentous question of the war.
The Workers Party can say this to the working people of the city because IT IS NOT INTERESTED IN GETTING EITHER CRAFTY POLITICIAN ELECTED.
BUT NOT SO THE COMMUNIST PARTY.
That dishonest flip-flopping outfit has instructions from the Kremlin to get behind LaGuardia because as a pro-war politician he has certain advantages over O’Dwyer – one of them being that LaGuardia is an insider of the pro-war Roosevelt gang.
You are supposed to forget that before Hitler’s unkind attack on his loyal partner in the Kremlin, Amter and the other Stalin stooges did not regard the Hitler forces as devils, but as inseparable boon companions.
On the contrary, in those days the Roosevelt-LaGuardia gang was poison to the party-liners.
But Stalin cracked his whip – AND THE AMTER CROWD JUMPED. Whatever uncomplimentary things one can say about Stalin’s American agents – and there are plenty – one has to admit that for political agility they .are rivaled only by that daring young man on the flying trapeze.

O’Dwyer accuses LaGuardia of spending $1,000,000 on his campaign – which is not unlikely. LaGuardia retorts to the effect that O’Dwyer is a liar.
LaGuardia shouts that O’Dwyer is bringing in “racial issues.” So O’Dwyer retorts to the effect that LaGuardia is a liar.
President Roosevelt comes into the fight as a self-appointed referee and declares LaGuardia the champ.
Whereupon Governor Lehman – a good member of the Democratic Party, of which the President is also a good member – steps into the ring, counts LaGuardia out, declares O’Dwyer the champ – and in effect calls his political chief a liar.
LaGuardia challenges O’Dwyer to clean out the bosses from his political machine. O’Dwyer counters by calling LaGuardia the worst boss New York City has ever had.
Neither candidate bothers to prove his accusations and counter-accusations. Each one hopes that by appealing to ignorance and prejudice he will win the fight for votes.
THIS CRAZY, DISHONEST MESS HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH THE INTERESTS OF THE WORKING CLASS.
Thus daily the intelligence of the working people of the city is being insulted EQUALLY BY BOTH O’DWYER AND LaGUARDIA.

At this moment the most important issue before the workers of this city and of every other city – an issue growing out of the greater. issue of the imperialist war for world power – is the THREAT TO THEIR RIGHT TO STRIKE.
In no uncertain words President Roosevelt in his Navy Day speech indicated what he has in mind. His audience of army and navy moguls applauded the anti-strike portion of his speech as they did no other part. In Congress the anti-labor contingent is again up in arms. Radio commentators try to whip up anti-strike sentiment. Those in the know in Washington predict that in a few weeks the crackdown will come.
WITHOUT THE RIGHT TO STRIKE, LABOR WILL BE TIED HAND AND FOOT TO THE WAR CHARIOT OF THE AMERICAN IMPERIALISTS. The workers will have no means of combating profiteer prices, increasing taxes, forced loans to the warlords, and the other hardships of war.
Without the right to strike, LABOR WILL BE REDUCED TO INDUSTRIAL SLAVERY NO DIFFERENT FROM THAT IMPOSED ON EUROPEAN WORKERS.
But to LaGuardia and O’Dwyer THIS IS NO CAMPAIGN ISSUE. To the disreputable horse-trading American Labor Party, THIS IS NO CAMPAIGN ISSUE.
To the dishonest somersaulting Communist Party, THIS IS NO CAMPAIGN ISSUE. They are all out for the same thing – TOTAL WAR.
They are all behind the President’s war program – and labor’s rights be damned – FOR THE DURATION.
If labor had its own independent class party, the war, the right to strike, the high cost of living, would be among the vital issues behind which the workers could rally.
SUCH AN INDEPENDENT CLASS PARTY IS LABOR’S CRYING NEED.
This shameless municipal campaign proves it to the hilt.
MAX SHACHTMAN, WORKERS PARTY CANDIDATE FOR MAYOR, champions labor’s cause in this respect as in all others.
 




THESE ARE SUPPOSED TO BE BOOM DAYS FOR LABOR.
At least we are so assured by the habitually reassuring Madam Perkins. Her report of September 30 declared that since June 1940 “all manufacturing industries increased employment by more than 2,320,000 wage earners.”
Throw up your hats, boys, and cheer for the capitalist system which gives some of you a short respite of employment at making the bloody tools of war.
BUT NOT TOO MANY OF YOU!
A few weeks ago, in Newark, N.J. where there are many manufacturing industries, a “job clearance exchange” – ordinarily known as an employment agency – was opened by the State Compensation Commission’s employment service division. On the opening day about 600 applicants were expected and preparations were made for that many. INSTEAD, 4,000 DESCENDED UPON THE AGENCY, HOPING FOR AN OPPORTUNITY TO EARN THEIR DAILY BREAD. They crammed the surrounding streets. Extra police squads were called out to keep order.
Of the 4,000 eager, job-hungry workers, 50 were hired. An additional 300 were told to report at factories for “further consultation.” The remaining 3,650 were sent to enjoy the autumn scenery and swallow saliva. In other words, 1¼ per cent got jobs, 7½ per cent were told “maybe” and 91¼ per cent were confronted with the familiar “NO HELP WANTED.”
“No help wanted” – and these are supposed to be boom times for labor. Have a closer look at labor’s much-tooted war prosperity.
 
Army of Jobless
Of the army of unemployed drafted and drilled by the depression of 1929 – the greatest marching army the world has ever known, not barring Hitler’s – there are still between 5,000,000 and 6,000,000 (government figures) without honorable discharge into jobs. THE WAR BOOM HAS NOT AFFECTED THEM.
Today, in the midst of feverish war preparation, this standing army of unemployed vets is being swelled by a great mass of rookies – THE WORKERS WHO ARE NOT PERMITTED TO EARN A LIVING BY MAKING PEACETIME GOODS. Peacetime goods, you know, have been arbitrarily declared “non-essential” by the warlords of the nation.
For example. Governor Murray D. Wagoner proclaims the stark fact that the state of Michigan is facing “its worst unemployment problem in history,” one that will “make 1932 seem almost rosy.”
Whereupon that prince of profit-makers. General Motors, confirms the governor’s prediction by discharging a round 90,000 auto workers. Motor Magnate Ford seconds the motion and fires 20,000 men. And not to be misunderstood, they clarify the matter for the press by stating that this is just “THE BEGINNING” and that tens of thousands more dismissal slips will be handed out before “adjustment to wartime production” has been made.
In Buffalo where only 3,600 workers were thrown out of auto factories, they have been disposed of as follows: One-third got jobs in other factories through the combined efforts of union representatives and employment agencies. What kind of jobs and for how much money are not stated by the OPM officials. Another third of the fired men are going to vocational schools to learn other trades. There are no paydays in vocational schools. The remaining third of the fired men left Buffalo “to work in other cities where jobs are plentiful,” according to the report. Possibly some found their way to Newark, where the “plentiful jobs” are apportioned 50 jobs to 4,000 applicants.
Leaders of the UAW place coming unemployment in the auto industry at a minimum of 215,000 and state unequivocally that MANY OF THESE WILL “NEVER GET THEIR JOBS BACK.” Three cheers for the war boom! The officials of OPM – not quite as reassuring as the soothing Secretary of Labor – estimate that the impact of production for war upon production for peace will, in the coming months, throw into the streets as many as 2,000,000 workers.
 
Understatement!
Going back to the OPM’s figure of 2,000,000 priority unemployed, one must remember that usually government unemployment figures suffer from understatement. In this case the understatement is flagrant. First, it does not include the many plants partially crippled by priority rulings, that do not discharge men but distribute the limited work among all the employees. These workers are not reported as unemployed, though only on part time employment. Second, many small plants do not even bother to report when they tell their workers to go pace the pavements.
Small plants in the country adversely affected by war production number around 150,000, according to Kiplinger Business Service. Of these as many will be closed down as cannot “convert to war production.” For the present 20,000 of these plants are doomed – THEIR WORKERS WITH THEM. As many more will go as cannot be “rescued” for war production – THEIR WORKERS WITH THEM.
This stoppage of production of peacetime goods – from autos to zippers – will have its repercussions in related fields. Wholesale and retail businesses will have to shut down. Salespeople, clerks, office workers, will be shut out by the tens of thousands.
The OPM holds out the hope for these war-made unemployed that when the new war-production plants are completed and when the factories shut down for retooling reopen – SOME TIME NEXT YEAR – there will be jobs. This is simply a fake. Obviously all of the 2,000,000 and more workers fired from all kinds of peacetime jobs, will not have the special requirements for war-production jobs. Only a small percentage of these workers can, or are permitted to, take training courses to fit them for skilled war work.
Furthermore, there will be a new crop of young skilled workers next year, especially trained for war jobs. Finally, next year is a long way off. UNEMPLOYED WORKERS AND THEIR FAMILIES CANNOT GO INTO A STATE OF SUSPENDED ANIMATION FOR A YEAR. Nature just won’t stand for it. Yes, next year is a long way off. BUT RIGHT NOW THE GOVERNMENT IS HELL-BENT ON SPENDING AS MUCH AS TWO HUNDRED BILLION DOLLARS FOR WAR.
RIGHT NOW – NOT SOME OTHER TIME – THE WORKERS WHO ARE NOT ALLOWED TO EARN A LIVING AT PEACETIME PRODUCTION MUST HAVE WAGES TO LIVE ON, ANYWAY!
Let the government spend some of those two hundred billion dollars on the industrial victims of its war program.
Let the bosses part with some of their pilfered profits so that their fired workers can live.
THE WAR-MADE UNEMPLOYED MUST HAVE A LIVING WAGE – PROVIDED JOINTLY BY THE BOSSES AND THE GOVERNMENT.
And they most have it right now!
 




Society dames and club women are running around like a lot of headless chickens simply outdoing themselves and each other in their willingness to “sacrifice.”
Wrapped in expensive furs and adorned in hats of original design, upper class women sign pledges not to waste this, that and the other thing, while – not too obviously of course – they show off their finery and smiles to good advantage when the cameras click.
Women who never have to deny themselves a single whim enter contests for making meals out of so-called half-empty larders which any working class housewife would consider a veritable bonanza of food.
All this is hypocritical and disgusting, and has no rhyme. But it certainly has reason – and plenty. Watch and see.
Read what a Washington business service writes its, clients:
“The government has no hope of preventing a general rise in prices ... People must plan ahead for a constantly rising price level. At least 25 per cent average wholesale prices sometime in 1942. At least 50 per cent higher average level sometime in 1943. These prospects are admitted privately by ALL authorities here, and some estimates are even higher. We understate rather than overstate.”
Regard also the plans for taking 15 per cent right out of every worker’s pay envelope before he even gets it. Think of the whisperings to extend the income tax to even lower brackets and to increase the rate. Add to the above the prospects of more and more young men, now contributing to the support of their families, being taken into the army.
Oh, yes! Sacrifices will be made in this inter-imperialist war for world domination – BUT NOT BY THE SOCIETY DAMES AND CLUB WOMEN. War profits will take care of them in more than the style to which they are accustomed.
The reason why the rich now play so hard at the game of “sacrifice” is that they want to fill the eyes and ears of the poor so full of the idea of sacrifice, that working class housewives will take as NATURAL all the burdens that the warlords will unload upon them!
BUT WILL THEY!

Mothers who have been keeping their fingers crossed and thanking their lucky stars that their boys were born later rather than sooner because they are still too young to be drafted, have a new flock of worries descending upon them.
Word comes from the makers of our destinies in Washington that the draft age will be reduced to 18 “when the time is ripe.” General Hershey, head of the miltary draft machinery, is doing spade work in Congress – where the wishes of the war gods are expected to become law.
Also, women who have been relying upon Roosevelt’s promise that American boys will not be sent Over There should know that the above-mentioned Washington business service advises its clients:
“AEF NEXT YEAR. It is an open secret in military circles here that there are plans for an AEF ... and it’s thought they will be used.”
Roosevelt’s promises are political quicksand for naive people to be caught in.

On the recent trip of Viscount and Viscountess Halifax through the midwestern industrial section of this country, they were served – not in edible form – tomatoes and eggs by mothers and wives of men in the army camps.
These notables were also picketed by women carrying placards with slogans such as “Drive the British from Washington Again,” “Give Us Back Our White House,” “Wake Up, Paul Revere – the British Are Here,” And one bore the truism, “Halifax believes in freedom of the Seize” – as do also the untitled rulers of America.
Newspapers reported that these Britishers of the upper crust took all this in their aristocratic stride, only commenting that in their country they have no tomatoes and eggs to throw away.
These members of Britain’s ruling class, who are making the British people fight for the preservation of their ill-famed empire, have amply earned the hatred of the working people not only of Britain, but of America; and of the entire world. BUT DRIVING THE BRITISH FROM WASHINGTON STILL LEAVES THERE THE SERVANTS OF AMERICAN IMPERIALISM.
Not in response to British pressure and propaganda and not for the altruistic purpose of saving the British Empire have the American people been railroaded into the bloody morass. THE MASTERS OF AMERICA HAVE THEIR OWN IMPERIALIST INTERESTS THAT WE SERVE WITH OUR FLESH AND BLOOD.
Furthermore, militant women determined to keep their men from destruction, must not make the mistake of supporting the Lindbergh pro-Nazi forces. The Nazis certainly are not more scrupulous about human life than the other war-makers. IF THEY TALK DIFFERENTLY, IT IS ONLY WINDOW DRESSING.
The sacredness of human life can be established FOR ALL TIME only by the workers of each country getting rid of their own imperialist robbers.
ONLY THEN CAN THERE BE INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD AND PEACE.

In pursuit of “national unity” – an evasive and unattainable will-o’-the-wisp because of the opposing class interests of the masses, and the bosses – radio team Pearson and Allen have offered a novel, if minor, contribution.
Why, they ask, should the bottle of champagne be broken on the nose of a new battleship by the wife or daughter of a captain of industry or government? This, they suggested, should be done by the wife or daughter of a workingman who helped build the vessel.
This idea is considered a good one by the chasers after “national unity.” At least one shipbuilding company has already adopted the Pearson and Allen suggestion.
So hereafter naval and other craft may be launched and good liquor served to the unappreciative fishes not by ladies in mink and orchids, but by women who may have to stop payments on the furniture to get a decent cloth coat for the occasion.
However, the old procedure was infinitely more honest. THE MINK AND ORCHIDS SYMBOLIZED THAT BATTLESHIPS ARE BUILT FOR THE PROFIT AND WAR NEEDS OF THE RULING CLASS.
 




The Kiplinger Washington Service – for value received – send its clients weekly letters on what’s brewing in Washington. Businessmen like to know ahead of time what’s coming out of the capital, It helps them in their pursuit of rapidly multiplying profits. I base the following items on information contained in recent Kiplinger letters. I figure that workers, in their just pursuit of life and a living, need this inside information – even if they are not paying clients.

All branches of the capitalist government are head-hunting for workers on strike to increase their wages to meet the rising cost of living. Knudsen and Stimson order the Al1is-Chalmers strikers back to work. State legislators propose laws to draft workers who strike. Some national legislators go so far as to propose the death penalty for strikers. And policemen and state troopers: are ordered by mayors and governors to do their stuff.
Under these circumstances you would exactly expect the government policy at the present time to be to ALLOW the cost of living to rise. Yet this astounding information is contained in the Kiplinger letter of March 15.
It is stated in that letter, and underlined for emphasis, that food prices will rise. Then comes the juicy morsel that in Washington “at present the rough official idea is to let them rise about 10 per cent before putting on the brakes.”
Regardless of why the government stands behind a 10 per cent increase in the cost of living, to be fair it should also stand behind a 10 per cent increase in wages. Instead this “democratic” government, city, state and federal, emerges as strikebreaker No. 1.
Is this a contradiction? Only if you don’t know that the job of a capitalist :government is to govern for the capitalists.

On the subject of “putting on the brakes” on rising prices, Kiplinger gives another bit of valuable information. But first I must tell you about Mr. Arnold, head of the anti-trust division of the Department of Justice, who very recently wrote a fat book called The Bottlenecks of Business. In it he showed most graphically how greedy monopolies have absolute control of certain commodities, fix prices, limit distribution, all in the interest of greater profits.
In his book and in speeches, Mr. Arnold promised to open up these bottlenecks of business by prosecuting all violators of the anti-trust law. In this way he was going to lower prices to the government and the consumer, keep down the cost of living permanently and in fact make milk and honey flow in all directions – even in the direction of the poor, which, of course, was a lot of hooey.
Comes Kiplinger’s letter of March 15 definitely advising its clients that from now on Mr. Arnold’s department will have very little to do. The government has made it clear to the captains of industry that there will be no anti-trust enforcement nonsense “for the duration,” as they are saying in Washington.
Writes Kiplinger: “This will not be announced ... (in fact announcement may be the other way). But it will be essential line of policy” Then the Kiplinger scribe put down the sentence: “Government price policing or fixing can prevent abuses of collusion,” and with tongue in cheek added the significant words, “they think.”
The only brakes working are those on WAGES.

Conscripts in the military camps who have gone there with the soothing notion that all will be over in a year will soon have it blasted out of their heads. A law is likely to be passed in the fall EXTENDING THEIR SERVICE. This extension of service will go into effect if the country gets into the war or if we have an “emergency.” “Regardless of the chances of ‘war,’ the chances of an ‘emergency’ are very great ... so great that plans should be made largely upon it.” Thus Kiplinger to businessmen.
You conscripts who thought a year’s training might not hurt you! The rosy promise of soon returning to a job, the besom of your family, peacetime pleasures, was only propaganda to ease you into the bosses’ army. “You’re in the army new” – and now – and NOW. The imperialists will be finished with you when they are finished with their war for world domination – unless a bomb gets you first.

Kiplinger predicts that “production for many civilian purposes is bound to be curtailed.” In the crazy concentration on manufacturing war equipment, making goods just for human needs takes a back seat. One of the reasons is that plants producing civilian goods will not be permitted to get the raw materials they need, The workers in these industries are sitting on a volcano.
Already there have been shutdowns. Already many workers have been thrown out of work. More shut downs will come. More workers will be out of jobs.
The theory is that such shut-out workers can find jobs in war industries. That’s easier said than done. They are skilled in other lines. An expert on ladies’ hats would not be much good at making airplanes. To train for new trades takes time and is a terrible hardship. For older workers it is almost impossible. (The younger ones are, of course, invited to join the army.) Why should the bread be taken out of the mouths of these workers and their families!
The capitalist who shuts down his plant continues to live in luxury and makes his adjustment to the more lucrative war economy without giving up his yacht and mansion. With the worker it is quite different. In England, at the height of war production, hundreds of thousands of shut-out workers were, and still are, out of jobs.
Here is a challenge for militant unionism. Before the executioner’s knife falls upon the livelihood of thousands and thousands of workers, demands should be made upon the Office of Production Management for the continued flow of raw materials to the plants producing peace-time goods.

Workers want jobs – not a bosses’ war!
While workers are exhorted to be “patriotic” and make sacrifices to to preserve “democracy,” Kiplinger’s letters make no bones about the fact that “democracy” will no longer exist after the war.
The March 22 letter states bluntly that there will be a “semi-totalitarian government here.” Those workers who think the suspension of their rights is just a war measure should read a hundred times the following sentence from the same letter: “Preparations for war are preparations for the post-war new era.”
Labor Action again poses the alternative that history lays before the working class: the “new era” of capitalism, meaning some form of fascism – or the struggle for workers’ power and SOCIALISM.
 




On April 17, most of the morning and evening papers in New York City – and presumably throughout the country – carried a full-page advertisement by General Motors. Under a spread eagle, and decorated with pictures of marching doughboys appeared a chatty, homey-folksy Message to General Motors folks everywhere. Such extensive advertising costs a pretty penny, you bet. But it was used in a good cause against the workers!
You see, folks, those terrible workers – of whom 160.000 are employed by GM out of pure love – have warned the company that they will go out on strike if it doesn’t come across with a satisfactory contract. And this in spite of the fact that GM has self-sacrificingly accepted $750,000,000 of war orders, GM was relying on “the loyal cooperation” of its employees. And “at a time when your country is asking for sacrifice, can anyone justify seeking selfish advantage at the cost of production?”
You see, folks, these 160,000 workers, who with their families add up to maybe 750,000 human beings, are not “folks” – they are just workers from whom to extract profits. These workers are getting it in the neck from this armament program – out of which GM has already made plenty as an encouraging beginning. And, folks, these workers are trying to take their necks out of the way of being hurt.
Furthermore, these workers are just plain “criminals” for trying to take their necks out of the way. Mr. Knudsen himself says so. His opinion, as you all know, is absolutely unbiased. You are not supposed to remember that he handed in a fake resignation as General Motors boss. You are not supposed to remember, folks, that Mr. Knudsen’s safe-deposit vault is no doubt stacked high with GM stocks and bonds. from which paper he expects big profits squeezed from labor – while he is holding his sacrificial $l-a-year job with the government.
So, come on, folks – all out to keep the necks of the workers where GM wants them! And by the way, don’t try to pull your own necks out of the way or you too will become “criminals.”

The southern coal operators still refuse to grant the United Mine Workers’ demands that wage differentials between North and South be abolished. The following excellent argument for granting the union demand does not come from the union, but from the northern operators:
“... transportation differentials have been wiped out as a competitive factor by application of thee Guffey Coal Act to minimum prices. The southern coal price at the mines is exactly the same as the northern coal price, after freight rates have been taken into consideration and the transportation differentials wiped out by the Guffey Act.”
However, the morality of the profit game calls for the southern operators holding out for their 40 cent wage differential. It doesn’t need an Einstein to figure out 40 cents less wages to each miner per day adds up to a noticeable amount of profit. So much do the southern bosses hate to part with this tidbit that they have acquired a touching attachment to the nation’s capital and will not go to New York to negotiate with the UMWA.
Meanwhile these bourbons are responsible for the idleness of some 400,000 miners, for a growing shortage of coal and for holding up the war program – in which Representative Sumners and Mr. Knudsen are both vitally interested.
To date, however, the former has not recommended the electric chair for the guilty bosses, nor has the latter called them criminals.
Neither do these “impartial” boss politicians and their ilk consider it criminal that the southern bourbons are using their old brutal tactics against the strikers. Mr. Lewis stated:
“Members of our union in that area are threatened with continuing lock-outs, with withdrawal of credit in company stores, possible evictions from their homes and their civil liberties destroyed through a return of the rule of the company gunmen in the southern mining communities.”
But the miners have learned the lesson of “divide and LOSE.” They are holding strong in the north, middle west and south. More power to them!

There is an old saying that is hard to teach old elephants new tricks. The only hesitancy I have in using this adage in relation to Henry Ford is that elephants are such nice animals.
Anyway, no sooner did the men return to the plants than it became evident that Ford didn’t learn everything he should have from the great militant strike his workers put up. Attacks on union men have continued in the plants. Ford thugs have beaten up unionists wherever and whenever they though they could get away with it. Ford still hopes to break the overwhelming strength of the United Automobile Workers so as not to have to negotiate with the CIO union as he has agreed to do. Undoubtedly, the great majority of the men in the plants will vote for the CIO.
As a result of Ford’s renewed efforts at intimidation, threats of another strike were in the air. Once more the state police appeared at the plant gate. Great crowds of workers milled about. Finally, stewards of the UAW instructed the workers to disperse. Later a union sound truck announced here would be no strike because Ford officials had agreed to “keep matters peaceful.”
That remains to be seen!
 




Representative Sumners, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, rose in the House and declared that his committee would not hesitate “a split second” to enact legislation to send STRIKERS “to the ELECTRIC CHAIR.”
What people does this “representative of the people” represent?
Not the 87 per cent who, according to government figures, cannot afford to buy a normal amount of the consumers’ goods produced for sale in this country!
No, not this 87 per cent who have to put up a fight for a little more in come when the cost of living rises so much that they can buy even less than their usual sub-normal amount of the necessities of life!
These are the people from whose midst the striking workmen come. These are the people Representative Sumners proposes to treat as murderous criminals fit for the electric chair. Definitely Mr. Sumners does not represent the underpaid 87 per cent of the people:
Neither does Representative Boren of Oklahoma, who wants to outlaw strikes, thus taking away from the 87 per cent their only means of fighting the bosses for more money.
Neither does Representative Johnson of Texas, who wants labor to “realize the error of defense strikes.”
Nor Representative Dies – he of the un-American activities – who came out with the brazen lie that the Allis-Chalmers’ strike vote was fraudulent.
Nor Representative Ford of California, who wants to discredit the militant CIO by calling its leadership a “racketeering” and “profiteering” outfit, and proposes a bill making strikes punishable by 25 years’ imprisonment or by death!
None of these members of the House of Representatives represent the 87 per cent.
 
Same for Senators
Now let us listen in on the Senators, those other “representatives of the people.” Do they perhaps represent the exploited 87 per cent? Are the worthy senators championing the workers’ right to stroke?
Senator Ball introduces a bill proposing “a cooling-off period” which would not take away from the workers the right to strike – oh no – merely the right to strike when they have a chance to win.
Senator Bailey of North Carolina is “for whatever measures may be necessary to eliminate all possibility of strikes or sit-downs.” And he wants speed in stripping the 87 per cent of all power.
Senator Byrd is good at arithmetic when it comes to making out a case against the 87 per cent. He figures out that 500,000 man-days will be lost during March as the result of strikes. But he does not mention that the strikers live on their daily pay and would not give up 500,000 days’ pay without a damn good reason.
To all these “representatives of the people,” the have-not 87 per cent who MUST strike in their struggle to live are not THE people to be represented.
 
Their True Colors
The strike wave has once more forced Congress to show its true colors. THE people Congress represents are to be found among those whose profits have already mounted from 100 per cent to 3,000 per cent – due to their intensive “pay-triotism.”
There is no hew and cry in Congress against these exploiters of labor. No law is offered to make them increase wages in proportion to profits.
No congressman proposed the electric chair for Packard Motor and the other companies who refused to take government orders until they were assured of profiteering profits – and a tax rate that would leave the profits with THEM – not with the government. Packard is among the represented.
Nor did any congressman propose the electric chair for those who sent an armored car into the strikers’ ranks at Allis-Chalmers.
You, will find THE people represented by Congress in the columns of the Wall Street Journal where it publishes a survey showing the many “defense” industries whose war profits now FAR OUTRUN excess profits taxes.
Nobody in Congress raised his voice against the attempt of Knox and Knudsen to force the Allis-Chalmers workers back to work. The injustice there is flagrant. Hillman and Knudsen had promised the workers that if they accepted the OPM formula for an agreement, the company would be made to accept it too. The workers accepted – the company did not. But coercion was attempted AGAINST THE WORKERS.
Congress very conveniently did not “notice” this injunction. The Allis-Chalmers Co. is THE people Congress represents.
 
And in the States
Most certainly the present strike wave has brought “democratic institutions” out on parade. Every worker can see what they look like.
And this is true not only of Congress. The big parade extends all over the country.
The Oklahoma Senate hurried to pass a bill making it a PENITENTIARY OFFENSE to organize workers on “defense” projects and to collect fees from persons working on “defense” projects. The impoverished 87 per cent is not represented by the Oklahoma Senate that takes away from workers the right to organize.
The Texas House of Representatives pushed through a bill making it a PENITENTIARY OFFENSE to interfere with persons doing lawful work. Thus the bosses are very well represented in the Texas House which makes picketing a criminal offense.
New York Senator Stokes wants the New York State Senate to get Congress to provide for the immediate induction into the army of men exempted because of employment in “essential industries,” if they strike or even participate “in any manner of labor dispute.” Starve or fight, you working stiff! You belong to the 87 per cent that are UN-represented!
And to complete this picture of "democracy at work," that great idealist Stimson presents himself, foaming at the mouth and calling for the swift organization of home guard units by the States to curb labor disturbances. History shows, said Stimson, that when a nation goes into great production effort such as the arms program, price structures go up and “there are likely to be disturbances between capital and labor.”
Thus Stimson is on the job to make sure that a generous “democracy” will hand out to WORKERS trying to keep up with the expected high cost of living not bread, but – TEAR GAS AND BULLETS.
 




The all-powerful FDR has just appointed Leo Henderson as federal price administrator and told him to see that prices do not go up.
To the working woman who has seen the value of the dollar cut. down alarmingly, this may sound like good news. With food, clothing and household necessities steadily mounting in price, she is anxious to grab onto any straw that looks like help.
But the fact is that the help Mr. Roosevelt’s new food administrator can give a poor woman not even a bent straw!
In an interview to newspaper men Mr: Henderson has already indicated that he is interested primarily – though he’s not sure he can do it – in keeping down the prices of those commodities directly needed in building the capitalist war machine. He is not concerned, you see, with making life more bearable for the women of the working class. So don’t kid yourself.
But that isn’t all Mr. Henderson has let on to. He said further: “We will watch wages as a prime cost factor. If unwarranted wage rises are in prospect, we will have a decided interest in them.”
At least you can give him credit for putting his cards on the table. His policy is definitely anti-labor. When the workers demand higher wages to meet the cost of living, which Mr. Henderson is not even going to try to keep down, he will be on the side of the bosses. However, labor is ably demonstrating its ability to look: out for itself in spite of Simpson, Knox, Knudsen, Roosevelt. It can add Henderson to the list.
Soon working women will be joining the good fight.
They will be forming housewives’ committees to battle against starvation prices, by picketing, boycotting and doing whatever else is necessary.
Working people can get no help from the trenches of their class enemies.

Under a picture of Mme. Colette Sarraut smilingly charming beneath a new spring bonnet, newspapers carried the story of this daughter-in-law of Albert Sarraut, who served the ruling class of France in various political capacities. The lady in question is the wife of his son, Lieut. Omar Sarraut.
Mme. Sarraut, who arrived in this country several weeks ago, has spoken very bitterla about the Hitler occupation of France, and said that the name Unoccupied France is a hideous illusion. Even that part of the country supposed to be ruled by Petain is so firmly in the -grip of the Gestapo that it might just as well be occupied. All of which is most certainly true – as is also true that the “right” people, like Mme. Sarraut, somehow manage to slip through the Gestapo grip.
However, Mme. Sarraut did not come here to stay – she and her three children have already sailed for Asia on the comfortable liner President Garfield. They will join Lieut. Sarraut NOW ON DUTY IN FRENCH INDO-CHINA
This lady, so sensitive about Hitler’s occupation of France, said nothing against the French dictatorship over the Asiatic people of Indo-China. That unhappy exploited country was conquered many years ago by the then flourishing imperialist army, and is still occupied by what is left of the French imperialist army.
Therefore, my dear Madame, excuse me if I ask what you are squawking about? Is it OK for the French imperialists to bleed Indo-China white and for your husband to function in the equivalent of the Gestapo there? Then – according to your own standards and those of your class – it can’t be wrong for the Germans to occupy France under the iron heel of the Gestapo.
Lady, your case is thrown out of court – the court of human progress. It will hear only the case of the enlightened working peoples of the world who play no favorites and are AGAINST ALL IMPERIALIST OCCUPATION.

The government is going to great lengths to assure the worried mothers and sweethearts of conscripts that their boys are getting plenty to eat in the training camps. At a dinner given to 500 women – at which I assure you the food was a little more elegant than that at the camps – a grand pageant was staged to prove that mothers and sweethearts do not have to send boxes of tidbits to their loved ones.
Miss Berber, food consultant to the government quartermaster corps, who arranged the affair, had soldiers dressed up in period uniforms from the war of 1776 to the present war, and each carried a tray of food supposed to duplicate exactly a meal of the buck private of that time. So there on the trays the guests could see the progress from beef, rice, coffee and bread in 1776 to soup, beef, string beans, spinach, potatoes, bread butter, apple pie and coffee in 1941.
Maybe yes – and maybe no, SO WHAT? Turkeys are also fed up before their heads are chopped off and undoubtedly they are fed more scientifically now than in 1776!
If Miss Berber had asked my advice, I would have added the touch of completeness to the pageant with a view of a modern battlefield strewn with the piteous monstrosities, the victims of imperialist war today. After all, one wants to know the destination of all that good food!

A blob of spit cannot be considered a political weapon, but certainly it can show which way the wind is blowing – as anybody who has experimented with saliva knows.
John T. Whitaker, describing in the New York Post the rising discontent among the Italian people, tells the story he heard about a wounded soldier. This battered victim of Italian imperialism rose from his hospital cot and spat full in the face of Countess Ciano.
The countess was serving as nurse at the time. She is one of the many women of the ruling classes of all the belligerent countries, doing their bit to ram the war down the throats of unwilling people. These helpful females – helpful to their own class – roll bandages, serve in hospitals, distribute alms and smile bravely. They “allow” themselves to be interviewed by newspapermen and they harp on the theme: "War is a marvelous leveler. There are no longer any classes. See how we all sacrifice!” And they modestly cast down their eyes.
Yes, every warring country has its feminine bamboozlers. England has the ever-gracious queen and the ladies this-and-that who “solidify national unity” with their .genteel fingers, The German wounded soldier is supposed to forget about the “hell” he went and got wounded for when Frau Goering smiles at him on her hospital rounds. And the American working stiff who has everything to lose and nothing to gain by the war he is being railroaded into is supposed to think it is all to the good because Mrs. Roosevelt – first aid to American imperialism – spouts a few liberal phrases at him.
When wounded soldiers begin to spit at these female frauds, THE WIND IS BLOWING THE RIGHT WAY!
 




The working women of America have a glorious record of struggle, of which they can be very proud. The power wielded by labor today is the result of bitter combat, from which women and men have drawn strength and wisdom. On this May Day, the international holiday of the workers of the world, working men and women can join hands in mutual esteem as comrades in a good fight.
The exploiters and deceivers of the workers point a triumphant finger at the recent agreement between Big Steel and the CIO and say: “Where else in the world can labor sit down with the big industrial magnates and with representatives of the government and work out an agreement so beneficial to labor?” Such a thing, they say, can only happen in this great American democracy. Therefore, continues this tricky argument, let every mother’s son go get his gun and fight for this grand and glorious democracy.
 
Labor Fought for Its Gains
All this is as false as that beautiful set of new teeth in the head of an old man. American democracy never handed the workers anything on a silver platter. Whatever gains the American working class has made it FOUGHT FOR. Industrial magnates and government representatives sit down with labor BECAUSE THEY HAVE TO. American labor is STRONG. It knows how to close down huge plants like Ford’s and how to keep them closed. It knows how to stop the flow of profits into the bulging pockets of the bosses. That is their talking point.
Labor has gained this strength and knowledge over long years of fierce fighting – struggles that have piled up many martyrs for the cause, And every inch of the way the workers have been attacked, not only by the private thugs of the bosses but by the city, state and federal forces of “this great American democracy.” With its laws and with its guns American “democracy” has sought to keep the working class down. IT HAS NOT SUCCEEDED.
In all these battles the women have done their share. They have fought bravely on their own, striking for unions, wages and conditions, and picketing shoulder to shoulder with the men. They have also participated as fighting partners of their striking husbands, as fighting partners of their striking sons.
 
In Steel and in Textile
In 1919 during the great strike that first shook the feudal foundations of the steel industry which now is forced to sign with the CIO, the women stood by their men for three and a half long months. Those were the days of Burleson and Palmer, when the revolts of the European workers produced such hysterical fear and hatred in the ruling class here that no terror against the workers was terrible enough. In the steel districts the Cossacks of. American democracy ruled supreme. Every vestige of free speech, press, assembly, was gone. For weeks at a time strikers were isolated from each other, without organizers, without strike bulletins. The mounted gunmen went so far as to charge into groups of children in order to provoke the fathers to fight and thus give the gunmen the excuse to let flow rivers of blood. The women had the strength to restrain their men. Their strength has gone into the building of the great labor movement of today.
In the textile strikes of the early twenties, that spread like wild fire throughout the New England states, the most backward, the most suppressed and exploited workers rose and did battle against their bosses and the forces of American “democracy.” Against a 54-hour week, against a 20 per cent reduction in wages and against the well armed troops of “democracy,” they fought. There were 100,000 of them, of all nationalities, many who came to the great American melting pot to escape the Cossacks abroad. Tens of thousands of women and girls were in the strikers’ ranks and in some localities fought on for nearly nine months. Their strength has gone into the building of the mighty labor movement of today.
There was the great Passaic strike of 1926–1927. Fifty per cent of the strikers were women – enslaved women who had labored continuously for eight to ten hours every night without pause even for a drink of water, who had slaved thus even when carrying their unborn children. They became dauntless warriors of the working class, They marched with the men on the picket lines and were in the thick of all union activities. During “Terror Week” when men, women and children were indiscriminately and mercilessly beaten and ridden down by the mounted police of the bosses and “the great American democracy,” these women did not run away, but kept reforming the picket lines with the men. Their strength too has gone into the building of the powerful labor movement of today.
 
As Militant as Ever
The growth of the CIO, the symbol and instrument of working class power in this country, was made possible by the splendid solidarity of the women with the men, by their courageous cooperation and at times brilliant initiative. Most dramatic is the part played by them in the great auto strikes, in Flint they went from house to house, from store to store, exposing the vigilante committees organized to fight the strikers, and succeeded in completely discrediting them. The women’s battalion picketed the plants and by their unswerving militancy often shamed the police into less brutal conduct. In the famous “Battle of Bulls Run” the women had the satisfaction of being fighters on the victorious side.
In the strikes of today the women are as militant as ever. They took their places among the pickets at the Ford plants. In the less spectacular strike at the Leviton factory in Brooklyn, now in its seventh month, women who have never struck before are persistent and courageous fighters. In the New York bus strike that made such a stir the wives and children of the strikers joined with them in their meetings and their activities.
 
The Real Test Is Yet to Come
As the child is father to the man, so labor’s history explains why the American workers can today talk turkey. Years of struggle
against the combined forces of American “democracy” and the exploiting bosses have made them strong – have increased their solidarity – have improved their strategy – have perfected their form of organization. In spite of the many setbacks inflicted by the craft form of organization of the AFL, in spite of the many sell-outs of false leaders in many of the unions, the rank and tile workers have come put on top. And in this development of labor there has been no such thing as “the weaker sex.”
But this May Day does not mark the achievement of the goal of’ the working class of America. Far from it. Today the call to fight rings out more compellingly than ever. The real test is yet to come.
The rising cost of living on the one hand and “frozen” wages on the other are bound to worsen living standards. The “mediation” boards will move heaven and earth to induce the workers to take it on the chin, while the bosses take it into their pockets. Payment for the imperialist war will in large measure be forced from the working class by income taxes, consumer taxes and ail kinds of “voluntary” contributions. If the war continues – as it is expected to – for three to five years more, there will be shortages of food and other living needs. Suffering and privation are the “benefits” the working class will get from the war.
As always, the women will feel most the direct impact of these war conditions. They suffer twice: their personal privations and their anguish for their families. On top of this is the harrowing worry over their boys who are already being sent to the outposts of American imperialism – to defend “their homes” in the Philippines, Hawaii and other distant places. And there will be the broken hearts of the bereaved mothers that will gradually fill up with anger at the war makers.
 
Women Will Play Their Part
In the past such conditions have led to great revolutionary struggles, in which women nave played a brave role. Back in 1871, the hardships of the Franco-Prussian war burst the bounds of endurance and the workers rebelled. For the first time in history, the working class of Paris took power and held it from March 15 to May 29: The Parisian working women knew how to fight. They were on the barricades, sewed the sand bags needed for defense, participated in the meetings of the people’s government, formed revolutionary clubs for women, And what they stood at the open graves of their fallen comrades, they pressed their children to them and taught the little ones to cry out “Vive la Commune!”
The Paris Commune was drowned in blood when the butcher Thiers invited the besieging German armies to enter Paris and do the filthy job. Then as in 1940 the French ruling class preferred the armies of the “enemy” capitalists of Germany to file power of ITS OWN WORKING CLASS. But the revolt of the men and women of the Paris Commune was not in vain. Perhaps the Russian Revolution would not have taken place without thee example of the Commune.
The world-shaking events of 1917, which stand as the criterion of action for the freedom-seeking workers of the world, also developed out of the unbearable conditions of war. The revolution was set in motion by a group of the most oppressed and downtrodden workers of Russia – THE WOMEN OF THE TEXTILE MILLS. On the 22nd of February, 1917, which was International Women’s Day, they walked out on strike – against the orders of their leaders.
They took the initiative, THE TIME HAD COME. They were through with slaving to fill the pockets of the bosses with war profits – through with standing hours on bread lines – through with being separated from their husbands at the front – through with being widowed.
They went out and more masses of women joined them. They flocked to the government buildings, demanding bread. Then the more advanced workers also swung into action. First to fall under the revolutionary might of the masses were the czar and the old despotism. After a series of crucial events leading up to the October Revolution the workers and peasants took complete power, ended the war, ended the rule of the capitalists, landlords and their fake democratic government.
Stalin and his gang of reactionary bureaucrats robbed the Russian masses of their revolutionary gains. But the glorious accomplishment of the Russian workers in making a successful revolution, the courage and initiative of the women in starting the massive, annihilating bail rolling over their vicious rulers, have not been lost. In some nation soon the workers will continue where the Russian masses left off.
 
Side by Side Toward Freedom
AMERICA SHOULD BE THAT NATION! The working class here has not yet been crushed by a military juggernaut. It is stronger than ever before. So strong, in fact, that while the stupid politicians call for the electric chair for strikers, the wiser ones advise kid-gloves for the handling of labor. They are afraid that the great giant will lift its mighty fist and slap them down.
Will the workers of America allow themselves to be “mediated,” then bludgeoned into powerlessness, or will they widen and deepen their struggle? Will the working women of America wait until their families are starving and their sons and husbands slaughtered; or will they carry out the tradition of women’s militancy in the past and FIGHT NOW FOR PEACE AND ALL THEIR PEACE-TIME NEEDS!
Millons of stunned, starved, lonely women under Hitler’s heel wait tor a sign that will set them in motion. Millions of women squirming under the paws of the British lion wait for the dawn of a better day. The working women of America have it in their power to give inspiration and courage to all the others. They can make those miserable ones abroad understand that in America the working class has started on the road to power and the END OF WAR AND STARVATION. Then they too will rise up against the bloody imperialists – dictators and “democrats” alike!
YOUR MOVE, WOMEN OF AMERICA!
 




Rich Boy, Poor Girl Divorce
“Kitty Foyle”
Ginger Rogers is my favorite actress. Back in the days when Hollywood’s queens never cracked their faces into expressiveness, Ginger was acting on the principle that the face should be more than a pretty mask. She has gone far on that principle. Another fact that marks her up in my eyes is that she usually plays the part of the girl or woman who works for a living. Her acting as the tom-boy daughter of the slums in the Primrose Path I voted the best female screen performance of 1940.
From this introduction you have guessed that I think Ginger Rogers pretty swell as Kitty Foyle, in this film story about the unhappy love of a white collar girl for a son of Philadelphia blue bloods. To see her in action is a delight. Only once in this rather long film did I catch an expression that was a dud. From an attitude of uncomprehending pain on being told that her baby was born dead, she turns full face to the camera to give the audience the benefit of tears on lashes. That I didn’t like.
I have not read the Christopher Morley book on which the film is supposed to be based. However, what the critics are saying is that any resemblance – except for names of characters and places – is purely coincidental. The implication is that the story is much better.
However, I see much to be grateful for in the film. There is the scene where Kitty is selling $67.50-an-ounce perfume to the wealthy dowager; another showing what happens to two of three girls sharing a one-room apartment, when the boy friend of the third comes a-calling; another in which Kitty tells off the family of rich snobs into which she married and out of which she escapes as soon as she discovers their plans to make her over in their own image.
Running through the whole story is the burning desire of girls of Kitty’s class for a home of their own and security – through a husband whose job might possibly be more secure than their own. And while most rich-guy-meets-poor-girl stories end with the fiction that there are no social differences in this country, this film strikes the honest note that the social differences between the rich and the poor are real and insurmountable.
 
Nothing to Get Excited About
“Night Train”
Just what the critics saw in this English picture to rave about remained invisible to me. Perhaps they were influenced – at least a little – by the “all out for Britain” campaign. It is a rather routine escape-from-the-Nazi film, of which the number is now legion.
Moreover, in Night Train credulity is required to stretch itself quite a bit. You will be asked to believe that Englishmen can traipse about Germany in Nazi officer and storm troop uniforms – that a couple of Englishmen in Germany, simply by picking up a receiver, can hear important gestapo secrets which enable them to go to the rescue of a compatriot – that the Nazi military staff are nitwits – that in general every thing in Nazi Germany works out just as an English man plans.
As is usual in this type of film, there is the prominent scientist. In this case the Nazi want to keep him because he is working on an experiment to produce invincible steel or something. He escaped to England from Czechoslovakia, but was kidnapped by the Nazis and returned to Germany. So a British secret agent, who has of course fallen for the scientist’s inevitable daughter, goes to Germany, poses as an officer of the Nazi engineers’ corps no less, and gets scientist plus daughter over the border into Switzerland.
What saves the film from flatness is the element of suspense. There is the situation where the lion-in-Nazi-uniform is caught whistling an English tune. Then he is recognized by an English tourist. Later, the note warning him that the gestapo is on to him, is almost taken from the waiter’s tray by a gestapo agent. And, of course, some may like the ending where the hero fights for his life by the synchronized use of two cable cars over a bottomless Alpine gorge. Don’t worry. He gets over the border – and kisses the heroine.
Praise is due the actors who play the role of two imperturbable English tourists in Germany, more concerned over the loss of their golf clubs than about the declaration of war.
 




One million arms workers in Great Britain demanded an increase in wages last week. Following their example, the shipbuilding workers en masse did likewise a few days ago. These English workers are not quietly starving, awaiting the utopia-after-the-war promised by the Bevins and the bosses. They want to know NOW how they can live on an average wage of $17 a week.
The arms and shipbuilding workers are asking, an increase of five cents an hour. Hearings have been held before an official arbitration tribunal – behind closed doors. The final decision has not yet been reached.
The workers, however, are in no mood to take a negative answer. Out of the $17 weekly wage, they have to pay rent of at least $6 a week, and a minimum of $1.20 for coal. Food prices have been sky-rocketing. For example, eggs are 7¢ each, bacon 40¢ a pound, beans 16¢ a pound. Even the government admits a rise of twenty-five percent in the cost of living since the war started. Unions declare that the official figure is based on tricky statistics and that actually the percentage of increase in the cost of living is much higher.
 
Anger Piles Up
Although there is a war-time ban on strikes in “democratic” England, the threat of strike hangs in the air. The anger of the workers has been piling up. They know that as the class of under-dogs they have been getting the usual dirty end of the stick as regards rising prices. as regards air raid shelters, as regards food rationing.
They see prices going out of sight, skyward, while they wait for a tribunal to decide upon their meager demand for five cents more an hour. At night they crawl into underground caves where water trickles down the walls and across the stone floors on which men and women try to sleep, with filth and rats for company. Whereas the rich rest in air-conditioned safety in the style to which they are accustomed. The rationing of food prevents the working woman from getting even the bit of meat she could afford to buy. But the rich satisfy their appetites at the best hotels.
In spite of these class inequalities, which stand out in bolder relief now than in peacetime, the employers say this is no time for the workers to demand more wages. They give a very fancy reason. They say that it would be very bad indeed to increase home consumption. They say that goods must be sent out of the country to be sold abroad and help pay for the war. They cross their hearts and: promise the workers a “new deal” when the war is won and British imperialism saved.
The workers are not taking seriously this promise of a “new deal” from the bosses after the war. They point to the fact that in the midst of the war boom, there are almost a million jobless workers – a big number for little England. They know that after the war there will be no “new deal” but only a great deal more unemployment.
If the arbitration tribunal refuses the very moderate demand of the arms and shipbuilding workers, this great sector of the British working class will not be frightened by the government ban on strikes.
 




Well Concealed Tripe
“The Philadelphia Story”
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer attains here its too-often unattained objective – entertainment. There are a flock of amusing situations. The dialogue is snappy. Katherine Hepburn makes of the main character, Tracy Lord, a captivating little snob. James Stewart does a reporter with his usual ingratiating humor. The manly Cary Grant gives a good account of himself as the still-loving first husband of the heroine. There is a diverting young busybody, played by Virginia Weidler, and Roland Young who is funny just to look at, and many other pleasing features. No doubt the crowds who wait more than an hour for a seat, think it was worth the wait.
But when all is said and done the story is superficial and hackneyed, and has to do with people whose blood is blue not red – the Lords of Philadelphia, blue bloods of the deepest dye who in the midst of the “50,000,000 shrunken bellies,” continue to pursue happiness with such trifling advantages as mansions, huge estates, stables, cars, swimming pools, champagne parties. Here is the story for what it is worth:
Old man Lord pursues happiness in the shape of a New York dancing girl. This is a skeleton in the family closet, as is also the love life of Tracy, beautiful, unpredictable daughter of the house. It seems that because of her hypocritical, better-than-thou puritanism, she divorced her loving but hard-drinking first husband. (This smells strongly of Susan and God.) Tracy is about to make another try at marriage, but this does not come off.
A couple of hard-hitting lectures from husband No. 1 and from her erring father result in her going on a champagne binge – apparently to free her inhibitions. At dawn, Tracy, the pure, is being carried from the swimming pool in the arms of this very attractive reporter, who has been hanging around to get the story of her wedding. The straight-jacketed husband-to-be draws the obvious conclusions from the situation which happen to be wrong – and the marriage is off.
Presumably the goodness of the champagne and of the reporter’s kisses – that is as far as he went – have made Tracy realize that man’s desire for liquor and dancing girls is not to be condemned. She forgives her father – or vice versa – and remarries her ever loving first husband.
This tripe has been made so toothsome an entertainment morsel that the uncritical audience accepts, with its laughter, the futile existence of this good-for-nothing bunch of parasites.
 
I Prefer Conrad
“Victory”
It would be a good thing if Hollywood admitted to itself that, even with the best intentions on its part (which are often absent), the written word is a much better vehicle for certain moods and meanings than the movies can hope to be. Conrad’s Victory must, I think, necessarily be better off between the covers of a book. At any rate, this screen version has left out everything that distinguishes the original from the run of the mill South Sea yarn. Conrad gave importance to the story not only by his clear-cut character delineations, but by his philosophic slant. One can imagine him sadly shaking his head over life: “See how life is. Here was this man Heyst, a civilized soul, wanting nothing but to be left alone. But being civilized, he had great compassion for suffering and was compelled, in spite of his better judgment, to help. That was his undoing.” Nothing of this geta across the screen.
The victory-theme of the film is the, usual “good, man plus good girl kill off one or more villains and live happily ever after”. But Conrad wrote Victory over this story with tongue in cheek, for he ended it with disaster for Heyst and for the girl. Heyst tried to save her from a sordid life but could not defend her from the desperado’s gun, But the girl dies with victory in her heart for she holds in her hand the knife that was to have brought death to her beloved Heyst. She does not know that he will die anyway.
Such fine shadings were apparently too much for the producers, They have turned out just another movie – graced, however,by a very fine cast.
 
Success Story
“Dispatch from Reuter’s”
My knowledge of the development of the world famous Reuter news agency – which presumably got going more than 100 years ago with the use of carrier pigeons – is very flimsy. So I can’t tell how much of the film is historical biography and how much Hollywood. However,I can say that the strong Horatio Alger overtones made me lift a skeptical eyebrow.
According to the film, Julius Reuter, known at first as the crazy pigeon man, succeeded in getting his carrier service established against tremendous odds. When the extension of the telegraph put his pigeons out of a job, he conceived the idea of the telegraphic news service only to be ousted by the telegraph company itself when it went into the news distributing business on its own. So Julius, not to be outdone, slung up a few wires on his own, and of course was able to get the news quicker than allthe rest.
Following the usual Hollywood formula, the Reuter of the film was motivated only by public service, love ofa free press, and devotion to truth. (Parenthetically, I might say that during the days of Lenin and Trotsky the famous Reuter agency distinguished itself by spreading the most infamous lies about the Russian revolution.) Also true to form is the faithful little woman, always at his side, cheering, and helping.
The really bright spots, on the whole, are those in which Albert Basserman appears. He does the part of a slightly slap-happy old artist. Though he over-acts a bit, he seems to be having so much genuine fun doing it that the enjoyment is passed on to the audience.
Did you ask me if I liked the picture?I stifle just a little yawn and reply: “Aw-awright.”
 
Watching the Money Bags
“The Eyes of the Navy”
This is one of the numerous propaganda films Hollywood is turning out to assist in the preparation for entry into the imperialist war. It is supercharged with patriotism, and would have the audience believe that, because “your son, my son and the neighbor’s son” form the personnel of the air division of the navy, therefore the whole works belong to us. Might as well believe that because “your son, my son arid the neighbor’s son” run the factories, the factories are ours, not the boss’. However, one lie is as good as another in attempting to create the false illusion that the armed forces of the boss government belong to the people.
The film does succeed in conveying the thrill of flying and the lure it has for youth. The shame of it is that decadent capitalist society can do nothing better with this marvelous spirit of youth and with the great inventions of our age than use them for bloody war.
 




What happens when the relief client tells his investigator that his family needs warm clothing? The investigator says, if he is polite: “Sorry, but there is no money.”
So the client argues that the children all have colds and must have warm clothes. He points out to the investigator that he has not had a clothing allowance for months and is entitled to it.
But the investigator still says: “No. You will have to wait. There is no cash for clothing.”
THAT HAPPENS TO BE A LIE. First, I want to remind you how the City gets its relief money. It comes from the sales tax that you and I and all of us pay on almost everything we buy. People are paying that sales tax with the understanding that it goes to the home relief clients.
Last year, 1940, $18,000,000 of the amount collected in sales taxes for relief purposes was NOT USED FOR THAT PURPOSE AT ALL. Most of it was just taking a rest and drawing interest in the bank, and $4,500,000 of it was used by the City FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
While all this money was lying idle and some of it was being used for the wrong purpose, the needy people on relief were waiting and waiting for clothing, for medical and dental treatment, for supplementary rent·to be able to have a proper roof over their heads. THEY STILL WAIT.
Furthermore, while all this money was there to be used for relief, investigators all over the City were doing their level best, and still are, to throw as many clients off relief as possible.
It is estimated that this corning year there will again be a surplus of around $18,000,000 collected for relief but not used for relief. Mayor LaGuardia, that great “friend of the people”, is trying to get permission from the state legislature to divert this bunch of money to other purposes and again take it away from relief clients.
NOW IS THE TIME FOR THE PEOPLE ON RELIEF TO MAKE THEMSELVES HEARD. They are entitled to the use of this $18,000,000. They need it. They must have it. They will, IF THEY PUT UP A FIGHT FOR IT.
 




Mrs. Roosevelt played a major role in getting the nation to swallow conscription. She traversed the length and breadth of the land getting people accustomed to the unwelcome idea. Her activities then clearly indicated which way the wind’ was blowing.
Today the first lady is doing another job for the profiteering war lords. She is the most vociferous supporter of the idea of conscription for WOMEN. In nearly every speech she makes she comes out for it. Thus she is again getting people accustomed to a very distasteful idea. And again her activities indicate which way the wind is blowing today.

Recently at the Women’s Centennial Congress in New York, again speaking up for conscription for women, she made some very significant remarks, among them the following:
“There is no use waiting, because life doesn’t wait, because now life moves so fast we have to run to keep up with it. There is need for every woman to do a job. Not just to twiddle her thumbs and say, ‘It’s hard to run a house’, but actually TO DO A JOB FOR HER GOVERNMENT.”
This quotation tells a two-fold story.
First it tells what is happening to the “democracy” that is supposed to be safely enthroned in this country. It is a forecast of totalitarianism.
When Hitler and Mussolini shook their fists at the downtrodden women in their countries and urged them to have many babies so that there might be many soldiers, the dictators used something of the same language. They told the women that they must give up their personal lives; that they must live exclusively for the TOTALITARIAN STATE. Later, when it was time to force these German and Italian women into war industry, they were admonished not to “twiddle their thumbs” at home with their children, but to do a “job for the GOVERNMENT, for the STATE”. They were regimented, pushed about like inanimate machines, to serve the war interests of the imperialist exploiters of their lands.
It is no accident that Mrs. Roosevelt uses a similar language. American women are to form a spoke in the wheel of the war chariot driven by the profit-mad American imperialists. Thus the false crusaders for “democracy” begin by plucking out whatever little of this rare plant is left on American’ soil.

Now please go back and read that quotation again. It reveals, without the shadow of doubt, the class of women Mrs. Roosevelt knows and represents – the THUMB-TWIDDLERS.
Women running a house and bringing up children ON A WORKING MAN’S WAGE have no time to twiddle their thumbs. Neither have the women running a house and bringing up children ON A RELIEFBUDGET. Neither have the millions of women IN OFFICES AND FACTORIES, many of whom not only work but also run a house and bring up children besides. Obviously Mrs. Roosevelt does not speak for these harassed, impoverished working class women.
She speaks for the women of the parasite class the thumb-twiddlers – who squawk at the “hardships” of running a luxurious household where every stitch is done by servants. She speaks for the useless wives of those useless masters of industry in which the PRODUCTIVE work, from top to bottom, is done by paid workers.
It is the government of this parasite class that is preparing for the war which they alone want. Let THEM do a job for THEIR government which is doing a job for THEM. Why should exploited working women, why should exploited working men, do a job for their enemy class and the government of their enemy class?

Back around election, my ears began to prick· up every time they heard God and religion mentioned by the contesting boss politicians in this country. None ofMr. Roosevelt’s speeches failed to drag in God. The final speech of his ·campaign, could not have been more sanctimonious even if the pope himself had delivered it. In not as beautiful a voice, but just as unctiously, Mr. Willkie ran Mr. Roosevelt a close second in placing everything in the hands of the Almighty.
Since then the supporters of the capitalist war program of this country are placing more and more emphasis on religion. Nearly every speaker, no matter what his subject, exhorts all and sundry to have faith in God, and of course to get behind the war program.
All this hypocritical casting of the eyes towards heaven forebodes evil for working women and their families.
When the war profits of the bosses mount sky high, while the high cost of living drastically reduces the real wages of the workers-they will say it is done in God’s “infinite wisdom”.
When our sons go off to man the machines of war and never come back – that will be God’s “will”.
When our husbands go to replace our sons – that will also be God’s “will”.
When mothers will be forced to abandon their families and replace their sons and husbands in factories, to produce more instruments of destruction so that still more mothers’ sons may be sacrificed on the altar of profit – that too will be in God’s “infinite wisdom”.
But the wisdom of the working women who are ground down the most by war will tell them who the real criminals are – and how to deal with the gorging imperialists.

“What about peace?” shouted a woman at Winston Churchill, war lord for tile British robber class, when he was inspecting some ruins made by the bombs of the German robber class.
The cry for peace was forced from the lips of one English woman. The longing for peace is in the hearts of millions of women all over the war-torn world. They are not interested in whether the British imperialists succeed in retaining their robbers’ empire – whether the German leeches succeed in grabbing it for themselves, or whether the American powers get the best of both the others.
The newspaper report said that Churchill stared hard at the woman who spoke up for peace as if he had failed to understand her. Then he snapped out: “Peace? When we have beaten them.”
Right, Mr. Churchill. Peace! When we have beaten them. Except that “we” and “them” are not the same for you as it is for the million-masses of the world.
When we say “we”, we EXCLUDE you and Hitler and Mussolini and Roosevelt. We include ALL THE EXPLOITED OF THE EARTH.
When we say “them”, we mean you and Hitler and Mussolini and Roosevelt and the imperialist robbers and bureaucrats of all the nations on earth.
We, the workers of the world, must beat the whole lot of you in order to have permanent peace.
 




“All mine catastrophes are avoidable,” Marcus Ken, chief of the Ohio Division of Mines, is reported to have said. “All mine catastrophes are preventable,” say United Mine Workers officials. “There is no such thing as an ‘inevitable’ mine explosion,” says even James Hyslop, general manager of the Hanna Coal Co., in whose Willow Grove mine 72 men lost their lives last March in an explosion so violent that it blew off arms and legs and heads of the unfortunate victims.
Nevertheless, according to reports, more than 1,500 men were killed in coal mines in this country last year. There were a number of big explosions which buried 30 to 90 miners at one time. And there were numerous lesser disasters, fatal to a miner here, and to a few miners there.
Why? Because only SOME safety measures are enforced. MANY ARE NOT ENFORCED. State inspectors take their orders from the Coal operators.
Among the demands now being made by the UMWA is one for workers’ safety, with UNION inspectors empowered to halt work when dangerous conditions are found.
Other union demands, expounded by John L. Lewis, include a blanket wage rise of $1 a day, with proportional rate increases for men who do piece work; a guaranty of at least 200 days’ work a year for each miner; two weeks annual vacation with pay; general improvement of hospitalization and medical care systems in mining communities; elimination of wage differentials, including that between north and south.
These are the demands the United Mine Workers are making for a new contract to replace the one expiring April, 1941, and involving 450,000 miners. Negotiations are going on in New York between representatives of the miners and the eastern coal operators in, what is known as the Appalachian Joint Conference.
 
Industrial Serfdom in the USA
Charles O’Neill, speaking for his fellow coal operators, said they would need some time to ponder these “rather formidable demands.” However; without any pondering at all, he “generously” offered to extend the miners’ working day – in the interest of pay-triotism. This is about all the operators have offered the men so far.
What needs pondering by the workers of the country is the bankruptcy of capitalist production, attested to by Mr. O’Neill’s comment. If at this late date the workers’ demand for 200 days’ work out at 365 is formidable, if their demands for workers’ safety is today formidable what, in heaven’s name, can workers expect from the capitalist system!
A survey of the unbelievable conditions. existing in the bituminous mines will reveal the extreme reasonableness of the union demands.
If some people believe that in “democratic” America industrial serfdom does not exist; they have but to take a peep at Piney Fork, Ohio. This is one of the towns owned by Hanna Coal Co., which is the boss of four coal mines in eastern Ohio. Hanna Coal is a subsidiary of the M.A. Hanna Co., which has extensive industrial interests, including iron ore, shipping, oil, copper and the National Steel Co. of Weirton. It is an industrial plutocrat.
The families of Piney Fork live in company houses owned by the Hanna Coal Co. The fathers and sons working in Hanna Coal’s mine (when they are lucky enough to get work), are compelled to spend their pay in Hanna Coal’s store; and even to buy the fuel they themselves produce from Hanna Coal.
The school provided for the children of this company-owned town is an old wooden building. The kids have to run through snow and sleet fifty yards to and from the wooden outhouse. This has accommodations for only three children.
Hanna Coal smells up the town with the stink from the constantly burning slate and other refuse from the mines. Soft coal smoke darkens the air and fills the lungs of women and children. Even the clothes on the washlines bear evidence of the domination of a coal company over the people of a whole town.
This is how reporters describe Piney Fork, Ohio, which is interesting for other reasons. The Piney Fork mine was a hand-loading mine employing about 1,000 men. They have just learned that the company is going to mechanize the mine by Installing loading ma chines. The mine will also be put on a steady three-shift basis. This will greatly increase production – and, at the same time, allow the company to discharge 300 to 500 miners.
James Hyslop, general manager of the Hanna Coal Co. is not concerned about the fate of the men laid off and their wives and children. “Same thing as happens to any other unemployed,” he is reported to have commented.
No wonder the union makes its “formidable” demand for at least 200 days of work a year for each miner!
The union demand for a $1 a day wage increase for the miners looks “formidable” to the operators because it makes them drop the false cloak of pay-triotism behind which they have been hiding.
“We must help win the Battle of Production” read propaganda posters at the mine entrances. When the speed-up was first instituted for the so-called national emergency, the operators resorted to the bonus system. Then they dropped it. The explanation was given too reporters by a Willow Grove miner.
“Yep,” he said, “they abolished the bonus, all right – soon’s they got the men workin’ so fast they couldn’t work any faster. Now the straw bosses keep ’em up to that maximum speed, but the men don’t get paid any extra for it.”
Therefore the union demand for the $1 increase is not only to meet the skyscraping cost of living; but also the vicious speed-up in the name of pay-triotism.
Reports are current that the government is definitely on the side of the operators in the matter of miners’ wages. The excuse is that coal is a basic commodity, the price of which must be kept down. The operators, of course, will not be expected to curb their war profiteering. But the underpaid miners are expected to make sacrifices – or else!
Sacrifices – not only by submitting to extensive robbery of the wealth they produce – but also needless sacrifice of life and limb. The last Congress adjourned without passing the Neely-Keller mine safety bill. This bill would have given inspectors of the US Bureau of Mines the right to go into coal mines and make their findings public. The coal operators’ lobby in Congress succeeded in ditching this bill. They have state inspection under their control and want it to remain that way. A similar bill is pending before the present Congress, which will perhaps be too busy giving “aid to Britain” to give any to the coal miners.
In the meantime the coal operators wantonly kill off hundreds of miners each year. In the case of the Willow Grove explosion, referred to above, state inspectors were in the mine two days before the disaster. They found quantities of gas and not enough ventilation. Yet they allowed the men in.
In the Nelms Mine of the Ohio & Pennsylvania Coal Co., which blew up last November, explosive gas was found on Wednesday in the tunnel where 31 men died on Friday. But nothing was done about it. After the explosion; the company put in a new ventilating fan. The old ventilating equipment had been more than 16 years old.
When the federal mine inspectors went into the Nelms mine after the explosion, they had difficulty determining whether the fatal spark had come from the electric cutting machine or the electric drill. Both machines were in what is described by mining men as “non-permissible” condition.
In mines where explosions have occurred practices continue which inevitably cause new disasters. Cutting machines are operated without water tanks to lay the dust. “Big dust,” the most combustible of stemming materials, is used for blasting, Other practices denounced by the US Bureau of Mines as hazardous go merrily on.
Often, the miners can foresee danger ahead. Mike Polocy, one of the 72 men caught in the Willow Grove explosion, who is in the hospital, a human wreck, not expected to live, warned of the coming calamity. Here is his own story, as reported in the newspaper PM:
“I tol’ boss something’ goin’ happen. I raise hell with big boss all time. I brattice man. I know mine. He tol’ me I crazy. He say: ‘You min’ you business, I min’ mine.’ He say: ‘You get coal, we take care of gas.
“Boss always raise bell, ‘You step on gas.’ Always hurry up, hurry up. I scared. Have one little explosion, two little explosion, ’bout month before. I know something gon’ happen. Night before it come, I go home, I no eat supper. I so scared. I cry, no eat. I no want to go in mine.”
But Mike did go into the mine the next day. Now he is a burned, crippled, bloodless, dying bundle of misery. But when he warned the boss of the coming explosion, he was told to mind his own business.
The men go into the gas-filled mines, miles from sun and air and the chance of salvation, because they can’t help themselves. Work has been so scarce for the bituminous miners. Poverty drives them into the jaws of death.
There is Carl Sterling, with a family of four. He told reporters that in 1939 he worked a grand total of 56 days. In 1940, 4 days: So far in 1941 – to February 20 – he worked all of 10 days, He is supposed to be working for the Fremont mine of Rase Valley, in the eastern Ohio district. The mine operated only when there were orders for coal. Sterling could go to no other mine in an effort to get more work. The mechanization of coal mining has thrown thousands of miners out of work. Each big mechanized mine has its own preferential list of former employees.
There WAS Ben Mazeroske, trackman in the Nelms. mine, 25 years old when he was murdered with 30 others, His young widow, 23 years old, told reporters:
“He was afraid of the mine. He didn’t talk much, but I knew he was afraid: Everybody knew it was a gassy mine, and dangerous; I know the union asked the federal mine inspectors to come inspect it last April after Willow Grove blew up. But the state inspectors wouldn’t let them come in.”
Mazeroske remembered when he had been out of work for seven solid months in 1938. That drove him into the death trap that finally got him. You can now understand why coal operator O’Neill calls the union demand for a minimum of 200 days employment a “formidable” one. Men might refuse to go into gassy mines. You can also understand why the union demands union inspectors.
 
And These Demands Are “Formidable”
Ask the miners’ wives what they think of the union demand for two weeks’ vacation with pay – these women who at thirty look fifty – who daily stand at their doors and watch their men leave them to earn a living in the bowels of the earth. Will they come back at night? Will the mine cave in and crush them? Will gas explode and snuff out their lives? Will the more treacherous coal dust explode and blow them into atoms?
Do these men and women need two weeks each year of blessed safety, two weeks of absence of fear? To the coal operators this is a “formidable” demand.
 




In Britain girls of 20 and 21 have been conscripted for compulsory labor.
To properly mark the event, the capitalist press featured numerous pictures of British women at work.
Women were shown making Army boots, doing carpenters’ work, riveting ovens and boilers and making guns and other armaments. One picture was of two young women lugging tremendous crates that looked as if they would be something even for longshoremen to handle.
The news item described how typists would be taught to use their facile fingersi making machine tools – how barmaids fresh from serving ale and being chucked under the chin would work on bombs and battleships.
All these girls will be torn from their homes, their friends, their customary ways of life to do men’s work and thus release men for military service in this war between the international bosses.
Nowhere in the capitalist press is there a peep of protest against women being thus uprooted and compelled to work on jobs beyond the normal strength of most women.

But there, was a time when every boss paper in every country in the world, in every language on earth, screamed out its dishonest protest against. Women doing men’s work. That was in the early days of the Russian Revolution – before Stalin and his reactionary gang betrayed the masses.
The young workers’ and peasants’ government was fighting the capitalist interventionists on all fronts – among them those outstanding “democrats” who are today so loudly defending the self-determination of nations. Every able-bodied man was needed for military service. The Russian women willingly went to work on the railroads, in armament plants and wherever they were needed.
Then the voices of British and American capitalism united with the voice of German capitalism in a choral performance, the theme song of which was: “Bolshevism is destroying womanhood!”

You would think from what the capitalist supporters were saying then that women are sweet, fragile creatures to be clothed in frills and feathers and protected from the harsher circumstances of existence. But today women are supposed to be as tough as nails and must make every inhuman sacrifice the governments of all the warring countries demand.
The explanation for this contradiction is very simple.When the Russian women were setting an example to the working women of the world on how to vanquish the bosses and put all power into the hands of the working people, the capitalists naturally wanted to wrap women up in bolts of lace – to make them powerless.
Today when the bloody bosses, competing for world domination, are waging this war which is annihilating all civilized life, they just as naturally want women to be regarded as Amazons in overalls, capable of doing the dirtiest, heaviest, most harmful work FOR THEIR FILTHY WAR.

Have you noticed how Hollywood stars are shining at Washington social functions. Perhaps you recently saw, in the newsreel or in the photogravure section of some paper, pictures of Deanna Durbin dancing with William S. Knudsen at one of the President’s birthday parties. She was smiling prettily and he was, very naturally, tremendously pleased with his partner.
For the past several months of frantic preparation for the imperialist war, movie stars have been invited to this and that Washington affair where only the very “best” people were guests. Mrs. Roosevelt has been especially instrumental in bringing together the stars of the political and entertainment worlds.
This hobnobbing of Hollywood and Washington is of particular interest to working women who didn’t raise their boys to be soldiers and don’t want them to be killed in a bosses war. It gives a glimpse of how propaganda for war is manufactured.
Movie stars – like most people in America and every other country – may be far from enthusiastic about the country going to war, but —
Wasn’t the president scintillating at that delightful dinner! Wasn’t the great $l-a-year Mr. Knudsen clever, attentive and flattering! And Hul1 is quite charming when you get to know him.
So when the very “best” people say America needs a total war, why it is very easy for the ladies and gentlemen of the screen to oblige thirr dancing partners with a bit of “patriotic” service. Before they know it, they are part and parcel of the war propaganda machine.
Their particular job is to bamboozle the movie-going public – which is practically everybody.

The suckers who are fascinated by a pretty face are supposed to go right home, get those $2 put away under the mattress and buy government war stamps because one of the charmers of the screen says so.
And the poor mother whose heart is heavy because her son has been drafted into the machinery of war and death is supposed to feel elated about the whole thing when a handsome screen hero makes a super-colossal appeal to mothers to be “patriotic.”
Clever propaganda on the part of the warmakers! But —
ARE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN GOING TO BE SO DUMB AS TO FALL FOR IT!
 




LABOR ACTION Reporter Finds That It Took All Kinds of Pressure to Make the Men Go Back
to Work Without Gaining Their Demands Because They Were Willing to Stick It Through
“National defense” is being used as a weapon to cripple the striking might of the workers and keep them from getting higher wages to meet the rising cost of living.
The most glaring recent illustration of his is the strike at the Edgewater, N.J., plant of the Aluminum Company of America. Because of pressure from CIO leaders, upon whom pressure has been put at Washington by Sidney Hillman – placed on the OPM (war board) just for that purpose – the workers returned to work on Monday, March 24, without gaining a blessed thing.
About 3,000 men were on strike since March 12. The plant was at a complete standstill. The workers original demands – promptly refused by the company – were very reasonable. They then offered to compromise and accept much less than they first asked for. But the ALCOA would not give in an inch. They were then hit on the head with the hammer of “national defense” and bludgeoned back to work.
The profits of the aluminum monopoly, which is owned principally by the Mellons, one of the sixty gilded families who own all America, were not so much as dented. These profits have been so astronomical that ALCOA did not dare publish them for 1940. Even greater profits are in the offing, as is evidenced by plant expansion now under way. At Edgewater, N.J., while the struck plant was as silent as a tomb, construction waqs proceeding on a new plant now nearing completion.
The ALCOA manufactures aluminum sheets, aluminum rivets, pins and screws, and other materials for air and sea craft. It has already received, and is in line for getting more, tremendous orders from the government.
It took the speeches of six officials of the CIO, with which Local 16, Aluminum Workers of America, is affiliated, to get the strikers to abandon their excellent strike. When on March 12 the local voted to strike, it was in spite of the opposition of Nicholas Zonarich, international president of the union. No wonder it took so much talking to get the men back to work.
The Bergen Evening Record, Hackensack, N.J., editorializing on the strike, truly stated: “The strike was called against the advice of Local 16’s own international president, so the motive must have been deep and compelling.”
This same opinion was belligerently expressed to this reporter by a boy of ten whose father was on strike. He was putting on his skates at the curb near the struck plant and I went ever to talk to him. When asked why the men went out, the boy looked as if I had asked him why people have to eat. “They weren’t getting enough money!” he snapped, and continued fastening his skates.
Specifically, the men demanded that the company live up to the agreement which called for the payment of time and a half for all overtime. The company paid time and a half for work on Sunday, but for all other time over 40 hours, it refused to pay time and a half. The men wanted the time and a half called for by the contract, and in addition they asked for 10 cents an hour increase in wages.
When the management of the Edgewater plant refused to consider the strikers’ demands, representatives of the men went to the Pittsburgh office of the ALCOA. There they also met with a flat refusal.
At this point William F. Cann was assigned to the case by the Department of Labor. Leo Kriczski was put on the case by Hillman. These “unbiased” conciliators began to conciliate by asking the strikers to compromise – of course, in the interest of “national defense” (that’s what they call the war program). The strikers complied.
Victor Fulgo, chairman of the union’s publicity committee, told me they put their demand for 10 cents an hour increase down to 2½ cents. He also explained that the overtime the men were asking for was equivalent to 2½ cents additional an hour, so that they were willing to settle for 5 cents an hour increase instead of the total of 12½ their original demands amounted to.
A striker who drove me in his jaloppy from the Edgewater plant to the union headquarters at Cliffside said: “It isn’t as if the company was not making plenty of money. Nobody knows just how much they are making, except them that get it. So why shouldn’t we get something to meet the higher cost of living? My wife spends more for food, clothing and things for the house. It’s a losing proposition for us men.”
But the plant management has an entirely different point of view. It doesn’t worry how the workers will meet the rising cost of living. Again it refused to consider even this compromise demand of the workers, which obviously was a very substantial compromise.
Thereupon Vincent McKenna, president of the local, and George Binsted, secretary, flew to Pittsburgh to take the compromise demands up with the main office of ALCOA. Cann of the Department of Labor and Kriczski of Hillman’s office sat in on the conference. It lasted over five hours. The company refused to come to terms. The next thing the strikers’ committee and the mediators were called to Washington by Hillman.
Back at the Edgewater plant the “national defense” pressure was becoming too great for the strikers to resist. On March 19, as a result, the union allowed eleven of its members to walk through the picket line to load 76 tons of finished products. The six trucks, on which the stuff was loaded were labeled: “This material is property of US Government.” It was destined for naval construction.
Another factor that handicapped the strikers was the silence of their negotiating committee. While McKenna and Binsted were in Washington, they were not in communication with the local and did not send infprmation on the developments. The men had only confusing rumors to go by. Some were to the effect that the government was going to take over the plant. Others that Hillman was insisting on breaking the strike. Finally word came from McKenna to call a meeting of the strikers for Sunday, March 28, at which a report would be given. It was at this meeting that the screws were applied and the men were forced to abandon their strike.
Irving Abramson, president of the New Jersey State CIO, who was one of the speakers at the meeting, stated to reporters:
“The return of the workers is made and the settlement of the strike will be made with the hope and understanding that the management will assume as much of the responsibility as labor is doing under the national defense program.”
Abramson apparently forgot that the management did not assume any “responsibility” while the workers had the plant tied up. Why should management be different now when the workers have resumed work, and profit-making goes blissfully on!
Abramson also said that the union had decided to change its tactics and continue negotations on a national scale. An increase will now be negotiated for the Edgewater plant as well as for 21 other plants of ALCOA which were not affected by the strike.
A young striker who spoke to me had a much better plan from the point of view of the workers. This worker had less love for ALCOA than the average worker at the Edgewater plant has. He had been hurt at work, wound up with a hernia, and had trouble getting any compensation from the company. So he doesn’t like ALCOA.
His idea was to extend the strike to all the ALCOA plants. He said that while the Edgewater plant was closed down, the speed-up was used in the other plants to make up for the loss of work in the struck plant. He said this naturally weakened the strikers’ fight.
Meanwhile the government continues to give juicy orders to ALCOA. The newspapers announced another such order on March 21.
In the interest of “national defense” – which is another way of saying imperialist war – the workers have to negotiate their modest demands to meet the rising cost of living. The negotiations will very likely take weeks, if not months. Under the circumstances of an abandoned strike, it is likely that they will get next to nothing. But the fat profits of the company will keep on moving upwards.
 




A few days ago a woman of forty-seven leaped to her death, from a fire escape on the fifteenth floor of the Cotton Exchange Building in New York City,
Though she had excellent qualifications and could correspond in English, French and German, she was out of a job, She had been out of a job for some time, owed money for her room rent, and did not even have the price for the postage on some letters which she left with a note for the police.
You see, she was forty-seven – and therefore shoved onto the human scrap heap.
She started to write her suicide note last November. For all the intervening months she clung to the hope that something would turn up, Finally she finished the note and her life. She wrote that “office girls are no longer wanted when they grow older.”

The day after this tragedy a wise-Alec known in this life as Mrs. Grace Oakley, holding down a lucrative job in the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, heaped insult upon injury on the heads of the thousands of women in the predicament of this poor suicide. At a meeting at which “considered counsel” was supposed to be dispensed to middle-aged job seekers, she insultingly gave out the following:
“The average woman over forty does not use her head – cannot be induced to use her head. Of course, if she has a head to use, she need not despair. Why complain that classified ads in newspapers discriminate against you on the subject of age? No one who was not completely naive would look in such a section for a job after passing forty. She must have friends who will help her find a career – and anyone who is not feeble-minded must have made friends.”
Even feeble-minded people make friends. But there are friends – and FRIENDS. This Mrs. Oakley doesn’t mean friends in the sense that we usually use that word. Most of us use that word to describe people whom we have come to like for their qualities, to whom our hearts go out, whom we help in the ordinary troubles of life, from whom we accept such help. She means not friends but PULL. Pull may have gotten Mrs. Oakley her hospital job, but the fact remains that pull is as rare as a job for a woman of forty.
Mrs. Oakley’s caustic, insulting and stupid speech comes from her own flagrant inability to say anything pertinent on the subject of jobs for women of forty.

The solution of the job problem for women of forty is the same as the solution of the job problem for the whple working class: TO ABOLISH THE OWNERSHIP OF THE MEANS OF LIFE BY A BOSS CLASS.
Pending this ultimate solution, powerful unionism is the only thing that will give the workers some control over thei r jobs under the capitalist system.
In the field of office work, unionism has lagged behind pitiably, due in large measure to the fact that office workers have for a long time foolishly clung to the untruth that they are not members of the working class.
Office workers in factories and plants must join the union of all the other workers of their factory or plant; must strike, picket, fight with their fellow workers; and in turn get from the union protection from the arbitrary hiring and firing practices of the bosses.
Office workers in the professions must build a mighty office workers union, able to make and enforce its demands; including protection for workers of middle age.
Not individual pull, but WORKERS’ COLLECTIVE POWER is the basis for solving the job problem in all its phases.

Talking about unionism reminds me that the other day Mrs. Roosevelt devoted her entire column, My Day, to that subject. Though that august lady does most or her traveling by deluxe airplane, she still knows how to ride two horses at the same time – as well as any other straddling politician.
She, of course, believes that labor unions are necessary for the protection of the workers. But at the same time she is sure that labor unions should be of benefit to the bosses.
She does not believe that every man, and woman should be forced to join a union – which puts her on the right side of Ford, that union-buster who claims that the United Automobile Workers are “forcing” the “contented” Ford workers to organize. But she stands for the right of a worker “to join with his fellows in a union if he feels it will help OTHERS and, incidentally, himself.”
So altruism is supposed to motivate the workers to join unions! What “others” are the workers supposed to help by joining a union? The bosses? The so-called public? – that cloak for a multitude of capitalist sins? Obviously Mrs. Roosevelt’s line will sell no tickets for unionism – which sue professes to support.
If workers were dumb enough to use the test laid down by the first lady, there would not now be even a first union. Workers join unions PRIMARILY to help themselves – but after they have learned that they cannot help themselves except by following the working class principle: ALL FOR EACH – EACH FOR ALL!

And talking of the first lady brings me around to a little story about society women of Mrs. Roosevelt’s class.
Since American imperialism has definitely allied itself with its British brother in this robbers’ war, dowagers and debutantes have something to do. Some of them have been giving their support to the American Fund for British War Aid, one of the groups engaged in the business of collecting money for Britain. They fuss around organizing benefits and dinners and dances and what-not.
It seems that the mountain has labored and brought forth a wee mouse. For this group of benefactors has turned over to the British war chest the tiny mite of three cents out of each dollar collected.
Class-conscious working women have enough to do strengthening their own class and the cause of socialism without worrying about the war chests of the British imperialists or the German imperialists or the American imperialists. But curiosity impels the question: “Just what happened to the other 97 cents out of each dollar collected?”
I would not hint that dowagers and debutantes – those feminine, if not always graceful, pillars of top society – are dishonest. But they certainly have been keeping bad company!
 




Labor is interested in ceilings – BUT NOT IN CEILINGS ON WAGES!
The workers have an interest in apartments and homes with HIGH CEILINGS and plenty of windows.
But the workers cannot get such basic necessities when a ceiling is put on wages and THAT IS WHAT THE BOSS POLITICIANS ARE TALKING ABOUT NOW.
Another kind of ceiling that the workers are definitely concerned about is a CEILING ON PROFITS.
The war has only begun AND ALREADY THE BOSS PROFITS ARE ASCENDING INTO THE STRATOSPHERE.
Let the Washington big-wigs clip the wings of war profits. WAGES must do SOME SOARING to shorten that long distance between the average worker and the good things of life.
There is a federal law declaring that labor IS NOT a commodity or article of commerce. In fact, a number of state statutes use the same sweet words. Such laws are so much eyewash.
When the warlords discuss putting ceiling on the prices of steel, oil, cotton wheat and hogs, they include the commodity LABOR.
According to the economic laws of the exploiting capitalist system, LABOR POWER IS A COMMODITY – without any buts, ands or ifs.
The war-wizards in the Capital talk about put ting ceilings on all prices – not only on the price of man’s capacity to labor.
THE WORKERS ARE FROM MISSOURI!
What has Leon Henderson been doing for these many months IF NOT FIXING PRICES?
But the result of all the “fixing” is that month by month the cost of living leaps to new heights. HENDERSON HIMSELF ADMITS PRICES CLIMBED BY 17 PER CENT ABOVE PRE-WAR LEVELS.
Has the commodity, labor, done as well?
Only in the basic war industries – WHERE THE GOVERNMENT AND THE BOSSES WERE COMPELLED BY MILITANT·STRIKES TO PLACATE THE WORKERS – have wages gone up to an average – NOT OF 17 PER CENT – BUT A MEAGER 10 PER CENT
Many, hundreds of thousands of workers have received only negligible increases – MANY HAVE RECEIVED NONE AT ALL SINCE THE WAR BEGAN.
YES, THE WORKERS ARE FROM MISSOURI.
When any “fixing” is to be done, IT ALWAYS TURNS OUT ALL RIGHT FOR THE BOSSES AND NOT SO HOT FOR THE WORKERS.
Nobody could argue that it isn’t being fixed pretty well for the bosses – WHEN THEY CAN REPORT WAR BOOTY ANYWHERE FROM ONE HUNDRED TO THREE THOUSAND PER CENT ABOVE PRE-WAR PICKINGS.
NO, THANK YOU – NO CEILINGS ON WAGES!
PUT YOUR CEILINGS ON PROFITS, YOU WAR-WIZARDS!
The worker is not exactly tickled pink with his status as a commodity along with hogs, wheat, cotton, oil, steel. He does not think it fun for human beings to be tossed about on the billowing waves of the profit-controlled market.
During the depression, when the bosses were not buying labor power, WORKERS HAD TO EKE OUT A MISERABLE EXISTENCE ON A SUB-HUMAN LEVEL.
Now, when there is a better seller’s market for labor power, THE BOSS POLITICIANS WANT TO PUT A CEILING ON WAGES!
The worker is also not exactly tickled pink about the war for the benefit of the exploiting capitalist system – that system which puts him in the same economic category as hogs.
But this war between the international bandits – which the workers hate and do not want to fight – has FOR THE TIME BEING undeniably created a better market for labor. THE WORKERS ARE WISE TO THE SCOUNDRELS WHO WANT TO PUT A CEILING ON WAGES NOW!
Old Lady Nature is not concerned with the fact that under capitalism labor is a commodity. According to the laws of nature, THE WORKERS ARE HUMAN BEINGS.
Today the worker’s family is in good health.
Next month there may be sickness and death. The size of his family increases. His children grow up. Their needs grow up, too. There are a hundred and one exigencies of human life that require MORE AND MORE MONEY.
THERE IS NO CEILING ON HUMAN NEEDS! Human needs must not be lost sight of in the deafening clamor the boss war-makers are raising.
In the coming period of mounting living costs, burdensome taxes, compulsory “savings,” increased “social security payments,” HUMAN NEEDS WILL BE LOST IN THE SHUFFLE – IF THE WORKERS DO NOT KEEP THE RIGHT TO DEMAND AND FIGHT FOR MORE WAGES!
LET THE CEILINGS BE PUT ON THE ONE HUNDRED TO THREE THOUSAND PER CENT WAR PROFITS!
NO CEILINGS ON WAGES!
 




LaGuardia will have some explaining to do to the organized workers of this city in his campaign for re-election. His fight to destroy the Transport Workers Union is still very fresh in the minds of all workers. And all city employees know his hostile attitude toward their unions.
Organized labor’s resentment against LaGuardia was expressed in the action taken by the CIO Industrial Union Council of Greater New York on August 7. Seventy-five delegates, representing 250 local CIO unions, unanimously voted to withhold endorsement of any candidate in the corning mayoralty election until the views of each candidate on the rights of organized labor in the municipal service have been fully given.
However, the trouble with this kind of action is that IT DOESN’T BEGIN TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS.

It is surprising that the CIO, which has gone so far in organizing the workers on progressive industrial union lines and in bringing out the true militancy of labor, is still so backward when it comes to politics.
When has any candidate – Fusion, Democrat or Republican – refused to promise the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow IN ORDER TO GET LABOR’S VOTE? Before election, boss politicians promise all things to all men. After election, they serve the interests they represent.
Therefore, for the powerful CIO unions to await “the views of each candidate on the rights of organized labor” – AND TO RELY ON THESE VIEWS – is to throw away their great political power!

Sam Burland, secretary of Local 33, Sanitation Workers Union of the State, County and Municipal Workers of America, CIO, declared that if LaGuardia “persists in his attacks on our union, there won’t be five members of the union who are going to give him their vote.”
Five labor votes for LaGuardia or for any of the other boss politicians ARE FIVE VOTES TOO MANY!
During the election campaign LaGuardia may easily DESIST from attacking the unions. BUT WHAT ABOUT THE LONG PERIODS BETWEEN ELECTIONS?
The CIO must shed its political naiveté. It is too, powerful to hang onto the tail of this or that boss politician. It has the strength to create a true political party of labor, RUNNING ITS OWN UNION CANDIDATES FOR OFFICE!
This the CIO must do!
In the meantime there is a working class candidate for Mayor in this election WHO SHOULD GET THE VOTE OF EVERY WORKER.
He is MAX SHACHTMAN – candidate of the WORKERS PARTY.

Of course, the CIO has connections with the American Labor Party.
The principal occupation of the ALP has been to hustle labor votes for boss politicians. THIS HARDLY MAKES IT A LABOR PARTY.
In this campaign the ALP is running union busting LaGuardia because he is supposed to have a record for “good government.”
The question is: Good government for whom?
CERTAINLY NOT FOR THE “LITTLE MAN.”
The LaGuardia administration has used. the police to break strikes – has kept relief money from the poor – has allowed WPA cuts – has slashed the budget for education – has barely touched the crying need for housing. The City Department of Markets, which is supposed to do something about rising prices, sits with folded hands and watches them go up.
All this does not matter to the ALP!
Neither is it fazed by LaGuardia’s opposition to collective bargaining for the tens of thousands of city workers. The ALP is devoting itself to a very low kind of political “collective bargaining.”
It will sell out labor’s vote – to the extent that it controls that vote – to the top Fusion candidates. But it will run its own candidates for the lesser city jobs – expecting that one good turn deserves another!
The Stalinist “left” wing of the ALP is knocking on the door for readmission into a united front with the “right” wing.
On the say-so of Moscow, LaGuardia is no longer a warmonger but a great champion of democracy and must be re-elected as the pro-war Mayor. The Stalinists are also endorsing other Fusion candidates and have no reasons for not uniting with the right wing this this campaign.
While Hitler and Stalin dwelt in blissful wedlock, the local Stalinists were planning to run a “peace” Mayor. But they have short memories!
However, Antonini and Rose are not biting.
They suspect that the left wing plans to capture control of the party organization and that the “united front for LaGuardia” is only a smoke screen.
Getting down to bedrock, neither right nor left wing of the ALP is much concerned about the class interests of the workers.
 




Don’t be downhearted, soldier! Fort Dix has a plan to help you if you are “financially embarrassed” – and it would be hard to find a $21-a-month “free soldier of democracy” who isn’t. The plan is a beauty. One marvels at the subtlety of the brain that conceived it.
A soldier can obtain a loan from the “chaplain’s fund” of any amount up to his monthly pay. Such a loan will be made only for emergency use. Here is a full explanation: “If a soldier happens to need funds during the middle of he month and requires money for a serious matter, SUCH AS CARFARE HOME WHEN THERE IS SICKNESS OR DEATH IN THE FAMILY, OR RENT PAYMENT AT HOME, then we grant the loan. Under no condition, however, will we lend money for entertainment or trivial purposes.”
One might ask how come that a soldier whose family can’t pay the rent is not at home where he belongs? One might ask: How come that his rich Uncle Sam, who can hand out $51,000,000,000 in war contracts to the big capitalists, doesn’t pay the soldier’s fare home in case of sickness or death?
However, I will only ask: How is the soldier expected to pay back that emergency loan?
The answer is out of the $21 a month, out of the $4.66 a week, which is called the “pay” of the soldier. This brilliant Fort Dix plan firmly stipulates not only that the borrower must pay back the loan but also that he must pay it back ON HIS NEXT PAY DAY.
The plan does not say what the soldier is to use for money the balance of the month after he pays off the debt. Is he perhaps expected to get it from his family that can’t pay its rent or that has had sickness or death to drain its resources!
The only merit of this insulting plan is that it brings out in bold relief the near-coolie condition of the $21-a-month “free soldiers of American democracy.”
When the draft extension bill was being argued in Congress, there was a good deal of talk about raising the soldiers’ pay. But it was just talk – to make the unfair draft extension more palatable. While there is plenty of money for everything else, including war profits for the big companies of the $1-a-year boys and juicy commissions for “contact men,” there is no money to raise the coolie pay of the soldier.
But don’t lose heart, soldier. There is before the Senate Military Affairs Committee the Downey Bill, which – PRESUMABLY – provides for an increase in pay for all enlisted men. If the bill is passed every soldier would get $30 a month more pay – PRESUMABLY.
In the meantime, soldier, just put your hand back into your empty pocket. Even if the bill is passed, you WOULD NOT GET THE INCREASE NOW. That bill provides for a very funny kind of “pay increase.” When you are discharged you MIGHT get $30 for every month you had been in service.
You might get it IF YOU AREN’T DEAD FIRST. You might enjoy the affluence of $6.66 a week IF YOU WILL NOT HAVE BEEN SO BADLY MAIMED IN THE WAR THAT LIVING OR DYING WON’T REALLY MATTER TO YOU. And if you do come out alive and in fairly good health, THE LAW MAY NO LONGER BE IN EFFECT WHEN YOU ARE ENTITLED TO THAT $6.66 A WEEK.
That sort of law is designed to fool the public. A “pay increase” that DOESN’T INCREASE THE PAY. Just like the draft law calling for one year of service that means two and a half years. And now Senator Pepper nonchalantly predicts that the government will probably find it necessary to keep selectees, National Guardsmen and reservists in service for “AT LEAST FIVE YEARS, AND IT MAY BE 10 YEARS, OR EVEN A GENERATION.”
In the eyes of the Lord, they say, a hundred years is but as a day. In the eyes of the boss politicians who make the laws, NO PAY INCREASE is called A PAY INCREASE, and two and a half years, five or ten years, or a generation, ARE BUT AS ONE YEAR.
This fall some thousands of soldiers are hoping to get out of’ the blessed status of $21-a-month “free soldiers of democracy.” They will be released because they come within the 28-year age limit, and in exceptional cases for other. Reasons. These men were promised their old jobs back – as were all the other draftees. You would think that all they would have to do would be to walk up to the old boss, slap him on the back, and say: “Well, old soak, here I am, rarin’ to go.” BUT IT LOOKS AS IF THERE ARE MIGHTY FEW JOBS THAT THE RETURNING DRAFTEES WILL BE ABLE TO GO BACK TO.
If the worker-soldier is to get his old job back, why the necessity for distributing forms to be filled out giving his “occupation and educational history”? If he is to get his old job back, why must he go to the state employment office? Why need there be such elaborate provisions for local board re-employment committee to take up the cases of men who can’t get work through the state employment office? And why such heart-rending appeals for cooperation by Selective Board officials to the chambers of commerce, boards of trade, national organizations such as Rotary, Kiwanis, the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars – and labor unions?
All these preparations FOR JUST A FEW THOUSAND MEN are very suspicious. Many of these men will be leaving the military forces TO JOIN THE ARMY OF DISEMPLOYED. That’ is the new word for the jobless. The returning soldiers will be falling in line with the unemployed workers thrown out of shutdown plants. And there will be plenty of shutdown plants and plenty of shutout workers. Autos, refrigerators, stoves, kitchen equipment, metal furniture, zippers, coin machines, electrical appliances, washing machines – these are only some of the commodities whose production will be curtailed or stopped by the imperialist war program.
There will be whole cities thrown into disemployment – cities and areas that have concentrated on a single industry. IT IS REPORED THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS MADE UP A LIST OF FIFTY SUCH DOOMED CITIES. The list is being kept secret so as not to shock the public!
This is the industrial upheaval that the “lucky” soldiers, who will be released, will find WHAT JOBS WILL MOST OF THEM GO BACK TO?
The men who remain as $21-a-month “free soldiers of American democracy” don’t have to worry about industrial jobs – JUST YET. Their present bosses have other plans for them. Washington correspondents have been reporting to their papers that President Roosevelt shares the opinion of those who believe that AMERICAN BOYS WILL HAVE TO BE SENT “OVER THERE.” On August 30, Kiplinger’s Washington letter – which is sent to business men who pay to receive private information on what goes on in the nation’s capital – also stated: “AMERICAN EXPEDITIONARY FORCES ABROAD ARE FORESEEN.”
President Roosevelt has conveniently forgotten his promise not to send American boys to fight on foreign soil.
Before you are herded into troopships and sent “over there” – before you are thrown to the wolves of war $21-a-month “free soldier of American democracy” – ponder these all-important facts:
This is a war between the Axis and so-called democratic powers so that the victors may exploit the people and wealth of the world without interference from the vanquished.
The working people of both sides have no reason to fight each other, BUT THEY HAVE A COMMON CAUSE AGAINST THEIR WAR-MAKING IMPERIALIST MASTERS.
 




The Board of Transportation and Mayor LaGuardia have unequivocally refused to make retroactive to July 1 the very inadequate wage increases finally decided upon for the transit workers. Thus the workers have been deprived of some hundreds of thousands of dollars in wages. A plea from Philip Murray has been of no avail. LaGuardia replied, in summary fashion, that the matter was settled.
All over the country new wage schedules become retroactive as of the expiration of old agreements. But the bosses of the 32,000 transit workers think they have special privileges.
The reason for the arrogance of the city bosses can be found in the conduct of the Transport Workers Union, presided over by Michael Quill. After working up the workers to fighting pitch, he allowed the union’s demand for collective bargaining to be dropped. Instead he consented to the hearings held before the union-hating Board of Transportation, with final decision on wages to rest with the hidebound board.
THERE IS NOTHING THAT MAKES BOSSES MORE COCKY THAN THE KNOWLEDGE THAT THE WORKERS ARE “JUST FOOLING.”

William Hodson, boss of the city Department of Welfare, turned down the demand of the State, County and Municipal Workers, CIO, for sole collective bargaining rights for the 9,200 employees of the Welfare Department, after elections indicated that the CIO union represents the majority.
He doesn’t know, he said, of any occasion for complaint or dissatisfaction with the department’s existing labor policies. These policies, he declared, are well in advance of those in effect in other departments. And so on.
These phrases have a very familiar ring. The politician-bosses in the LaGuardia administration are today speaking the same language that the private bosses were using before they understood that organized labor means business.
THERE WAS NEVER A UNION-HATING BOSS WHO DID NOT CLAIM THAT HIS WORKERS WERE BEING TREATED LIKE PRINCES – AND, OF COURSE, DIDN’T NEED ANY UNION!

Some time ago Ewart T. Guinier, junior examiner in the Municipal Civil Service Commission, was suspended from his job. He was charged with being “an immoral influence” upon his fellow employees. Specifically, Mr. Guinier was accused of “living in sin.”
Commissioner of Investigation William B. Herlands went to work on Mr. Guinier. Many witnesses were called. Some of them declared that the only immoral influence they were aware of was the shameful prying into the private affairs of a city employee.
This column has an overwhelming suspicion that Mr. Guinier’s being vice president of the State, County and Municipal Workers of America, CIO, has something to do with this disgraceful suspension and “investigation.” The policy of the LaGuardia administration toward city employees is so rabidly anti-union.
DID THE CITY POLITICOS THINK THEY COULD DISCREDIT MR. GUINIER BY AROUSING RACE PREJUDICE?
Mr. Guinier is a Negro. His sweetheart is a white woman.

William F. O’Dwyer, Democratic choice for Mayor, seems to have been very popular on the designating petitions.
What has undoubtedly contributed to his popularity has been his success as Kings County District Attorney. The latest triumph of his office has been to bring Louis (Lepke) Buchalter into the Kings County Court on a murder indictment. Lepke, with the late Dutch Schultz and Lucky Luciano, were the big three of organized crime.
While the worker approves of crime and criminals no more than does Mr. O’Dwyer, still his intelligence must lead him to inquire of the Democratic aspirant for the mayoralty, what his position is toward the cause of crime.
IS MR. O’DWYER AGAINST THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM OF INJUSTICE WAR AND CRIME?
But remember when you ask this question that Mr. O’Dwyer is the district attorney of Kings County, and may – who knows – clap you into jail for the crime of “SUBVERSION.”

As if no water at all has flowed under the bridge for the past two score years, Professor George W. Hartmann, choice for Mayor of the Socialist Party – which periodically turns over in its grave at election times – comes out with a good old-fashioned public ownership program.
He wants public ownership of gas, electricity, water companies and the bus lines. Why he stops there is a puzzle. There are innumerable other services and commodities essential to the general public.
However, this is not the main criticism.
There is public ownership in Germany and Italy – AND THE WORKERS HAVE NO FREEDOM. There is public ownership of the subways in New York City – AND LAGUARDIA WOULD LIKE TO REDUCE THE UNIONIZED WORKERS TO AUTOMATONS.
PUBLIC OWNERSHIP IN ITSELF IS NOT THE THING!
The government which “publicly owns” must be a WORKERS GOVERNMENT.
The utilities and industries “publicly owned” MUST BE ACTUALLY CONTROLLED BY THE ORGANIZED WORKERS ON THE JOB THERE.
This is the kind of public ownership that MAX SHACHTMAN, choice for Mayor of the WORKERS PARTY stands for.
 




Do you fondle an egg and think twice before you crack it?
The confinement of a hen is no more expensive now than before the imperialist war started. Why should the by-product cost almost FIVE CENTS EACH? But such is the stark white fact.
We are told that eggs are being shipped to England and to the starving Europeans. To what extent the victims of imperialist war – ON BOTH SIDES OF THE ENGLISH CHANNEL – are being fed by shipments from this country is a very well guarded secret.
BUT WE DO KNOW THERE IS NO SHORTAGE OF EGGS. THERE ARE PLENTY OF THEM – AND THEY ARE PLENTY DEAR.
If ever there was an open-and-shut case for Mr. Henderson’s price-fixing attention. HERE IS ONE.
As was to be expected, Mr. HENDERSON IS A MUCH BETTER FRIEND TO THE WAR PROFITEERS THAN TO THE WORKING WOMAN.

To clothe a family this fall requires an amount of financial genius that even the resourceful working-class housewife does not posses.
Underwear, stockings, shoes, dresses, coats, suits, sweaters, hats bear price tags that make shudders go up ad down the back.
In stores that catered to the puny purse, and even in bargain basements, a look at the prices makes one wonder if one got into the wrong place by mistake.
But all the stores are accommodatingly offering facilities for the purchase of war bonds and stamps.
When the cold breezes begin to blow – JUST WRAP YOUR FAMILY IN PATRIOTISM.

And you haven’t seen the beginning of inflation yet.
You haven’t seen the beginning of consumer goods scarcity yet, either.
WHAT YOU SEE TODAY IS MERELY A DRESS REHEARSAL OF THE GRUESOME DRAMA ABOUT TO BE ENACTED.
But the planners in Washington are nothing if not comprehensive.
They foresee the time when a workingman’s wage will be able to buy much less, than today. Don’t think they are not providing for this emergency in Washington. In their own peculiar way they certainly are.
“Oh-ho!” they say down there. “If wages won’t buy much anyway, we might just as well relieve the workers of the trouble of taking all their pay home. Thus we will have more money to spend on this war that the workers don’t want.”
So next on the program will be FORCED SAVINGS. The bosses will be instructed to lift right out of the workers’ pay to turn over to the government – WHAT THE LAWMAKERS DECIDE THE WORKERS WON’T BE ABLE TO USE ANYWAY BECAUSE PRICES WILL BE TOO HIGH.

Readers of Labor Action may remember that the recent drive for old aluminum pots and pans was called a fake in this column.
It wasn’t the pots and pans tat the war-makers needed, BUT A PRO-WAR PUBLIC SENTIMENT – which does not exist now and did not exist then.
The high-pressure psychology behind the aluminum drive was: Get everybody to do something for the war. Then they will want to get into it on all fours. Get a poor woman to give an old pot and she will visualize that pot in a bomber, and. her boy at the wheel – and everything will be hunky-dory for the imperialist war-enthusiasts.
That the war frenzy did not materialize was amply demonstrated by the way in which the extension of the draft was squeezed through Congress BY ONE VOTE.
That the war program did not depend on your old old pot is now very definitely proved by a report from Washington. The United States will be producing the unheard-of amount of 1,500,000,000 pounds of aluminum per year – which is more than the combined output of the rest of the world.
Labor Action has a remarkably good record AT BEING RIGHT.

If you look in the right quarters, you can already see the beneficial effects of the “good neighbor policy.”
Mrs. Roosevelt has accepted the “invitation” of the Pan-American Coffee Bureau to broadcast a weekly program over a nation-wide hookup of the National Broadcasting Co. The bureau represents coffee growers in Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Venezuela, Costa Rica, Cuba and El Salvador.
How much the First Lady will cash in on this deal has not been made public. You can be sure she will get HERS. Her broadcasts, it was estimated about a year ago, totaled nearly a half million dollars.
“Oh, she gives it all to charity,” protests a wide-eyed admirer of the First Lady.
Maybe she does. I DON’T KNOW.
However, I do know that she cashes in on her reputation as “A GREAT PHILANTHROPIST” – as all philanthropists of the boss class do. They all bleed, copiously for the sake of humanity – don’t you know – while taking very good care of their own class interests.
In her broadcasts for the Coffee Bureau, Mrs. Roosevelt will be commenting on CURRENT EVENTS.
BOY! WHAT AN OPPORTUNITY THAT WILL BE TO MAKE PROPAGANDA FOR THE BOSSES – ALL UNDER THE CLOAK OF OF CHARITY!
 




On September 10, at 5 a.m. Stockholm time, martial law went into effect in Oslo, Norway, and in adjoining districts. The Nazi commissioner for Norway had declared a state of civilian emergency.
Thus, some 500,000 Norwegians were made virtual prisoners of the Nazis. Curfew was decreed for 7 p.m. Meetings on streets or in public places are banned. People are being compelled to give up their radios.
The Nazi decree of September 22, 1940, forbidding Norwegians to possess arms, has been invoked. Large quantities of arms are said to be still in the hands of the population and the authorities are warning that death or long terms of hard labor will be meted out to offenders.
Reports from Stockholm state that the streets of Oslo are being patrolled by the police in full field equipment, with steel helmets and tommy guns, that all the approaches to the city are guarded by heavy concentrations of German troops and that no one can enter without special permit.
Since the declaration of a “civilian emergency” on the 10th, 27 Norwegians have been court-martialed, resulting in five death sentences and long terms at hard labor. About 2,000 arrests have been made. It is estimated that 300 leading trade unionists have been put behind bars, and replaced in the unions by trusted Quislingists. Not only labor leaders but everyone who is suspected of not approving of Quisling and who might become a center of resistance is being purged.
Among the civil organizations ordered dissolved are the Boy Scout and Girl Guide organizations: the Salvation Army and the Norwegian People’s Help.
Trade union officials desiring to leave their posts have been forbidden to do so. Workers cannot leave their jobs and must pay their membership dues to the trade unions after these are taken over by the Quislingists. The workers have been informed, it is reported;that they will have to work overtime for every hour lost during air raids – and there will not be any wage increase.
The Norwegian events have had repercussions among the workers in all the northern countries. The Swedish Trade Union Congress, in session in Stockholm on September 11, paid tribute to the two Norwegian trade union leaders shot on September 10 and passed a resolution of solidarity with bott the Norwegian and German workers containing the following significant paragraph:
“We express our solidarity with and our sincere admiration for the Norwegian working classes, who keep faith in our common ideals, democracy and national independence. We regret: that all the ways are closed for a free communication with the German workers, and we refuse to believe that the prevailing violence which deprives others of their rightful interests can find support with the German worker.”
Quisling retorted with a protest and a threat:
“We strongly protest against the Swedish trades unions which found it necessary to hold commemorative ceremonies for the punishment of the Norwegian state criminals. It is an unheard of insult against Germany that the Swedish government did not find it necessary to stop this effrontery. It must clearly realize that Germany does not let herself be insulted without retaliation.”
However, when the death sentence pronounced upon Ludvig Byland, vice-president of the Norwegian trade unions, was commuted to hard labor for life, this was attributed in the reports to the intense indignation throughout the Scandinavian countries.
 




Believe it or not, LaGuardia has decreed that for the year 1942 the New York City budget shall provide exactly $1.00 for all the public improvements so necessary and vital to the health and well-being of the population of this large congested city.
A dollar a year can’t get anyone anywhere – except the $1.00-a-year boys who now infest the nation’s capital. Their $1.00-a-year jobs enable them to toss to their own companies a good share of the $60,000,000,000 war contracts. The boys, of course, pocket their “modest” war profits.
But for the workers of the city $1.00 a year in the budget for public works means that they are condemned to do without much-needed hospitals, clinics, schools, parks, beaches. LaGuardia, who is fanatically in favor of entering the war between the international robbers, has done this because he wants all the resources of the nation to be used for building bombers, battleships, tanks and guns.
For the things which can bring better health and greater enjoyment to the workers and their families – ONE DOLLAR.
For the things that can bring them only death and misery – SIXTY BILLION DOLLARS.
THIS IS LAGUARDIA’S CAMPAIGN PLATFORM!

John B. Davies, whose backers were determined to get him into the Republican primaries by hooking or crooking petition signatures, was willing to withdraw as a candidate if LaGuardia would promise not to campaign against the next Republican candidates for Governor and President – YOU SCRATCH MY BACK AND I’LL SCRATCH YOURS. LaGuardia, of course, wasn’t interested. The Little Flower has ambitions to blossom into a big sun flower. He merely tolerates the job of Mayor – until the proper moment. He trots around the country, sticking his nose into national and international affairs. He has secret hopes, it is rumored, of occupying the White House, without even so much as a sojourn in Albany. he Gallup poll already counts him as fifth runner-up for Roosevelt’s crown. Definitely LaGuardia has no reason for scratching Davies’ back.
So now Davies rolls up his sleeves to do battle. He discovers no less than 24 reasons why he is opposed to LaGuardia.
One wonders: WHAT WOULD HAVE HAPPENED TO THOSE 24 REASONS IF LAGUARDIA HAD MADE THE DEAL WITH DAVIES?

When the WORKERS PARTY threw its hat into the ring and put up MAX SHACHTMAN for Mayor, it stated that the main issue in this municipal election is THE WAR.
As the campaign continues it becomes more evident that the politicians are playing around with the anti-war sentiment of the people TO GET VOTES.
Thus Davies points an accusing finger at LaGuardia and says: “You are behind Roosevelt’s foreign policy – you are for war!” And LaGuardia’s supporters, panicky lest they lose the anti-war vote, hasten to assure the voters that war is NOT the issue, but purely city administration.
BOTH THESE GANGS ARE OUT TO HURT THE WORKERS. LaGuardia – like Roosevelt – is willing to sacrifice every poor mother’s son to fight for the American money bags. Davies – if he is not an out-and-out pro-Nazi like Lindbergh – is against the war only for election purposes.
The working people will throw away their chance to vote against war in this election UNLESS THEY SUPPORT THE TRUE WORKING CLASS CANDIDATE.
MAX SHACHTMAN opposes this war because wars between the international bandits always have been – AND STILL ARE – AGAINST THE INTERESTS OF THE WORKERS!

In the American Labor Party he war issue also looms very big.
So anxious are its leaders to hand over to the war-mongering politicians labor’s vote tied up in a neat red-white-and-blue wrapper that they refused to renominate Harry W. Laidler for City Councilman. This action was taken because in 1940 Laidler supported Norman Thomas for President and not Roosevelt, the capitalist candidate of the ALP.
Now, very little harm can come to the boss class from supporting Thomas. He does not believe in WORKING-CLASS MILITANT ACTION. Nevertheless, this was not sufficient reason for the super-patriots of the ALP to renominate Laidler. Then the drama began to unfold. LAIDLER CROSSED HIS HEART AND DENIED THAT HE IS AN ISOLATIONIST. Well, of course!
He has been designated for re-election by the City Fusion Party. NOW HE BEATS THE DRUM WITH LAGUARDIA – at least a little bit.

While on the subject of the ALP, it should be noted that Davies believes the ALP should be DESTROYED because it is “un-American.”
It can hardly be said that the ALP is “un-American” if being American means to support the boss class and its politicians.
It therefore appears that Davies has been influenced by the German Fuehrer into a belief that anything that even bears the label “Labor” should be annihilated.
The WORKERS PARTY believes that the ALP will die A NATURAL DEATH when labor realizes that the ALP simply rounds up the trade union vote for the boss politicians!

The other day in Chicago, before a gathering of 15,000, Mayor LaGuardia tried his darndest to steam up hatred against the “Boche.” “My friends,” he shouted, “there is only one language they understand, and that is the language of force.”
The poor people of Chicago and New York are better acquainted with the domestic Boche – the profiteering landlords, the exploiting boss. An instance in point recently developed in New York City.
Owners of some of the foulest tenements are actually beginning to comply with some of the requirements of the Multiple Dwellings Law. They are installing private toilets, supplying fire-proofing, painting hallways; cutting windows into dark rooms. The absence of any of these features constitutes a violation of the law. BUT THE LANDLORDS DON’T WORRY ABOUT THAT – NEITHER DID THE MAYOR.
But lately the landlords have become more law-abiding. INCIDENTALLY THEY HAVE ADDED FROM ONE DOLLAR TO TEN DOLLARS TO THE MONTHLY RENTALS:
The poor families who thought they might be getting a break but find they can’t pay the increased rents must pack up and move into tenements WHERE THE LANDLORDS CONTINUE TO VIOLATE THE LAW:
The profiteering landlords figured that the war situation will make the housing situation so acute that by spending a little money on remodelling their fire-traps, they might be able to get a better class of tenants – and to hell with the poor.
HOW ABOUT A LITTLE FORCE FOR THE NATIVE BOCHE, MR. MAYOR? The profiteers can’t understand any other language!
 




Senator Wheeler, leader of the so-called isolationist group in Congress, has mounted a white charger and is crusading against the warmongers in Washington. He would be a very formidable opponent – except that his sword is suspect.
He storms against the Administration for getting into the war behind the backs of the people. He accuses the newspapers and Hollywood of becoming war propaganda mediums.
He even gets Warlord Stimson to call some of his doings “very near the line of subversive activities against the United States, if not treason.” Whereupon Senator Hiram Johnson, another so-called isolationist, pats him on the back and says in effect: “Go to it, Burt, I’ll join you in the concentration camp.”
All very fine staging and, except for the accusations against the warmongers, which are true; a lot of political buncombe.
Being a boss politician of long experience, Wheeler knows darned well that the capitalist system – which he staunchly supports – must have foreign markets, that foreign markets are fought for, that wars are not carried on by democratic means.
Thus, when Iceland was occupied by United States forces, he reacted in harmony with his basic capitalistic convictions. His opposition to this dictatorial administrative war measure, taken without the consent of his dear people and without the sanction of his sacred Congress, was of the yes-and-no variety.
“I would have no objection to the occupation of Iceland purely as a defensive measure,” said Wheeler – plainly a distinction without a difference. Mussolini occupied Albania as a “defense” measure; Hitler occupied the Low Countries as a “defense” measure; Stalin occupied parts of Fin:land as a “defense” measure. Always (who has any doubt?) imperialist military maneuvers are purely “defensive” actions.
Again, when Stimson lambasted Wheeler for sending anti-war post cards to men in the army, on what basis did the fiery senator defend himself? “I would not write to men in the army to urge them to write to the President,” explained this limping crusader. It was purely accidental that a few army men, whose names just happened to be on the commercial mailing list Wheeler used, got those post cards.
Why shouldn’t this loud defender of “democratic” rights send his anti-war cards to men in the army? Why shouldn’t he urge those most vitally concerned by war to express their views to the President?.
Why? Because “anti-war” Wheeler agrees with Warlord Stimson that the capitalist class must have an army rigidly controlled from the top. “Theirs not to reason why; theirs not to make reply; theirs but to do and die” – as the poet put it. An army that has the right to ask for reasons, to discuss, to say yes or no, will refuse to fight for imperialist interests. Wheeler, as a boss politician, knows this. No wonder Warlord Stimson accepted his explanation and issued a public apology.
More than a week ago, Senator Clark, also an isolationist, came out with the blunt proposal that the United States simply take over the whole western hemisphere. He advocated following. He Hitler example of setting up “puppet governments which we could trust to put American interests ahead of Germany or any other nation in the world.”
To date Senator Wheeler, who is quite vociferous on all subjects, has made no public disclaimer of sharing Senator Clark’s “aggressive approach” to Canada, Central and South America.
That noted “isolationist,” Lindbergh, Wheeler’s political partner, also advocates taking by force of arms, if need be, every strategic point in this hemisphere to insure complete control by the home-grown crop of world imperialists. It certainly becomes necessary to write “isolationist” in quotation marks. These capitalist politicians know their stuff about the necessity for FOREIGN MARKETS AND SPHERES OF INFLUENCE.
After the series of moves taken by Roosevelt in the Far Eastern situation, which unquestionably brought the United States nearer to a war with Japan and which just as unquestionably were made without the consent of the people or of Congress, Wheeler gave his complete approval. He told the Washington correspondents: “I think the President did the right thing. You may say for me that I agree with him – for the first time.”
This “anti-war, isolationist” leader is not against war with Japan nor against intervention in Asia. Over the rich markets of Asia, he gets so excited that he forgets to put on his anti-war, isolationist mask.
What distinguishes Wheeler & Co. from the pro-Roosevelt politicians is simply this:
The “isolationists” are willing to fight for American imperialist interests in the Western hemisphere and in the Far East. Intervention there is right up their alley. But they fear that by entering the exhausting European war, American imperialism will be biting off more than it can chew. No little impressed by fascist methods, they would rather make a deal with Hitler on the European front.
On the other hand, Roosevelt is willing to take a chance. By going the whole hog he hopes that, as senior victor in the European war American imperialism will sit on top of the whole world.
No wonder the Kiplinger Business Service reports: “Secret politics are being played with the anti-war groups.” There is much in common between the “isolationists” and the interventionists.
The fine “democratic” ideals that Wheeler shouts as he brandishes his rubber sword are just politics – meant for consumption by a predominantly anti-war public. His “ideals” are no more to be relied on by the workers than the assurances of the Roosevelt warmongers that they are fighting for democracy.
 




The New York City mayoralty campaign is getting into its stride. As it swings along, the chorus of pots calling the kettles black becomes ever louder.
Thus Councilman Joseph E. Kinsley, democrat from the Bronx, accuses fusionist candidate, LaGuardia of having misused relief funds.
It was brought out before a special committee of the City Council that salaries in the Welfare Department, which should have been paid out of regular city funds, were taken out of the emergency relief funds.
It was also revealed that one Edward B. Butler, some sort of special counsel, got “his” out of the money collected by the 2 per cent sales tax.
Mrs. Ethel Epstein, who serves as the Mayor’s labor secretary, was likewise remunerated for her exertions out of the money which should have gone to the poor people on relief.
Naturally, the Mayor got up on his hind legs and “denied.”
He claimed that the City Council knew all along about these expenditures – so why do they protest now? And he produced a memorandum by the Corporation Counsel – the guy who knows all about twisting the laws – in which it was stated that everything the Mayor did is jake and strictly in accordance with state and City laws.
By whatever process of crooked politics the Little Flower may try to spread sweet perfume all around, the stink about relief funds still smells to high heavens.
There is excellent authority for the above statement.
Welfare Commissioner Hodson, who knows all about relief, recently issued a statement that the total salary expenditures of his department in 1940 were $13,923,389. ALL OF THIS SHOULD HAVE BEEN PAID OUT OF REGULAR CITY FUNDS. However, only $2,011,565 came from regular city funds. The other $11,911,824 – THE GREATEST PART OF IT – came out of the relief tax fund.
THIS MONEY SHOULD HAVE GONE TOWARD THE SUPPORT OF THE UNEMPLOYED OF THE CITY FOR WHICH PURPOSE EVERY PURCHASER OF MERCHANDISE WAS PAYING THE TWO PER CENT TAX.
Earlier this year, City Controller McGoldrick, who knows all about city finances, reported that actually much more than $11,911,824 was withheld from welfare purposes. He said there was a “surplus” of $21,600,000 of relief funds. Instead of this large sum going to the support of poor people, it all was spent for regular city purposes, including the reduction of the city debt.
The stink is so bad you can hardly breathe.
Mr. Hodson has also informed the public that in all $63,000,000 went to the relief clients of the City last year in one form or another. If you put this figure alongside of Mr. McGoldrick’s surplus of $21,600,000, you see that RELIEF CLIENTS WERE ENTITLED TO 331/3% MORE THAN THEY GOT:
LaGuardia’s campaigners will shout how efficient the Mayor is, and how he “kept down the taxes.” They will not even whisper that HE DID IT BY TAKING $21,600,000 OUT OF THE MOUTHS OF THE POOR.
There are two groups of people who will not fall for this swindle.
One group consists of the people with small purchasing power, who are paying the 2 per cent city tax on commodities UNDER THE ILLUSION THAT THE MONEY IS GOING TO THE UNEMPLOYED.
The other group is made up of the miserable people who rely upon city relief for the wherewithal to live. TO THESE UNFORTUNATES THE IDEA OF A “SURPLUS” OF RELIEF FUNDS IS A GRIM JOKE.
When these relief clients make claims for clothing to meet the needs of changing weather, they are told that “no money has been appropriated” for clothing.
When they request replacement of worn out mattresses, beds and other essential furniture, they hear the same refrain: “No money has been appropriated.”
They wait months and months for urgent dental and medical care because “no money has been appropriated.”
It requires from a year to two before they can get eye glasses that have been prescribed for them, because “no money has been appropriated.”
These are the needy people who have been swindled by LaGuardia and his administration out of what $21,600,000 could have bought for them. This fraud is still being perpetrated against them – and against those who are paying the relief tax in the belief that their money is going to the needy.
When Councilman Kinsley, democrat, points the accusing finger at fusionist LaGuardia, he does not thereby exonerate himself. For four years this sort of swindling has been going on. For at least part of this period Councilman Kinsley, democrat, has been chairman of the Finance Committee of the City Council.
Didn’t he know what was going on? If he did, why did he wait for election before speaking up?
And if he didn’t know – which is hardly believable – he was asleep at the switch and should go home to bed.
To the average worker a blackened pot is no more attractive than a blackened kettle. The politicians of one boss party are just as crooked as those of another.
WHY THEN SHOULD ANY WORKING MAN VOTE FOR ANY OF THESE GANGS AT ELECTION TIME!
 




NEW YORK CITY – The 8,000 skilled electricians in Electrical Workers Union, Local 3, AFL, are out out on a general strike, the first general strike in the industry since 1907.
By unanimous vote and with great enthusiasm the men have undertaken to smash the Brotherhood of Consolidated Edison Employees, a company union which is being used by big boss Con-Ed in an attempt to undermine Local 3.
So strong has been the stranglehold of Con-Ed on its employees that at an NLRB election held a year and a half ago, the Brotherhood of Consolidated Edison Employees, a stooge union, won against Local 3 and the CIO. With the company’s nerve strengthened by the results of the election, it went further and took away from Local 3 the construction jobs on its new $1,000,000 power plant at 39th Street and First Avenue, Manhattan.
For 20 years Local 3 men had been getting the work on all construction for the Con-Ed system – at the union scale. But the 600 construction jobs on the new plant were filled by members of the stooge union – at an average wage of $1 an hour, instead of the $2 paid union men. And, whereas the union. week is 30 hours, the 50-hour week was instituted. It was only after Local 3 began its agitation that the company was compelled to shorten the week to 40 hours.
The strikers claim: that these 600 construction jobs belong to Local 3 at union wages and conditions. They say, if they let Con-Ed get away with this union-busting ruse, other employers will soon follow suit, and union standards, won through long and bitter struggles, will be permanently undermined.
On Tuesday morning, when the strike began, more than 3,000 men congregated at strike headquarters and threw their mass picket line about the new plant, This was at 7 a.m. Later the pickets divided into groups and went to other construction jobs to picket, leaving about 600 at the First Avenue plant. Several hundred strikers picketed the main office of the company on Irving Place.
At the union meeting held at Manhattan Center Monday night, at which the strike vote was taken, rank and file members were the ones who urged the strike. It is a well known fact among Local 3 men that it costs the big monopolist of the light and power of New York City only half a cent a kilowatt hour to make power which it sells to the public at 7 cents a kilowatt hour. When this aristocrat of profit-makers goes in for breaking down decent union standards by means of its stooge union, bona fide union men have something to say about it, and they did.
Because electrical construction workers are key men on all building jobs, the general strike of Local 3 involves some 250,000 building workers. Walls and floors cannot be completed in new buildings without electrical installation. Local 3 expects many of these building workers to strike in sympathy.
Before the workers voted to strike, there had been futile conferences with the company and with the State Mediation Board. The Electrical Contractors Association, with whom Local 3 has an agreement, was considering applying for an injunction to restrain the union officers from calling the strike. However, Harry van Arsdale, business manager of Local 3, told the men: “Your officers may be restrained from telling you to strike. But there is no injunction on earth compelling you to work.” The men liked that.
Meanwhile, William Green, one of the labor leaders more worried about the boss war than about union men, was singing his theme song down in Washington: “Strikes must be avoided at all costs.”
Local 3, however, has a reputation for not pulling its punches.
 




“Inflation” is one those scary words about the meaning of which many women are a bit uncertain. In practice, however, nobody knows better than the working class housewife what inflation means.
When for the same amount of commodities they have to pay a good deal more money – or, conversely stated, when for the same amount of money they get a great deal less commodities – THAT’S INFLATION.
Obviously for the housewife who wants to keep her family on at least the same standard of living the only solution for inflated prices is for the earner in the family to get “INFLATED” WAGES!
But the National City Bank doesn’t think this is the solution – which is exactly what to expect from a Wall Street bigwig.
You see, the bosses and bankers have an awfully good profit report for the first six months of 1941. Leading capitalist concerns have made about 20 per cent more profits in those six months than in the first six months of 1940. After peeling the juicy onion down to its very heart by deducting taxes, deficits, depreciations and this and that, in cold cash they have a profit of about $800,000,000 for the six months just passed. Naturally, if more wages were paid the workers to meet inflated prices, the profits report would be a bit less.
So the National City Bank has a different solution for inflation.
YOU think you need MORE money to meet inflated prices. The National City Bank is of the opinion that you need LESS MONEY!
It wants the government to reach into every working man’s pocket and leave it practically empty – first by compelling him to lend the government more and more money to carry on the boss war, and second by making the poor pay even more in taxes than is now proposed by the bill in Congress.
The brilliant idea of the National City Bank is that if the working people don’t have much money to spend, there will be no demand for goods and thereby the prices will be kept down.
The only thing is that housing, food and clothing – like water and air – are always in demand. UNFORTUNATELY, WITHOUT THEM PEOPLE JUST CAN’T LIVE. And if they don’t have the money to buy them, they must just get MORE MONEY!

You have read all about the silk-stocking raids. You ave also seen the candid camera shots of mobs of women around store counters doing battle for the wherewithal to keep their underpinnings sleek. Maybe you have been one of the raiders. All that was rather foolish.
It gave the manufacturers and merchants the green light to raise prices up to 100 per cent on merchandise that cost them not one cent more.
It also gave the newspapers and the radio a chance to play up the wrong angle.
The important aspect of the shut-down of silk manufacturing for civilian needs is that 175,000 silk workers are threatened with temporary or permanent unemployment.
The ground has literally been removed from under these workers and their families. The cause of their calamity is that the competition between the Japanese and American bosses over the rich resources of the Far East has brought these countries to the verge of war and the consequent cessation of the normal silk trade.
There is much talk about converting the silk factories into rayon manufacturing plants. But it takes time to make such extensive alterations. What about the silk workers and their families in the meantime? How will they be provided for?
Furthermore, in the reshuffling process, many workers are due to lose their jobs permanently. This invariably happens in large-scale industrial readjustments. What about the workers who will be thrown into the army of permanently unemployed? What will their dependents do?’

Some thirty billion dollars have been appropriated by the boss government to change this country into an arsenal of war.
In the course of carrying out its total war program it is throwing out of their jobs hundreds of thousands of workers employed in civilian industries. Not only the silk workers, but great masses of auto workers, gas station men and others are due to pace the pavements.
PAYMENT OF THEIR REGULAR WAGES TO THESE WORKERS UNTIL THEY ONCE MORE GET JOBS SHOULD BE A LEGITIMATE EXPENSE OF TOTAL WAR. The Administration should be made to pay for its blows against these innocent workers.
Why should they be reduced to the pittance of unemployment insurance and then to the dry crust of home relief?
Instead of raids at silk-stocking counters, the situation calls for mass picketing by the working women threatened with abject poverty by the boss war schemes. Picketing Congress for an appropriation to pay their regular incomes so that they can continue to feed their families – THAT WOULD BE SOMETHING!

In France babies are born weighing two or three pounds. Imagine it! Adolescent boys and girls are small, thin, spindly, entirely undeveloped. Thus grow the children of starvation – in a world that has so much wealth, that hundreds of millions of dollars of it are daily uselessly blown to smithereens.
Our capitalist masters would like this heart-rending picture of the deterioration of the human race to arouse in our hearts hatred for Hitler – AND NOTHING MORE. Then they could use our hatred to push us into this war which they want to win to get the lion’s share of the markets of the world.
But we must not stop at merely hating Adolph Hitler. He is only a superlative example of the ruthless boss politicians and militarists everywhere who stop at nothing to gain their ends. Hitlerism is nothing more than universal bossism developed to the Nth degree.
In a sense, the working class has itself to blame for the appalling situation that bossism has brought to France, to Europe, to the whole world.
We did not wipe our capitalist masters off the face of the earth during the first dreadful World War. We allowed them to remain, to bring forth their Hitlers and their Hitlerism, and to plunge us into this second holocaust!
WHAT WE FAILED TO DO THEN, WE MUST DO NOW!
 




Not because the two great angels of peace terms were impelled by democratic motives, but for “purely military reasons,” Roosevelt and Churchill issued to the people of their two countries eight vacuous points as a substitute for information about the mysterious sea conference.
These so-called peace aims of the great democrats were supposed to have the effect of making every mother’s son grab a gun, the wheel of a tank, a parachute, or something and go forth to battle for the beautiful new world to come after Hitler is licked.
To date, the newspapers have not reported any raids at the recruiting offices either here or in England. On the contrary; what has become apparent’ is that the masses of both countries have very publicly stuck tongue in cheek. THEY HAVE THEIR DOUBTS.
 
The Memory of Yesterday
Consciously or unconsciously, the experience does not impress itself on the masses. The doubts of today are based on the disillusionments of yesterday. In the memory of the masses reading the eight points of Roosevelt and Churchill linger the fourteen more idealistic points of another “champion of democracy,” Woodrow Wilson. They see with their own eyes the calamity into which Wilson’s “ideals” brought them.
In many respects the Roosevelt-Churchill claptrap resembles the Wilson formula – although nowhere near as precise or “attractive.”
They both describe a world – after the war, of course – which will be blessed with freedom of the seas, with disarmament, with international economic cooperation instead of economic barriers, trade and colonial rivalry.
Wilson’s post-war paradise led to the greatest blockade of the seas, the most stupendous armaments, the most insurmountable economic barriers, the deadliest trade and colonial rivalry – in all history. And it must be noted – and given full force and effect – that all these “unidealistic” developments took place in a world in which the “barbarous hun” had been conquered and the “great democracies” were ruling the roost. WHY SHOULD ANYONE EXPECT ANYTHING DIFFERENT AFTER THIS WAR?
The reason why Wilson’s points ran up to fourteen is that he took up in detail each of the nations involved in the last war: Russia, Belgium, France, Italy, Austria-Hungary, the Balkan states, Turkey and Poland. All these countries were to be tucked away permanently – neatly wrapped in their sovereignties, national rights, equal opportunities, etc. – and live happily ever after. The result was the delayed action bomb planted in the middle of Europe, which exploded in the face of the world in 1939.
 
The Road to Wars Is Paved ...
Roosevelt and Churchill do not go into all this detail. They economize on points, but not on generalities, about England and America not seeking aggrandizement, about “freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned,” about restoring “sovereign rights and self-government” to those who have been forcibly deprived of them. It is with just such high-sounding words that the everlasting road to imperialist wars has always been paved.
Let us also note, in passing, that the “great democracies,” formulating thus their good intentions, did not mention such places as India for instance, or Porto Rico, where people have been forcibly deprived of their “sovereign rights” and all that – nor did Roosevelt and Churchill even have their own oppressed colonies remotely in mind.
Two major points made by Wilson are entirely omitted from the latest edition of the capitalist peace points. Remember the one about “open covenants” openly arrived at – about diplomacy proceeding “always frankly and in the public view”? During the last war the notion got around that if there had not been secret diplomacy, the war could not have taken place. Wilson was going to remedy all that and have the international robber bands always lay all their cards on the table. But Wilson’s remedy, the cards, the table and everything but the robber bands, were completely lost in the imperialist shuffle of the last score of years.
 
One Empty Shell for Another
So short has become the life-line of treaties and laws that it doesn’t matter how they are made. Nobody takes them seriously. Not only in international politics are treaties made today and torn up tomorrow, but in national politics too. It is, for, example, quite moral to replace a law conscripting young men for one year by extending the time to two and one half years – after the conscripts are in the camps, of course.
It was very wise indeed of Roosevelt and Churchill to leave out all references to diplomacy, national or international, secret or open. Why stir up a stink?
The other important point made by Wilson and omitted by Roosevelt and Churchill pertained to "a general association of nations,” which later took form in the infamous League of Nations; deceased. That deformity was in its prime the instrument through which the conquerors of the last war imposed their will on the lesser nations. Yet it was the empty shell! of international democratic procedure, so to speak.
Today Roosevelt and Churchill do not want even the empty shell of international democratic procedure. Just as Hitler disposes of Parliament as senile and feeble, so do the “great democrats” dispose of all international parliaments. They know that American and British imperialism will control the earth if they win the war. And they deliberately exclude any reference to world democracy, sanctifying in advance any regime, however horrible, provided it “plays ball.”
A point that Wilson did not make which Roosevelt and Churchill found it necessary to include is: “Securing for all improved labor standards, economic adjustment and social security.” Wilson did not have to make this promise on January 8, 1918, when he came out with his famous fourteen points, because the masses were then not yet fully aware of the fact that they were getting nowhere out of the war.
But twenty years of crises and depressions, of unemployment and starvation, of humiliation and suffering, of being on relief and being migratory workers, have made the masses fully aware that they got nothing out of the last bloody business.
So Roosevelt and Churchill feel compelled to pat the masses on the head and say: “No, now, don’t you worry your poor heads. We’ll give you improved labor standards, economic adjustment anti social security. So there!”
But economists are already reporting that in America alone there will be twenty million – YES, TWENTY MILLION – unemployed after the war. Other economists are scratching their heads over the post-war plans for public building projects to take up all these unemployed. There will have to be an awful lot of them to give jobs to the unemployed. Such vast projects will cost oodles of money. The governments will be so deep in the red because of the war, that they will have bad enough budget headaches without all these fancy plans.
Visualize, if you can, the labor standards, economic adjustment and social security the workers will enjoy under post-war capitalism.
That tongue in the cheek of the doubting masses is absolutely correct. But they have more to do than that.
ROLL UP YOUR SLEEVES, WORKING PEOPLE, FOR THE JOB YOU HAVE TO DO.
You have to get rid of he robber gangs of all nations, with their Hitlers, Roosevelts, Churchills, Mussolinis, Stalins and others.
PEACE AND SOCIAL SECURITY CAN BE BORNE ONLY IN A SOCIALIST WORLD!
 




The primary purpose of the furious campaign AT THIS TIME to collect aluminum is NOT AN URGENT NEED FOR THAT METAL.
The false impression has been created that there is a shortage. The fact is that there is, and will be, plenty.
Not only are the present needs of the imperialist war machine being amply met, but huge quantities of the metal are being stored up for the future. When the workers of the monopolist Aluminum Company of America were striking some months ago, they accused the company of a merciless speed-up not only to meet the demand of the market but to pile up tons of reserves to be sold in the future – AT WAR PRICES, of course.
With the government policy of allocating supplies and cutting down civilian consumption, it will be a very long time before the present supply will be used up!
Furthermore, according to the New York Times, “Oxidized aluminum is among the most abundant things in the earth’s crust. If we are efficient enough about arranging the energy transaction with nature, we will be repaid, with all the pure aluminum we can use.”
Why, then, at this time, the rush to collect old pots and pans? Here is the answer:
The war-makers are using every trick in the bag in an effort to make the people WHO DON’T WANT WAR, think they do!
By hook or crook Washington is trying to stir the overwhelmingly anti-war population into war activity. An all-out aluminum campaign is as good a pretext as any other. Hitler is not the only would-be master of mass psychology.
But I have my doubts. A working woman may give a Woolworth aluminum pot that has been used until it became bent and burned through. But that is not going to make her feel she has enough of a stake in the boss war TO SEND HER SON OR HUSBAND TO FIGHT FOR IT.

In America the ruling class is just starting to “sell” the war to the common people. In England, Germany and the other belligerent countries, they are still at it and have not yet succeeded.
Mrs. Jean Knox, the new major general in command of the Women’s Auxiliary Territorial Service in England, thinks she can knock them down and drag them in by promising women more dates.
By the simple lure of a snappy uniform she hopes to increase her force from 50,000 to 200,000, to do cooking, secretarial and other work in the army.
She says she has designed a four-paneled skirt and a tailored jacket in which her troops will look so ravishing that they will get all the dates. This in turn is supposed to act as an inducement to more young women to join up and wrap themselves in that magic uniform.
“JOIN THE ARMY AND GET MORE DATES!”
Don’t laugh! You can’t expect the British war-makers to shout: “JOIN THE ARMY AND FIGHT FOR OUR PROFITS IN INDIA!”
Have a heart!

At the fruit and vegetable counter in the A&P two women were picking oranges and bitterly complaining about rising prices.
“Yesterday these oranges were fifteen for twenty-five cents; today they are thirteen. I suppose tomorrow they will be eleven.”
“They tell us to eat vitamin foods,” replied the second woman. “That’s fine if you have the money. Look at this head of lettuce. Imagine paying fifteen cents for for few leaves of lettuce in the summertime. Honest it galls me.”
“Heaven knows they’re not putting oranges and lettuce into airplanes. I suppose they raise the prices of everything – just on general principles.”

The general principle on which the prices of the necessities of life are being boosted daily is that WAR IS A PROFITEER’S PARADISE
For the bosses, financiers, food brokers and big merchants war is an El Dorado.
Mr. Henderson, who is supposed to be curbing the appetites. of these pay-triots, is too busy with other matters to do anything: about the prices of oranges and lettuce.
Just now he is occupied with cutting down the output of automobiles in favor of bombers – thus threatening masses of workers with unemployment and the general dislocation of their lives.
As was to have been expected from a boss politician, Mr. Henderson is giving too much attention to the war needs of the bosses and, too little to the vital needs of human beings.
I have an idea that thousands of organized working-class housewives, assembled in Washington from all over the country, picketing OPACS, would make Mr. Henderson sit up and take notice of the prices of oranges and lettuce and a few other things!

At Southampton and Newport, where the rich go for the summer to escape from the stuffiness of their air-conditioned penthouse apartments, the price of food is, if possible, of less concern to the dowagers and debutantes than ever.
They fete each other at brunches, lunches, dinners, dances, beach racetrack and garden parties. Turn to the society page of any paper any day and read something like the following:
“The 400 guests danced under a huge marquee erected on the lawn. The interior of the marquee was lined with turquoise blue with white pleating and blue and white were used in the other decorations.”
This gives you a rough idea of the style in which the “haves” enjoy themselves.
That the price of food has gone up 15 per cent since the beginning of the war does not give these women of the boss class any gray hair. Skyrocketing prices which to the working woman spell malnutrition and poor health for their families, to the wives and daughters of the war profiteers mean MORE LAVISH PARTIES!
THAT’S AMERICAN DEMOCRACY IN A NUTSHELL!
 




LaGuardia is being big-hearted three weeks before election.
He is asking the City Council to pass a bill cutting the sales tax to 1 per cent.
To make sure that he will cash in for this “good deed” at the polls, he is pressing the Council to put the cut through by November 1.
But the Democrats are going the Mayor one better. They will introduce a bill to slash the tax down to one-half of 1 per cent or to abolish it altogether.
Thus the flypaper is spread out for catching votes.
LaGuardia sprinkles his with sugar.
The Democrats for O’Dwyer cover theirs with honey.
BUT IN EITHER CASE THE WORKING CLASS VOTER WILL BE STUCK.
This last minute “good deed” does not wipe out LaGuardia’s anti-working class record.
Neither does the Democrats’ “better deed” cancel out the fact that as the majority in the City Council they did nothing to stop the Mayor.
LaGuardia has squeezed the transit workers to pay the bankers. Not a peep of protest out of the Democrats.
LaGuardia has tried to break up the Transport Workers Union. The Democratic politicians approved by their silence.
LaGuardia has opposed union organization of civil service employees. The Democrats were well pleased.
LaGuardia has done next to nothing REALLY to solve the terrible housing situation of the city. The majority in the City Council didn’t lift a finger.
LaGuardia has cut down on much-needed schools, clinics and hospitals. The Democratic councilmen did not interfere.
LaGuardia has kept $21,000,000 collected by the sales tax from the 139,000 families on relief WHILE THE COST OF LIVING HAS BEEN SKY-SCRAPING. The Democrats did not intervene on behalf of the poor families.
THUS THE LABOR RECORD OF THE LaGUARDIA ADMINISTRATION IS PRETTY BLACK.
THAT OF THE DEMOCRATIC MAJORITY IN THE CITY COUNCIL IS OF THE SAME COLOR.
Now they come out with their rival proposals to cut the sales tax – and want the working class voter to forget the past. LET BY-GONES BE BY-GONES.
Every working man and woman whose shrinking dollar has been still further reduced by the sales tax wants to see it removed.
But no working man or woman wants to see it removed at the expense of the 139,000 families on relief whose subsistence standard of living has already been pushed down further by the enormous increase in the cost of living!
LaGuardia and the Democrats will both cut the sales tax. BUT WILL THEY RAISE MONEY IN ANOTHER WAY FOR THESE NEEDY PEOPLE OF THE WORKING CLASS?
The only other way is to tax the rich!
The Wall Street bankers who are pocketing millions for the watered stocks of the subway lines bought by LaGuardia should be compelled to disgorge some of their ill-gotten gains IN ORDER TO PROTECT THE FAMILIES ON RELIEF.
THE WAR PROFITS OF THE BOSSES SHOULD BE TAXED TO IMPROVE THE LIVING LEVEL OF THE UNEMPLOYED.
To cut the sales tax without providing a tax against the rich for the benefit of the poor is a sham and a delusion.
BUT LaGUARDIA WILL NOT TOUCH THE PROFITS OF THE BANKERS.
AND THE DEMOCRATS WILL NOT TAX THE RICH EITHER.
They will reduce the sales tax to make a good impression on the voters before election – AND THE FAMILIES ON RELIEF WILL FOOT THE BILL.
There is a candidate in the field who has no respect for profits. He is concerned only with the needs of human beings.
MAX SHACHTMAN, candidate for Mayor of the Workers Party, stands for abolishing the sales tax AND FOR A TAX ON THE RICH TO FEED THE POOR!
 




This column has been urging working class housewives to organize militantly to fight the ever-rising cost of living.
What should be the functions of such organizations?

They should, cooperate in every way with the union movement and help union workers gain their demands for higher wages to meet the towering prices.
They should use their power as consumers to. organize demonstrations and boycotts against profiteering companies which increase prices on the pretext of higher wages.
They should act to force the government to take REAL measures against the war profiteers.

In a word, the organizations of housewives must be PART AND PARCEL OF THE ORGANIZED LABOR MOVEMENT – adding their strength to it.
This warning is occasioned by the formation of “Organized Housewives” in the city of Syracuse, N.Y. There are indications that this new organization is built on the very false notion that high wages are responsible for the high cost of living.
As the newspapers reported it, the Syracuse housewives “were aroused” by the strike of drivers and dairy plant workers for higher wages. They opposed the workers’ demands because they feared higher milk prices would result.
It is only too true that higher milk prices would result, BUT MERELY BECAUSE THE BLOATED MILK COMPANY WOULD USE A LEGITIMATE WAGE INCREASE AS A PRETEXT TO PROFITEER.
It is not true that high wages are the cause of high prices. Housewives must get rid of this dangerous notion.
A government survey for the year from August 1940 to August 1941 shows that price increases DEFINITELY ARE NOT DUE TO WAGE INCREASES.
For instance:

Cotton goods have gone up 39.7 per cent, WHILE WAGES ROSE ONLY 5.5 PER CENT.
Lumber costs mounted by 29.6 per cent, BUT WAGES WENT UP A MERE 2.8 PER CENT.
Petroleum prices increased by 23 per cent, WHEREAS WAGES DID NOT GO UP AT ALL.

These are only a few illustrations which, however, MAKE IT VERY OBVIOUS WHAT THE BOSSES ARE DOING.
Organized working class housewives must direct their fight against the real enemies – THE PROFITEERING BOSSES AND THE GOVERNMENT WHICH ALLOWS THEM TO FLOURISH.
Otherwise they will become the pawns of the anti-labor and fascist forces in the country. Otherwise, they will allow their organizations to become a boomerang – INJURING THEMSELVES AND HELPING THE WAR PROFITEERS.

Lieut. Gen. Delos C. Emmons, head of the air force combat command, has made the significant announcement that the army air corps will soon call for 25,000 women volunteers for enlistment in the regular army in connection with an air-raid warning system.
Army service for women is not going to be a bed of roses. In fact, Emmons warns that volunteers will have to be able to “STAND THE GAME OF WORKING UP TO TEN HOURS A DAY UNDER WAR CONDITIONS.”
In return the women will get an “attractive uniform” and A BUCK PRIVATE’S PAY. Whether that means the $21 coolie wage of the drafted soldiers or even less than that because they are “mere women,” is not stated.
Thus the unadorned facts are that the United States Army is about to acquire – through capitalizing on the misdirected patriotism of 25,000 women – that great number of SHAMEFULLY UNDERPAID ARMY WORKERS.

In New York City, and perhaps in other parts of the country, the mothers of drafted soldiers are organizing to get better pay for their sons.
Through Parent-Teacher Associations or through newly-formed committees – as in Harlem, where the Permanent Committee for Welfare of Negro Soldiers has been organized – women are preparing to campaign for their boys.
These mothers complain that not only have they been deprived of whatever financial help their sons were able to contribute when in civilian work, but they are now compelled to send money to their sons.
It is impossible for young men to live on $21 or $30 a month – even in the army. They must get money from home for all kinds of necessary expenses as well as for fare to make occasional visits to their folks.
MORE POWER TO THESE WOMEN IN THEIR FIGHT FOR THEIR BOYS WHOM THE GOVERNMENT IS EXPLOITING – while permitting the capitalists to fatten on war contracts.
However, there is one point these embattled women must not miss.
WHY SHOULD NOT THEIR BOYS THEMSELVES HAVE THE RIGHT TO DEMAND MORE PAY?
Why should they be lesser citizens, poor relations, so to speak?
Workers outside the army have the right to demand increases in wages and improved conditions. WORKERS IN THE ARMY SHOULD HAVE EQUAL RIGHTS!

It is very easy for us to fall victim to the tricks of our masters.
I am thinking of the way in which this colossal war is being reported in the capitalist press.
You hear of tanks, planes, guns. It is all a matter of so and so many mechanized divisions, of so many miles traversed, of this river crossed, of that city taken. All cut and dried and ordinary.
Of the millions – yes millions – of squirming, shrieking, shattered human beings who are uselessly annihilated, we hear very little. YET THIS IS WHAT THE PRESENT WAR MEANS TO US. This kind of one-sided reporting has a purpose. If the actualities of the war were daily put before our eyes from the human angle, the horror of it would make us rise up in rebellion.
Working women must not fall for this trick. They should bear well in mind what the war means to human beings.
When they read about the stupendous battles being fought, they should think of them in terms of people piled high in ditches, on roads, in bombed houses – in terms of mashed, mangled, mutilated bodies in the million-mass.
They should remember also that this greatest of all crimes against humanity has been committed alike by the imperialist rulers of all the warring countries – AND CAN BE STOPPED BY THE WORKING CLASSES OF THESE COUNTRIES.
 




One of the most side-splitting performances in this election campaign has been given by the politicians of the American Labor Party.
That disreputable outfit – which is neither a party nor of labor, but simply a corral for labor votes to be used in the interest of the ALP politicians – has just completed a deal with the Democratic Party.
What! With the Democratic Party? The ALP is fighting the Democratic Party, isn’t it?
Nonsense! The ALP doesn’t fight anyone or anything – IT HASN’T THAT MUCH PRINCIPLE. It merely makes political deals.
So ――
On the one hand it strikes a bargain with LaGuardia – that outstanding politician of the American boss class. This places the ALP in opposition to O’Dwyer and the Democratic Party.
But on the other hand the ALP comes to terms with Governor Lehman and the Democratic Party together to run Joseph V. O’Leary for state controller to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Morris E. Tremaine. Thus the ALP puts its own candidate for Mayor, LaGuardia, in something of a pickle. (O’Leary, an ambitious lawyer fishing in political waters through ALP channels, is, by the way, no more a representative of labor than is LaGuardia.)
SUCH POLITICAL TRAFFICKERS SHOULD FEEL THE HARD EDGE OF LABOR’S BOOT.

For outspoken class interests, the businessmen’s committee formed to work for the re-election of LaGuardia takes the cake.
According to their chairman, I.A. Hirschmann, vice-president of Bloomingdale’s department store, they have good and sufficient reasons for supporting the Mayor.
In the first place, they “know where they stand with him.”
They can “get things done quickly and without red tape.”
They state they have no other motive in advancing the candidacy of LaGuardia, “EXCEPT THE DESIRE FOR PROFITABLE BUSINESS.” Mr. Hirschmann’s statement cannot be beat. These businessmen want a Mayor who will help them in their innocent game of extracting profits from the working class.
LaGUARDIA IS THEIR MAN.

In condemning contrast to his treatment of businessmen is LaGuardia’s bosslike handling of the tens of thousands of his city employees, including the 30,000 subway workers.
THEY ALSO KNOW WHERE THEY STAND WITH LaGUARDIA.
His administration opposes the city workers’ elementary rights to organize and bargain collectively.
It has tried to entangle them in miles of red tape.
Union representatives of the subway workers have been literally smothered in red tape by the Mayor’s Board of Transportation.
LaGuardia’s aim is to put the Transport Workers Union OUT OF BUSINESS in this city. He has brought a law suit to deny the TWU the right to bargain collectively for the organized transit workers. (Naturally the case has been postponed until AFTER election.)
The city workers want merely to protect and improve their livelihood.
AS BOSS OF THE CITY, LaGUARDIA HAS MADE A FIGHTING FRONT AGAINST THEM – as does every boss against his workers.

Speaking before 400 bankers and brokers at the poor man’s Banker’s Club,
LaGuardia let out of the bag a very important bit of information about his much-tooted clean government.
He told the emaciated bankers that: “It would not only be disastrous, it would be fatal if the government of the city of New York were turned back to Flynn, Kelly and Sullivan.”
Why will financial destruction descend upon the city if O’Dwyer and Tammany Hall win the election? Because, states the Mayor, “their only desire is to get back into office, take control of the departments and get their slimy fingers back into the city treasury so that the tin boxes, safe deposit vaults and special accounts may be replenished.”
LaGuardia knows Tammany Hall. HE ALSO KNOWS HIS BANKERS.
If the Tammany grafters get their fingers on the city swag, if they cheat on prices to split with contractors, there will be less left in the city treasury for Wall Street.
Unearned millions must go to the bankers for interest on city bonds. The Morgans and the Rockefellers must get their $340,000,000 for the watered stock of the BMT and IRT, plus the pure gravy of millions in interest. This gives a rough idea of why Wall Street is interested in “clean government.” In a word, LaGuardia’s civic virtues amount to keeping the fingers of the Tammany grafters out of the city treasury SO THAT THE BANKERS CAN GET THEIR FISTS INTO IT.
The answer of the working people of the city to Tammany-run O’Dwyer and banker-run LaGuardia must be: A PLAGUE ON BOTH YOUR HOUSES!

Before the same bunch of starving bankers, LaGuardia became prophetic and predicted that the change from a war to a peace basis when it is all over, will bring millions upon millions of unemployed, “WORSE THAN IN 1929.”
Just why he tells this cheery news to the bankers at election time is hard to say. Maybe he wants them to know that he worries about their problems.
NO DOUBT MILLIONS UPON MILLIONS OF UNEMPLOYED WILL BE A PROBLEM – BUT PRIMARILY FOR THE WORKERS, NOT FOR THE BANKERS!
The workers might start on the solution by asking LaGuardia and the other vicarious warriors why they are shoving the country into this imperialist war, OUT OF WHICH THE WORKERS WILL EMERGE VERY MUCH IN THE RED – in the red in every respect.
He will tell the workers: “Hitlerism must be defeated.”
The German workers are told: British imperialism and the Jewish international bankers must be defeated.”
Both these statements are false and only war propaganda because —
WHOEVER IS DEFEATED, THOSE WORKERS WHO ARE NOT WIPED OUT IN THE CATACLYSM – be they American or German, British or Italian, Russian or Japanese – WILL REAP THE HELL OF THE AFTER-WAR DEPRESSION, until the next imperialist war will bring another so-called boom.
This is what working people are worrying about today – not “clean government” for the bankers. THE ISSUE OF THIS CAMPAIGN IS THE WAR.
On this issue, the candidate of the WORKERS PARTY/MAX SHACHTMAN, is on the ballot.
He stands on an anti-war platform. Not the Lindbergh brand of anti-war platform, which is a cloak for pro-Nazism.
But on the anti-war platform of the class-conscious working class, LEADING TOWARD SOCIALISM AND THE ABOLITION OF ALL IMPERIALIST WARS.
 




Since its last convention two years ago, the Transport Workers Union of America has shown remarkable growth. This was brought out at its third biennial convention held in New York City, September 24–27, by the officers’ reports and by the enthusiastic speeches of delegates from the floor.
The 22 locals which existed two years ago have been greatly strengthened and 36 new locals have been organized through actual struggle since then. The union now claims a membership of 95,000.
Noteworthy accomplishments in this direction were the organization of locals in the bourbon South. In New Orleans, for instance, a local of 800 members has been firmly established, with a closed shop contract. After a successful 11-day strike, Fairfield, Ala., saw the birth of a local of the TWU. Even in the open-shop city of Los Angeles the TWU has gained a foothold and its organizing pressure has forced an increase in wages of from 10 to 13 cents an hour for some 4,000 transport workers.
The outstanding successes in New York City were the great bus strike and the victory on the Third Avenue railway, Another high spot was the mobilization of the subway workers, all unionists and union sympathizers of the city for the struggle against the union-busting LaGuardia administration. Although the TWU leadership did not characterize their action this way, it was definitely due to pressure from Washington and to the sudden turn of the Stalinists that they called off the well prepared strike and went into protracted negotiations with the Board of Transportation. The leadership admits that it did not get very brilliant gains for the subway workers. But the last chapter of this .struggle has not yet been written.
All along the line, however, the TWU has signed very beneficial contracts, has gained the closed shop, and after six years of organization has stepped out into full maturity.
 
One Hit – Two Misses
Judging its important actions at this third biennial convention from the point of view of developing class consciousness – which is also a necessary measuring rod to be applied to a growing union – it must be reported that one hit was scored and two misses.
A very progressive move was made on the last day of the convention when certain proposed amendments to the union’s constitution were accepted which will result in widening the field of TWU organization. The delegates voted that the TWU organize not only subway, street car and bus employees, but gather into its ranks workers in all transport, including taxi and truck drivers, along which lines the TWU has already had some success.
Furthermore, it was agreed that since power is part of transport and since in some areas the same boss interests operate the street car lines and the electric power plants, the workers’ interests require a single industrial union embracing all the workers involved both in transport and in power.
Thus the principle of industrial unionism upon which the CIO was founded is being carried out not only in the mass production industries, where it is an obvious necessity, but in fields where artificial union divisions have existed for many years.
 
In Contrast
In marked contrast to this under standing of working class interests was the decision taken after the second day of the convention to endorse the war policy of the representative of the capitalist class in the White House.
The matter of whether or not to endorse the imperialist war took up far more time than any other question. One delegate stated the convention could have been over in 24 hours if not for the war issue.
During the first part of the discussion there was a great deal of opposition to changing the union’s previous anti-war stand. Delegates condemned the flip-flop that the leaders had taken. They recalled the Rochester convention of the New York State CIO, when the TWU delegates had walked out in protest against the garment workers’ support of Roosevelt.
There are many Irishmen in the TWU and many delegates described their experiences as Irish slaves under the heel of British imperialism.
“In war, all is lost,” exclaimed one delegate. Another declared that no honest labor leader can say that labor will be better off after the war. One reminded Michael Quill of his speeches about the wives and children who are victims of war, about the white coffins of the last war, and wanted to know if the horrors of war are less than when Quill was on the other side of the flop.
All these sentiments, received considerable bona fide applause as distinguished from the whistling, stamping and shouting for the pro-war speakers coming in good measure from the visitors’ gallery.
 
Quill Fires Big Guns
When Quill, who was presiding, sensed the extent of his opposition, he brought out one of his big guns in the person of John Santo, secretary-treasurer of the union. It would be impossible to give space to exposing all Santo’s twisted arguments. But he emphasized two false and misleading points: (1) that the leadership expected the endorsement of the pro-war stand and (2) that it is TREASON to vote against the war since the country is already in a shooting war.
That the effect of this shameful lambasting might not be dissipated by an opposition speaker, the convention was adjourned for two hours. In the afternoon there was a marked difference in tone, though there were still opposition speakers. Santo’s slave-driving speech had made its mark. The refrain of a majority of the speakers was: “Support our leadership, no matter what.” One delegate shouted: “Roosevelt is not wrong. Murray is not wrong. Our leadership is not wrong.”
It was pitiful to hear working men repeat the treacherous arguments their exploiting rulers are using to put over the war. Instead of looking forward to a world controlled by the workers and not by the capitalist quest for markets, some of the delegates were worried about what would happen to the markets of the American boss class if Hitler won.
Some of the pro-war delegates appealed to the opposition to stop being Irishmen and become Americans – as if the test of an American worker consists in his desire to support the American ruling class.
When the vote was finally taken only 20 delegates had withstood the pro-war tornado out of a total of 250! Thus the third biennial Conference of the TWU yielded to the influence of those who put the wishes of the Kremlin and the White House above the interests of the working class, which are opposed to all imperialist wars.
The convention also raised the salaries of its officers. Michael Quill’s salary was increased from $50 to $100. The other officers received comparable increases. But that such increases are out of all proportion is illustrated by the following comparison. A delegate from Section 124 praised the achievements of the union because he himself had received a $12 a week raise in four years. He is one of the better paid workers. But Quill has risen from a ticket agent on the IRT at $27 for an 84-hour week to a $100 a week union official.
 




It so happens that milk makes good bones and good teeth for growing children. It so happens that milk is essential to young and old for good health.
In New York City this indispensable food sells at FOURTEEN CENTS A QUART, representing a FORTY PER CENT INCREASE OVER WHAT IT SOLD FOR WHEN THE WAR BEGAN.
This exorbitant price has compelled the average housewife to cut down on milk consumption. The children of New York City’s poor – of whom THIRTY-THREE PER CENT ARE UNDERNOURISHED, according to the medical records kept by forty-four settlement houses – will be milk-starved Young people, adults and aged will be deprived of this diet essential.
Coming down to brass tacks, this means that war rationing has already begun. Not by law but by the facts of life. NOT FOR THE RICH, BUT FOR THE POOR.
Nor has the price ceiling for milk been reached. Predictions are that it will rise to EIGHTEEN AND TWENTY CENTS A QUART.
Leon Henderson boasts that he is keeping down the prices of steel and chemicals. However, people do not consume steel and chemicals either in the raw or in the form of tanks and poisongas.
The Washington politicians have on their minds such imperialist business as a two-ocean navy and air and chemical supremacy. The human business of feeding people cannot be left to suchas they.
If the working people arc to save themselves from undermined health that will make them susceptible to devastating epidemics – AS HAPPENED IN THE LAST WAR – THEY THEMSELVES MUST DO SOMETHING ABOUT THE PRICE OF FOOD.
WORKING WOMEN OF THE NATION – BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE – ORGANIZE YOURSELVES INTO COMMITTEES. ONLY BY MILITANT ACTION CAN YOU COMPEL THE WAR-MAD GOVERNMENT TO STOP FOOD PROFITEERING AT THE EXPENSE OF HUMAN LIFE.

The air and the press are full-up with appeals to women to get into “defense” jobs.
A little enlightenment from women who have “gone and done it” is timely.
For months now the government has been giving industrial courses to women. Leaflets are distributed high and wide advertising these two-month courses and calling upon women between theages of 18 and 50 to “help their country by training for defense jobs.”
Many women fall for that line and also for the prospect of good wages. Many give up jobs they already have to take these two-month courses – without pay.
THEN THEY BEGIN TO FIND OUT THINGS THE LEAFLETS DO NOT ADVERTISE.
When the course is over and they get their “work certificates,” they register with the State Employment Bureau – AND WAIT. It is quite usual to wait two weeks before even being sent out to a job. When finally they go to a plant, they may have to sit around from four to six hours – without lunch – only to get an application card to fill in. Then they wait some more – WITHOUT PAY.
It soon becomes clear to these women that employers prefer girls of 18 to 22. If they are over 30 – in spite of the government leaflets – their chance of employment are very, very slim.
If they are either Negroes or Jews, or if their citizenship is derived from their menfolk, industry is not very anxious to have them. If they are married, their chances are not as good as if they are single – the bosses want women who are so dependent on their jobs that they will stick no matter what the grind.
“Defense” jobs for women are still very limited. Many plants will not employ the female of the special at all. If women do get into war industry, they are put on the minimum wage of thirty cents an hour. Mostly they land in the radio factories and get “SOME CRAPPY JOBS.”
PAY-TRIOTISM DOES NOT WASTE ITS FAVORS ON THE WOMEN WHO HAVE GONE INTO SO-CALLED “DEFENSE” JOBS.

Mary Churchill, you may know, is the daughter of that “sincere democrat,” who, not too long ago, expressed the hope for a British Hitler to save the Empire, if England should be defeated in a war.
This same Mary Churchill has become a member of the working class – no less! You have doubtless seen her picture – in the papers or or. the screen – cleaning windows or scrubbing floors.
The lion puts on the lamb’s skin to fool the lambs. WHEN THE RULING CLASS DRESSES UP IN OVERALLS. SCRUBBING PAILS AND BRUSHES, IT IS TO FOOL THE WORKERS.
Everybody is supposed to he working hard and making sacrifices for the SAME CAUSE, don’t you know!
But —
WAR BETWEEN THE INTERNATIONAL PLUNDERERS IS NEVER THE CAUSE OF THE WORKING CLASS!

My clandestine apparatus picked up the following picture and conversation in the exclusive and expensive Rainbow Room at Radio City on the eve of October 1, the famous day when the new taxes went into effect.
Mr. and Mrs. Have-have, glamorous in evening attire, are seated tête-à-tête, sipping cocktails, beaming with content, well-being and tonsorial splendor.
“You are absolutely ravishing tonight, my dear,” Mr. Have-have purrs across the table.
“Thank you, darling. And you, I noticed, are in remarkably good spirits,” his wife replied in dulcet tones.
“I was getting around to telling you, my dear.” At this point Mr. Have-have put down his glass to rub his hands in satisfaction. “I landed that billion-dollar government contract. Congratulate me.”
“You darling!” breathed his wife in ecstasy, pressing his knee under the table. “I didn’t do so badly myself today.”
“How do you mean, dear?”
“I picked up this sable wrap at a mere $5,000 today, and saved you $500 in taxes.”
“That’s the girl,” exclaimed Mr. Have-have, patting her hand approvingly. “Every penny counts!”
 




In accordance with Notice to Members appearing in the May 23 issue of the Appeal, I submit the following points for revising the political resolution also appearing in that issue.
1. Paragraph 8 should not remain in its present form. It gives the impression that Yankee imperialism is the only brand in Latin America. Latin America has been meat for all the imperialist nations, even though the U.S. grabbed the lion’s share. Recently the inroads of Nazi Germany in parts of Latin America have been considerable and furthermore have been given wide publicity. We, of course, support the struggle of the Latin American masses against the whole imperialist racket. Our particular concern with U.S. imperialism must not lead us to state our position in such a way as to allow the accusation “pro-Nazi” to be made against us by our enemies.
2. In the section of the resolution The Struggle Against Fascism a new part should be added. It is imperative in the fight against fascism that the unions enter into the struggles of the unemployed. The more solidarity created between the unions and the unemployed the less chance does fascism have to gain the support of the unemployed and use the latter for smashing the unions. We must get this idea over. Our comrades in the unions must work along this line. We must hammer on this idea in the Appeal and in special leaflets for distribution at union meetings. This work has to be done by us.
 

