roves: Communist, Trotskyist, Christian Socialist, Labour Historian And Labour Party Parliamentary Candidate



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

GROVES, Reginald Percy (Reg)
(1908–1988)
Communist, Trotskyist, Christian Socialist, Labour Historian
and Labour Party Parliamentary Candidate

Published: This is published by kind permission of the author Prof. John McIlroy and is from Keith Gildart, David Howell (eds.), Dictionary of Labour Biography, vol. xii, 2005, pp. 106–19.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2013 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Copyright: Prof. John McIlroy and the Dictionary of Labour Biography.

Reg Groves was born on 16 April 1908 in Clacton, Essex, the eldest of the six children of Percy Groves and his wife Dora (née Canler). His father and grandfather were both policemen, and his mother’s parents, Philip and Frances Canler, kept an ironmonger’s shop in Clacton. His parents moved to London, leaving him with the Canlers, but the family were soon reunited in the metropolis, where they lived in the Sandringham Buildings at the back of Charing Cross Road. As a boy, Groves experienced working-class London, the southern seaside and rural Essex, for he often stayed with the Canlers. The latter were nineteenth-century radicals who bred in him a love of the countryside and a sympathy for the long tradition of struggle by rural workers. He always credited them with sowing in his young mind the seeds of socialism.
When Groves was 14 he left St Martin-in-the-Fields School, Holborn, where he had acquired a love of Shakespeare to complement his passion for Charlie Chaplin, and took an a succession of temporary jobs: messenger boy, railway porter, farm labourer, sports groundsman and Post Office engineering apprentice. He was the only member of his family to take an interest in politics. In 1924 he joined the Westminster branch of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), but it was the prelude to the general strike and his induction into militant Christian socialism that made him become an activist.
His parents were not religious, although Philip Canler was a Methodist lay preacher. Primary influences on his new allegiance, perhaps inspired more by socialism than Christianity, were the Australian-born clergyman St John Groser (1890–1966) and his brother-in-law, Jack Bucknall (1888–1954), both of whom were Anglo-Catholic curates at St Michael’s in Bromley-by-Bow and adherents of the Catholic Crusade, established by the revolutionary vicar of Thaxted, Conrad Noel, in 1918 to further the Anglo-Catholic movement and win the Church to socialism. They worked with George Lansbury, collaborated with the Communist Party (CPGB) and; in accordance with the philosophy of the Thaxted movement, were deeply involved in socialist causes across London. The movement, which stood on the left of the Christian socialist spectrum despite its High Church provenance, had some tradition in London churches near Groves’ home, such as St George’s in Bloomsbury and St Mary’s in Somers Town, as well as St Michael’s. Through discussion meetings in Groser’s rooms in Teviot Street, Poplar, he was drawn into the Catholic Crusade. It was in Groser’s rooms that in early 1925 he met a group of Christian socialists who were active in the trade unions.
He became close to Stewart Purkis, Billy Williams, Bert Field and Ruby Rayner, all of whom were members of the Clearing House branch of the Railway Clerks’ Association and worked in Somers Town, not far from his home. The 40-year-old Purkis (1885–1969) had been a socialist since 1904, a disciple of Noel since his days in the Christian Social League early in the century and secretary of the Catholic Crusade. A dynamic, dapper, gnome of a man who sustained trade unionism among the railway clerical elite and added more than a dash of militancy to it, Purkis came to have a significant influence on Groves. Encouraged by Groser, Bucknall and Purkis, he read voraciously and haunted Henderson’s ‘bomb shop’, the Charing Cross Road book store – with its red and gold décor painted by Walter Crane – that played a role in shaping successive generations of socialists. Guided by them, he visited Thaxted. Its beauty and the magic of its rituals and pageantry, plainsong, folk singing and morris dancing reinforced his new faith. It deepened his lifelong concern with the relevance of socialism to rural workers. Noel, who had been a member of the British Socialist Party and involved in the ferment over the creation of the CPGB in 1920–21, remained an enduring inspiration.
Groves was also interested in cultural matters. In April 1926 a letter was published in the CPGB’s broad left weekly, the Sunday Worker, from ‘Reginald P. Groves’ criticising the party Journalist Charles Ashleigh’s review of Miles Malleson’s play Conflict at the Queen’s Theatre. What Ashleigh wanted from art, Groves claimed, was crude lessons in revolution. Effective drama, in contrast, demanded evocation of uncertainty, complexity and the dilemmas workers faced in confronting capitalism and developing socialist politics [Groves (1926)]. On 1 May 1926 Groves presented Purkis with a copy of Trotsky’s Where is Britain Going? Suitably fortified, they plunged into the general strike. The 18-year-old Groves organised gatherings of strikers at St Mary’s, Somers Town, and participated in Groser’s meetings in South London. He shared the exhilaration of witnessing the blackcoated aristocrats of the Clearing House walk out to join the strike. He shared the bitterness of defeat, the beating of Groser by the police, the victimisation of union activists and the pressures placed by the Church of England on its socialist clergy: both Groser and Bucknall were eventually removed from St Michael’s and Rowland Jones from St. Mary’s. Events vindicated his feeling that the Church had let the workers down, his critical estimation of the Labour Party and his positive impression of the CPGB. Convinced of the necessity of Leninism, he joined the CPGB in 1927, along with fellow Crusaders Purkis, Williams and James Desormeaux. His father believed that having a Communist son could cause him problems in the police force and asked him to leave home.
There has been some controversy over whether Groves maintained his Christianity during his years in the communist and Trotskyist movements. He certainly maintained an ethical approach and a sharp sense of equity, a vision of how life should be lived and relationships conducted, which caused him difficulties in the CPGB. The best view is that whatever went on inside his heart, he was no longer a pledged, still less a practising Christian. Criticising Jack Bucknall in the CPGB press in 1928, Groves’ fellow former Crusaders emphasised that it was impossible to be a Christian and CPGB member. This was certainly the conclusion of the party leadership when they refused Bucknall’s application for membership two years later. At that time Groves himself criticised the Crusade in the pages of the Daily Worker. None of his comrades saw any evidence of adherence to Christianity after 1927. While he continued his close relationship with Purkis and maintained his friendship with Bucknall, Noel and Groser were succeeded as guiding lights by the austere militant atheist, the CPGB theorist Rajani Palme Dutt, whose Labour Monthly he had first read on Bucknall’s recommendation. His vision of heaven on earth now centred on a soviet Britain.
He was initially a member of the Westminster group of the CPGB, and it was there that he met his future wife, Daisy Cox. Born in Blackfriars in London on 28 August 1908, Daisy was apprenticed to a Soho tailor and became an activist in the elite West End cutters’ branch of the Tailor and Garment Workers’ Union. She joined the CPGB in 1926 and – together with her elder sister, Nell, and her brother-in-law, the Irish bricklayer Steve Dowdall – became active in the party and subsequently in the Trotskyist movement. By 1929 Groves and Daisy were living together and they were married on 27 February 1932. They lived in East London and were members of the Bethnal Green branch of the CPGB before moving to South London, where they joined the Battersea branch.
Groves was preoccupied by the significance of 1926. This strengthened his interest in labour history, particularly in the lessons of the Chartist movement for working-class independence and revolutionary opportunity. He came to share Dutt’s view that the CPGB had to terminate its role as the protesting left wing of the labour movement and project itself as an independent, revolutionary alternative. He initially supported the intervention of the Communist International (Comintern) to correct the ‘right-wing’ policies of the CPGB leadership and purge recalcitrants. Dutt was always prepared to promote right-thinking party activists. He corresponded with the born-again Groves, who met the prescription of the zealous young worker whom Dutt’s masters in Moscow were intent on grooming for leadership.
By 1928 Groves was a party speaker and worked on Dutt’s Labour Monthly. By 1929 he was a member of the London District Committee, assistant to the organiser, R.W. Robson, prominent on the Central Agit-Prop Committee and author of the CPGB pamphlet on the Labour Party commissioned for the 1929 general election. In the party press he enunciated the ultra-left politics of the ‘third period’ with a vigour that owed much to Dutt’s Notes of the Month in Labour Monthly. Confronted by economic crisis, the workers were thwarted by ‘a single unbroken front of employers and trade Union leaders from Lord Melchett to A.J. Cook’. Faced with union incorporation, ‘the only basis for our work is the factory. The key to a mechanised army lies in the factory.’ Socialists must refuse to pay the political levy to the Labour Party, reject ‘reformist discipline in the unions’ and lead strikes in defiance of them. There was a need for the CPGB to fight for a revolutionary workers’ government, renew its leadership and establish an illegal apparatus [Groves (July 1929) 412–14; Groves (November 1929) 604–9]. He attended the November 1929 CPGB congress in Leeds, which accepted the new line of class against class, armed with Dutt’s personal assurance that he was executing the mission of the Comintern. He was prominent in insisting that the decline of the party had to be confronted, that its provenance lay in its ‘right-wing’ direction, and that a new leadership was ‘the supreme issue’.
By 1930 Groves was an up-and-coming force. He was an effective speaker and writer, with contributions published in the Daily Worker, the Communist, Communist Review and Labour Monthly. He engaged with contemporary issues, but also with working-class history, where he pondered the relevance of Chartism to contemporary struggle. In the summer of 1929 the CPGB had asked him to go to Russia to work for the Comintern and then take up a place at the International Lenin School in Moscow. He had declined, believing that the battle in Britain and the party’s difficulties took priority. In 1930 he was briefly on the staff of the Daily Worker. He emulated Dutt in criticising the paper for its limited ability to reflect working-class problems and its preponderance of assertion over fact and argument.
As ‘Plowman’, in April 1930 he launched the Workers’ Notebook, which would become one of the paper’s enduring features. However he came into conflict with the editors over their failure to publish his column regularly and their propensity to alter his copy. He appealed to the secretariat, but the party leadership backed the editorial board, insisting on its right and duty to correct ‘mistaken formulations’ and ‘incorrect conclusions’. In response he suspended his contributions.
Groves was labelled a capricious critic. Dissatisfaction with his treatment mingled with political disillusionment. The new leadership had failed to reverse the party’s decline into a sect that was as ‘bureaucratic’ as its predecessor. His historical studies were a solace. As an admirer of David Riazanov’s work at the Marx-Engels Institute in Moscow, he inquired about employment in London. Instead Riazanov offered him a job in Moscow, helping to prepare Marx’s English works for publication and undertaking research into the nineteenth-century British labour movement. He wanted to go but the CPGB leadership, remembering his earlier reluctance to work in Russia, withheld their permission.
His disenchantment hardened during the rest of 1930. He talked with Purkis, Williams, Henry Sara (who had joined their discussions in the Express Dairies Café near Euston), Harry Wicks (whom he had met when both were found work by the party at Russian Oil Products) and the former Comintern functionary, George Weston. They remained adherents of the politics of 1929. They underestimated the extent to which the Comintern was now emphasising ‘the left danger’ as well as ‘the right danger’. However their solidarity as a group was strengthened when Purkis was branded as ‘a theoretician of left sectarianism’, essentially for affirming Dutt’s insistence on the need to politicise economic struggles, and when Groves was criticised by the leadership for raising the question of councils of action during the August crisis of 1931, a position that however wrongheaded would have been unexceptionable in the aftermath of the Leeds congress. Their confidence was boosted when Groves attracted support from the Nine Elms Concentration Group, which worked around a large rail depot, produced the Nine Elms Spark and in autumn 1931, with shifts in the small south-west London membership, became the Balham Group of the CPGB.
The Opposition centred on south-west London and the St Pancras branch, initially represented a defence of the apogee of the ‘third period’. But in the spring of 1931 Groves had his first significant encounter with Trotskyism. In Henderson’s bookshop he discovered the literature of the Communist League of America (CLA), a section of the International Left Opposition (ILO). On Purkis’s account, the former Catholic Crusaders had been uneasy about the CPGB’s condemnation of Trotsky and the United Opposition in 1928, but had felt unequipped to judge the issues. Doubts continued over developments in Russia and China. By 1930 the group had become acutely concerned with the Comintern’s sectarian prohibition of a united front between communist and social democratic parties and its emphasis on the ineffectual ‘united front from below’. Daisy Groves later recalled her husband’s Opposition to the official line on China in 1928, while Harry Wicks recollected that the development of the theory of social fascism – fascism and social democracy were twins – united the emerging Opposition. But there is no hard evidence that Groves and his comrades had grasped the rudiments of the ILO’s politics before Groves circulated the American Militant.
Now, however, they placed the development of fascism in Germany, the urgent need for a united front and criticism of the Comintern and ‘socialism in one country’ at the heart of their developing politics. Groves contacted the CLA and by autumn 1931 he was writing under a pseudonym in its paper, the Militant, and had commenced a correspondence with Trotsky in Turkey. With his comrades, he held meetings in London with the CLA youth leader, Albert Glotzer, and the gifted American Trotskyist, Max Shachtman. This culminated in the formation in December 1931 of the British Group of the ILO, which would act as a clandestine faction inside the CPGB. There was little political discussion and less clarification. He had his doubts but he swallowed them. By May 1932 the group had published the first issue of the Communist, devoted to Trotsky’s writings on Germany.
Groves’ leading role in the group’s initiatives, his lack of tactical acumen and his ultra-left purism on the trade union question enabled the leadership to stamp the opposition with a sectarian label. The ‘January resolution’, hammered out in Moscow by the leaders of the Comintern and the CPGB, reaffirmed that while the union apparatus remained irredeemable, ‘the lower organs’, specifically the union branches, could be transformed into ‘organs of class struggle’. In a statement drafted by Groves and published in the Daily Worker in April 1931, the Balham Group criticised the resolution for its neglect of Germany and the Far East, and asserted the primacy of factory and job organisation in the industrial struggle. The leadership responded that there would be no change in policy. The unions could not be transformed; given the relationship of factory to branch, it was possible to win workers at lower levels from the bureaucracy. This was an argument within ultra-leftism, but the January resolution had the better of it. Groves’ persistence and a further exchange in May enabled the leadership to saddle the group with an abstentionist position on work in union branches. In reality they zealously carried on such work and Purkis’s activities in the Railway Clerks’ Association were covered in the CPGB press. But Groves’ formulations were disowned by Dutt, criticised in the Communist International and disapproved of by Shachtman.
The Americans had urged that one member of the British group should be offered up for expulsion as a focal point around which to organise open opposition. But the heat was already on all protagonists. The Balham Group defended their positions in two south-west London aggregates, losing the vote by a modest 22 to 16. They were condemned by the London leadership and Groves was indicted for accusing the leadership of political cowardice. At that point they implemented the ‘sacrifice’ stratagem. But the publication in July 1932 of Purkis’s Open Letter to Harry Pollitt, which expounded the politics of the ILO, provoked not only his expulsion but also the identification of the rest of the group with Trotskyism. There was one small success. Through its work with ILP members the group had created a strong Anti-War Committee in south-west London. Their resolution mandating the sending of a delegate to the forthcoming World Anti-War Congress was commended by the Daily Worker. It was only days later that a furious J.R. Campbell noticed its Trotskyist sentiments, and its warning that the only antidote to war and the safeguarding of the Soviet Union was world revolution.
By that time the die was cast. After interrogation by Pollitt and Gallacher, Groves was expelled on 17 August 1932. Further expulsions and the liquidation of the Balham Group followed. Groves was refused the right to appeal to the party’s November congress, where Pollitt expressed his ‘contempt, hatred and loathing for the miserable gang of counter-revolutionaries’.
Groves found it difficult to pass from factionalism inside an established organisation to the leadership of a tiny group that was persecuted by former comrades and branded as fascist. The ex-CPGB members were augmented by recruits from the ILP, a circle of students at the London School of Economics and a trickle of expelled Communists. The loyal Jack Bucknall took up their cause in the Catholic Crusader. The group never had more than 50 members and it was confined to London. Groves became absorbed in unavoidable arguments over whether they should constitute themselves as a propaganda group, publishing Trotsky’s writings and directing themselves to revolutionaries, primarily the CPGB; whether they should prioritise day-to-day activity in the British labour movement; or, perhaps more pertinently, how they could combine these two approaches.
Groves was a British, or more precisely an English, activist who wanted to influence what happened in England. He was disillusioned with the Comintern and perhaps the least enthusiastic of those in the opposition about the link with the ILO. His evocation of attendance at an ILO gathering in February 1933 suggests his ambivalence: ‘A reluctant delegate, I travelled to Paris and sat through complex and heavily jargonised discussions in French and German’. The outcome was ‘an aching head and jaded spirits’ [Groves (1974) 74]. His attempts to exercise ‘hegemony’, as he put it, within the group brought him into conflict with Purkis and Wicks over his prioritising of activity in the labour movement and of ‘British materials’, as against the development of theoretical education. His opponents counselled against impatience and parochialism. They recalled his intemperate criticism of the CPGB leaders and his leftism over the trade union issue. Nonetheless, during 1933 the group produced six issues of the Communist, launched the Red Flag, which was addressed largely to the revolutionary left, and in June, declared itself the Communist League, British Section International Left Opposition.
In August 1933 the ILO urged the League to augment its forces by entering the ILP. The old CPGB group closed ranks. They resisted Trotsky’s subsequent attempts to persuade them that they could win the ILP’s revolutionary core and inoculate the whole party against Stalinism, and asserted the need for independent organisation. There was an element of Communist hauteur towards the pedestrian ILP, as well as a keen appreciation of its limitations. The new recruits proved more susceptible to the view that the League could not sustain itself as an independent organisation. The old guard won the day. But the minority’s refusal to accept the vote and the ILO’s subsequent decision to sanction their entry into the ILP increased Groves’ disillusionment with international Trotskyism.
During 1934 he allowed formal contact with Trotsky and the ILO to slip away. He saw this as no great loss. But the League was beset with further infighting. Purkis had had enough and returned to the church. Trotsky observed, ‘the majority finds itself in a state of constant internal strife ... certain leaders have left the organisation altogether’ [Trotsky (1971) 64]. Groves proposed critical support for a Labour government and a new approach towards the Labour Party as the CPGB’s turn away from isolation towards alliances gathered momentum, undermining the appeal of Trotskyism. When Groves was disqualified as a delegate to the 1934 Labour Party conference because of his connections with the Communist League, the group agreed to reorganise for more effective entry. It resurfaced as the Marxist League. Groves declared that the League would ‘work loyally as an integral part of the labour movement’. It would now operate as ‘an association of Labour Party members, Trade Unionists and Co-operators, organised together for the study of Marxism, the training of Marxist leaders and the advocacy of Marxist policy and principles in the Labour Movement’ [Sara-Maitland Papers, MSS15/4/1/5, Aims and Objects of the Marxist League, n.d. (1934)]
Work in the Labour Party came easily to him and he acted as agent for Andrew Campbell in Guildford in the 1935 general election. He prioritised activity in the Socialist League, established in 1932 by traditional Labour intellectuals and left wing activists who did not wish to follow the ILP out of the party. In 1935 its leading personalities were Sir Stafford Cripps, William Mellor and its ex-Communist general secretary, J.T. Murphy. Groves became London area secretary and represented London on the National Council. He spoke extensively at its meetings and was a regular contributor to its paper, the Socialist. The Marxist League used the Socialist League as a means to distribute the literature of the Spanish Partido de Unificación Marxista (POUM), an organisation led by Andrés Nin and influenced by Trotsky, although he had broken with his supporters in the party. In 1935–36 the Socialist League published three pamphlets by Groves on fascism, socialism and war, and trades councils.
Believing the foundations had been laid for more vigorous activity, he re-established contact with Trotsky and requested his support for the relaunch of the Red Flag in May 1936. Trotsky was scathing about the League’s failure to raise revolutionary politics inside the Labour Party and judged it ‘a vague centrist trend’. He relented when the League insisted that it still accepted the policy and principles of the movement for the Fourth International and promised discussions with the Trotskyist Marxist Group in the ILP. But Groves firmly rebuffed Trotsky’s criticism of work in the Socialist League and refused to bind his Organisation to the discipline of the ILO whose leaders believed that Groves only wanted to utilise Trotsky’s prestige and had no intention of accepting international discipline. Some British Trotskyists agreed: ‘He did not highlight the historic role of Trotskyism or of the Left Opposition … when the Communists wanted to attack him they could present his association with Trotsky as something sinister and underhand’ [Archer (2001) 256].
Yet he was prepared to stand on principle and put his neck on the Hock. He opposed the unity negotiations between the CPGB, ILP and Socialist League in January 1937. The CPGB’s strategy, he claimed, given the near certainty of the League’s proscription by Labour’s leaders should it sign a unity agreement, was to remove a competitor on its left and strengthen its own campaign for affiliation to the Labour Party. For him the CPGB’s insistence that eschewal of criticism of the Soviet Union by the ILP and Socialist League should be a precondition for any pact was unacceptable. He was concerned about the minimal consultation the League’s leaders afforded their members. When the League’s conference on 17 January failed to ratify the accord by an overall majority, he circulated branches with a criticism of the National Council and the agreement.
The national press carried front-page coverage of his statement. The Daily Worker immediately accused him of ‘allowing his materials to be placed at the disposal of the Daily Herald’, going on to inform readers: ‘Groves is a Trotskyist. In the Soviet Union Trotskyism organises the murder of the leaders of the Communist Party and acts as the agent of the secret police of Hitler’ [Daily Worker, 18 January 1937]. He responded by denying that he had had any contact with the Herald. He affirmed that the CPGB’s allegations were ‘without an atom of truth’. The Socialist League, he averred, had been recruited into a conspiracy of silence about the misdoings of the Russian government ... ‘A Party with nothing to hide will not object to the criticisms of working class opponents. The agreement denies the right of free criticism, either of the parties concerned, or of their personnel, or of the actions and policies of the Soviet government’ [Red Flag, February 1937, p.3].
Only a handful of disembodied sentences from his response to the Daily Worker were published, set in a vehement commentary that concluded the onus was on Groves to prove his innocence. The persecution continued with contributions from Pollitt and John Strachey – then campaigning for free speech in the Labour Party. The latter prefaced his condemnation of Groves with the considered observation: ‘all over the world the Trotsky organisations are in close touch with the Fascists’ [Daily Worker, 22 January 1937].
After the dissolution of the Socialist League, Groves unsuccessfully attempted to create a successor, the Socialist Left Federation. In October 1937 the Marxist League itself was wound up. The majority of the members, led by Wicks, were determined to continue in the Trotskyist movement and fuse with the Marxist Group, led by C.L.R. James. Years later Groves felt that at last he had the courage of his convictions. Life in the Trotskyist movement demanded a harsh hyperactivism and a dedication to intensive political disputation. It imposed restricted horizons; for most leaders it ended in burn-out. He knew Shakespeare better than he knew Marx. He had felt for some time that he did not want to spend the rest of his life arguing with other Trotskyists within the purism, introversion and factionalism of small group culture. He was depressed by the Moscow trials and the resilience of Stalinism. Fundamentally, as his friend Harry Wicks remembered, ‘Rightly or wrongly, he found the style and rhythms of the Third and soon, of the Fourth, Internationals unbearable’ [Wicks (1992) 148]. The Marxist League was his last involvement with that kind of politics.
Groves’ life was changing. Since the 1920s he had been employed only intermittently in a series of part-time jobs, including a stint at Booklovers Corner, the Hampstead bookshoop (owned by two ILP members, the Westropes) that was immortalised in George Orwell’s Keep the Aspidistra Flying. Casual work provided him with time for politics, study and writing, and for indulgence of his love of the cinema, Bix Beiderbecke, beer, pubs, football and folksong. But in 1935 he secured a job he enjoyed: working as a journalist on World Film News. Established by the pioneering documentary film makers John Grierson and Basil Wright, this was an influential, if short-lived, monthly magazine. His new work catered for and extended his abiding interest in all aspects of film production and appreciation. In 1937 he completed his history of Chartism and it was accepted by the anti-Stalinist publisher, Frederic Warburg. He saw it as a meditation on the class politics of both the 1840s and the 1920s and 1930s, a plea for working-class independence and a parable of the problems with popular frontism. That April he was adopted as prospective parliamentary candidate for Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire.
This provided an opportunity to carry socialism into the countryside, although Aylesbury was a safe Conservative seat and no contest was in view until the next general election, probably in 1940. However a by-election was precipitated in May 1938 by the unexpected resignation of the incumbent MP. A strong current of Popular Front opinion demanded that Labour step aside to provide a clear run for the Liberals, the established second party in Aylesbury. Transport House would have none of it. Labour’s national agent, George Shepherd, at first sought to replace Groves with a more conventional and ‘stronger’ candidate; but he finally bowed to Groves’ sustained support by the local party. The national machine swung behind Groves, whipping in unlikely supporters such as the popular frontists D.N. Pritt and Harold Laski.
Groves rose to the occasion. In the face of secessions from the Aylesbury party, the appearance of a local, popular frontist peace alliance and a campaign of sustained vituperation from the CPGB, which claimed that Groves was ‘a friend of Franco’, actively abetting Hitler, he had to make concessions. His positive response to a questionnaire from Lloyd George’s Council of Action for Peace and Reconstruction that Britain should work with the League of Nations, incurred the disapproval of the Trotskyists. But in the view of the ILP’s New Leader, he consistently expounded ‘the most outspoken Socialist appeal that had been heard from the official Labour Party platform for a very long time’. In the face of sustained criticism by the Liberal-Communist coalition, he remarked: ‘We are still Socialists down here.’ He ridiculed the Popular Front as the preserve of ‘the middle class element, university socialists, the “weekenders” who had never done a day’s work for the local party, and the social elite of the Left Book Club’ [Groves (1938) 1].
Amid predictions of a lost deposit, despite general commendation of the campaign, the vote on 19 May 1938 was widely perceived as a vindication of Labour and its candidate. The Daily Herald proclaimed ‘Congratulations Mr Groves and Goodbye, Popular Front’. Support for the Conservatives and Liberals dropped by 3,000 in each case; the Labour vote increased by 3,500. Groves was the only candidate to increase his share of the vote and was the first Labour candidate in Aylesbury not to lose his deposit. The swing against the Conservatives was greater than in the ensuing ‘Munich by-elections’ in Bridgewater and Oxford.



Aylesbury by-Election, 19 May 1938:
electorate 63,624, turnout 63.0 per cent




Sir H.S. Reed (Conservative)   


21,695 (54.1 per cent)




T.A. Robertson (Liberal)


10,751 (26.8 per cent)




R. Groves (Labour)


   7,666 (19.1 per cent)




Majority


10,944 (27.3 per cent)



For Groves the episode affirmed that the only way to a new revolutionary politics was via direct engagement with workers. The rituals and language of small group politics, their emphasis on internal disputation and the constraints of democratic centralism he now viewed as a barrier to creative socialism. Aylesbury reinforced his commitment to a revolutionary populism in which the Popular Front had no place. Rejecting overtures in autumn 1938 from the American Trotskyist James P. Cannon to involve him in the leadership of the unified Trotskyist Revolutionary Socialist League, he chose to plough his own furrow. The collapse of World Film News provided more time for politics. From 1939 he was the motivating influence in the Socialist Anti-War Front (SAWF), which argued that only socialism could stop war and that the workers should oppose the military preparations. He was elected to the executive of the No Conscription League, which was established in February 1939 with the support of the Labour Party and trade union branches and claimed to represent 700,000 workers.
Upon the outbreak of hostilities he produced the first of several issues of a small monthly, Home Front, which promised to document the real story of the conflict in industry and civilian life in Britain. In the pages of the Call of the Socialist Anti-War Front, he argued that the war was like its predecessor of 1914–18, a product of imperialist rivalry. Workers should oppose it and fight for wage increases, controls over prices and profits and the socialisation of industry. His attempts to revive the anti-war traditions of 1914–18 incurred the wrath of the Trotskyists, who believed he was sowing illusions in the state and that revolutionaries should acknowledge the fascist threat by agitating within the armed forces for workers’ defence. He found time to write a regular column of film reviews for the New Leader, demonstrating a partiality for James Cagney, the gangster cycle of the 1930s and the epic westerns.
His response to Harold Laski’s support for the war, in the pamphlet It Is an Imperialist War, ended his honeymoon with the Labour Party. Shepherd wrote to inform him that he was recommending his expulsion for violation of party policy. Groves responded defensively, claiming that the pamphlet had been written before the party’s 1940 conference had endorsed Labour’s entry into the coalition government. He publicly stated: ‘As long as I am a member of the Party I am bound to accept these decisions’ [Groves (1940) 13]. Shepherd relented and Groves modified his position. He began to argue that the only way to win the war was through adoption of socialist policies.
Groves underwent something of a personal crisis. In early 1940 he had volunteered for the Friends’ Ambulance Unit but had been rejected. Dunkirk brought his populism, nationalism and realism to the surface. The immediacy of the Nazi threat convinced him that the defence of the democracies was a necessary obligation for socialists. The SAWF and the Call disappeared. He decided not to register as a conscientious objector as he had earlier intended. Instead he spent the rest of the war in a reserved occupation as a maker of documentary films for the Ministry of Information, but refused to accept the army commission that went with the job. He remained politically active, supporting the ILP’s Campaign For a Socialist Britain Now, which was launched in January 1942 and called for the immediate social ownership of industry, redistribution of wealth, freedom for the colonies and ‘a socialist peace offensive’. Unlike some of his political associates, Groves rejected the temptation to quit Labour and join the ILP. He was a delegate to party conferences between 1941 and 1944 and sensed a mood of change. Nonetheless his problems with the National Executive continued. In 1942 he was endorsed as candidate for Aylesbury, but was warned to keep his distance from the ILP. His response was to augment his political contributions to the ILP press with a regular column, Time to kill, in the New Leader. This prefigured some of the concerns of what came to be known in later decades as ‘cultural studies’ in its attention to the social significance of film, theatre, language (particularly working-class speech), jazz, folksong, the music hall, football and working-class history.
Groves remained a revolutionary. He continued to urge the case against state regulation and Morrison-style nationalisation, and argued for workers’ management, democratic planning and socialism as ‘a complete change in the whole basis of our way of working and living’ [Groves (New Leader, 30 October 1943) 2]. But as a revolutionary in a world that offered limited prospects for revolution, he chose the Labour Party as the best place to work for socialist change. More than ever he saw Stalinism as a perversion of socialism and viewed the CPGB with contempt. He still appeared at Trotskyist meetings and chaired the launch in May 1944 of the Anti-Labour Laws Victims Defence Committee, established to protest against the imprisonment of Jock Haston and his comrades in the Revolutionary Communist Party. Emotionally Groves had a love-hate relationship with Trotskyism, but he would not return to that path. Politically he had broken decisively from the trajectory he had followed since 1926 and in a different fashion between 1930 and 1937.
Instead he cultivated a small, informal network, the Red Flag Fellowship. It discussed socialist prospects in the postwar era and its meetings were addressed by a range of speakers, memorably by George Orwell. The close of the war saw the birth of the Groves’ twin daughters, Frances and Jennifer. In the 1945 general election he once again performed with distinction at Aylesbury. But the campaign was marred by differences between Groves and party workers, particularly over his outspoken attacks on Churchill.



Aylesbury, 1945:
electorate 73,737, turnout 69.5 per cent




Sir H.S. Reed (Conservative)   


24,537 (47.8 per cent)




R. Groves (Labour)


16,445 (32.1 per cent)




G.D. Naylor (Liberal)


10,302 (20.1 per cent)




Majority


   8,092 (15.7 per cent)



Uncomfortable in the constituency that had brought him fleeting fame, Groves decamped to Eastbourne in Sussex. There he turned in a creditable performance in the 1950 general election. He increased Labour’s total by 5,000 votes, although his reservations about government policy and his belief that Britain should take a neutral position between the United States and Russia caused consternation.



Sussex (East), Eastbourne, 1950:
electorate 69 932, turnout 85.1 per cent




C.S. Taylor (Conservative)


35,425 (59.5 per cent)




R. Groves (Labour)


18,304 (30.8 per cent)




C.L.H. Douglas-Bate (Liberal)    


  5,766 (9.7 per cent)




Majority


17,121 (28.7 per cent)



This time candidate and constituency parted amicably. Groves had a longstanding agreement that if a vacancy became available in Saffron Walden, Essex, another unwinnable but more rural constituency, he would allow his name to be put forward.
His statements during the 1951 campaign, questioning the radicalism of Attlee’s domestic policies and opposing the Korean War, were criticised in the press and used against him by his patrician Conservative opponent, R.A. Butler. His speech calling for the withdrawal of US forces from Britain – ‘Clear out the American bomber squadrons’ – provoked a storm in Saffron Walden. While he pushed up Labour’s vote and its share of the poll, the Conservative vote also increased.



Essex, Safron Walden, 1951:
electorate 47,836, turnout 83.1 per cent




Rt Hon. R.A. Butler (Conservative)    


20,564 (51.7 per cent)




R. Groves (Labour)


15,425 (38.8 per cent)




W.O. Smedley (Liberal)


   3,774 (9.5 per cent)




Majority


   5,139 (12.9 per cent)



In the aftermath of the election the national agent, R.T. Windle, interviewed Groves and raised his disregard of policy with the National Executive Committee. Groves escaped with another warning, and a promise to exercise greater care in future. Some constituency activists were not placated and in 1952 he was once more on his travels. The 1955 general election saw him contesting Ilford North in a campaign studded with disputes over Labour’s defence policy and acrimony over German rearmament and nuclear deterrence. He restored Labour’s fortunes – its vote had collapsed in a 1954 by-election but, in accordance with the national trend, not to the peak of 1951.



Ilford North, 1955:
electorate 67,496, turnout 76.6 per cent




T.L. Iremonger (Conservative)    


28,749 (55.6 per cent)




R. Groves (Labour)


18,248 (35.3 per cent)




P.L. Rose (Liberal)


  4,702 (9.1 per cent)




Majority


10,501 (20.3 per cent)



In June 1957 Groves was selected a second time as Labour candidate for Eastbourne, the National Executive Committee having given its approval after careful consideration. He was unhappy with the organisation and weakness of campaigning in the constituency. Some activists were concerned about his views on defence and his sponsoring of a CND group in Eastbourne. After discussion and correspondence with Ron Hayward, the regional organiser, he offered his resignation and it was accepted by the local party. This marked an end to 20 years of rural peregrination and propaganda, an unusual personal crusade that was sometimes painful, often thankless and always stimulated by his central belief that the propagation of socialist ideas among workers in the countryside came far down the list of priorities of socialists across the spectrum. He reflected that he had never picked his constituencies, they had picked him. But he had usually laid down two conditions: they should be rural and hard to win.
In the postwar years Groves made a kind of living from freelance journalism, the occasional film script and book royalties. Rebels’ Oak (1947) and The Peasants’ Revolt (1950) reflected his absorption with the long history of rural struggle, while Sharpen the Sickle (1949), the story of the agricultural workers’ union, was one of the few trade Union histories to transcend the genre and attract a wider audience. His love affair with the traditional English pub and his deep affection for Chelsea Football Club endured. He edited the Amateur Football Handbook, wrote histories of Chelsea and West Ham United, and even tried his hand at a western. During the war he had become a member of the Cinematograph Technicians’ Union and in the early 1950s he was appointed as editor of its paper, Film Technician. Once again things did not work out: political differences in the union presaged a parting of the ways.
Groves found work as a reader for ABC Films, assessing the suitability of novels for the screen. His earlier allegiance reasserted itself. Throughout the 1950s he was active in the Socialist Christian League, together with Purkis, who edited the magazine Socialist Christian, and Desormeaux, who with the anarchist vicar Gresham Kirkby were its animating force. He held Christ’s teaching to be a model for socialists and loved the language of the Bible, but he rarely went to church. When in 1960 the League, with its strong revolutionary ethos, joined its competitor, the Society of Socialist Clergy and Ministers in the Christian Socialist Movement (CSM), Groves opposed the initiative. He was minimally involved with the bland CSM.
He had lectured for the National Council of Labour Colleges since the 1930s. From the 1960s his income came from taking local authority adult education classes in Wandsworth Prison, and from teaching for the Workers’ Educational Association, City University, the London University Extra-Mural Department and the National Union of Agricultural Workers. His 1967 study of Noel was worthy but only episodically brought the man, as distinct from his movement, to life. He continued to be active in the Labour Party but in the early 1970s he came into contact with the International Socialists, the predecessors of the Socialist Workers’ Party. His memories of the early days of British Trotskyism were published in their journal and later as The Balham Group (1974). Together with Harry Wicks, he spoke at International Socialist meetings. He sympathised with their aspirations, but unlike Harry he was never tempted to return to Trotskyist politics. His Christian socialism endured. From 1974 until the mid 1980s he was active in the Jubilee Group, formed by the socialist priest Kenneth Leech to sustain the study and renewal of the radical Christian tradition and keep something of Thaxted alive. He was associated with the Dictionary of Labour Biography, working on entries on Christian socialists.
Graves died after a stroke on 17 May 1988, leaving £100,500. Gresham Kirkby preached at his cremation, which was attended by Christian socialists and Trotskyists, as well as family members and friends. As a young man he was serious and single-minded, possessed of bursts of infectious enthusiasm, very much an individual, never the best team worker but a loyal friend who could quarrel without enmity. He could be impatient and had a stubborn streak. He mellowed into a gentle, sometimes gruff, always colourful character, a great storyteller who was still interested in worlds beyond politics. His life was a troubled attempt to reconcile the crucifix and the red flag. His belief in the revolutionary tradition and contemporary mission of English workers, whom he knew at first hand, was primary. His identification with Thaxted flowed from and affirmed that credo, entwining the desire for God’s kingdom on Earth with the longing for a lost but remembered organic community, a socialist Merrie England. In official Communism and Trotskyism he sought instruments to realise this utopian ambition. Disillusioned with the means, he continued to believe passionately in the end, and like other thwarted revolutionaries he sought solace in the Labour Party, another dreamer fallen among realists. If he was no more successful than the long line he venerated, from John Ball through Julian Harney to Conrad Noel, his consolation was that he would be remembered as a worthy member of the distinguished fellowship of English revolutionaries.

Writings:
(1) Books: But We Shall Rise Again: A Narrative History of Chartism (1938); The Mystery of Victor Grayson (1946); as P.R. Groves, Jesse James (1946); Rebels’ Oak: The Norfolk Rebellion of 1549 (1947); Sharpen the Sickle: The History of the Farmworkers’ Union (1949); with Philip Lindsay, The Peasants’ Revolt of 1381 (1950); Conrad Noel and the Thaxted Movement (1967); The Balham Group: How British Trotskyism Began (1974); The Strange Case of Victor Grayson (1975).
(2) Pamphlets: Four Years of Labour Opposition: A Communist Examination of the Labour Party’s Record in the House of Commons from 1925 to 1929 (1929); East End Crisis! Socialism, the Jews and Fascism (n.d., 1935); Trades Councils in the Fight for Socialism (n.d., 1936); Arms and the Unions (1936); It Is An Imperialist War: A Reply to Laski’s Defence of the War (1940); Chelsea: The Story of Chelsea Football Club (1947); West Ham United (1947); The Catholic Crusade, 1918–1936 (1970); Seed Time and Harvest: A National Centenary (of the Agricultural Workers’ Union) (1972); The General Strike in Battersea (n.d., 1985); To The Edge of Triumph: Charles Marson, Priest and Socialist (1985).
(3) Articles: Letter, Sunday Worker, 25 April 1926; The Class Struggle and Keir Hardie, Communist, September 1928; Chartism and The Present day, Labour Monthly, January 1929; The Class Leadership of Chartism, Labour Monthly, April 1929; Mondism and Our Industrial Policy, Communist Review, July 1929; Our Party and the New Period, Communist Review, November 1929; The Brighton Labour Party Conference, Labour Monthly, November 1929; A Year of Struggles in Britain, Daily Worker, 23 January 1930; Luddism: A Necessary Step in the History of our Movement, Daily Worker, 7 February 1930; A Dyspeptic Interpretation of Karl Marx, Labour Monthly, February 1930; Marx and the Labour Parliament of 1854, Labour Monthly, March 1930; Folded Arms, Labour Monthly, May 1930; as Plowman, Workers’ Notebook, Daily Worker, March–May 1930; The Communist Manifesto, Labour Monthly, June 1930; Wilkes and Liberty, Labour Monthly, September 1930; Their Charter and Ours, Worker (Minority Movement), 19 September 1930; Fighting For The Leadership, Worker, 2 October 1930; Pain and Growth, Worker, 23 October 1930; Riot and Revolt Ninety Years Ago, Worker, 31 October 1930; Women in 1840 and Today, Worker, 7 November 1930; The Dotage of the Hammonds, Labour Monthly, November 1930; The Up-to-Date Fabian, Labour Monthly, April 1931; A Typical British Trade Union, Labour Monthly, August 1931; as Anglicus, British Crisis Sharpens, Militant (USA), 10 October 1931; Growing Revolt Against National Government, Militant, 24 October 1931; Conservatives Press Attack on Labour, Militant, 21 November 1931; National Government in Sharp Attack on Workers’ Standards, Militant, 26 December 1931; Vienna and the London Elections, Red Flag, March 1934; Threat to Trotsky, Red Flag, August 1934; The Rise and Decline of R.P. Dutt, Red Flag, August 1934; The Communist League and its Future, Red Flag, October 1934; Spain and the British Left, Red Flag, November 1934; After the French Socialist Congress, Socialist Leaguer, July 1935; Trade Union Democracy Threatened, Socialist, January 1936; Maintain and Strengthen Local Unity, Socialist, March 1936; The Labour Party and the Young Workers, Socialist, June 1936; Prelude to War 1: Germany’s War Machine, Socialist, July 1936; Prelude to War 2: Menace to Unions, Socialist, October 1936; Reg Groves Replies: the Unity Agreement and the Moscow Trials, Red Flag, February 1937; A Disclaimer, Socialist Broadsheet, February 1937; How We Fought the Liberal-Communist Alliance, Forward, 28 May 1938; film column in New Leader,, 1939–40; The Course of the War, Call of the Socialist Anti-War Front, 1 November 1939; Rally Growing Militant Forces, Call, December 1939; Peg Prices, Raise Wages, Abolish Profits, Call, January 1940; Socialists and The War, Home Front, June 1940; Time to kill column in New Leader 1943–45; Need Labour MPs Know Their History?, New Leader, 19 August 1943; Mission to Moscow is Miles from the Truth, New Leader, 4 September 1943; Old Words for New Times, New Leader, 16, 30 October, 13, 27 November 1943; The 28 Pioneers, New Leader, 8 July 1944; Visions of England, Socialist Leader, 15 October 1949; A Backward Glance in Working Class History, Socialist Leader, 29 October 1949; The Problem of Revolution: The Biggest Single Question of our Time, Socialist Leader, 3 December 1949; The Madness of John Clare, Socialist Leader, 24 December 1949; He Lifted His Head, Socialist Leader, 28 January 1950; The Story of Eugene Debs, Socialist Leader, 4 February 1950; The God That Failed, Socialist Leader, 25 March 1950; Politics and the People’s Culture, Socialist Leader, 24 June 1950; Down Lambeth Way, Socialist Leader, 18 August 1951; He Personified the Up and Battling East Ender, Socialist Leader, 24 November 1951; Songs and Singers of the Nineteenth Century, Socialist Leader, 29 December 1951; Jazz, The Theatre and The People, Socialist Leader, 4 October 1952; The Cat and the Cannibals, Socialist Leader, 6 December 1952; 3 Dimension, Socialist Leader, 21 March 1953; The Christians, The Cricketers and The Cockneys, Socialist Leader, 21 March 1953; Noel, Conrad, le Despenser Roden 1869–1942, in J. Bellamy and J. Saville (eds.), Dictionary of Labour Biography, vol. II (1974); The Socialist League, Revolutionary History, 1,1, (Spring 1988). Also articles in Agricultural Worker, Balham and Tooting Gazette, Christian Socialism, Cine Technician, International Socialism, Journeyman Baker, Leeds Weekly Citizen, Socialist Outlook, Socialist Review, Tribune, Woodcraft Folk.

Sources:
(1) MSS: Graves Papers, Sara-Maitland Papers, Wicks Papers, MRC, University of Warwick; Haston Papers, Noel Papers, University of Hull; Reg Groves, A Documentary History of the Socialist League, mimeo, and other unpublished writings on the Socialist League by Groves are in possession of A. Richardson; Reg Groves, interview with A. Richardson, 2 April 1978; Steve Dowdall and Daisy Groves, interview with A. Richardson, n.d., 1982.
(2) Books and articles: A.F. Brockway, Inside The Left (1941); St John Groser, Politics and Persons (1949); W.R. Jones, Diary of a Misfit Priest (1960); L.J. Macfarlane, The British Communist Party: its origin and development until 1929 (1966); M.B. Reckitt, For Christ And The People (1968); K. Brill (ed.), John Groser: East London Priest (1971); L. Trotsky, Murphy’s Expulsion, After the British Expulsions, After the British Municipal Elections, in Writings Of Leon Trotsky: Supplement, 1929–33 (New York, 1979); L. Trotsky, Summary of the Discussion, in Writings ... 1934–35 (New York, 1971); L. Trotsky, Greetings to the Red Flag, in Writings 1932–33 (New York, 1972); L. Trotsky, Whither the Independent Labour Party, How to Influence the ILP, Principled Considerations on Entry, The Lever of a Small Group, in Writings ... 1933–34 (New York, 1972); Questions of a British Group, Some Advice to a British Group, A Good Omen for Joint Work in Britain, For A Common Goal in Britain, Interview on British Problems, in Writings ... 1935–36 (New York, 1977); L. Trotsky, The IS Reply to the British Majority, Differences with the British Minority, Obstacles in Britain, in Writings ... Supplement, 1934–40 (New York, 1979); H. Dewar, Communist Politics in Britain: the CPGB from its origins to the Second World War (1976); D. Howell, British Social Democracy: a study in development and decay (1976); B. Pimlott, Labour and the Left in the 1930s (Cambridge, 1977); A. Richardson, The Early Years of the British Left Opposition (1979); R. Groves, Sixty Years of Struggle, Socialist Review (March 1983); S. Bornstein and A. Richardson, Against the Stream: a history of the Trotskyist movement in Britain, 1924–38 (1986); M. Upham, The Aylesbury By-Election of 1938, Revolutionary History, 1, 3 (Autumn 1988); H. Wicks, Keeping My Head: the memoirs of a British Bolshevik (1992); K. Leech (ed.), Conrad Noel and the Catholic Crusade: a critical evaluation (1993); J. Callaghan, Rajani Palme Dutt: a study in British Stalinism (1993); B. Hunter, Lifelong Apprenticeship: the life and times of a revolutionary (1997); A. Wilkinson, Christian Socialism from Scott Holland to Tony Blair (1998); J. Archer, Britain: entrism and the Labour Party, 1931–1937, Revolutionary History, 8, 1 (2001); M. Tyldesley, Jack Bucknall (1888–1945): a particular kind of Socialist’, Labour History Review, 67, 2 (2001).
(3) Thesis: J. Archer, Trotskyism In Britain, 1931–37 (Council For National Academic Awards, PhD, 1980); M. Upham, The History of British Trotskyism to 1949 (Hull University, PhD, 1980).
(4) Obituary: Bulletin of the Society for the Study of Labour History, 54, 1 (spring 1989).
(5) Other: Information and papers from J. Bennett, K. Leech and A. Richardson.
JOHN MCILROY

There are also entries in the Dictionary of Labour History for St John Beverley GROSER; Jock HASTON; Gerry HEALY; Conrad NOEL; Arthur READE; Henry SARA.
 



LONDON, ENGLAND – No doubt you have already heard of the expulsion of J.T. Murphy from the Communist Party of Great Britain. Since the struggle between Murphy and the political bureau of the party began over the question of credits to the Soviet Union, details of the discussion which led to J.T. Murphy’s resignation and subsequent expulsion may be of interest to American comrades.
It must be remembered that Murphy is an old member of the party and has been for years on the central committee. He was for two years the British party’s Comintern representative, one of the ablest men – maintaining all due proportions – produced by the British party, an effective speaker and writer and a capable politician. Murphy was, moreover, foremost in the fight against “Trotskyism”. He wrote the preface to the English edition of the Errors of Trotskyism and at the party’s convention of 1927 moved the resolution endorsing Trotsky’s expulsion from the party. It will be seen that J.T. Murphy has an excellent record in the service of Stalin.
In the April number of the Communist Review, Murphy advanced the slogan of “Credits to the Soviet Union”. He prefaced this with a vicious attack on the Left Opposition and, having cleared himself of any suspicion in this direction proceeded to argue that the slogan of “Credits” would be an effective weapon to aid the Soviet Union. The article appeared. Nothing was said. The May issue of the Communist Review contained no suggestion that there was any disagreement save that Murphy was no longer editor.
Then, on May 11, there appeared a statement in the Daily Worker that Murphy was expelled for the propagation of “anti-working class views and the desertion of the working class fight against war, starvation and repression at a decisively critical stage in the class struggle”. Murphy’s arguments were that the more credits we could obtain, the more trade there would be between Britain and Russia, the less inclined the capitalists would be to declare war on the Soviet Union. The political bureau correctly drew attention to certain statements in the article which would weaken the agitation against the war menace. But on the central point of the quarrel the political bureau was silent. They avoided any definite statements on whether or no the slogan of “Credits” was correct. All they did was to point to Manchuria and scream about war, to say that such a slogan was not needed at this stage and to condemn Murphy for “moving nearer to the position of the counter-revolutionary Trotskyists”.
Murphy has since published articles in the socialist press, admitting that he did advance arguments which tended to cover up the danger of war. His articles fail to explain why the discussion conducted between himself and the polburo was kept secret and why, when attacked, he resigned from the party. The discussion commenced, according to Murphy, in March if not earlier. The article in which he openly advocated credits appeared in April. All those C.C. members who are now rushing into print to denounce Murphy saw it and, read it and by their silence accepted it until told by the secretariat – Rust and Pollit – to do otherwise. For over two months the polburo and Murphy concealed their differences from the membership and only Murphy’s resignation forced the matter into the open. Not open struggle, not education of the membership by open political discussion, but diplomatic correspondence and the covering up of differences within the leadership – this is the line of the political bureau and Murphy. Murphy started by accepting the theory of “socialism in one country” and built up his arguments for the “Credits” slogan on it. As a result, his tree bore reformist fruits. The polburo, in replying, avoided the question. The U.S.S.R. needs credits, is at this moment negotiating for them, but the polburo believes with Stalin that diplomatic negotiation can secure more than mass pressure. This, they say, is a matter for the Soviet diplomats – keep the workers out of this.
It is here that our group of the Left Opposition takes up the matter. Making use of comrade Trotsky’s pamphlet – Unemployment and the Five Year Plan – we are urging in the party that such a slogan can be an effective part of our immediate struggle. Those who argue that the U.S.S.R. is independent of world economy are going to find it very difficult to explain why the Soviet Union is negotiating credits and why we cannot advance it as a main slogan in the present stage of the struggle. But then, clear explanations and the honest facing of political issues is not the strong point of the party leadership. Molotov, Stalin have spoken – means must be found to agree.
ANGLICUS
 



In the last few months, the question of the attitude of the party towards the Independent Labor Party has occupied the attention of the party and the C.I. The absence of a clear policy on this matter has led to frequent disasters: the bloc with the ‘Left’ reformists from 1925–1927, the support of the Maxton-Cook movement of 1928, and the confusion on this question as recent as last Autumn, all these blunders are due to the essential weaknesses in the policy of the leadership of the C.I. and the British Party, Today, after they burned their fingers
many times, the party declares on order from the C.I. that between it and the I.L.P. there is “war to the death”. A very noisy resolution signifying absolutely nothing.
The resolution issued by the C.I. and accepted by the party leadership last January declares that during the struggle of last September one could only notice the slightest difference between the party and the I.L.P. This fact, which is due to the “Left” reformist policy pursued by the party in the time prior to and during last year’s crisis, was pointed out by party members among whom this viewpoint was stifled and denounced. Now that one can perceive it, what is the remedy? As for the party leadership, it is “war to the death”. But such an attitude reflects only a weak revolutionary policy, whereas a clear demarcation between the policy of the C.P. and that of the I.L.P. makes such declarations superfluous. The difference is clear in itself. The revolutionary party has a special role to fulfill and between it and “left” reformism there is a great difference, but the leadership of the party is afraid of repeating its past errors and lumps together the leaders of the Labor Party, those of the I.L.P. and at the same time, those workers in the ranks of the I.L.P. who are orientating themselves towards a revolutionary policy, and calls them all “social fascists”.
 
What Is the I.L.P.
The I.L.P. occupies a rather important position in the British working class movement, not because it has a formidable following, but because the impotence of the party has fortified the idea among the workers that it is becoming a real center of opposition against the Labor Party. On the other hand it has a large number of individual adherents, and especially of late, it is attracting those young workers who are entering the movement for the first time.
Until now the I.L.P. has always been a reform party. It has grown with the neo-trade unionism of the unskilled workers and has played a big role in pushing large masses of workers towards an independent workers’ policy. The Social Democratic Federation which characterized itself as Marxian but which Engels repudiated as sectarian, failed in this task; the I.L.P. was infected by the doctrines of radical liberalism and based its socialism on ethical conceptions and not oil Marxism. Consequently it grew as a reformist party organized on this basis and it never has been otherwise During the war it adopted the pacifist point of view, and after the war it continued to support the Labor Party and the leadership of MacDonald who up to several months ago was a member of the I.L.P. Its differences with the Labor Party began in actuality to manifest themselves during the last Labor Government. But these were always differences in words only; behind all the criticism was always to be found the implied support of the Labor Government.
But in the ranks of the I.L.P. the criticism had an effect which tended to carry it beyond the realm of words, and toward the struggle for a break with reformism. The young members criticized the Labor Party leaders more and more and had little inclination to be satisfied with parliamentary maneuvers. This year we have seen the growth of unofficial committees constituted to bring about a repudiation of the reformist doctrines and to work for the adoption of a revolutionary policy by the I.L.P. The I.L.P. leaders immediately transformed this movement into one for a formal break with the Labor party and the principal discussion has been for or against the breaking off of relations with the Labor Party. The leaders of the I.L.P. asked for the right to vote in the communes according to the dictates of their conscience. The Labor party refuses this right and on such a question these revolutionary leaders spend hours of babbling, filling the columns of newspapers and holding record-breaking meetings!
The Party must struggle against such leaders but it should distinguish between them and the members who are trying to point the way toward a revolutionary policy. Nevertheless the party adopts an attitude which signifies in reality “all those outside our ranks are enemies of the working class” an attitude which makes it impossible for the Party to win over the most militant sections within the reformist ranks.
The British Left Opposition group is fighting against this policy; it demands that the party while showing the weaknesses of the policy advanced by the unofficial committees; for example, their inability to give clear expression to the relation between the present struggles of the workers and the struggle for power, their lack of understanding of the role of a revolutionary party in the daily struggles and in the struggle for power, their equivocal statements on the subjects of civil war; should be ready to struggle with them against the I.L.P. leaders and on questions of the daily struggle. Already some progress has been made in this direction and several I.L.P. militants have been won over to the support of the viewpoint of the Left Opposition.
On this question as on others members of the Left Opposition in England will carry on a consistent struggle against the false policy of Stalinism.
ANGLICUS
 



We can now turn to the present position in England: one that arises directly from the conditions outlined, in the preceding article.
The National Government, returned by a majority of voters at the General Election, is now in an extremely strong position: its huge majority in the House of Commons guarantees for the ruling class a constitutional cover for all their activities against the workers. Whatever measures are “necessary”; however strongly the Government may attack the workers’ movement; however great the misery and suffering inflicted upon the workers by the policy of the Government; all can be done in the name of “democracy”, since the Government is constitutionally elected, was given a free hand by the majority of the electors, and, whilst wielding the iron hand of the capitalist dictatorship, can conceal it beneath the silken glove of parliamentary democracy.
What does the immediate future threaten? Not Fascism, as some would appear to believe: that can, and perhaps will, come in England, but only when Parliamentary Government no longer, has the support of the middle-class and sections of the working class. Those obsessed with the possibility of Fascism are apt to overlook the problems of the present, the correct handling of which will, in advance, help to decide the tempo of England’s advance to Fascism.
 
National Government Lowers Workers’ Standards
The policy of the National Government is one of wage-reductions, tariffs bringing higher prices, inflation, and a ruthless reduction in the number of unemployed drawing benefit. Part of this program has been realized already: the wages of Civil Servants, teachers, and of the armed forces have been reduced; the benefit of the unemployed has been cut and in one week alone, out of eighty thousand workers brought before the authorities, seventy thousand have been removed from the unemployed exchange register and from benefit altogether.
The resistance to this attack offered by some sections of the working class has been dealt with in no uncertain manner: twenty-four sailors have been dismissed from the navy for their part in the mutiny of the Atlantic Fleet; all meetings have been stopped outside Labor Exchanges, a ruling enforced by the batoning and imprisonment of numbers of unemployed. The attack on conditions has begun and any assistance by the workers is to be crushed with all the force the employers can command.
Against such an attack resistance can and will be offered by many sections of the workers and in the only way possible – strike action. But such strike action must be general and widespread, for the old sectional methods of struggle can play no effective role in the present period. A sectional struggle, as a means of developing widespread strike action, certainly: but not the old long-drawn-out-certain-to-be-defeated strike of which we have experienced, so much in the last few years.
Such action however demands careful preparation and considerable agitation. A widespread strike can develop, of course, without this preliminary preparation, but only under such circumstances as will ensure its crushing defeat. General strike action, with a leadership prepared to face up to, and prepare for, all the implications of such a struggle – this idea must be spread amongst the workers.
 
Prepare For Struggles
The General Strike of 1926 was lead, and to some extent, organized by the Trade Union leaders. It represented an attempt to meet the new conditions with machinery and ideas which had grown up under old and very different conditions. The Union leaders were more or less forced into the struggle by the employers. Faced with the need for revolutionary mass struggle against the State, the Union leaders could only capitulate at the earliest possible opportunity. From then onwards the reformists could only follow the path of American Trade Unionism and advocate collaboration with the employers as against the alternative of revolutionary struggle. To expect such leaders, men who have betrayed every strike that has taken place during the last five years, to lead and organize a mass struggle against the present attack is foolish, and unwarranted.
The recent struggle of a section of the Postal Workers shows what role the union leaders will play. The Manchester Postmen carried on a “go slow” strike; two of the leaders were suspended: the union executive protested at the suspension but only on the grounds that there was no inquiry carried through first before the men were suspended. They then got the struggle called off on the grounds that it injured the chances of successful negotiations.
New leadership, new forms of organization, revolutionary ideas and revolutionary action are necessary in order to wage effective struggle under present day conditions.
Such a leadership can only come from the Communist Party, always providing that its policy is a correct one. The increase in the membership of the party during the past few weeks shows that, to thousands of workers, it stands out as the revolutionary leadership which alone can wage effective struggle against the employers’ attack and ultimately achieve the conquest of power.



London


ANGLICUS



(To be continued) [1]

Note by ETOL
1. No continuation of this article has been found.
 

roves: The Up-to-date Fabian (April 1931)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
Book Reviews
The Up-to-date Fabian
(April 1931)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), Book Reviews, Labour Monthly, April 1931, pp. 252–253.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

A History of Socialism
by R.S.F. Markham
Black Ltd., 7s. 6d.
R.S.F. MARKHAM, M.P., whose main title to fame so far seems to be that of a signatory to the recent Mosley Memorandum, has: written a history of socialism which seeks to outline for the general reader the origins and growth of Socialism in the chief countries of the world. The publishers inform us that “this book is intended to take the place of Kirkup’s history, for so many years the standard work.” That it is based on Kirkup is pathetically obvious.
The author’s typically Fabian point of view shows clearly throughout the book, colouring and distorting his history; in summing up the phases of socialism’s growth in every country he almost out-Fabians the Fabians:
Everywhere we find the same story — first one or two enthusiasts, then a slow process of organisation; premature attempts to attain parliamentary power, which generally end in defeat; then repressive laws and persecutions; at length, steady growth ... Finally, the Socialist party becomes the largest is the State and even captures supreme power ... Then comes the curious anti-climax — the opposing parties begin to fight socialism either by dictatorship or by socialism itself ... Socialism, by converting Conservative and Liberal Parties ... to its own programme can achieve its end. (p. 299. Our italics)
The class struggle, out of which has grown the working class movement, receives no attention. As a result the book is merely a collection of “facts” grouped around Mr. Markham’s conceptions of socialism and of society; the author dodges from country to country without adequate plan or sense of historical development; in no way offering a deeper and fuller knowledge of the rise of the international working class movement.
We have said that this book is merely a collection of “facts”; but even Mr. Markham’s “facts” are wrong in countless cases. We can only deal with a few of them.
The account of the early English movement is almost entirely devoted to Robert Owen; Chartism is only incidentally mentioned. The sole interest this movement has for Mr. Markham is that “in its organ the doctrine of ‘surplus value,’ afterwards elaborated by Marx as the basis of his system, is broadly and emphatically enunciated.” (p. 10) Of the relations between the Owenite Socialists and the proletarian Chartists; of the differing Socialist and Communist groups within the Chartist movement; of their relations to the working class as a whole, and to later Socialist thought, Mr. Markham says nothing. On page 177 he argues that the distinction between “Socialist” and “Communist” was first made in 1916 and that previously the words were interchangable! An examination of some of the Chartist “organs” of which he writes would have shown him that the distinction was very clear and sharp in the later stages of the Chartist movement.
The last page of this section on the early English Socialist Movement is devoted to the Christian Socialism of Maurice and Kingsley. Even on this subject Markham goes wrong; he links its origins with the effect of the “abortive Chartist demonstration” at Kennington, which, he writes, “excited in Maurice and his friends the deepest sympathy with the sufferings of English working class.” Actually the Christian Socialist movement was under discussion before April 10; only when the Christian Socialists thought Chartism was broken did they venture into the open. As for Maurice’s “sympathy,” what a pity Mr. Markham does not mention that this “Socialist” offered his services as “special constable” on the very occasion of the April 10 demonstration!
Markham describes the Social Democratic Federation as a Marxist revolutionary organisation unable to attract the workers for that reason. He puffs the Fabians, who, he thinks, made progress because they rejected Marx, and “the revolutionary method which was then considered indispensable.”
His story of the rise of the Labour Party gives much space to its “difficulties” just prior to the war when it was supporting the Liberal Government; and shows his disapproval of the Party’s critics. Syndicalism, the Daily Herald, and the great pre-war strike movement receive no attention at all! The Victor Grayson election of 1908 is mentioned, but nothing is said of the Labour Party’s attitude to Grayson and to independent Socialist candidates. Either ignorance or impudence permits him to write:
In these pre-war days it may be truly said that to the electorate the Labour Socialist movement presented a fairly solid front.
The failure to understand the class-struggle is revealed most clearly in the treatment of the International Socialist Movement in relation to the World War. The war is described as “spreading confusion in the ranks of labour,” and the comment on the support for war-credits by the German Social Democrats is “The great betrayal had begun.” Markham fails to show that the betrayal had its beginning in the Lib-Lab class-collaboration policy approved of then, and now more than ever, by Mr. Markham and his political associates.
The German Revolution is dealt with in a very unsatisfactory way; and there is undisguised approval of the success of the Social Democrats in defeating the revolution and restoring order for capitalism. Liebknecht receives mention for his stand against the war: his part in the Revolution and his fate at the hands of the Social Democrats are tactfully omitted.
Even Mrs. Markham, whose historical work was so beloved of our grandmothers, never rose to such heights of exquisite idiocy as Mr. Markham achieves in writing of the Paris Commune. He actually writes:
In 1870 the adherents of the Paris Commune or Town Council were called Communists when really they were Municipal Home Rulers. (p. 177)
In dealing with the Commune, Markham mentions Marx’s Civil War in France: the German edition! Can it be possible that Mr. Markham does not know that this great piece of writing was written by Marx in English and is still available in our own tongue?
In the section headed The Post-War International, nine pages are devoted to the Labour and Socialist International and only three to the Communist International: of these three, nearly a page is given to Dr. Adler’s remarks on the impossibility of unity between the two internationals. In this same section nearly three pages are given to the International Labour Office, described as “one of the finest indirect achievements of Socialist thought throughout the world”!
This is how Mr. Markham writes history; his way of making it is to sign the Mosley Manifesto.
R.G.
 



LONDON LETTER
Full details of the Labor government’s fall and of the formation of the National government will be, by now, in the hands of American militants: probably some points concerning the effect of this change, and of the threatened attack on the workers, upon the English proletariat, will be of interest to readers of the Militant.
One thing stands out most clearly – the immediate response of the working people. Not since the General Strike of 1926 have audiences been so easy to get and so attentive: socialist and Communist meetings are attracting large audiences and unemployed meetings and marches, in some cases spontaneous, are becoming daily occurrences in some districts. The English workers have awakened in a manner that reveals very clearly their fundamental soundness in class outlook. Even more ominous is the fact that the long silence over the General Strike is at last broken and the proletariat is discussing the events of 1926 because their relation to today has been strikingly revealed.
The working class, employed and unemployed, are united against the National government and its economy plans: only over the question of ways and means of meeting the attack are they divided and uncertain.
 
The Labor “Opposition”
Right up to the moment of the cabinet’s resignation, the chief leaders of the present Labor “Opposition” were prepared to accept “nine-tenths” of the bankers’ demands. The General Council of the Trades Union Congress were also prepared to reduce the workers’ wages but by the less open method of tariffs. Now, both groups, wisely silent over their previous attitude, are, together with the Independent Labor Party, grouped together against the whole program of the National government.
The three Labor ministers who have joined the National government – Snowden, MacDonald and Thomas – are undoubtedly the three most able men in the Labor party. Thomas is its most astute tactician; Snowden its financial expert and MacDonald the leading theorist of British gradualism. Their breach with the Labor party has a deeper meaning than merely a “sell-out”. It is not a “sell-out” in the commonly understood sense of the word: these men have seen quite clearly that the only alternative to acceptance of the employers’ demands is revolution – which, of course, is no alternative to reformists.
Because of this, the “Opposition” of Henderson, of Clynes, of Maxton, of the General Council, will be limited to words and to unreal parliamentary “opposition”, since any effective mobilization of the workers will raise revolutionary issues. Indeed can only be effective to the extent that it can challenge the whole basis of capitalist rule in Britain. This difference between a revolutionary leadership and a reformist one is not being emphasized here at all, and the Communist party is in danger of becoming either a mere “tail” of the “Left wing” or an isolated group understood by no one.
 
The Plight of the Party
The party has never before been seen to such disadvantage. Days elapsed before any lead was given to the party members or to the workers: locals meeting difficult and delicate questions in the localities were left to drift. Only under pressure from angry rank and filers did the party leadership eventually issue some kind of lead – a confused and uncertain call which left the locals even more muddled than before.
The slogans of the party – “Not a penny off the dole”; “Not one worker off benefit”; etc. – are in essence the slogans of the “Left” and nowhere is it being shown clearly that the party is a revolutionary party, different fundamentally from the I.L.P.
There has been, to date, no clear explanation in the Daily Worker of the crisis, no clear statement of how the fight is to be waged and with what end. To the numerous questions raised by the locals, there is no reply.
The workers are, justly as far as they are concerned, beginning to assume that the party and the Labor “Opposition” are, save for personal differences, working along the same lines. More especially so since the Labor leaders are endeavoring to divert the workers from immediate action by talking of the next General Election and the party urges that “now is the time to build up the party’s General Election Fund.” By its inability to use the recent events to show the lie of parliamentary democracy, by its cowardice, hesitancy and its stupidity, the party leadership is aiding the labor leaders to hoodwink the working class.
Criticism has already been levelled at these leaders and more will follow. In the events of the next few weeks, the workers may forge new weapons and find new leaders; in any case, they will demand a reckoning from these who have served them falsely.
 
American Bankers and the Crisis
Comments upon the revelations of the party played in the crisis by American bankers, are both amusing and instructive.
The Liberal press, whilst more or less admitting that the bankers demanded certain “guarantees” before agreeing to the loan, are regretting the event – not, however, the fact that the bankers should dictate to Parliament but that the dictation should be made public!
Sections of the Labor movement are playing the imperialist game by denouncing “foreign” bankers’ interference with English government, although the part played by the English bankers was precisely the same. In this way, the anti-American feeling is fostered amongst the workers here.
An American Communist, one of the party on their way to the Soviet Union a few weeks ago, was questioned about the attitude of the American workers to England and whether the American labor movement recognized the dangers of war through the development of Anglo-American rivalry.
A look of astonishment came over his face: war, he declared, between the two countries was undreamed of, and his expression showed that as far as he was concerned, he’d never heard of such a thing! Which shows how well the Molotovs and the Stalins have done their work.
 
Some Stalinist “Leninism”
An address delivered early this year by M. Gurevitch (Director of the Supreme Council of National Economy of the U.S.S.R.) to the “Society for Cultural Relations with Russia”, has just been published in pamphlet form. Some of the statements in it deserve to be classed with Litvinov’s latest utterances.
His concluding words were:
“We have so much work to do in our own country and so little help from abroad, that our only desire is to be left alone. Let us work for a few years. All of you here are not Communists. Nor am I here to convert you. We have only one wish. Here are two systems, one Communist (!) and the other capitalist. Let us have a fair struggle, and let us meet again in a few years time and then judge who has succeeded and who has failed ... after a few years let us compare results.” (Page 15).
M. Gurevitch is certainly a good pupil of Stalin: who would have thought it possible that such pitiful nonsense could be put forward on behalf of workers’ Russia. A remarkable tribute to the effectiveness of the struggle against “Trotskyism” in the Comintern!



 
London, September 2, 1931


ANGLICUS
 



 



LONDON. – The position here grows more and more unsatisfactory: it seems that as the crisis grows more acute so the uncertainty and confusion of the Party leadership increases. Their failure to state a concrete policy right at the beginning has led the Party into making blunder after blunder: even now the lead being issued is half-hearted and unreal.
The strong feeling aroused amongst the working-class shows no sign of diminishing: indeed it grows daily and has been strengthened by the sailors’ splendid stand against the economies to be effected in their pay – a stand which has already brought promises from the government of possible readjustment. But precisely because there exists no capable Communist leadership the movement seems likely to come to nothing.
It was necessary for the Party to enter this struggle perfectly clear about two things; the immediate steps to be taken by the workers, led by the party, to meet the Government’s attack; the organization necessary and the ways of fighting; and the role of a revolutionary party in such a situation. On both these points the party blundered – it still avoids any clear answer to the question being asked by all workers “How are we to fight!” There can only be one reply since in such a situation the workers have only one weapon to commence such a fight with – general strike action. The party leadership asked whether strike action is their policy reply that strike action is a “weapon that needs to be used ‘wisely’.” True enough – but coming from those who for the last four years have sought strikes on every little protest, have held up ridiculous “immediate” demands for the workers to strike for, who have used the strike weapon on very “unwisely” and mainly to impress their Stalinist pay-master, it signifies a cowardly running away from the issues of the day. For the present Party campaign of demonstrations is meaningless and merely a parallel campaign to that of the I.L.P. if it is not run for the purpose of securing general action by the workers. When this is pointed out and when the results of this policy are seen in secret maneuvers with Maxton, Kirkwood and Brockway, the reply of the present leadership is to attack the party comrades of the “Left” and allow numerous right errors to go unchecked. Probably nothing could show the essentially reformist attitude of the Party leadership more strikingly than their attitude towards the sailors. The cuts in pay of the sailors received no attention from the Party and were ignored in their slogans: then the Atlantic Fleet went on strike and the Daily Worker filled its front page with babblings about the Atlantic Fleet but avoided any definite appeal to the sailors: that is they did not urge any form of organization or action upon the sailors but merely applauded their action. The German Communist Paper has been suspended for four weeks for a direct appeal to the English sailors whilst the English Communist Daily avoids this and beyond sending “greetings” plays no part in the sailors’ struggle whatsoever.
The need is for effective organization of all the workers for mass demonstrations and for strike action; for a real revolutionary leadership; for courage and determination. Indecisiveness, hesitation avoidance of direct and clear preparation for widespread strike action, friendly overtures to the “Left” of the I.L.P., talk of the General Election, hiding of the revolutionary implications of the struggle, these things are helping to confuse and weaken the workers and to prevent real resistance to the economy cuts and to the heavy wage-reductions threatened. Whether such a leadership can come forward in the party it is impossible to say, but there are signs that efforts are being made to force the issues into open Party discussion.
* * *
The full extent of the National Government’s economies are now known: it is beginning to be clear that this attack is preliminary to widespread wage reductions, affecting all sections of the working class. Talk of “balancing the budget” has now given place to talk of the need to revive industry and trade. For the financial crisis is only the reflection of the existing industrial crisis: the outflow of gold is due to the increasing excess of imports over exports, so great that the enormous tribute levied by British capitalism from foreign investments cannot cover it, and only a revival of industry and increased exports can save the whole of British imperialism. Because under capitalism present methods must go ton the only “solution” possible for the ruling class is wage-cuts. The Budget has been “balanced” by reducing the wages of state employees and by cutting the benefits of the unemployed: trade can only be revived by heavy wage reductions in the principal industries.
Arthur Hayday, M.P., in his presidential address to the Trades Union Congress said: “To restore our export trade to equilibrium, if the wage-cutting policy were adopted, would involve wage reductions of 20 to 30 per cent”. That the wage-cutting policy will be adopted we need not doubt: it is as certain as the fact that the trade union and labor leaders will not offer any real resistance to the Government’s economies. For the extent of the wage reductions and of the strength of the workers’ resistance to these demands depends very much upon the nature of the opposition to the National Government’s economies.
 
Parliamentary Opposition
The Labor Party’s “opposition” has been revealed as one of words and very weak “words” at that! Indeed, there is widespread suspicion that the whole affair has been “rigged”: this instinctive feeling is very widespread among the workers.
The role of the Labor opposition is clear enough: it is to divert the growing fury and revolt of the workers into “safe” parliamentary channels. More than ever before is the parliamentary deceit clear to all and the uselessness of the Labor Party’s opposition opens the way to the development of a powerful mass movement led by the Communist party.
In .the weakness and cowardice of the Party leadership lies groat danger for the workers of England. Hesitant for days, unwilling to move without sanction from Moscow; locals, all initiative destroyed by the suppression of discussion and by the attacks on critical comrades, did nothing save run meetings, and the party as a whole could return no answer to the question of the workers “what do you suggest we should do?” This remains unchanged: the party has no definite policy and even distorts and alters resolutions passed by militant trade union branches in order to avoid being committed too definitely. Where steps have been taken by locals, results have followed but in the vast majority of districts the workers are being offered denunciations of the T.U.C., of the Labor Party, of the I.L.P., and nothing beyond that. The need of the hour is the uniting of the organized and unorganized workers together with the unemployed in each district for action; mass demonstrations and preparation for widespread strike action. No other course is possible save confusion.
 
The Party
The implications of widespread action against the economies are obvious: any real and effective struggle would intensify the crisis and line up openly the two classes for warfare with the state forces at the disposal of the employees. A revolutionary party should face the implications, prepare the workers to face them and lead into struggle a conscious working-class; to avoid clear explanation and preparation is treachery. The party is avoiding it and is thus almost indistinguishable from the Independent Labor Party. Time is all important but the signs are that the leadership of the English party will fail to utilize this great chance and that their failure will be paid for heavily by the English workers. It is the task of Left Oppositionists in England to rouse the party membership against the present policy and methods of the party leaders; to force discussion and full consideration of the position immediately and to win to the party workers who will fight inside it for a return to the Communism of Lenin and Trotsky.



 
London, September 15, 1931


ANGLICUS
 



 



LONDON. – This week has seen the struggle against the National government’s economies reach its highest point since the fight began. Not a day has passed without demonstrations of unemployed workers; demonstrations which by their size and militancy testified to the deep feeling and anger of the unemployed at the threatened reactions in their benefits.
Last Sunday over twenty-thousand workers assembled in Hyde Park and at the conclusion of the meeting, marched off to Wormwood Scrubs Prison, where several militants were imprisoned. On Tuesday evening, thousands gathered again in the Park: a deputation proceeded to the House of Commons with a petition against the cuts and in support of them the workers surged out of the Park, through the West End and gathered around Parliament. The police attempted to disperse them, there were baton charges, several scuffles between groups of workers and mounted policemen, and twelve arrests. When the deputation returned, the crowd formed up again and in spite of the police, marched away to the Park. In the Park, thoroughly aroused by the brutal methods of the police, they tore down railings and distributed the staves, carrying these in readiness on the homeward march.
In Manchester, Rochdale, Salford, Birmingham and a score of equally important industrial centers, great demonstrations took place whilst the campaign in Glasgow culminated on Thursday with a demonstration of 50,000 workers; police interference with the march caused trouble and a miniature battle took place, the workers using railings, bottles and sticks against the police: the fight lasted well into the night. This by no means exhausts the week’s story of demonstrations, baton charges and “skirmishes” between police and unemployed. But it is sufficient to show the widespread character, as well as the militancy of feeling, of the movement against the economy cuts.
I have briefly recounted certain happenings of the last few days because they are of importance for the International Opposition. The party press here, as elsewhere, indulges in continual exaggeration and distortion of happenings and there is a danger that comrades aware of this will tend to minimize the strength of the mass movement against the economy cuts. It cannot be made too clear that there is a real, widespread and militant revival of the working class movement here and that, in spite of the stupidities of our party leaders, it finds its reflection in increased support for our party. But the effectiveness and durability of this “revival” must be greatly affected by the policy pursued by the party during the next few weeks.
 
A Turn-About
Today’s Daily Worker issues a new call to the workers: partly due to the fact that in less than a week the cuts begin and partly because even a Stalinist official cannot altogether avoid seeing the obvious. Having refused from the beginning to work for united workers’ councils, bringing into the movement the workers in industry as well as the unemployed, the party leadership suddenly realizes that the campaign has been largely an unemployed campaign and that, save in a few districts, there are no broad united front bodies influential enough to mobilize effective resistance. Had they, right from the start, set about getting all the workers, employed and unemployed, organized in each locality and linked up nationally in councils of action, they might now have been at the head of a powerful mass movement, with strength inside and outside of the trade unions and organized for action. Instead, at the eleventh hour, they are compelled to issue a last minute call, without having in any way prepared the road for such a call, for strike action. And even now they blunder. This is how it is done:
“How to stop the cuts? What can be done in the next few days to organize the wonderful fighting spirit evidenced on all sides? ... The great need during the coming days is more and more activity, more factory gate meetings, demonstrations, mass marches, resolutions in the trade union branches and local Labour Parties, the building up of united front organizations – committees of action, Charter committees, unemployed committees, etc.” (October 3, 1931)
What a conception of organization for serious struggle! Here “Charter Committees”, “unemployed committees” and “councils of action” mean the same thing: the “etc.” is especially revealing. To such stupidity it is impossible to find an adequate reply: certainly, in this way will lie disaster for the movement. Careful explanation of the reasons why united workers’ councils are needed; how they are to be formed and of whom they are to be composed; what attitude is to be taken to the councils already established, or in process of establishment. by the branches of the Independent Labour Party; what form of action is to be worked for and in what way – these elementary things have not been done in this latest pronouncement and as a result it is worthless to the workers and even may help to spread further confusion and uncertainty.
The statement already quoted also says in the usual panic-stricken way that “the lower scales will be paid out – unless the attack is defeated”. There is exactly a week to build united workers’ councils, to orgsnize a strike find to bring the whole working class “on the streets”.
To have done at the beginning of the struggle in a systematic way, what they are now, at this late hour, doing so badly and foolishly, would have advanced the revolutionary movement in England further than all the party’s efforts for the last ten years. This was not done when it should have been done: worse even – those who suggested doing it were attacked as “sectarians” and now, in a frantic effort to develop the fight further, the party leadership screams out for workers’ councils and for strikes – all in a week!
Most interesting perhaps has been the dropping of the “Nine Points” of the Workers’ Charter. After a year’s campaign for these “Nine Points”, they are quietly pushed aside and to save the faces of the sponsors of this Workers’ Charter, the present slogans of the party against the cuts are now put forward as the “Charter”.
 
Establish an English Opposition!
Clearly, the time is ripe for the consolidation of all the critical elements under the banner of the International Left Opposition. So far nothing has been done in this direction: isolated comrades have been crushed easily by the leadership: the party press has not only refused to publish criticism but it has even suppressed reports of very large and important demonstrations when those demonstrations have been carried through by comrades in disagreement with the party policy. At present, the control by the Stalinists of the press, and the lack of an organized Opposition, together with the low theoretical level of the English party membership, makes the position of the present leadership very strong.
The need is for an English Opposition platform around which the best elements in the English party can rally.



London, October 3, 1931
 


 
ANGLICUS





LONDON. – In previous letters some of the weaknesses of the party’s campaign around the National government’s economy attack have been pointed out. Events have more than justified this criticism and more than ever is it necessary to rouse the party membership against the policy pursued by the party leadership.
At the commencement of the campaign it was pointed out in these columns that failure on the part of the party to give a definite lead for the formation of councils of action and to urge preparation for strike action would prevent the widest possible mobilization of all workers under militant leadership. In addition, it was shown that the line carried out by the party was a reformist line, not a revolutionary one and that such a policy could only result in a strengthening of the I.L.P. “Lefts” at the expense of the party.
It is now possible to see that the virtual restriction of the campaign to the unemployed has found our party after seven weeks’ agitation with no real gains to register as far as the trade unions and the factories are concerned. Whilst in the great demonstrations of unemployed, the party, as a party, has scarcely appeared at all. All the great demonstrations in London and in the provinces, have been organized by the National Unemployed Workers’ Movement: all the speakers at these demonstrations have been unemployed leaders or local unemployed organizers. There can be, of course, no objection to the organizing of the unemployed in the N.U.W.M., but the party should work to secure a workers’ united front movement to bring together employed and unemployed under the leadership of the Communist party. The need for the party, its role [1] in the workers’ struggle should be explained and demonstrated day in and day out, especially in this time when the workers are more politically active than for some years past. In the meantime, precisely because the party is not pursuing a correct policy, the influence of the “Lefts” increases: in Glasgow, for example, only a week ago, Maxton and other I.L.P. leaders were greeted with enthusiasm by a demonstration of 100,000 workers.
 
The Party and the Election
During the General Election, of course, we shall hear and see more of the party. This is a hard thing to say, but it is true, and one can even see that, under certain circumstances, a big party vote in the election will be a step backward for the movement.
How should the party approach the election? Clearly it should enter the election primarily to strengthen and develop the mass movement and not merely to get seats in Parliament. The worst thing that could happen would be that the naturally strong tendency amongst the workers is to rely upon the vote rather than upon their own organized strength, should be encouraged by our participation in the election. To enter the election to help to extend the mass agitation against the economy cuts and to prepare for strike action is one thing; to enter it to gain seats in Parliament is another. Let Communists go to the poll wherever possible by all means, but see that they utilize the campaign principally to gain support in the unions, in the factories, and at the unemployment exchanges, for the extra-Parliamentary struggle against the employers’ attack. Where it is not possible to raise the necessary money (150 pounds deposit is needed before a candidate can go to the poll which is lost unless a certain percentage of the total vote is registered for the candidate concerned) then let candidates be put up and lead mass marches of workers to the polling stations to vote Communist, although such votes will of course be disallowed. But everywhere the party should carry to the workers the message: build your movement in the factories and outside the factories for in this way only can you achieve anything real.
 
Fighting – for Votes!
Unfortunately, the party is not entering the fight in this way. The party seeks seats in parliament: it is therefore to concentrate mainly upon certain constituencies where they believe they have a chance of getting in. Although this plan has been partly defeated by the insistence of the locals upon running at least “demonstrative” candidates, yet in the main it still holds good. It can only mean that in many areas, the workers will get no real and effective lead from the party, that the party comrades in certain areas will work, not amongst the workers in their own areas but in nearby places where, by concentration, the party hopes to secure a seat in Parliament.
This is opportunism of the worst kind and it means, so far as the party leaders are concerned, that they are more concerned about results to report to their Stalinist masters than with the effect of their campaign upon the mass of the workers.
Against such a policy, the Oppositionist in England should fight not only by raising the question inside the party but also by refusing to consent to the desertion of the workers in their own areas for the purpose of getting a Communist in somewhere else.
 
Division and Doubt
The serious nature of the crisis is revealed in the election, for at this election no less than eight different groups will fight for seats.
The Liberals are now divided into three groups: one led by Sir John Simon who is pro-National government and pro-tariff: another group led by Sir Herbert Samuel who is a member of the National government but anti-tariff; and a third group led by Lloyd George who is now out openly against the National government and getting nearer to the Labour party. The Labour party, save for one or two constituencies where the I.L.P. are running their own “rebel” candidate, without the sanction of the Labour party, will fight as one party but with their late leaders fighting against them and with several “National-Labour” candidates in various constituencies. Then, of course, there are “independents” of all shades, a few “Prohibitionists” and so on to make confusion worse confounded. To forecast the result of this election is obviously impossible but the Communist party, of whose candidates about forty may go to the poll, will do well in spite of its stupidities and the Labour party will probably get a very large working class vote. The result will be known on October 28.
 
The Case of the Meerut Prisoners
The campaign for the release of the Meerut prisoners, three of them are comrades, started well over two years ago. Since then, it has, save for occasional spurts, almost disappeared and real effective agitation has long abandoned. Occasionally a letter from one of the English prisoners would be received and published in the Daily Worker. Will the Daily Worker publish the latest letter received from Meerut jail?
In this letter, the English party leaders are bitterly reproached not only for the failure to conduct an effective campaign but also for their failure to fulfill their obligations to the English prisoners. The latter states that money due to them has not been sent as it should have been sent, which, considering the position of the prisoners, who have been nearly three years in Meerut Jail, is scandalous. The proletarian members of the League against Imperialism Executive raised an indignant protest, much to the embarrassment of the party functionaries present.
An attempt is being made to hush the matter up, but it should be made known and remedied.



October 12, 1931
 


 
ANGLICUS





Note by ETOL
1. In the printed version of this article this word is “vote”.
 



Two days ago the General Election, described by the liberal Manchester Guardian as the “shortest, strangest and most fraudulent of our time”, ended. Out of the confusion and the turmoil of the last few weeks has come the strongest reactionary Government this country has had since the war.
Most Militant readers will be familiar with the results of the Election before this letter appears in print. Some comment is however justified and necessary, for the effects of the Election are likely to be far-reaching. The clearer we are as to why the National Government was elected in this way, the nearer we shall be to establishing a correct policy for the English revolutionary movement.
First let it be said that the recent Election was the most vicious of modern times. The Conservatives set out to “smash Socialism” and its supposed advocates, the Labour Party (rather puzzling this to our comrades who say that Labour is the same as the Conservatives and who call the Labour Party “Social-Fascist”!); to establish protection, to lower the workers’ wages and to drive thousands off of unemployment benefit. Their petty-bourgeois servants, the Labour Party, were too weak, too vacillating to carry the program through effectively: so, as in 1924 when the first Labour Government was swept aside to give place to the Baldwin Government, the Labour Party had to go in order to make room for more ruthless Government.
 
The Conservative Attack On Labour
To this end a sweeping attack was carried through upon the Labour Party, an attack waged by newspapers, the wireless, the platform and the cinema. The reply of the Labour Party was timid, cowardly and confused. More and more they were driven into a position where their only effective reply could be a class reply, a Socialist reply. But how could they reply in this way? How could they who decry class war rally the working class against their masters? How could men who had previously agreed to “economies” protest effectively against “economies”? With a shameful record as a Government, with the whole basis for their reformist policy swept away, with the knowledge, behind their semi-apologetic protests, that if returned they could do nothing, how could they rally the workers against the employers?
Against the fierce attack of the ruling class, the Labour Party could pit only weak words and pledges that rang false. By their timidity, by the confusion they spread, by the policy they had pursued when the “economy cuts” were made, Labour helped to weaken and discourage the working class and to expose the whole movement to the attack which, now begun, will be carried ruthlessly through to the bitter end.
Seldom has the mailed fist of capitalist rule been so clearly visible through the velvet glove of democracy. “Dare to demonstrate”, said the National Ministers, “and we will have you batoned down.” “Dare to return a Labour Government,” said the financiers, “and we will pull down the pound sterling.” “Dare to vote Labour”, said the employer, “and I shall have to close down my factory.” A lesson, this election, in the realities of capitalist democracy, a lesson soon to be expounded more clearly by the Employers National Government.
In such circumstances it is not to be wondered at that the Conservatives were able to pull over the petit-bourgeoisie almost en bloc and even to Influence the waverers in the ranks of the workers. Decisiveness, power, confidence and a bold working class program could have won Labour tremendous support; but these things cannot, in a crisis, come from the representatives of the petit-bourgeoisie ; they can only come from the workers’ revolutionary Party. So the strength of the Conservative’s campaign enabled them to march the middle-classes, with drums beating and flags flying, to the Poll. The six and a half-million votes cast for Labour were working class votes, but they were votes cast without hope and with the minimum enthusiasm.
The weakness of Labour, together with the peculiarities of the electoral system, account for the weakness of the Labour Party in the new House of Commons. Here are the principle figures.



 


  


Votes


  


Seats




For the Government (Tories, National-
liberals & National-labour


14,297,597


550




The Labour Opposition


  6,718,054


  56




Communist Party


        72,824


Nil



It would naturally seem to follow that the Communist Party would rally considerable support around its candidates.
In a previous letter, the weakness of the Party’s line in the Election has been dealt with: the results certainly show that there was much wrong. For the Election weakened, as we predicted, the mass movement against the cuts and also brought very few votes to the Party candidates.
The Results for the Communists Of the total Communist poll of 72,024 votes, 43,892 were cast in four constituencies out of twenty-six. In the 1929 election the party polled 50,000 votes with twenty-five candidates contesting: in some constituencies this election saw an increase; in some, notably Greenock, Battersea and Ogmore there was a decrease. Insofar as votes indicate the amount of support existing for the Party, the results show how very weak the Party is in England and how effectively its recent campaign against the “economies” has been.
 
Prospects
It is clear that during this winter the employers will attempt to reduce wages heavily and that the application, by the National Government, of the “means test” to thousands of unemployed will worsen the conditions of large numbers of unemployed and employed workers. A correct policy, a clear fighting call, and a sensible approach to the workers will bring tremendous support to the Party. Without this the Party cannot grow and cannot fulfill its duty to the international working class.
But unfortunately we know that our leaders are incapable of achieving real and lasting results for the Party, and are incapable of playing a decisive role in the big struggles ahead. We have already seen, time after time, that the failure or treachery of Labour does not automatically bring increased support to the Party. Only if the Party membership can force a full unfettered discussion and from that discussion select a Bolshevik leadership; only providing that the power of the Stalinist machine can be broken and new life and vigor brought to the Party, Can we hope to play a decisive part in the struggles of the next few months. To this end the activities of the Opposition comrades in England must be directed.



London, October 29, 1931


ANGLICUS



 






With Part VI, Reg Groves concludes his account of the formation of a Left Opposition within the British Communist Party, and its expulsion in the gathering storm of the Nazi victory in Germany. Previous parts of this account, which carry the story from the 1926 General Strike to 1932, can be found in the last five issues of International Socialism.





In 1932 the ILP organised a national campaign calling for action to stop Japanese aggression. It was the Clapham ILP, therefore, with our agreement, that called an area conference on the subject at the New Morris Hall on 2 July, with Dr C.A. Smith as chief speaker. Seventy delegates were there from 30 local organisations; at the end of the conference, the organisations represented agreed to elect two delegates apiece to serve regularly on the anti-war committee. [71]
Thus, greatly enlarged in numbers and influence, our small joint committee became the South-West London Anti-War Committee, and was to provide us with a useful base for our work in the area for some time ahead. One of our first moves on the enlarged committee was to propose a series of open-air meetings on the critical German situation – meetings expressing solidarity with the German workers in what we still hoped would be a united stand by Social-democrats and Communists against the advancing Nazis.
For Hitler’s National Socialist Workers’ Party had advanced in Germany in apparent concert with the Japanese conquest of Manchuria; and by July 1932 the pace of that advance was accelerating alarmingly. From a vote of 810,000 in 1928, the Nazis had climbed to a vote of 6,409,600 in 1930, when the Social-democrats polled 8,577,700 votes, and the Communists 4,592,000. In the second stage of the March 1932 presidential election, Adolf Hitler polled 13,418,500 votes against the Social-democrat-supported Hindenburg’s 19,360,000, and the Communist Thaelmann’s 3,706,800. In June, street battles began, with the Nazis, protected by the police, invading working-class suburbs. A defensive pact between Social-democrats and Communists could yet influence that result, and rouse the German workers to battle against the fascists. [72]
Our public meetings were held on Sunday 17 July and on the following weekend, at Brockwell Park, Battersea Park, Clapham Common, and Tooting. The speakers were: Bert Joy, ASW, Pickering, TGWU, W. Jordan, Labour Party, Jimmy Lane, Syd Kemp and W. Simmons, ILP, and S. Saclatvala, Stewart Purkis and Reg Groves of the Communist Party [73]: At these meetings, reported the Daily Worker,
‘... a resolution was passed expressing solidarity with the German workers in their fight against fascism, and pointing out that a victory in Germany would intensify the war situation ...
‘R. Groves was the speaker at a meeting on Saturday, 23 July, attended by 300 workers, and Henry Sara spoke on Clapham Common yesterday morning. At both meetings resolutions were passed emphasising that a fascist dictatorship in Germany would seriously affect the position of the working class of the whole world, and declaring the solidarity of the British workers.’ [74]
Our main concern, of course, was the party itself; we still kept alive a diminishing hope that through it, the Comintern or the German CP might be persuaded to make an eleventh-hour offer of an organisational united front with the Social-democrats against the Nazis. We raised the German question at the aggregate meeting of London members in July, and there were bitter exchanges between our people and party leaders on the platform, but nothing was changed. At the elections 11 days later, the Nazis polled 13,745,800 votes – the Social-democrats 7,959,700, the Communists 5,282,600. It was the peak of Nazi advance – and the bulk of Social-democrat and Communist supporters still held firm. A united front for common resistance to fascism could yet prevail, but the shadows were lengthening ominously; and soon would come the night. On 9 August, the Balham Group wrote again to the party secretariat, protesting that nothing had been done by the party about Germany, urging the organising of a national campaign, and ending: ‘We would ask the party secretariat to see that the party fulfils its duty to the world revolution.’ [75]
Our attack on the World Congress Against War had opened with a letter to the secretariat from the Balham Group, saying that the campaign was ‘being conducted around a manifesto drawn up by non-revolutionaries ... this manifesto has received the support of a number of pacifists and social patriots. Many of the signatories ... played a treacherous part during the last war; some are confusing the fight to prevent war at the present time and others actually support the social system which makes the war inevitable ... the present campaign is being substituted for the mobilisation of the workers around the Leninist line against war ...’ Leading party members, the letter went on, had signed the manifesto; and the Daily Worker has given unconditional support to the campaign. The party should expose the unsatisfactory contents of the manifesto and mandate its delegates to the World Congress to fight for the Leninist line. [76] We received no answer to this.
On 13 August, the Daily Worker carried a report under the headline
‘Militant mandate for delegate – attitude towards world congress defined.’
At the meeting of the South-West London Anti-War Committee held last Monday (8 August) Comrade Wild of the AEU was elected as the delegate of the committee for the World Anti-War Congress.
The delegate was instructed to ‘give full support to any resolution, group or section of congress that stands for the following points:

(1) Unmasking of the League of Nations and its pacifist trickery, and the exposure of all capitalist disarmament programmes.
(2) Refusal to support capitalist war budgets.
(3) To explain that in all wars waged by the capitalists the workers should fight, not for the defence of their country but for the defeat and/overthrow of their own ruling class.
(4) Development of an agitation amongst the workers for full credit and trading relations with the USSR.
(5) Anti-war agitation and the building of revolutionary groups in the war industries and armed forces.
(6) Systematic education of the workers in the fact that the USSR is their country, and that the Red Army is their army, ready to do battle on behalf of the workers in any country.
(7) At the same time untiring explanation that the only guarantee of victory for the workers of Russia lies in the development of world revolution.’

Comrade Wild was instructed as above, only one vote being cast against and 28 for. [77]
On 16 August, a long article by J.R. Campbell – headed ‘The Anti-War Congress and its tasks – a South-West London resolution that is not militant but mischievous’ – said, among other things, that South-West London’s resolution needed ‘redrafting on the basis of a genuine fight against the plans of the warmongers and the cutting out of the phrases which conceal Trotskyist meanings.’ [78]
On the same day, Henry Sara, Harry Wicks and myself were summoned by London organiser R.W. Robson to district headquarters. When we arrived we found Willie Gallacher, Harry Pollitt and Kay Beauchamp – a well-connected mediocrity – waiting for us. Where, asked Henry Sara, was Robson? He would not be present, was the answer. Henry rose. ‘Robson invited me here’, he said, ‘and if he is not coming, then I’m not waiting’. And he walked out. It was neatly done, and probably Harry and I should have followed, but we were too surprised to move, and remained to face the inquisitors. Pollitt, startled and annoyed, dismissed Henry’s act as ‘mere liberalism’ and turned to us. Would we cease our opposition to party line and leadership, particularly on the World Congress Against War? We would not. Gallacher blinked at us over his spectacles – did we realise that we were doing harm to the party? Encouraging sinister forces? ‘Some very strange circulars are going round the country’, he said. The individual was nothing, the party everything, he went on. To talk about doing our own thinking was petit-bourgeois, and at the word petit-bourgeois, tiny bubbles of saliva began gathering at the corners of his mouth, and his voice became harsher.
Gallacher was personally a kindly and generous man, but certain political phrases seemed to set him off on an uncontrolled torrent of bitter vituperation. Pollitt probably saw the danger signal, for he now interrupted Gallacher to ask again, were we prepared to accept the policy laid down by the Comintern and the party and the discipline of the party? ‘Open the pre-congress discussion, Harry,’ I said, ‘and let it all be settled at party congress.’ He waved that away, hesitated, then went abruptly to a table on the other side of the room and picked up a duplicated paper. He brought it near enough for us to see what it was, but not near enough for us to read what it contained, or to be contaminated by it. It was The Communist.
‘This is the kind of thing that is being circulated among party members – can’t you see how dangerous it could be. And it is your opposition that encourages this danger – let me ask you again, Reg, and you Harry, will you now help to unite the party by supporting party policy and accepting party discipline?’ We stayed silent, knowing that once we gave such assurances we would be asked to disavow our criticisms, confess them as errors, and denounce any who continued in opposition. It had to be complete capitulation.
Taking our silence, rightly, as rejection of his appeal, Pollitt turned away, with a gesture of dismissal. There was no more to be said. Outside, an impatient Henry Sara was pacing up and down on the pavement. He seemed aggrieved that we had not followed him out.
Two days later, we each received a letter from Robson. To me and Harry Wicks, Robson wrote that in view of ‘your absolute refusal to state that you accept the policy of the Communist Party and will abide by its discipline ... the special meeting of the working bureau unanimously decided that you be expelled from membership of the party.’ [79] But Henry Sara, wiser than both of us, was only ‘suspended’ from membership, having avoided answering that decisive question!
His expulsion, of course, followed hard upon. The Balham Group was ‘liquidated’, but its members were invited to apply individually for re-admission to the party. None capitulated, despite stormy meetings and arguments, and individual appeals. On the Monday following our expulsions the party’s pre-congress discussion was opened.
Robson circularised group members inviting them to ‘a meeting for comradely discussion with local and district party committee representatives ... at 17 Defoe Road, Tooting’, exhorting them, somewhat ambiguously, ‘not to allow any personal relations to stand between their duty to the party and the working class’. [80]
The members went to the meeting, where they were subjected to cajolery and criticism, but all stuck to their opinions. At another meeting of the Tooting local, addressed by Dave Springhall, a lone Hugo Dewar defended the group’s opinions, and was duly expelled. [81] Then individuals were summoned to be interviewed, questioned, argued with, offered retention of their party membership, told all sorts of tales – until the group came together to draw up a letter to the district committee, saying:
‘Every member of the group is anxious to retain membership of the party ... and is willing for discussion between the group and the district to continue. The group, however, is in favour of open discussion before the party members and not ... of the district committee’s method of private discussion with individual members ... (with) no record kept of what took place ... The group is prepared to continue the discussion with the committee as a group and to state its case openly before the party membership either in the press or at aggregate meetings.’ [82]
There was no reply to this – the last thing the leadership wanted was open discussion of the issues, particularly as, a few days after the first expulsions., they had opened the pre-congress discussion; so the group issued a cyclostyled statement – To our comrades in the party from the ‘Liquidated’ Balham Group – about the ‘liquidation’, the individual expulsions, and the issues over which it had come into conflict with the party. This we distributed as widely as our numbers and support permitted. Stewart Purkis had been expelled for ‘disruptionist activities and political unreliability’, and in September, number two of The Communist was published, this time carrying an address, and articles on the expulsions, the World Congress Against War, and extracts from Trotsky’s Letter to a German Worker. [83]
The party congress was held in November, conveniently for us, at the Latchmere Baths, Battersea. We painted slogans on walls facing the entrance to the hall; and on the morning congress opened, Harry Wicks and I stood outside on the pavement, distributing An Appeal to Congress delegates from the Balham Group, which summarised our views on the trade union question, the united front, the German crisis, party democracy, and the World Congress Against War, ending: ‘We seek to return to the party and stand by our comrades in the trials ahead. To this end we ask the congress delegates to raise, inside the congress, the question of our return to the party: to demand access to the documents in which our point of view is set out: to allow one of our members to take part in the congress: and in so doing, help towards building a virile Communist Party, free from the bureaucracy which in the past few years has done so much harm.’
As we stood outside the hall, many party members who knew us scurried past with averted faces; a few showed hostility, and made threatening gestures; others, taken by surprise, accepted our leaflets, only to have them snatched from their hands at the door by William Rust. We saw none refuse his request to hand over the leaflets, even Wally Tapsell.
The congress and our activities were described as we saw them in A letter to Albert Glotzer, in Chicago:
The party congress took place in the middle of November. We presented a statement to the congress on behalf of the expelled Balham Group, and another statement was presented from the British Group of the Left Opposition. Outside the congress we painted such slogans as Not National Socialism but World Revolution, Reinstate the expelled Left, Release Rakovsky and return Trotsky, and several slogans of a similar character. In spite of threatened violence from party officials we succeeded both in distributing our material and in having delegates inside the congress. We judged it unwise for our delegates in the congress to make any stand since we could not afford to lose valuable party contacts. As it happens, this was justified because the congress was the most docile in the history of the party. The Right wing, principally Hannington and Arthur Horner, were in jail and were removed from the central committee, and the Left wing, as you understand, have been expelled from the party; so that all the resolutions and decisions of the congress were carried with very little argument. Resolutions were carried condemning the Spanish (CP) political bureau and approving their expulsion, and also approving the expulsion of Zinoviev, Kamenev and others, without material or discussion of any kind. A new constitution was approved by the congress, but has not yet actually been published, which allows in future for delegates to the congress to be picked by district committees on the basis of their loyalty to the party line, a condition which is quite a new development in the International ... [84]
In the closing speech of the congress, Pollitt said: ‘I ask the congress delegates to go away from this congress full of contempt, hatred and loathing for the miserable gang of counter-revolutionaries who, on the walls outside the congress, have written the slogan “Not National Socialism but World Revolution”.’ If, he went on, there were any in the congress who supported those ‘scoundrels’ but who had ‘not the courage to express that support ... if they dare raise their heads inside our movement ... we will smash and destroy them.’ [85]
Pollitt had acquired already the theology, style and vocabulary of Stalinism. Minor and major functionaries, and the basic cadres of the party had to acquire it too; to accustom themselves to perform the rituals of revolutionary struggle, to use the postures and phrases of the revolution, as cover for an expediency and opportunism which served not the workers of the world but the rulers of Russia.
We met many of our old comrades in the months that followed our expulsion – for these were months of continual agitation, of meetings, marches, demonstrations, of repression and arrests by the increasingly-worried authorities, until even the official movement was shaken into action and full-scale protest. Privately, our old comrades admitted the validity of much that we said, and were apologetic at the abuse being heaped upon us by the party. Publicly, they were silent.
To them the party had become all, greater than the ideas and ideals that had made them rebels and communists, which survived only in set phrases and formal declarations used to gain support for a party and an alien government that were discrediting and destroying those very ideas and ideals. They had, in Ignazio Silone’s phrase, ‘made relative what should be permanent.’ Our fault was that we went on talking like they did for some time after our expulsion; and confined our thinking to those Marxist themes emphasised and restated by a triumphant Leninism and written as dogmas into the life and work of the Comintern. We were not helped in this respect by our having entered the world of international Trotskyism, which was beyond our control and often beyond our understanding. Instead of clearing away political lumber and its jargon, the pronouncements of the international Left Opposition (LO) merely added to it.
That we survived as a group the expulsions, and the many assaults made on us by the party, was because we had support among the unemployed and trade unionists in South-West London. Frequent attempts were made by the party to oust the ‘counter-revolutionary Trotskyists’ from the Anti-War Committee; and we were paid a grudging tribute by London party organiser R.W. Robson when he told his district committee that there was only one representative and active anti-war committee in the whole of London. The principal reason for this was, he was sorry to say, that there were a number of Trotskyists on it.
As the British section, LO, we were invited to send someone to an enlarged meeting of the LO’s International Secretariat, to be held from 4 to 8 February 1933, in Paris. On 30 January, Hitler had been appointed Chancellor of Germany by President Hindenburg, and it was felt that we ought to send someone to the meeting. A reluctant delegate I travelled to Paris, and sat through complex, heavily-jargonised discussions in French and German, with someone whispering occasional explanations in English, on Saturday, and again on Sunday, when every so often the proceedings were interrupted by hoots, howls, shouts, screams, the crash of breaking furniture and the thump of falling bodies from the room overhead where the League of French Pacifists was in conference.
That evening, walking through the streets of Paris with aching head and jaded spirits, I saw newspapers being sold on the streets, the newsvendors carrying placards – ‘250,000 at Hyde Park’. So the movement was on the mend, and even officialdom had been pushed into making an impressive show of strength – indeed, within 12 months the government would be in startled retreat. There was revival, renewal of struggle, but to what end? So that the working people could be sold out by shallow-pated Labour careerists, or duped by Stalinism? There was, too, something unreal in evening retrospect about the LO conference solemnly pronouncing on those controversies of the Comintern, and even earlier ones of Russian Social-democracy. Hitler and the Nazis stood on the threshold of total power. Surely there could be no true renovation of socialist ideas, or renewal of the forces and spirit of rebellion and resistance, in those old, obscure contentions, argued out again in the thick accents of a new degenerate communism?
Back home – and on 27 February, the monthly delegate meeting of the anti-war committee, and yet another attempt by Communists to remove the Trotskyists. They came primed with a suitable resolution; and the final speech in support of it was made by a tall, spare young zealot, Soderland. His shrill tones echo in the memory still, though not, fortunately, most of what he said. His voice rose to a higher pitch of hysteria as he concluded, jabbing a bony, accusing finger at us: They even want a united front’ – and he screamed the last words – ‘with the vile Social-democrats!’
The invaders, who built nothing and destroyed what others built, were repulsed again, their resolution defeated. A small incident, but as was the way of such things, we were elated as we walked home through the chill night air. Well might we have had misgivings had we known how fateful that night was to be:



Some consequence yet hanging in the stars.
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night’s revels ...



For on that night, the German Reichstag was set on fire, a dire combustion that was in due course to burn much, much more than Germany’s parliament. Immediately, though, the German CP was made illegal, the Nazi terror unleashed, thousands of Social-democrats and Communist officials and members arrested. Consumed in the flames, too, was the disastrous policy imposed by Stalin’s men on the German party and the Comintern. The Comintern now called on its sections everywhere to approach the social-democratic parties for a united front. On 8 March, just two weeks after it had ridiculed an ILP suggestion for a united front appeal to TUC and Labour, and nine days after Soderland’s speech, the CPGB did just that! Like sponges, the party members squeezed the old policy out of their pores and sucked in the new one.
Too late, of course. On 5 March, amid burnings, beatings, arrests and suppression of socialist and communist meetings and newspapers, Germany went to the polls. Seventeen million votes – 43 per cent of the total – went to the Nazis, the Social-democrats polling 7,182,000, the Communists 4,845,000. On 23 March, Hitler asked parliament for dictatorial powers and got them. The most powerful socialist and communist parties in Western Europe were destroyed without resistence.
If all this made any impression on the Soderlands, it was not visible in their words and deeds. William Gallacher, denouncing the ‘ignoramuses of Balham’, wrote that, ‘a well-known writer who has had considerable association with the revolutionary movement asked me if there was any possibility of a reconciliation between Trotsky and Stalin. [86]
‘Ask me,’ replied Gallacher, ‘if there is any chance of Trotsky and Hitler coming together, and I’ll think your question worth considering.’
The writer was horrified and showed it. ‘You are not serious,’ he said.
‘I am quite serious’, replied Gallacher. In August 1939, it was Stalin and Hitler who ‘came together’, in the bloodiest diplomatic handshake in history! And thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges ...
 



Expectation was high among delegates assmbled on 30 November, 1929, at Leeds for the CPGB’s eleventh congress. And when they departed three days later, the mood was hopeful among most. Under sustained attack, led by the district committee members of London, Newcastle and Manchester, the new policies appeared to have been adopted fully. Many of the leaders most associated with the ‘old line’ had been removed from positions of importance – only 12 of the old central committee remained, and 23 new ones had been added. [21]
Yet it was a dusty triumph. Noisy and passionate debates took place in the hall, but the real decisions were made behind the scenes. The new leadership was chosen from above, not elected from below. A ‘recommended’ panel was substituted for normally elected members; there were to be no more ‘social-democratic methods of election’; the new CC members were chosen ‘for practical reasons, and their understanding of the present period, their experience in the conduct of class battles, and their capacity for carrying out the political tasks of the party’, making possible ‘the more energetic fulfillment of the obligations that are imposed on our party as a section of the Communist International’ [22]; or, as Wally Tapsell put it more succinctly, a leadership ‘which would strive to carry out the line of the Comintern’. [23]
Personal recollections of the congress have been blurred by rime, and its documents tell little, but re-read, bring only a weariness of spirit, an incredulity that these dry papers, containing only falsehoods and false-seeming, empty of disinterested argument, creative thought and humanity, could have been taken seriously by so many bright and brave souls among the small and mostly dedicated membership. A few vivid impressions remain of the congress itself – a recollection of Wal Hannington and Arthur Horner, the party’s only genuine mass leaders, in the shadows as being of the Right, yet vigorous and defiant in explanation of their views; a perspiring, brow-mopping Bob Lovell, of the almost non-existent British section of the International Class War Prisoners’ Aid, making vituperative attacks on [from?] the Left, as he defended the lurid stunts and provocative clashes with the police by which he secured newspaper headlines and approval and continued support from his Moscow employers.
I remember the resentful abasement of some of the ‘old line’ leaders as they strove to hold their places by abject and dishonourable ‘confession’; Harry Pollitt, now acknowledged leader of the party, was allowed to state his case for postponement of Daily Worker publication to the end of May, but without oratorical embellishments lest he carry the delegates with him. Later, he dutifully ‘confessed’ his error in having advocated such a proposition. Pollitt took Stewart Purkis aside and attempted to coax him into tempering his opposition; Stewart, unruffled and courteous, refused. And, distinct in the memory, yet puzzling, there was a strange little meeting almost conspiratorially arranged, between some London delegates, and the Comintern representative, Walter Ulbricht of Germany. We stood at one end of the room, the impassive, aloof Ulbricht at the other. Presently, we were beckoned before the presence. Ulbricht spoke in German, an interpreter passed his words on to us. We learned with surprise that all the great man wanted was an assurance that London members’ objections to Johnny Campbell remaining in commanding party positions were political objections not personal ones. It was left to Stewart Purkis to reply for us, and he assured the interpreter that we all had the greatest respect and affection for Campbell, but felt that he was too deeply embedded in the old ways and policies to perform adequately where the new policies were concerned. The interpreter, baffled by the amiability shown and the jargon-free vocabulary, juggled the words in the air for a moment before passing them to Ulbricht in more formal terms. The great man nodded at us, and faded from the scene. The interview as over.
We were uneasy about the way things had gone at Leeds, but reluctant to examine the full implications. Chiefly, we shied away from the matter of growing Russian party control over the international movement, and from attempting to estimate what might be happening in Russia itself. We told ourselves that Russia, a backward country, devastated by war, civil war and wars of intervention, hampered by blockade and capitalist hostility, was now engaged in a gigantic programme of industrialisation. Some measure of dictatorship was still required. Faults of omission and commission were due to these circumstances. Adverse reports on conditions in Russia came almost entirely from malignant and blatantly untruthful capitalist-owned newspapers and politicians, the enemies of revolution, socialism and the working peoples. How could we then give credence to criticisms of Russia?
Pushing aside our uncertainties, we threw ourselves into our party activities. In struggle and action differences would be resolved, errors on all our parts corrected, experience and understanding enlarged.
The Daily Worker duly appeared on 1 January, 1930, edited by William Rust, in itself a guarantee that it would be drab and colourless, and inhibited from experiment and adventure by fear of deviation. A series of wholesalers’ boycotts put a considerable burden on the small, overworked membership, who in many places had to meet late-night or early-morning trains, collect and distribute to local newsagents bundles of the paper. A declaration of war on ‘capitalist sport’ by the Comintern compelled the dropping of football, cricket and racing reports and ‘tips’; and as most workers could afford but one daily newspaper, down came the already sadly drooping sales.
When editorial board and party leadership inclined to blame the members for the falling sales, there were exasperated protests. Some came from members of the Battersea local; and these discussions, and talks between Stewart Purkis, Billy Williams and myself, led to a letter of some length being sent by me to the party secretariat on 26 February, discussing the role of a daily paper in the workers’ struggle, and suggesting among other things reporting in depth of major or unusually important industrial conflicts, bringing background, industry and the people involved to life for the workers everywhere. [24] These and other suggestions were ignored or brushed aside. Yet, by June 1930, Rust himself was complaining:
‘The whole party must face the fact that just as the party membership is small and stagnant, so is the circulation of the Daily Worker very low and unsatisfactory. The basic reason for the still unsatisfactory party situation is the mistakes of the leadership, which failed to mobilise the membership for a systematic and daily struggle against opportunism.’
The Daily Worker should be used for a ‘ruthless war against opportunism in practice, against right-wing passivity and left sectarianism ...’ [25] So the Daily Worker was not primarily a paper for working people but an instrument for imposing Mowcow-directed policies on the British party!
In early March I offered to write voluntarily a column called A Worker’s Notebook, over the pseudonym ‘Plowman’ and the offer was accepted. [26] I wrote it every day, helped out only by an occasional paragraph from Stewart Purkis, and took it each morning from South-West London to Tabernacle Street, using a sixpenny all-day tram ticket. The column went its troubled way until 30 May when, because of continual editorial suppression and alteration, I quit. Though most of the political differences that flared up were argued out in correspondence [27], the curious will find in published material some evidence of the differences that arose. [28]
Two paragraphs in the Notebook may be noted as indicative of our critical views at the time. One referred to an article by Bukharin that compared, with superb irony undetected by the party leaders, the disciplines of Jesuit and Communist. In commending the article to Daily Worker readers, the Notebook quoted a passage describing the Jesuit theory of subordination:
‘Every member of the order must submit to his superior, “like a corpse which can be turned in any direction; like a stick which submits to every movement; like a lump of wax which can be made to change its shape and to stretch in any direction”.’ [29]
That we saw in this an allusion to the discipline being imposed on Russian party and Comintern sections, suggests that our eyes were being opened to the real situation of the revolutionary movement.
Nearer home, and of more immediate concern to us, was another item commended in the Notebook – Freda Utley’s review of the two volumes of Lenin’s works, The Iskra Record. Freda, whom we first met and become friendly with when she fought Westminster as a Communist candidate in the 1928 LCC elections, drew attention to Lenin’s attacks on the ‘economists’ – described by him as those that ‘bow down before spontaneity, gaze with awe upon the posteriors of the Russian proletariat, and think it sufficient in the party press merely to reflect the drab day to day struggle, so that the workers read the paper once or twice and then say “awfully dull”.’ Freda went on:
‘Who can deny that “economism” is strong in our ranks? ... But, comrades, it is not enough to repeat the slogans “Down with the social-fascist Labour Government” and “A revolutionary workers’ government”, and feel that in so doing you have fulfilled the task of raising the political consciousness of the workers.’ [30]
Freda Utley’s worldwide researches into the textile industry had led to her concern over party propaganda and activities among the Lancashire cotton workers. Local and industry-wide resistance to reorganisation, speed-up, lower pay and mass unemployment was necessary – but was it not the party’s duty to make plain to the workers that the outdated British capitalist textile industry, facing growing competition from the cheap-labour, highly modernised textile industries of the East, would be driven inexorably to continuous reduction in pay and employment? And that the workers had to choose between going along with the employers in this desperate and ultimately ineffectual course to ‘keep the industry competitive’, or of taking the way of resistance to worsening conditions – socialist revolution, socialist internationalism and social ownership? [31]
To Communists it was axiomatic that in Britain’s older and major industries, capitalism could survive only by the lowering of living standards at home and the exploitation of colonial peoples and resources abroad. Stewart Purkis did for the railways what Freda Utley had done for textiles, and analysed the situation and prospects for the railway workers under capitalism. The railway companies’ decline was a crisis of capitalism, and
‘inside capitalism, all industries will increasingly prove unable to maintain both wages and profits ... That every railwayman may master this basic fact should be the main political concern of the revolutionary who participates in the railway struggle.’ [32]
The party’s political bureau denounced Utley and Purkis for ‘attacking the leadership that has a correct political line and is also paying considerable attention to improving the understanding of the whole party.’ [33] If the critical formulations here were not completely adequate, arising as they did from examinations of particular industries, yet the issue underlying the argument was a vital one, for it concerned the reciprocal relations between the battles of the hour and the revolutionary uprising which was the party’s supposed aim, indeed, the reason for its existence. How far we were as a party from understanding this reciprocity was shown during the dispute in the woollen industry in 1930.
Here were assembled all the essential elements in the revolutionary argument – a declining major industry, already afflicted by falling wages and employment; employers pressing for further wage reductions; a vigorous rejection of the cuts by the workers; and intervention in the dispute by the Labour Government, which took the form of a supposedly impartial inquiry and which inevitably reported in favour of wage reductions. Despite faint-heartedness on the part of officials of some of the unions involved, the workers voted down the recommended cuts, and were locked out.
Sent by the party to the West Riding for a week of outdoor meetings; walking the lamplit, cobbled streets of Dewsbury and Batley, watching the trams climbing the streets between rows and rows of little stone houses, gaunt silent mills and forests of smokeless chimneys; listening to the talk of locked-out men and women, and of the older men whose fathers or grandfathers had been Chartists, or radicals and socialists of the early days, it was impossible not to be reminded again of what the Daily Worker could have been – what might have been done here, in the lockout, given the character and quality of the people, their long traditions of struggle. Riches indeed with which to give life and colour to the presentation of the revolutionary cause.
As it was, the Daily Worker sloganised this struggle as it sloganised all struggles, large or small, making it faceless and drab. To anyone on the spot, the slogans appeared to have nothing whatever to do with the course of events, nor did they seem to have any meaning for those directly engaged in the battle. In the Bradford area the party’s main work, except for a parade of outdoor meetings, was the distribution of relief to locked-out men and women in need. This was organised by Isobel Brown, on behalf of the Moscow-controlled and financed Workers’ International Relief, one of the many party front organisations. A non-representative, nebulous ‘action committee’ met in the building, and there also Ernie Brown, Isobel’s husband, addressed the workers who came to the centre. The political content of his speeches was obscure – his speciality seemed to be ‘cheerin’ t’lads oop’, with a comedy style reminiscent of his native Lancashire. It was obvious that the party had no influence on the course or outcome of the battle, nor was it attracting to its ranks the more thoughtful workers.
Returning to London when the week ended, I reported to Harry Pollitt. He said nothing, asked me for a written report, and handed me a week’s pay, which I refused. Nothing came of the written report; and, after several weeks of unbroken solidarity, the unions decided to negotiate separate settlements and the workers returned to work. At a West Riding by-election held soon afterwards, the Labour vote fell drastically, the Tory was elected, and a Communist candidate polled 700 votes.
So brief a chronicle as this, compressing events as it must, necessarily emphasises disproportionately our opposition to the party’s leadership, as though this occupied all our waking thoughts and actions. It didn’t. Our time was taken almost, exclusively by our party work – the frequent parades and gatherings under a variety of banners; the sale of party papers; union branch, party group, committee and fraction meetings; as well as, for some, a deal of speaking, lecturing and writing. Opposition to aspects of party policies grew out of our party work and experience, and was intended as a contribution to the discussion and formulation of policy. We were not an organised group but close friends who talked things over, and who individually expressed our views openly to our party comrades.
Stewart Purkis, expelled from his union in 1929 for his party activities, but still strongly supported and respected by his fellow workers, edited, with Billy Williams, a lively cyclostyled paper, The Jogger; and, in collaboration with some Idris workers at the Camden Town factory, the Idris Ginger which, with its vigorous presentation of the workers’ grievances and its brief, simple exposition in each number of Marxian economics and Communist policy, came to be regarded as a model of what a factory paper should be. Both Purkis and Williams were active in the St Pancras local, on various LDC sub-committees, and busy among railway militants in the NUR and ASLEF.
Steve and Nell Dowdall, and my wife Daisy and I, were active in the South West London local, busy in various Battersea groups, finally being settled in the Nine Elms rail group, and responsible for the sale at the rail depot of the cyclostyled Nine Elms Signal, though almost all of us lived in Balham, and no; one in the group worked on the railways, much less at Nine Elms.
It was towards the end of 1930 that Harry Wicks first became associated with us, having returned in August to his native Battersea, after three years at the Lenin School in Moscow. As a lad working on the railway, Harry had joined the Daily Herald League, which in 1921 went over almost entirely to the newly-founded Communist Party. Harry went with it, helped to form a Young Communist League in Battersea; and took part in the production and distribution of the Nine Elms Spark and the Victoria Signal up to the time of the General Strike. Elected to the YCL executive in 1926, in the following year he was selected to be sent to the Lenin School. Harry brought us much – he had witnessed episodes in the struggle in the Comintern and the Russian party between the increasingly powerful Stalin group and the Left Opposition, he knew of man international controversies and personalities – and he also knew Battersea, its radical traditions, and its active socialist and Communist Party workers.
Harry Wicks was to join us as we renewed our criticisms of the leadership early in the year 1931.
 



The central committee’s ‘January Resolution’ had been produced because of the Comintern’s continued dissatisfaction with the British Communist Party (CPGB). Not, as some suspected, because the Comintern wanted a revolutionary party and a revolution in Britain, or anywhere else, but because the Comintern, being transformed into a department of the Russian state, a state controlled in the interests of the dominant party caucus by a bureaucracy and a secret police, expected Comintern national sections to serve them, not the interests of the working people.
We, like most communists, had supposed that a successful revolution elsewhere would benefit Russia and its people. So it would, but not necessarily Russia’s rulers, whose power would be imperilled by such a revolution, unless they could control it as they now controlled the destiny of Russian people. The thought was no sooner whispered than brushed away – but it was true, though it was to be a long time before most of us would admit it openly, to ourselves or to others.
We went on uncomfortably wearing clothes that no longer fitted us, thinking of ourselves as more correctly dressed than the Stalinists; more determined defenders of soviet power, more truly communist. Our doubts were, if not dispelled, at least held in limbo by our respect for Trotsky’s brilliant mind, experience and revolutionary integrity; he argued forcefully and with a wealth of Marxist precept and theory that the Russian state owned all land and industry, controlled production, and distribution of wealth, and remained therefore a worker’s state, temporarily off-course because of wrong leadership and wrong policies.
It did not convince us deep down in our troubled and uneasy consciences, but it seemed better to let such profound and complex matters lie undisturbed; and to go on shouting that the Soviet Union must be defended – and that revolutionary uprisings in other countries were the best way to do it. We could not hope to escape calumny, but at least we could do battle on issues of our own choosing and so limit the area of misrepresentation and distortion to manageable proportions.
An early reaction to the January Resolution was a letter sent to the party secretariat drawing attention to criticism of party policy contained in that letter of 26 August, 1931, which was refused publication in the Daily Worker on grounds that it contained ‘incorrect and unhelpful opinions’. As the January Resolution contained similar criticism and admitted the errors in policy, would the secretariat now withdraw its statement? [50] The secretariat would not.
‘We are surprised that instead of seeing the Comintern resolution as a guide for future action, you are attempting to utilise it in order to justify your own sectarian and academic tendencies.’ [51]
We noted the reference to ‘Comintern’ resolution with interest.
These letters were read to the Balham group on 4 March. The group – which had discussed the January Resolution on three occasions, beginning on 15 January – resolved to put its criticism in resolution form: and at the meeting of 18 March
‘a discussion took place on the CC (January) Resolution ... a resolution drafted by Comrade Groves was agreed unanimously by the group to be sent to the secretariat. The group also agreed that representation be made to the London party committee for an urgent and overdue aggregate.’ [52]
The group’s resolution was sent on 1 April, the day of fools; in it the group questioned the central committee’s formulation on the party’s activities in the trade unions, which said that the trade union branches must be transformed
‘from organs of class collaboration into organs of class struggle ... The whole line of the party at the Leeds congress and since has been to maintain that job organisation can alone be the unit of an organ of class struggle; that the very structure, limited scope, organisation, constitution and leadership of the unions make them unsuitable as organs of class struggle.’
The group also pointed out that the two major features of the international situation were not mentioned at all in the resolution – the war in the Far East, and the crisis in Germany, where the Nazis were advancing to power.
‘The resolution was drafted at a time when the dangers in the Far East and the approaching crisis in Germany were clearly visible, and it should have set out the tasks of the party in relation to both.’
The group went on to call for a party congress, which was two years and more overdue.
‘We regard the amount and extent of the discussion allowed on the resolution to be quite insufficient. In view of the present unsatisfactory state of the party as depicted in the resolution itself, we suggest: full open discussion in the party and party press as a preliminary to a party congress, the date of which should be fixed without further delay.’ [53]
The group’s criticism was published in the Daily Worker for 14 April, with a reply from the secretariat which ignored the major arguments and accused us of ‘underestimating the trade unions.’ At the regular group meeting on the day following publication, the secretariat’s answer was discussed, and rejected indignantly by the members as inadequate as a reply and untrue in its accusations against the group.
At an aggregate meeting of South West local members held in Battersea on 20 April we defended our statement and enlarged our attack on the leadership and its policy. On 12 May, the group drew up its reply to the secretariat, denying accusations of underestimating the importance of work in the unions, and that union branches were, as the central committee resolution said, ‘organs of class collaboration’ or that they could be ‘transformed’ into ‘organs of class struggle’, a role for which they were unsuited.
In support of our argument, we quoted R.P. Dutt’s Labour Monthly notes, in which he asked,
‘Do the trade unions provide the means of mobilising the workers for the present struggle? To say this is to be blind to obvious facts ... Could control of the trade union machine be a means to leading the workers’ struggle? No, experience has shown repeatedly that this is nothing less than a constitutional reformist delusion ... the fighting front of the workers can only be effectively built up in the daily struggle at the point of production ...’ [54]
Even more to the point was a statement by Lozovsky, chief of the Russian-based and controlled Red International of Trade Unions:
‘That we want to explode the trade union apparatus and destroy it, of that there cannot be the slightest doubt.’ [55]
Balham again drew attention to Germany, and the international situation.
‘We believe this (a party congress) to be more necessary now than ever before ... The menace of war which grows in the West and the East demands a party united on the basis of conviction and belief in the line of the party. Only a full, unfettered discussion within the party can make this posssible.’ [56]
This appeared in the Daily Worker but without Lozovsky’s words, which had been deleted, and with a condemnatory reply by the secretariat. [57] Though the quote from Lozovsky had been suppressed, the Daily Worker published two articles by the Red International chief on trade union policy in the course of which he rebuked the Balham group!
On 3 May, another aggregate meeting of South West local members was held in Battersea, at which district organiser R.W. Robson, and other party functionaries were present, and spoke. We put forward the Balham resolution, and attacked party policy and leadership. Henry Sara and Harry Wicks were among our spokesmen. A few days afterwards, three of us received letters from the district party office.
Henry Sara was charged with ‘supporting the general accusations of the lack of integrity, trickery, cowardice, and stupidity which were levelled against the party leadership by Comrade Groves’. Harry Wicks was accused of supporting ‘the remarks of Groves which accused the leadership of the party of trickery, of being opposed to criticism and discussion ...’
The quotations varied somewhat, for letter number three said
‘it is reported that ... you stated that "the policy which has wrecked this local organisation has also wrecked others. Battersea represents the state of the party in other parts of the country ... it is not better but worse than in January," and for this you blame the "stupidity, hesitation and cowardice of the party leadership in the period of September to December 1931".’
The letters asked of us, did we ‘maintain these views ... on the present leadership and policy of the party?’ [58]
We replied, rejecting the ‘reported’ quotations as inaccurate and out of context, and pointed out that our opinions on these matters were set out for all to see in the Balham group resolutions and related statements.
Reports on the state of the party in several major areas were in the hands of the centre.
‘Let these be published in full for discussion in the party press and then we shall be in a position to re-assert our statement or to modify it.’ [59]
When the secretariat declared that the Balham resolutions were the work of ‘one or two well-known sectarians’ [60] it was clear to us that they were trying to isolate some of us from the rest of the group, so that they could demand our submission to official policy, or expel us. What the party functionaries did not understand was that the members were convinced that what was being done was right, and, in fact, not one was to desert in the hectic two months that followed.
Our aim, the aim of all, was to battle on and compel the calling of a party congress and the holding of the pre-congress discussion that could be expected to go with it; and in the discussion and at the congress present or criticisms and ideas to the party membership.
But it looked as though the party leaders were deferring announcement of a date for the congress until we had been subdued or silenced. We renewed our demand for a congress, while offering a re-phrased resolution paragraph on trade union policy which we hoped would make our position clearer, and harder for the leadership to refuse discussion or distort our viewpoint. [61]
Events were forcing us, however, into further immediate assaults on party and Comintern policy, so jeopardising our chances of securing a congress. Indeed, our situation had been rendered the more precarious, for impelled by the alarming situation in Germany, we had risked the publication during May, of the duplicated journal The Communist, containing Trotsky’s Germany, the Key to the International Situation, and the statement that the British section of the Left Opposition was now established.
It was published anonymously and circulated carefully and secretly; it was a reluctant, uncertain gesture indeed, and the response to it was a loud, disconcerting silence. Not all of us were convinced of the wisdom of it – but once done there could be no going back on it. We began pressing anew for a party congress, and for educational and agitational activity by the party over the situation in Germany. [62]
In June, Arne Swabeck wrote from New York of the Communist, ‘naturally we greet its appearance with considerable joy ... It is our hope however that you will be able, when the next issue appears, to establish a regular address and give some direction for the revolutionary workers ... how to get in touch with you’ [63]; and, several weeks later, ‘It is our hope that you will soon be able to have another issue.’ [64]
An address! Whose? We were too closely linked as friends, and as critics of the leadership, for one of us to come out as publisher of the Communist without bringing suspicion on all the others. To the affluent Americans we must have seemed reluctant martyrs – but then we were but privates in a tiny isolated unit of the army of world revolution, our armaments pitiable, our provisions scanty. Some of us were held back too by anxiety to make plain to our Party comrades that we were fighting for, not against the Party; and by the knowledge that whatever support we mustered among them for an inner-party discussion, a Congress and policy changes, would disintegrate if the movement appeared to be promoted from the outside, which it certainly had not been.
In those last few months in the life of the Balham Group, its Minutes show the members busy on routine Party work, but carrying on as well an acrimonious correspondence with the London District Party Committee, and the Party Secretariat, on four issues – on the formulation of trade union policy, an issue we had to put aside when told that no more letters from the Group on the subject would be published in the Party Press [65]; on the Party leadership’s proposal that the DPC should, like the CC no longer be elected by the members but hand-picked by an appointed ‘commission’; on the absence of any Party discussion or campaign on events in Germany; and on the need for the holding of a Party Congress and a pre-Congress discussion.
Among local concerns recorded in the Minutes was the problem of unemployed organisation and on this, too, we clashed on policy with district and national leadership. Efforts to rejuvenate the local Branch of the Party-controlled NUWM had come to nothing. The Wandsworth Trades Council had formed an association for unemployed trade unionists, but the Party had declared war on such bodies and ordered members to break them up. Bill Pyne, by artful and devious argument, had secured the Group’s permission to join the Association; his reports on it convinced us that we should support it and help make it an effective, fighting organisation among the unemployed. [66] The DPC rebuked us for this, and ordered us to bring our members and supporters out of the Association and enrol them in the NUWM. The Group ignored this instruction [67], and the Association, backed by the Trade Council, and, before long, led by our members, grew in numbers and influence. Many of the trade unionists we met and worked with then became supporters in the years ahead. Several months afterwards, the Party itself reversed its policy of destroying the associations, and ordered members to support them.
The Minutes show us maintaining or friendly relations with the local ILP branches, particularly the Clapham branch, whose New Morris Hall was often the venue for our occasional public meetings, socials and conferences. The comradeship which had begun in the autumn of 1931 with such staunch socialists as Sid Kemp and his brother, Alwynne Wynne and Miriam Knibbs, Ernie Patterson, Harold Ratten, and several others, was to endure until the coming of war scattered us all, and the old days were done.
It was at the New Morris Hall amid the excitements of late 1931 that we met Hugo Dewar. An ILPer for a couple of years or so, he was, in 1931, a member of the Marxist League, a small organisation of which none of us had heard, and which revolved around the unusual personality of freelance socialist and secularist, Francis Ridley. ML members had, we learned, been reading and circulating The Militant; and Ridley and an Indian member, Chanda Ram, had sent Trotsky a thesis on the theme that ‘Great Britain is at the present time in a transitional phase between Democracy and Fascism’, to which Trotsky replied at some length in The Militant, concluding,
‘It would be very sad if the critical members of the British Communist Party would imagine that the opinions of Ridley and Ram represent the opinions of the Left Opposition.’ [68]
Hugo Dewar had disagreed with the Ridley-Ram thesis, and now linked up with us and the ILP at Clapham in our campaign against the National Government’s ‘economies’; and presently joined the CP, becoming a member of the Tooting Local, linking up as an individual with the Balham Group in its struggle within the Party.
The district leadership was uneasy about our collaboration with the ILP, and sharply critical when we joined with the ILP in establishing a committee to organise the May Day demonstration. [69] Because of events in the Far East, we kept the joint committee in existence after May Day, to campaign against ‘imperialist war’ – Japan’s invasion of Manchuria in 1931 had culminated in a successful conquest of the province, and in February 1932, Japan set up there the puppet state of Manchukuo, a base for further military adventures at the expense of China, and maybe of Russia. The Comintern had ordered its sections to mobilise opinion and protest against this plot of the imperialist powers against the Soviet Union, and the CPGB had called for the setting up of anti-war committees; and the campaign shaped itself along the usual lines – the workers’ fatherland was in danger, Britain and other Imperialist powers were supporting Japanese aggression against Russia and China, and the workers had to take militant action against their imperialist governments; the Social Democrats, the Left Socialists and the Pacifists had to be exposed as allies of the imperialists. ‘Pacifism is the twin ally of the bloodiest imperialism’ wrote R.P. Dutt, calling for ‘neither imperialist patriotism nor pacifism but the active mass fight for the destruction of imperialism and the victory of Socialism.’ [70]
Hardly had these words appeared in print when the ‘Leninist line’ on war was repudiated: a Comintern-backed campaign was launched for a spectacular world congress against war, the public appeal being made by French pacifist Henri Barbusse, and addressed to progressives, liberals, pacifists as well as to the working classes.
The promptness with which CPGB members obeyed Comintern instructions and jettisoned orthodox Leninist policy on war in favour of attitudes it had alwayds denounced; the fervour and haste with which members argued for the new policy; the sight of comrades we had known and respected for years as principled Marxists and devoted Communists, distributing an appeal couched in liberal and pacifist terms for a projected world parade of non-revolutionary, anti-revolutionary and most non-socialist notabilities, should have shocked us into looking a little more thoroughly into our own ideas and actions and at the course we had set for ourselves. We did not. Instead, we championed the accepted Leninist position on war. We still believed that such departures from orthodoxy were temporary abberations from principles shared in common, the correctness of which we had – or would admit to ourselves – no doubt. We were still in the same psychological sphere as the people with whom we were in conflict – our differences, we told ourselves, were limited to certain issues. Even after we had been expelled, and were being ostracised and vilely abused, we continued to believe this; and some remained in that mind, making no reassessment, not looking behind causes to effects, nor wondering what obscure questionings stayed us from the absolute capitulation of so many admired and worthier comrades. When the appeal for the World Congress Against War was launched, and for a British pre-Congress at Bermondsey to precede the greater charade at Amsterdam, we opened what was to be our final campaign as members of the CPGB.
 



Cromwell, Our Chief of Men
Antonia Fraser
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, £4.95.
OLIVER CROMWELL was born at Huntingdon in the year 1599, and died in London in 1658.
When he was born, an ageing Queen Elizabeth was on the throne of England. When he died, he was Lord Protector of a republican England, Scotland and Ireland.
‘A gentleman by birth’ – in his own words – for the first half of his life he lived ‘neither in considerable height not yet in obscurity’; one of the ‘middling sort’ who were mustering reluctant but determined resistance to the absolutist tyranny of Charles 1. By the time he was 30, Cromwell had already appeared in Parliament for his own town, and both there and at Huntingdon had distinguished himself as an opponent of the King’s demands. A dozen or so years later he was raising a troop of horse in support of a Parliament on which the King had declared war.
‘Your troopers,’ Cromwell told his cousin John Hampden, after the unhappy failure of the Parliamentary troopers at Edgehill, ‘are most of them decayed servingmen and tapsters and such kind of fellows ... Their troopers are gentlemen’s sons, younger sons and persons of quality; do you think that the spirits of such base and mean fellows will ever be able to encounter gentlemen that have honour and courage and resolution in them? You must get men of spirit.’
’I would rather,’ he said on another occasion, ‘have a plain, russet-coated captain that knows what he fights for and loves what he knows, than what you call a gentleman and is nothing else.’ Recruited from free-holding and tenant farmers and their sons, from craftsmen and workmen, Cromwell’s troop became a regiment, famed and feared as the Ironsides. And surely the New Model Army, learning from Cromwell and his troopers, was the most remarkable army in our history – with its delegate councils, its officially recognised agitators, its preachers and religious tolerance. It debated the great political issues of the time (and of the future), wrecked the King’s armies, and, at Dunbar, hopelessly outnumbered and situated, scattered the Scots; it saw the revolution through, purged a compromising Parliament, and brought to judgment that ‘man of blood’, Charles Stuart.
Momentous times, and, as such, subject of much contention among historians; some seeing it as England’s bourgeois revolution, as a clearing away of feudal lumber, a way forward to constitutional, Parliamentary government, a rising to power of new commercial and capitalist classes; others as a time when social democratic ideas made hesitant, tentative appearance, and others as a period of dictatorship, misgovernment and oppression.
Antonia Fraser’s recently published biography of Oliver Cromwell, some 750 closely-printed pages long, evades assessment of class relationships at the time, and of social and economic conditions and problems. It is just not that sort of book – it is a biography of Oliver Cromwell, concerned with his private and public behaviour, and, within those limits, a thoroughly-researched, brightly-written one. Lady Fraser admires the man, and so on the whole maintains a reasonable calm when narrating the events of the time and Oliver’s part in them. But her composure deserts her when she comes to write of the execution of Charles Stuart.
‘For whatever could be said of the execution of King Charles I,’ she writes, ‘that it was inevitable, even that it was necessary, it could never be said that it was right ... it was a disastrous mistake for the cause in which Cromwell believed. From the moment of his trial King Charles had begun to tread the long causeway towards martyrdom ... The accusation of arbitrary tyranny, once levelled with some justice at the King, could now be placed firmly at the door of the men who had done him to death ...’
Charles, it will be seen, was not the only one to lose his head on this occasion!
We do not know what great cause Charles was supposed to have died for—most of us would say that if executions can ever be justified, this was one; and share Cromwell’s opinion that it was ‘the great fruit of the war ... the execution of exemplary justice upon the prime leader of all this quarrel’; and accept John Cook’s statement at his own trial before a post-restoration court packed with royal toadies,
‘We are not traitors, nor murderers, nor fanatics, but true Christians and good Commonwealth men ... We sought the public good and would have enfranchised the people, and secured the welfare of the whole groaning creation, if the nation had not more delighted in servitude than in freedom ...’
It must be added that Lady Fraser expresses no sympathy for those who, like the Leveller troopers, died for freedom and the cause of poor men; nor for the victims of Charles II’s savage and obscene vengeance on surviving Parliamentary leaders. She has no patience with supposed extremists like John Lilburne the Leveller’s leader; and dubs a London woman who led protestors into the House of Commons to confront Cromwell and demand the release of Levellers held in prison, and ‘those rights and freedoms of the Nation that you promised us’, a harpy!
She hurries away from the more determined and vigorous of the sects and congregations. Like Obstinate in Pilgrim’s Progress, she says: ‘I will go back to my place. I will be no companion to such misled fantastical fellows’ – suggesting that they were a small minority of those involved actively in events, and pinning on many of them the label, ‘millenarian’, unaware, it seems, that ‘millenarianism’ was a commonplace of doctrine at the time. The biblical prophecies of the rise and fall of four .successive world monarchies, and the coming of a fifth and enduring kingdom; in which the saints would prepare the world for the Judgment and the reign of Christ, bubbled beneath the surface through the centuries. Belief in ‘the. last days’ came to the top in stormy times, and it was natural that believers should read into the turbulent happenings of the period signs that the time was at hand.
Cromwell himself spoke of being ‘one of those whose hearts God has drawn out to wait for some extraordinary dispensation, according to those promises that he hath held forth of things to be accomplished in the later time’; to many, the Civil War portended that the ‘last wonders of the world’ were about to be accomplished – ‘Christ’, said one zealot in 1642, ‘seems now to have set up his glorious standard.’ The war was on ‘till Babylon be down and Sion be up’, and what had to be done was debated in workshop, tavern, street and conventicle, and on the battlefield. The sects merged and mingled, the saints went to battle for the New Jerusalem, and the revolutionary gospel walked abroad again.
Of the many hopes, ideas, aspirations raised by the revolution, one that certainly survived among the poor was the hope of the coming of ‘the last days’ and the establishment of social justice. In times of upset, it emerged again as an essential element in popular movements of reform and protest. It can be traced in many social and religious movements of the 18th Century; and again in the socialist and co-operative movements of the early 19th century. And, if it departed from most of the chapels save as a pious belief in life after death, it could be found subsequently among earnest groups of working men and women poring over Owenite and Marxist texts, seeking assurance of an imminent, cataclysmic collapse of capitalism and the speedy coming of the new socialist society.
Ironic that nowadays most people no longer deny the likelihood of world catastrophe, but are not so certain about the good society coming out of it and after it. Maybe this is measure of our failure to explain our beliefs adequately. Maybe we spend too much of our time calling for the end of what is, and too little time explaining what might be.
 



Up to 1931, most British communists had scant knowledge of communist oppositional groups abroad, though the names of many departed and expelled leaders were familiar to us through the Comintern’s frequent abusive references to them. Leon Trotsky, however, was known to us by his writings, and was much in the news. Exiled to Alma Ata in 1928, he was deported in 1929 to Turkey. In that year he asked for political asylum in England, the country to which he had travelled in 1902, after his escape from Siberia, to meet Lenin, Martov, Plekhanov, Axelrod and other Russian exiles. Labour Home Secretary J.R. Clynes rejected the application. [39] During 1930, Trotsky’s autobiography was published here [40], and occasional interviews with him appeared in the newspapers. But that there were organised groups in Europe and America supporting the Left Opposition and Trotsky was unknown to us – until one bright cold spring morning in 1931, I called at the ‘Bomb Shop’ in Charing Cross Road, to buy some pamphlets and say hullo to old Henderson, who ran it.
Henderson was short, rotund, brusque in manner, with bristling white hair, pointed beard and scarlet tie; his was the only socialist bookshop in the West End. An open-style shop – unusual then – it had been designed and decorated in red and gold and emblazoned with the names of past rebels, by socialist painter Walter Crane. Its defiant name, red doors and window frames, and display of socialist and anarchist publications, incited upper-class louts and their toadies to heave an occasional brick through the full-length plate glass door and windows, to daub blue and white paint on to the red, and sometimes to break in at night and wreck the interior. All this Henderson expected. What provoked him to outbreaks of shouting was the non-political behaviour of boys and lads from the ‘buildings for the industrious working classes’ which rose several storeys high above the shops in Charing Cross Road. All of us on our way to school kicked over Henderson’s dustbins and boxes; and on evenings and Saturdays in summer hit many a sixer through his back windows.
So when, in 1925, grimy and in working overalls, I walked into the shop for the first time to buy a socialist weekly, Henderson glowered at me, recognizing me as an erstwhile dustbin kicker and hitter of sixers, one whose younger brothers were still at it. After I had called regularly for some time, Henderson became affable, clearly seeing me as a brand plucked from the burning, and over the years talked helpfully to me about socialism, anarchism, and the books I ought to read.
On sale in the shop on that later day in 1931 were bundles of two American weeklies – Labour Action, run by Jay Lovestone, an expelled ‘Rightist’; and the Militant, published by the American Left Opposition, with articles in it by Trotsky himself, which appeared the more promising publication. The three of four numbers bought that day were passed round among six or seven of us – and our little world was enlarged. There were others, communists who were working for a reformation of the Comintern and its national sections, for a restoration of inner-party democracy, and an international programme of, not just socialism in one country, but world revolution.
Our first letters to the Americans were merely orders for pamphlets advertised in the Militant. But then Henderson’s supplies were cut off for not paying the accounts. He explained this to me indignantly, for he made nothing on the few copies he sold, and would be much out of pocket if he posted unsold copies back to America. We wrote to the Americans explaining Henderson’s problem, saying how important these isolated sales were, and telling them who and what we were, and what we were trying to do in the party.
The Americans were adamant. [41] In the end we had to order our own copies by post if we wanted to go on reading the paper. More letters were exchanged during the summer; but we made it clear to the Americans that we were not prepared to set up a Left Opposition group in Britain. We went along with them on much, such as the restoration of full inner-party democracy in the national sections, a diminution of Russian command of the Comintern, and a recovery of the communism of the founding fathers. And we were deeply shaken by Trotsky’s powerful indictment of Comintern policy in Germany, based as it was on the formula that social-democracy and National Socialism were ‘varieties of fascism’, or, in Stalin’s words, ‘not opposite poles but neighbours’; by Trotsky’s warnings of the disaster that would follow for workers in Germany, Russia and throughout the world if that policy was persisted in; and by his call for a principled united front of the Social Democratic Party and the Communist Party to check and defeat the Nazis. All these things we would raise in the party, and fight for, but as members, not outsiders.
We were reassured by Arne Swabeck’s statement that ‘the Left Opposition’s views are not at all those of splitting the communist movement but of unifying it, naturally expecting every Left Oppositionist to work within the party for our views, endeavouring as much as possible to remain a member of the party without however sacrificing these views’. [42] But in a later letter Swabeck wrote ‘our international secretariat, nevertheless, proposes that some concrete steps should be taken towards organisation in a preliminary sense’, and added: ‘Albert Glotzer ... youth representative on our national committee ...’ after visiting Trotsky, and the international secretariat, would ‘stop over in England for the purpose of being helpful in bringing our various contacts together.’ [43]
Another letter told us that Max Shachtman was also coming to England ‘to do whatever possible to help towards the formation of a Left Opposition group in England’, another from Albert Glotzer, staying at Kadikoy, Turkey with Trotsky, confirmed his intention of visiting England, telling us that ‘our task in England is the building of an organisation of the Left Opposition.’ [44]
Uncomfortably, we felt we were being hurried; that a decision was being thrust upon us. To become a group of the Left Opposition meant expulsion merely for ‘conspiracy’, for breaking the rules; and in circumstances that would incline our party comrades to condemn us unheard, and allow the party leaders to justify absolute repression of discussion by reference to the fabricated but nevertheless widely circulated and believed slanders against the ‘Trotskyists’. We all had ties of comradeship with many party members; the party occupied our waking hours, was our vocation, our social life. Our complete commitment was to the revolutionary party, which for us, at the time, was the Communist Party, however sadly it may have gone awry.
Our opinions had also been sent to Trotsky himself. He wrote, urging that
‘... the British Left Opposition must begin systematic work. You must establish our staff centre, though a small one. You must build your own publications, even on a modest scale .... It is necessary to have a steady, uninterrupted activity, analysis, critic and propaganda. It is necessary to educate our cadres, although in the first stages, few. When, in England, more than elsewhere, communism in a short time can conquer the consciousness of the wide masses, so can conquer within communism, in the same short time, the supremacy of the ideas of the Left Opposition, that is the ideas of Marx and Lenin.’ [45]
Trotsky’s arguments were reiterated by Albert Glotzer of Chicago when he arrived; and by Max Shachtman of New York – urbane, witty, a theoretician of agility and much experience. Meeting Henry Sara, Stewart Purkis, Billy Williams, Harry Wicks and myself, he took up the theme of setting up an open LO group. ‘Someone,’ he said in a discouraging phrase, ‘has to go to the altar, someone has to be sacrificed.’ The candidates for sacrifice looked at each other but said nothing. We remained unconvinced as to the wisdom of the course suggested, though we did agree that it would be useful to begin the regular publication of a journal. There it was left. We were not yet the British Section of the International Left Opposition; and it was to be several months before we became so. [46]
From the shadowy world of these obscure little meetings, we came out into the unheeding, bustling, seeming-invicible world of Britain’s rulers, the Britain of the National Government, now strongly in command. The revolutionary hours had passed, the multitudes fallen away in bewilderment or despair. Registered unemployment remained around three million; distress and destitution spread like a medieval plague. Here, indeed, the issues of the day were being debated in action among our fellow-workers.
Labour Party leaders – most of them out of Parliament – were denouncing ‘MacDonaldism’ as the head and fount of all offending, thereby diverting blame for the party’s disgrace and defeat from themselves to their former but now departed heroes, MacDonald, Snowden and Thomas.
Five members of the Independent Labour Party (ILP) had been returned to Parliament [47], all intransigents; they rejected new attempts to curtail their right to speak and vote freely, particularly as those attempts were being made by those who had backed the MacDonald administration and all its villainies, and bawled abuse at the ILPers for refusing to do the same. ILP leaders and members, however, were divided on ILP-LP relationships, and not until July 1932 did an ILP conference vote disaffiliation from the LP by 241 votes to 142.
Politically discredited, few in number, inhibited by a reformist philosophy and by obsequiousness to parliamentary procedures and fetishes, the Labour Party in the House of Commons was impotent to check the government’s legislative onslaught on the social services and the unemployed.
The bright day was done; the aspirations and endeavour of 50 years were in ruins. A shaken movement surveyed the wreckage, and as the survivors of the disaster began picking up the pieces, it was plain to the most election-minded constitutionalist in the ranks that the government and the employers could be resisted only by action in the workshops and in the streets. So, as at the end of the General Strike, it was the men and women of the union branches, trades councils, Labour parties and socialist societies who took up the task of rebuilding the shattered defences of labour and of restoring the movement’s morale in renewed struggle against hunger, poverty and oppression. They were busy on labour exchange committees; on relief bodies and councils, fighting countless individual cases of injustice; they set up, through the trades councils, associations of unemployed trade unionists; but they also made public protest on ever-mounting scale.
In hundreds of towns and cities, union and socialist banners were lifted against dark winter skies; there were swirling, turbulent clashes with police, incited by authority to deny rights of procession and to use brutality in doing so. A long steady explanation and action began; a stubborn rearguard action that was after a couple of years to halt the capitalist offensive, and compel the enemy to retreat, and make meagre but encouraging concessions.
The battle had to be local – how could it be otherwise in the absence of a national leadership? The ILP was divided and uncertain, and the CP remained isolated and mistrusted. In the alchemy of a brewing revolutionary situation one vital element had been missing – a revolutionary leadership able to reach the masses.
‘The Communist Party’, wrote Tom Bell later, ‘was still isolated, through neglect of mass work in factories and trade unions. To remedy this a special commission was appointed ... The results were expressed in the January (1932) Resolution ...
‘Almost immediately, a group of Trotskyists appeared in the south-west district of London (the Balham Group). This group, headed by Groves, Purkis, Sara and Wicks, who had been secretly flirting with the local Independent Labour Party for a time, opened an attack on the central committee ...’ [48]
‘Almost immediately’ – as though, like Prospero’s spirits, we had been conjured out of the air! Tom Bell knew better, of course, for he had been attached to the group for a while, and had, with a companion, attended a few meetings. [49] He found nothing amiss – else we should have heard about it from district and national party officials. Our members were all active in party causes, and group meetings were concerned almost entirely with planning, reporting and discussing these activities. Policy discussions arose from that work, or from documents issued by the district or national leadership. Our ‘flirtation’ with the local ILP branches during the 1931 crisis and after, was open and public, not secret; and at the time of which Bell was writing we were not an organised group, much less ‘Trotskyists’; we were busy and convinced members of a party we still hoped would train, educate and organise a revolutionary leadership among the British working people. But our opposition to the party functionaries hardened as they became more and more openly the pliant creatures of the Russian bureaucracy, and we were increasingly aware that reform of the British party would require also reform of the Comintern.
 



It is forty years since the anonymous publication of a duplicated journal, The Communist, made it known that an organised opposition existed inside the British Communist Party.
It called itself the British Section of the Left Opposition, a grand title for a group of less than a dozen people; and introduced itself in a front page article by saying
‘The Communist International is unable to gain the leadership of the world proletariat. It is – at this critical moment – unable, unready and unfit to lead the world revolution, and there is no possible alternative. The Left Opposition – led by Comrade Trotsky – is fighting to win back the CI to its task of leading the world revolution; the British group begins its work by the issue of this bulletin.’ [1]
Because of the heightening crisis in Germany, most of that first number was given over to Leon Trotsky’s Germany, the Key to the International Situation which, written several months before, had since become even more pointed and relevant with its warning of looming disaster for the workers’ movement in Germany, and ultimately in all Europe, unless Communist policies were changed in time. That was in May, 1932. At a specially summoned aggregate meeting of London members on 20th July, accumulating criticism of the Party leadership boiled over. The German question was one of several contentious issues raised, and there, in a conversation with Harry Pollitt, Stewart Purkis identified himself with Trotsky’s views. On 27 July Purkis wrote the letter to Pollitt – ‘You have asked a straight question: you have a straight answer. You have asked me how far I go with The Communist ... I go with it all the way’ [2] – that was to bring, a few weeks later, his and Bill Williams’ expulsion from the Party.
Before they were thrown out, however, the Party had acted against others, on matters not connected directly with The Communist. On 17 August Harry Wicks and Reg Groves [3] were expelled, Henry Sara ‘suspended’ and the Balham Group to which they belonged ‘liquidated’, accused of having ‘held views fundamentally opposed to the policy of the Communist Party for some time past’, and (unhappy formulation!) of having operated ‘its own anti-working class line instead of that of the Party’. Some of the members, the statement went on supported by ‘a majority in the Group, have deliberately engaged in anti-Party factional activity in order to achieve this object. The leader of the Balham Group, R. Groves, now openly declares his absolute opposition to the united front line of the Party, particularly in connection with the World Anti-War Congress.’ [4]
Members of the ‘liquidated’ group who desired ‘to retain their membership of the Party’ were invited to a meeting ‘for
comradely discussion’ with Party officials on 19 August. [5] All but those expelled went along, but at this and other meetings and private interviews, the Party functionaries were rebuffed. All wanted to stay in the Party, but not at the price demanded – a stifling of discussion and a shuffling surrender to a leadership bent on the promotion of false policies.
The passing over of the Balham Group members, together with Hugo Dewar of the Tooting Group, gave the British Section a small but active membership in South-West London, and one with a base in the local working class movement. So long ago, so small an event, worth at most a line or two in the chronicles of our Left movements – it is not surprising, then, that little has been written on it, or that what has, should have been either ill-or inadequately informed. Some have seen it as prompted almost entirely by changes in Russian Communist and Communist International policies, by the onslaught between 1928 and 32 on ‘right deviationists’ and ‘conciliators’, and by the Comintern’s criticism of the British Party leadership at the World Congress of 1928 and in a series of subsequent resolutions. [6]Others have seen it as the almost accidental outcome of inner-party discussions on trade union policy, with the expelled malcontents being driven into the Left Opposition; or as an outbreak of ‘Left Sectarianism’; or as a pioneering episode in the story of British Trotskyism.
Segments of truth can be found in all these views. Our criticisms were inevitably couched in the formulae of Comintern resolutions and Party textbooks; the Balham Group’s policy challenges and earlier critical essays might easily have been smothered, and the group might have perished in the dark but for the Comintern’s sustained attack upon the British Party’s leadership; and our own little contentions might have been washed away in the storm of official controversy, but for events in Spain and Germany in 1930-32 which together with the changes taking place in the British Party, convinced us in the end that the disarray of the British Party was no mere national peculiarity but endemic to the Comintern and its controller, the Russian Party. True, we were woefully ignorant, particularly about the situation in Russia, and as we struggled for enlightenment and understanding and clarity, some of us found help in the writings of Trotsky and, to a lesser extent, in the periodicals published by the American Left Opposition.
 
All this conceded, there remains an unexplained residue – a group that went on to expulsion and ostracism, and to political ex-communication. To explain this it may help to say something about the people involved, and their relationships, to make some personal observations, and to start the story back in 1925. On ‘Red Friday’, on the eve of a lock-out of a million miners for rejecting lower pay and longer hours, rail and road transport unions placed on movements of coal an embargo that compelled hasty intervention by an unprepared Tory Government. The Government paid a subsidy to keep the pits open on the old terms until a Royal Commission had reported – giving the Tories time to make preparations for battle with the unions.
As the months passed, the conviction grew among socialists, trade unionists, labour folk, that only a General Strike could prevent a renewal of the attack by Government and employers on the miners, and then, on the rest of us.
It was soon after Red Friday that, at a crowded discussion meeting in John Groser’s little back and front living rooms in Teviot Street, Poplar, I first met Stewart Purkis, Billy Williams and Bert Field, all three of them active in the Clearing House branch of the Railway Clerks’ Association, the union’s biggest and supposedly most reactionary branch; and active to such effect that, in May 1926, to the amazement of the Union and the outraged indignation of the Railway Companies, a majority of branch members came out on strike in support of the miners, and held the line unbroken to the muddled, hopeless end of the strike.
Stewart [7]: forty, a socialist from 1904, an early enthusiast for Guild Socialism and various rebel causes, incisive, thorough in study and argument, bubbling with humour, yet in deadly earnest about the Socialism which he lived as well as preached. Billy [8]: in his mid-twenties, son of a Quaker-agnostic-building-worker-socialist-Welsh father, an om-niverous reader, hard hitting in debate and in serious conversation, a good mixer but intolerant of the pompous, the slothful and the shoddy. And Bert Field: forty, affable, inarticulate, using his pipe to cover retreat from the more complicated controversies, and probably wiser than any of us. Such company, such mentors, and amid such stirring events, were exhilarating indeed to a raw but enthusiastic seventeen year-old socialist like myself, and the friendships began then lasted for life.
As government preparations and intentions grew more pronounced, newspapers more abusive about the miners, and as Communist Party leaders were arrested and sent to prison, street meetings multiplied, arguments became more serious in the workshop and in the trade union branch, we read, and talked after the meetings about events and books. One of the books was Trotsky’s Where is Britain Going? published in 1925, an analysis of Britain’s decline, and an argument on the need for political revolutions as a necessary preliminary to the social organisation of production and distribution, and of the certainty of capitalist resistance to such a revolution. At a time when open conflict between Government and unions seemed certain, Trotsky’s book had a considerable effect on us. We did not know, of course, that the book was, in Trotsky’s own words, directed at the ‘official conception’ of the Comintern leadership with its hopes of ‘an evolution to the left by the British General Council (TUC) and the painless penetration of Communism into the British Labour Party’. Nor did we suspect, then, that R. Palme Dutt’s defence of the book against Labour and Socialist critics was aimed also at the majority of the British Communist Party’s leaders who saw the party as a militant wing of the reformist Labour Movement, not as an independent alternative to it.
We read also Trotsky’s The Lessons of October (again unaware of controversies inside the Russian Party, or that – as Harry Wicks has recently reminded us – there was some resistance among London Communists to a blanket condemnation of the Russian Oppositionists unheard). Trotsky’s account of the role of Soviets and party in the insurrection, his demonstration that Bolshevism was not a theory but also ‘a revolutionary system for teaching insurrection to the proletariat’; and his theme that ‘The proletarian revolution cannot win if there is no party, or without the help of the party, or with a substitute for a party ... The task of the Communist Party is to seize power and to transform society’ [9] was argued over, but not yet accepted by us. There was much to find out about Marxism and the Communism of Lenin, and some enlightening experiences to live through and observe before we came to see that a revolutionary party was needed.
The General Strike multiplied the arguments for such a party. Watching, with thousands of other workers, the convoys of food lorries and armoured cars rumbling out of the Docks and along the Commercial Road; witnessing on the day of the TUC’s abject surrender, brutal police attacks on a peaceful Poplar meeting and on scores of poor men’s homes; the triumph displayed that day by our rulers and their toadies, and the ferocity of the employers’ counter offensive – checked by a spontaneous rally of the strikers – it certainly seemed unlikely that the capitalists would allow power to pass from their hands without a struggle involving force. If so, a party of self-sacrificing, trained revolutionaries would be needed to prepare, guide and sustain the struggle for proletarian dictatorship – a Blanquist phrase coined when the proletariat was in a minority, but understood by us and most ordinary Socialist and Communist workers as meaning in contemporary conditions a government of the workers, a majority; and not, as it was to become in Russia, the dictatorship of a clique, ruling through a powerful bureaucracy.
The betrayal of the General Strike and the abandonment by the Labour leaders of the miners in the anguished months that followed, produced widespread disillusionment, slumped union membership, and a million and a half unemployed, the drop in wages, vengeful anti-union legislation by the Tory Government drove the whole movement into the doldrums. Union leaders conferred with employers to secure ‘rationalisation’ of industry – speed-up, more production by fewer workers, more unemployment – and an imposed industrial peace, with pay cuts and longer hours in the basic-industries to make Britain’s exports more ‘competitive’, until the capitalists of other lands did the same, and the whole process began all over again, a competition in becoming poorer and more wretched.
With all this, and having learned and studied and argued a way through to a conviction that the Communists alone were trying to build a revolutionary party, Stewart Purkis, Billy Williams and I joined the party. Only the phlegmatic Bert Field remained outside, though he stayed a close friend and and comrade, supporting Stewart Purkis and Billy Williams in union struggles, yet remaining a social-democrat of the truest sort, a guild socialist, a militant, a sturdy witness to his beliefs. Curiously, in view of later events, soon after we joined, the Party held a series of local members’ meetings, addressed by Party officials at which members were invited to approve the ‘condemnation’ of the Russian Left Opposition, by the Russian Communist Party and Comintern. Some material by the Opposition was available, wedged in between massive corrective and condemnatory material; the issues involved included Russian economic policy, and the Comintern’s policy in China. Purkis and Williams had pored hard and long over the Russian economic material, and at the St. Pancras Party meeting, unconvinced by the official case, abstained on this, or voted against. At the West London area meeting, I abstained on Russian economic policy and other matters, and voted against the official resolution on the Chinese question.
That no one rebuked us, or indeed showed any surprise or concern over our attitude would have been evidence to a Russian Communist of the British Party’s backwardness. At this time, differences of opinion up to the deciding vote was what most Party members took for granted, and most of us assumed that it was so in Russia. Before long, such doubts and abstentions let alone votes against, would become vilest heresy, bring expulsion, denunciation, victimisation – and in Russia imprisonment and execution.
 
Things were far from well in the British Party. Membership, which had doubled during 1926, had halved in 1927. Sales of Party periodicals and pamphlets fell, and went on falling. Policy was still directed at hopeful reform of the official movement, and the Party still called for ‘all power to the TUC General Council’, the selfsame General Council that had surrendered abjectly in May 1926 and that had abandoned the miners in the long lockout that had followed.
Despite rebuffs, the Party still sought affiliation to the Labour Party, which was expelling Communists from individual membership, beginning to bar them as delegates from trade unions to constituency Labour Party management committees and national conferences, and expelling any local parties that refused to expel or bar Communists. Some twenty-four of these parties or sections of parties, had, by 1927, been organised in the National Left Wing Movement, a confusing masquerade which led to many Communists giving time and energy needed by their own party to sustain the ‘original’ local Labour Party in elections and other activities against the more recently established ‘official Labour Party’. The National Left Wing Movement was, like so many of the auxiliaries, a substitute for the Party, not an extension of it.
The Party was still calling for ‘a Labour Government’, adding such phrases as ‘but make it fight’; or demanding, as did the 7th Plenum of the Comintern (ECCI, a ‘real Labour Government’. [10] Even as late as January, 1928, the adroit, plausible, wily, Andrew Rothstein, who may have already received hints of sharp changes in Russian and Comintern policy when the fateful 9th Plenum was assembling, was too deeply embedded in the routine of office and the old policy to grasp the full import of what was happening. He could be found calling on the one hand for ‘a sharpening of the war on reformism’ and on the other for ‘a real change of leadership’ in the Labour Party. He urged the National Left Wing Movement to replace a score or so reformist Parliamentary candidates by ‘honest revolutionary fighters’, members of the Labour Party of course, who would run as Labour candidates in the elections. [11] The decisions of the 9th Plenum were ‘unanimously endorsed’ by the British Party’s Political Bureau and Central Committee. ‘The 9th Plenum’ said Tom Bell, in that convoluted phraseology which owed as much to his being a Scot as to the perils of political life in the Comintern, ‘drew attention to the tendency towards a definite merging of the trade union organisations and the labour bureaucracy with the State apparatus ... It was necessary for the party to adopt a sharper tactic towards the Labour Party and the trade union leaders. This was the tactic of “class against class”.’ [12]
According to Bell, the Party’s 10th Congress at Bermondsey in January 1929, ‘unreservedly adopted the new line’. But Bell was not only a Party elder, and so one of those very much responsible for the ‘old line’, he was also – as the British Party’s representative at the Comintern – visiting other national sections, chiding them as ‘right deviationists’, that is, as followers of that very same ‘old line’. He was also, according to Allen Hurt, ‘Among the majority of those who were then the principal Party leaders, men who had come over from the previously existing Socialist groupings and bore strong marks of sectarian dogmatism in their outlook’, who showed ‘a strange hesitancy in appreciating the need for the Party now to assert its full independence and to change its tactics and approach accordingly’.
‘And so,’ Hutt goes on ‘from the end of 1927 there was waged for two years the keenest battle of ideas the Party had so far known around the question of its “new line”. This new line sought to prescribe a new independence for the Communist Party both in political and economic struggles ... it represented a necessary break with the past. As such it was stubbornly resisted by the dominant section of the Party leadership ... Thorough-going changes in the Leadership were obviously necessary if the Party was not to stagnate. These were not finally achieved till the Party’s Congress held at Leeds in December, 1929’. [13]
As will be seen, the necessary changes were not achieved at Leeds; but Hutt, a lively and able critic, was one of the dozen or so potential candidates for Party leadership invited to Moscow for a year’s course at the Lenin School. I was the only one who refused to go, believing that the struggle in the British Party was far from ended. As with most of those that went, Hutt’s critical faculty atrophied rapidly, and he was to serve the Stalinised Party faithfully through all the policy changes, through all the Stalin-worship, Party purges, imprisonments, trials and executions. His account omits much, particularly the extent to which the Comintern dictated the terms of discussion and outcome, but it does not exaggerate the discontent among the members in 1929.
It was early in 1929 that Henry Sara [14] first became associated with the three of us and with others in our circle, which included Steve Dowdall, a tiler-bricklayer and founder member of the Party, his wife Nell, and her sister Daisy, both busy in the Tailor and Garment Workers’ Union, and active members of the Party since mid 1926.
Living in North London, Henry Sara soon became, like myself, a frequent caller at the Express Dairy teashop close to Euston Station, where Stewart and Billy lunched each day on bread, cheese and coffee, and where books, politics and Party affairs were talked about, often irreverently and sometimes hilariously. Henry, tall, strong of build, with eloquent, resonant voice, and a commanding platform manner, incisive, informed in debate and discussion, brought much to us in the way of knowledge of Marxism, Socialist theory and labour history. His critical faculty had been toughened by early associations with anarchist ideas and the stricter industrial unionism groups; by his experiences during the 1914-18 War, when after a courageous anti-militarist campaign of public meetings he was arrested and conscripted into the army. He refused to obey orders or wear a uniform, was maltreated and finally sent to prison. A popular outdoor orator in Finsbury Park and elsewhere before, during and after the war, and a skilful lecturer at Socialist and secularist halls all over the country, he had hesitated to join the Communist Party at the time of its foundation, knowing as he did most of its leading personalities from pre-war days. But a visit to Russia, where the revolution was still in rags and struggling to survive, decided him, though the suppression of the Kronstadt uprising, caused him some uneasiness, and was perhaps one reason why he avoided being drawn into the inner circles of the Party leadership.
By now, Stewart Purkis and I were on the London District Committee, and for most of 1929 I was its assistant-organiser. The London District Committee office adjoined that of the almost non-existent Young Communist League, from which William Rust, who had assumed the role of Comintern spokesman, aided by the more likeable Walter Tapsell, conducted a campaign against the old leadership and for his own elevation to power.
As the General Election of 1929 approached, the Party leadership, committed to the slogans of ‘Class Against Class’ and ‘A Revolutionary Workers’ Government’, was again shaken by controversy. In March five members of the Central Committee-voted that where no Communist candidates were running, the workers should be advised to vote Labour. In the election, 25 Party candidates polled 50,644 votes, most of them faring miserably. Only in a few constituencies did the vote reach four figures. Labour, with over eight million voters and 288 seats, took office, with Ramsey MacDonald as Prime Minister.
A whole series of factors re-stimulated criticism of the leadership: the scanty vote, a membership fall from 10,000 in 1926 to some 3,500 in 1929, periodicals kept alive and functionaries paid only by Comintern subsidies; a diminished but devoted band of members who by sheer persistence and by appearing in many places, on many occasions, under many titles and banners, alone made the Party seem larger and more important than it was. There were demands for a Special Conference. The attack on the resolution drawn up by the Central Committee, was led by the London, Tyneside and – to a lesser extent – Manchester, District Committees. The Tynesiders, led by Maurice Ferguson [15], were rabidly ‘Comintern line’ men; the London District was less so, though its resolution, compiled at long and wearying committee meetings, often prodded into angry argument by interjections, expostulations and tirades from attending representatives of the Political Bureau, tended to keep to accepted phrases and formulations. The London resolution, indeed, showed a marked independence of approach over a matter on which the Comintern and Russian leaders were most sensitive. The Central Committee Resolution said, ‘We completely endorse the measures that have been taken by the ECCI (Comintern) in the struggles against the Right Wingers and the Conciliators in its own ranks and in the parties ...’ London District Committee dissented, saying, This pre-supposes that the Party as a whole has a fair knowledge of the inner-Party situations of these sections. This information the Party has not got and for the Party to understand this statement it must have in its possession more complete information’. London’s Resolution was approved at an aggregate meeting of London members, at which Rothstein and ‘Jock’ Wilson, strident and politically uncouth, angered the membership by their abuse of the District Committee and by a blatantly dishonest defence of the majority Party leadership. [16]
The 10th Plenum of the ECCI condemned the British Party leadership in language that was to become depressingly familiar in subsequent years. It called on the Party to ‘intensify the fight against Social Democracy, which is the chief support of capitalism’, to wage ‘an energetic struggle against the “left” wing of Social Democracy’, to ‘eradicate from its (own) ranks all remnants of Right opportunist deviations’. Noting that ‘conciliation, which appeared as cowardly opportunism, screening avowed liquidationism, has recently slipped over to the Right Wing position ...’, the Plenum demanded
‘that the conciliators openly and emphatically disassociate themselves from the Right deviators, conduct an active fight ... against the Right deviation ... Submit implicitly to all decisions of the Comintern and its sections, and actively carry them out. Failure will place the culprits outside the ranks of the Communist International.’ [17]
Reading this uneasily, we saw the Central Committee, including those so splenetic against London and other critical Districts, ‘endorse’ Comintern decisions and commands, and ‘welcome’ (!) the critical resolutions of London, Newcastle and Manchester, saying, ‘The Party membership has been in advance of the leadership in appreciating the new situation and desiring the more energetic carrying through of the new line’ [18], we watched critics and criticised alike scurrying to obey and conform to the latest commands, and leading CC members twisting themselves into most abject postures to placate the Comintern and retain their posts. We grew less and less sure in our minds that the Comintern’s extending control and direction of policy and people was a good thing.
But, on the hopeful side, was the critical, determined mood of the members, the possibility that a new leadership would emerge from the discussion, and from the coming Party Congress. Britain’s first Communist daily paper, The Daily Worker, was promised for 1 January 1930. Discontent with the Labour Government which was retreating from even modest plans to reduce unemployment, was growing among the workers. And, though bankers, economists and politicians dispensed optimistic forecasts for the coming year, already there were cracks on the surface of optimism and complacency. The first signs were detectable of what was to be world capitalism’s most serious economic crisis.
For the third time in a decade, a potentially revolutionary situation was on its way. Would there this time be a truly revolutionary party to keep the rendevous?
On the eve of the Party Congress, R. Palme Dutt wrote, privately, of the Congress.
‘The supreme need is that the positive lead from all contributing must be strong. It is necessary to start one’s thinking out of the present position of the party in the working class, of the line of advance of the party, of the consequent role of the Congress in the total political situation and in the historical development of the British working class ...
‘The primary problem and task for us in relation to the economic struggles is, first, to fight the way forward for tho independent action of the masses, and lead it, and second, to develop the political character of the gathering economic struggles, to develop the consciousness of the masses through them for further struggle and advance to a new plane ...’ [19]
Perhaps, after all, out of bitter argument and controversy, would come a renewal of revolutionary purpose and the first useful steps to the creation of that party to which all of us were committed.
So – it was heigh-ho for Leeds, and that Special Congress, where, if all went well, faded reformist policies would be replaced by bright new revolutionary ones, and where old leaders were to be put down, and new ones raised up.
 



Busy indeed was the life in those times of the Communist Party member, and we were as busy as any. But there were occasional summer afternoons at cricket, and some Saturday or Friday nights when we walked through the crowded New Cut market with its stalls, its loquacious stallholders and its roaring naphthalene flares, to the Waterloo Road and the Old Vic, queued and paid five pence and climbed the stairs to the gallery; and saw our Shakespeare staged by Harcourt Williams and spoken by a superb company closer to the original text, pace and style than any before or since. And as we came out under the stars, into the rain-washed streets, odd words sometimes lingered in the mind as strangely apt to our party activities. Like the sharp exchange from the first part of Henry IV, when Owen Glendower says:



‘I can call spirits from the vasty deep’



and Hotspur retorts:



‘Why, so can I, or so can any man:
But will they come when you do call them?’



Would they come, indeed? During 1930, the party leadership produced yet another ‘front’ organisation behind which and in which the party could attempt – vainly – to hide itself and its political identity. This was the campaign for the Workers’ Charter – the name was based on the People’s Charter of 1837. The Workers’ Charter began with six points, immediate demands for those at work and those unemployed: the demands grew to nine, then to 15 points, but when, after nearly a year’s activity, a monster conference was held at Bermondsey on 12 April 1931, of the 316 organisations represented there, only 68 union branches and seven co-op guilds could be called genuine, non-party organisations. [34]
The ballyhoo lasted a few more weeks; the spirits refused to come from the vasty deep or from anywhere else. By June, William Rust was writing:
‘United front work is practically non-existent, as is shown by the weakness of the Charter campaign: our slogans are far too general, and the Minority Movement tends to be a duplicate of the party. We have not yet succeeded in organising the daily fight in a revolutionary manner; our revolutionary policy for the way out of the capitalist crisis remains abstract, and is mechanically presented.’ [35]
R.P. Dutt, too, found the Charter campaign unsatisfactory – it was liable to be ‘misunderstood as some kind of all-round programme of reforms, a kind of minimum programme to meet the crisis.’ This was not so. ‘The Charter cannot solve the crisis ... The Charter is not a programme in the sense of a programme of a party ... but simply “common ground” on the most immediate issues of the class struggle.’ But, went on Dutt, members, while fighting for these issues alongside non-party workers, should ‘spread the understanding of the revolutionary line of Communism which can alone conquer the crisis and bring final victory.’ [36]
Unfortunately, the freedom of thought and action required by a revolutionary party to change its points of emphasis and adapt to swiftly-moving events no longer existed. Initiative had been destroyed, improvisation inhibited. Those attempting to stimulate discussion on the necessary reciprocity between immediate battles and the revolutionary uprising, between objective and subjective factors, had been denounced and silenced. Even Rust and Dutt had not confessed until a dissatisfied Comintern had demanded that the British party should produce results commensurate with the objective situation.
The party members could but go on as before. The, programmes of immediate demands designed to deceive workers into an unsuspecting support of the party, deceived only the party membership. Such attempted deceptions and the continual and indiscriminate abuse of the ‘social-fascists’ of all ranks and opinions – an obligatory act if Comintern approval was to be ensured – made many socialist workers suspicious of the party; and the excessive attacks on the ‘Left’ as the biggest political scoundrels of all made the situation worse. An assured, firmly-held independent view would have enabled a flexibility of tactics and relationships to be possible, and in a rapidly changing situation, such flexibility, allied to a firm revolutionary position, was vital if the party was to influence events. But the revolutionary certainty was not there – only the ‘immediate demands’.
For the economic storm blowing across the entire capitalist world was becoming a mighty tempest. By January 1931, out of an insured working population of 12.4 million Britain had 2,662,824 registered as unemployed. Many hundreds of thousands outside insurance were unemployed but unregistered, or working but part-time. Nearly a million were on poor relief.
As the numbers of unemployed rose, the Labour government, which had long abandoned its modest election programme of reforms, and which had almost angrily rejected plans to provide employment, now turned to the orthodox capitalist remedies for slump – massive economies in public spending at the expense of the social services; cuts in pay in public and private industries and services; drastic cuts in unemployment benefit, in the period of benefit and in eligibility for benefit.
Throughout the cheap compromises, and now through the period of ‘tough measures’, the large majority of Labour MPs supported the government, and turned savagely on the tiny group of ILP members in the Commons who spoke and voted against the government’s broken promises and failure to act on behalf of the unemployed. When the Mosley plan for providing work was rejected by the cabinet, the Labour MPs also voted the plan down by 202 votes to 29, and went on backing MacDonald, Snowden, Thomas, Henderson and the rest. When the Labour cabinet appointed, in February 1931, an ‘economies’ commission headed by Sir George May of the Prudential, only a score of Labour MPs voted against it, the rest voting for it; and Snowden’s April budget, which pointed the conditions for subsequent economies, received also the support of most Labour MPs.
The May committee reported, recommended massive economies in social services and other state expenditure; cuts in the pay of teachers, the armed forces and civil servants; and a reduction in unemployment benefit of 20 per cent. The Labour cabinet went along with two-thirds of the proposed cuts, was considering, and might well have agreed to, almost all of the rest, when there was an angry intervention by the general council of the TUC, expressing adamant opposition to nearly all the ‘economies’. [37] Even then, when a cabinet vote was taken on the one issue made crucial and decisive as a condition of support by British, French and American bankers, and by the leaders of the Liberal and Conservative parties in the Commons, that of the cut in unemployment benefit 12 cabinet ministers voted for the cut, and only eight voted against.
Prime Minister MacDonald went to Buckingham Palace to resign – or, at least, that was the story. Next day he met his Labour colleagues to dismiss them, and explain that he was now head of an ‘emergency’ government, a coalition completely dependent upon Liberal and Conservative votes. Only Chancellor Philip Snowden, Lord Privy Seal, J.H. Thomas, and a handful of junior ministers, went with him. The Labour Party was now the opposition, but an opposition rendered ineffectual and completely discredited by Labour’s behaviour and record when in government, by its sponsorship and acceptance of the ‘cuts’, and of the orthodox capitalist economics from which they were derived – the economics of enforced scarcity in a world of plenty.
For the massive retrenchment espoused by Labour as well as by the parties of capital, took place in a world where, for several years, output of food, raw materials and manufactures had risen steeply, far outstripping the growth of population. There was enough and to spare to feed, clothe and house the working millions of the world. But the remedy applied by the capitalist financiers, industrialists and politicians was the deliberate restoration of scarcity by closing the mills, mines and factories, cutting the wages of those still at work, destroying all kinds of crops including foodstuffs, letting land go out of cultivation, and limiting drastically the production of raw materials. The bread lines stretched across the world. One hundred million were estimated to be unemployed. In Britain, by the autumn of 1931, the registered unemployed totalled 2,824,774, and a million were on poor relief. The crisis of capitalism was plain for all to see. That its overthrow alone could provide reasonable provision for the people could now be plainly demonstrated. Objectively, for the third time since the war, the elements of a potential revolutionary situation were discernible.
On 25 August, the Daily Worker published the party’s pronouncement on the crisis. Its content called for immediate protest; but a hurried letter from myself, published next day in the Worker, and two subsequent letters which were not published – ‘the opening of a party discussion at the present moment is no way desirable’ wrote the political bureau – were inadequate, and in some ways over-cautious in formulation, mainly through anxiety to give the party leadership no pretext to exaggerate minor issues into monstrous heresies (a method learned from Comintern and Russian party leaders) so. blotting out the major arguments. As it was, one or two bogies were raised which were to haunt us for a long time to come; and it is possible that we would have done better to have spoken out irrespective of possible misrepresentation. [38]
As we came to see it, in those last August weeks and early September, the party’s forces were small, isolated from the main body of workers, unprepared, and immersed in operations and agitations unrelated to the development of the crisis. We communists were far too few to determine by ourselves the way things went. But there were leaders of the workers everywhere, active in factories, mills, union branches, trades councils, socialist societies and even Labour parties, hostile to capitalism and the employers, awake now, or partly so, to the ominous attacks on standards of living, prepared to resist and, maybe, in the course of the struggle, to go all the way with the revolution.
These local and industrial leaders would be to the fore, in the front line of the workers’ resistance to the cuts. Here could be mobilised a multitude of militants, close to the people and toughened politically by recent events. Somehow in each area a centre of struggle had to be created around which the workers could unite, debate and decide each step of the struggle. In many areas, the trades councils might provide this leadership and centre, but many of them had been reduced in strength, had expelled communists, and, as a consequence of the 1927 anti-trade union act, had divided themselves into separate political and industrial bodies. In such cases, improvised organisation might be needed – committees or councils of action.
What we did in south-west London – where our group numbered less than a dozen, and where the whole party membership in Battersea and Wandsworth amounted to no more than a few dozen, was to make contact with the active militants and socialists in our area. In the first few days of September, one or two of us visited the ILP branches at Tooting and Clapham. Both branches were affiliated, as were all ILP branches, to the local Labour parties in the two constituencies; both had supported the small group of ILP members in the Commons who had defied Labour Party rules to speak and vote against the government’s treatment of the unemployed, and so had clashed with local Labour Parry mandarins. We went to them honestly, saying in effect that though we held to our revolutionary views and would go on advocating them, and expected them to stick to their opinions, too, we thought we could work together to unite workers’ resistance to the cuts and for a socialist answer to the crisis. They responded generously, particularly in Clapham, and together we began to recruit from union branches, cooperative guilds and Labour Party wards, members for our committee, which was soon in regular session at the New Morris Hall in Clapham. In mid-September we threw a line of outdoor meetings across south-west London, covering Brixton, Clapham, Battersea arid Tooting, and these we maintained at regular intervals throughout September and October.
Parliament assembled on 8 September. The communist-led National Unemployed Workers’ Movement and other organisations called on the unemployed to demonstrate outside Parliament; crowds came, not only the stalwarts of the NUWM from every London borough, but thousands of others, anonymous, bewildered, indignant, shaken out of quietude by the raging storm of economic crisis, and now drawn together in protest.



‘We are fellows still.
Serving alike in sorrow.
Leak’d is our bark.
And we poor mates,
Stand on the dying deck,
Hearing the surge’s threat



As darkness fell, the crowd grew, stretching away under the street lights as far as the eye could see. In front of Parliament, the mounted police charged again and again at the swirling crowds of cloth-capped men ...
A tense excitement not felt since the General Strike was noticeable at all the local indoor and outdoor meetings. Where there were usually scores, there now were hundreds, and on occasions a thousand or more. The upturned, lamplit faces were serious, anxious, hopeful that the apostles of change, of class struggle, of revolution, would tell them what to do. Excitement grew when, on 15 September, the men of the Atlantic Fleet at Invergordon refused to obey orders to sail, and, in tidy Navy fashion, took over the ships, ‘refusing to serve under the new rates of pay’. The government quickly appeased the sailors; but teachers and civil servants, not given in that period to militant protest, now marched and met in great numbers. In Britain’s major cities, the unemployed in tens and scores of thousands surged in turbulent protest, often clashing violently with the police. The men of money began shifting their cash away from Britain, government credit tumbled and on 20 September, a government set up to keep Britain on the gold standard was forced to go off it. On 11 October postal workers, civil servants, teachers, unemployed and trade unionists staged a 100,000-strong united demonstration in Hyde Park.
Somewhere during those first few weeks of the crisis, the balance of forces shifted, the mood of the people changed subtly, imperceptibly, and the revolutionary prospect receded – though the battle against the cuts went on, and, it should be emphasised, went on under the leadership of the local militants all over the country. But without clearly communicated aims and a related strategy of progressively extending struggle, the militants in workshop, union branch and at labour exchange had nothing in the way of political ideas and purposes around which to rally and unite the movement – except resistance to the cuts. No visible, acceptable alternative emerged to the hopelessly compromised and discredited Labour Party leadership, which foundered and faltered still more in the swiftly-snatched election of 16 to 27 October, described by the Manchester Guardian as the ‘shortest, strangest and most fraudulent of our time’. The combined Liberal and Conservative vote gave the ‘National’ government an overwhelming electoral victory and inflicted a crushing defeat on the Labour Party, which held only 52 seats, approximately its representation in 1910. Only our failure as communists to create – under fire – a revolutionary party allowed the Labour Party subsequently to restore its influence over the workers.
In the election, 26 CPGB candidates polled 72,824 votes; and 43,892 of these were polled in four constituencies where conditions were especially favourable. The central committee admitted:
‘In many cases the difference in principle between the policy of the CP and the policy of the reformists was not at all made clear in the election campaign ... The party has absolutely failed to express the revolutionary way out of the crisis in concrete terms that the masses can understand ...’
In south-west London, our committee, or council of action as we had named it (hopefully but, I think, wrongly) was expanding and recruiting support in local union branches, at regular outdoor meetings, and at the labour exchanges, where we now led the local unemployed organisation. The group had become the ‘Balham group’, and had been strengthened by the transfer to it of Jim Barrett, a party member of nine years standing; and by the recruiting of some younger people, Cyril Whiting, Maurice Simmonds, Bill Pyne and Isabel Mussi. By the early months of 1932, members of the Balham group were again engaged in an argument with the party leadership over the central committee’s ‘January resolution’. And by then, a few of us were in touch with the American Left Opposition, receiving its publications and talking over Left Opposition’s criticisms of the Comintern and the Russian party leadership.

Footnotes
34. J. Mahon, The Workers’ Charter Convention, Labour Monthly, May 1931, pp. 283–286.
35. W. Rust, The Eleventh Plenum of the ECCI, CR, June 1931, p. 221.
36. R.P. Dutt, The Political Situation and the Fight for the Charter, CR, June 1931, p. 211.
37. P. Snowden, An Autobiography: ‘The only proposal to which the general council were not completely opposed was that the salaries of ministers and judges should be subjected to a cut.’ p. 942.
38. RG, Daily Worker, 25 August, 1931; secretariat’s reply, 27 August 1931. Letters of RG 26 and 27 August 1931 not published; for fuller statement, see letter of RG, dated 15 September 1931, and published in American Militant, 10 October 1931.
 



John Strachey
Hugh Thomas
Eyre Methuen, £4.50
LACKING GUIDING theme and political analysis, this biography of Evelyn John Strachey makes of him an enigma, a political and psychological conundrum – a view that finds some support in the picture on the bookjacket, which gives Strachey a curiously Mephistophelian look.
Professor Thomas is, alas, concerned chiefly with the froth of politics (‘a disappointed man ... but then so are most politicians who fail to become Prime Minister’); and with gossip and opinions gathered from past and present top-level mediocrities (‘ambitious, too, for power for its own sake’ says Peter Shore; ‘a backroom character who wanted to be in front’ is George Brown’s judgement; and ‘not a political operator’ is an unintentional compliment from James Callaghan, who should know!)
An underlying denigration is fairly constant through the book, and is a poor substitute for serious study of Strachey’s life and work and worth. To take a couple of examples – the suggestion that Strachey made sacrifices for the labour cause brings from Professor Thomas the comment, ‘the sacrifices of ambitious men are not acts of charity’; and when Strachey, after visiting a Central Europe ravaged by war, revolution and counter revolution, collecting on the way as mistress a radical French journalist named Yvette Fouque, joined the Independent Labour Party and Labour Party at the end of 1923, doubting Thomas questions his motive for doing so.
Strachey, Thomas says, was having an affair with Elizabeth, daughter of ex-Liberal and by then prominent Labour Party politician, Arthur Ponsonby. Horrified at the prospect of having Strachey as son-in-law, Ponsonby had a serious talk with the young man. That talk, says Professor Thomas, ‘must have strayed into politics, and Ponsonby perhaps pointed out the possibilities now opening to Labour as the party of government.’ Thus, it seems, Strachey embraced Ponsonby’s politics instead of his daughter!
Mr Worldy-Wise would, of course, expect Strachey to rise rapidly to the top in politics, for, after all, he came from a socially prominent, comfortably placed family, was educated at Eton and Oxford, and wrote for his father’s paper, the influential and successful weekly the Spectator. He was on friendly terms, too, with those restive, radical young Tories, Bob Boothby and Oswald Mosley. It was Mosley rather than Boothby that Strachey followed, for Mosley resigned from the Tory Party, and, after a period as Independent MP for Harrow, joined the Labour Party and became Labour candidate for Neville Chamberlain’s constituency of Ladywood.
Mosley helped secure the neighbouring constituency of Aston Manor for Strachey: both men raised the Labour vote substantially in the election that followed the fall of the 1924 Labour government, and both men were to be elected to parliament for Midland constituencies in 1929.
In the interim, Strachey edited the ILP monthly, Socialist Review and the miners’ union weekly, The Miner. He collaborated with Mosley in preparing a programme for the ILP to urge on the Labour Party a programme which included control of banking and finance, an expanding home market, and a planned, controlled economy. It was an embryonic Keynesianism, now so depressingly familiar in most capitalist and some communist countries.
Professor Thomas records such events, but only superficially. He clearly enjoys, however, probing into Strachey’s affair with Celia Simpson, and his subsequent desertion of her, without warning, to marry a rich, 30-year-old, American-Irish Roman Catholic, Esther Murphy, ‘attracted,’ says Professor Thomas, ‘by Esther’s money.’ The Professor’s academic objectivity, so far unruffled by the condition of Britain at the time, by the plight of the poor, by the callousness of the rich, or by the treacheries of the 1929–31 Labour government, is thrown out of the window when it comes to dealing with the hapless Esther.
She was a compulsive talker ... ‘a Lesbian ... hideous ... she squinted ... She was very tall ... She drank like a fish ...’ and so on and so on. The marriage broke up after a couple of years, and Strachey resumed his separate relationships with Yvette and Celia.
In the 1929 government, Strachey was private Parliamentary Secretary to Mosley, who was Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and responsible for co-ordinating the Labour government’s policies on unemployment. As the government had no serious policy, and retreated from any sort of action as the depression advanced and unemployment mounted, Mosley prepared a series of proposals. These were rejected by the Cabinet, and by almost every Labour MP. Mosley resigned to form the New Party, and Strachey and a few others went with him. It was not envisaged as a socialist party, but as a centre party of state action and planning which might attract the more humane, radical Tories and Liberals to it. It foundered when Mosley moved towards fascist ideas. Strachey, after considerable hesitations and uncertainties, turned to the Communist Party.
He was to make a circuitous and prolonged journey with the Communists, away from classical communism and socialism towards that same kind of coalition, centre party projected by the New Party; to a combination of ‘progressives’ – and towards the end, non-progressives as well – that was known for a period as a Popular Front.
The dishonest, unscrupulous Communist-directed campaign to this end reached its peak in the Left Book Club rally in June 1939 at the Empress Hall, Earl’s Court, at which Lloyd George, Stafford Cripps, the Dean of Canterbury, Harry Pollitt, John Strachey, Norman Angell and Victor Gollancz all spoke. Strachey went on praising Stalin and defending the terror trials in Moscow at least until November 1939. But he had been shaken by the Stalin-Hitler Pact of August 1939, and he did sell the Russian Five-Year Plan bonds he had bought some years before, to reinvest his money in America’s General Motors and other companies.
Professor Thomas’ section on the Left Book Club shows clearly enough how the Communist Party secretly controlled the club, and how their main instruments in this were Strachey and Gollancz, with help from Harold Laski, and, apparently, from Kingsley Martin. But Professor Thomas does not attempt to discuss the doctrine and arguments involved, nor to assess the consequences for British socialists of the ideas and practices, treacheries and deceptions, spread by the Club, which demoralised the Socialist Left and contaminated the intellectuals of the movement. Many never recovered from the sickness and passed it on to others, so that today’s left still has symptoms of the disease – the double standard of values, the double-think, the double talk, the outwardly-fair, inwardly false which was and is the essence of the corruption.
Strachey, more responsible for spreading the sickness than almost any other British intellectual, never recovered from it. In 1960 he explained the belief that still guided his actions. For him ‘the word “good” meant that which lay along the evolutionary axis; the word “evil” that which pointed in the reverse direction down the evolutionary axis on the time scale, or branching off from it at too sharp a tangent.’ This, though in more moderate terms, is the familiar doctrine by which Stalinism and all its evils flourished; and Professor Thomas’ account of Strachey’s wartime and postwar ministerial career in Attlee’s two governments shows it.
Strachey died aged 61 in 1963. It would be kinder to record some things in his favour – such as the fact that he was bitterly detested by Dr Edith Summerskill, or that he was a keen cricketer and leave it at that. But the evil that men do lives after them – and seldom on such a scale as that left with us by the disciples of Stalin. Strachey had great gifts, and as a cogent expositer of complex ideas and doctrines had few equals. But he wasted his bounty on base causes – and this has to be understood and thought about and discussed, if ever we are to recover our senses.



‘Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight,
And burned is Apollo’s laurel bough,
That sometime grew within this learned man.’



 

Groves: The Communist Manifesto (June 1930)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
The Communist Manifesto
(June 1930)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), The Communist Manifesto, Book Reviews, Labour Monthly, June 1930, pp.382-384.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

The Communist Manifesto of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels
With an introduction and explanatory notes by D. Riazanov
Martin Lawrence, 6s.
Eighty years ago, George Julian Harney, the Chartist leader, published in his Red Republican the Communist Manifesto. The English workers had by then left behind the stormy days of Chartism and were emerging out into the comparatively peaceful period that followed. The Manifesto was introduced to the readers of the Red Republican in the following words:–
The following Manifesto, which has since been adopted by all fractions of the German Communists, was drawn up in the German language in January 1848 by Citizens Charles Marx and Frederic Engels. It was immediately printed in London in the German language and published a few days before the outbreak of the revolution of February. The turmoil consequent upon that great event made it impossible to carry out at that time the intention of translating it into all the languages of civilised Europe.
The English reader will be enabled by the following excellent translation of this important document to judge of the plans and principles of the most advanced Party of the German revolutionists.
Thus was the Communist Manifesto introduced to the British working class. Most revolutionaries of the time failed to understand it fully, or to see clearly its tremendous implications. As Engels wrote many years afterwards: “‘Proletarians of all Lands, Unite!’ Few were the voices to respond when we launched these words into the world.”
When, writing this in 1890, on the first May Day mobilisation of the workers of the world, Engels pointed to the tremendous strides forward made by the movement since the year 1848: “the spectacle we are now witnessing,” he wrote, “will make the capitalists and landowners of all lands realise that to-day the proletarians of all lands are in very truth united.”
To-day, if Engels were alive, what could he not add! One-sixth of the world’s surface ruled by the proletariat: in the rest of the world the Communist International leading the revolutionary struggles of the working class.
To describe the Communist Manifesto as an historical document would be true but hopelessly inadequate. For this work of the two founders of scientific socialism lives and breathes to-day with the same fire, the same conviction as it did in the stormy days of 1848. To-day, its analysis of the tendencies of capitalism, so often “disproved,” so often “refuted,” is rapidly proving to be true: and the role of the working class presented so vividly and clearly in the Manifesto, when it was neither clear nor obvious, is now fulfilled in revolutionary action by the proletariat throughout the world.
To appreciate fully the genius of the authors of the Manifesto it is necessary to know the period in which the Manifesto was written and the outlook and theory of the working-class movement of that time. To read the sentimental speeches and writings of many of the socialists of those days with their appeals to “love” and to “justice”: to read the dull utopian writings and lectures of the Owenites, and then to turn to this vivid challenging document is to measure to a greater degree than was possible before the real power and wide vision of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. To such an understanding of the period of the Manifesto and of the genius of its authors all students will be helped by the work of Professor Riazanov.
The book begins with a history by Riazanov of the Communist League, which gives a detailed picture of the revolutionary movement of the time. There is the Manifesto itself and a number of valuable appendices. Over two hundred pages are devoted to descriptions of almost forgotten movements, to obscure phrases, to economic terms, and to biographical notes on men of the period, then widely known, now forgotten.
The student will probably find the appendices the most useful part of the book. They include an article by Engels on the revolutionary movements of 1847, and the prefaces by Engels to five of the editions of the Communist Manifesto. These contain valuable observations on the international working-class movement and on the movement of the particular countries for which editions were prepared. Riazanov also includes Principles of Communism – Engels’ suggested draft of the Manifesto – interesting not only in itself but as an indication of the part played by Engels in the drawing up of the Manifesto; the “Trial Number” of the Communist Journal of September 1847; the rules and constitution of the Communist League, and the demands of the Communist Party of Germany. The importance and interest of the Rules and Constitution of the Communist League can be seen from Article one, which reads:–
The aim of the League is the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the establishment of the rule of the proletariat, the abolition of the bourgeois social order founded upon class antagonisms, and the inauguration of a new social order wherein there shall be neither classes nor private property.
The form of organisation and of the discipline revealed in these rules is not only extremely interesting to students, but is useful to all who are part of, or interested in, the revolutionary movement of to-day.
From this bare outline of the contents of the book it will be seen that this book is by far the most thorough and useful book on the Communist Manifesto available. It has faults, inaccurate dates, insufficient explanation on some points, – indeed the author points out that it is not the complete commentary on the Manifesto that he hopes at some time to write, and explains why it is not so complete as he would desire – but these faults are incidental and do not detract to any great extent from the value of the book.
An understanding of the struggles of to-day is impossible without an understanding of revolutionary theory. We have our theoretical weapon, our key to clearer understanding of revolutionary theory, in the Communist Manifesto. In helping us to a fuller understanding of this great work Professor Riazanov has done a great service to the revolutionary working class.
To students of revolutionary theory, of the period in which this Manifesto was written, and to all actively working for the “rule of the proletariat,” this book is indispensable.
R.G.
 

Groves: A Dyspeptic Interpretation of Karl Marx (February 1930)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
A Dyspeptic Interpretation of Karl Marx
(February 1930)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), Book Reviews, Labour Monthly, February 1930, pp.125-127.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

Karl Marx
By Otto Rühle
Allen & Unwin, 1929. 12s. 6d.
In Britain, works on Marx and Marxism are few and far between; even for the standard works of Marx the British student is mainly dependent upon the mangled American editions. Because of this and because of the general backwardness of scientific theory in Britain any new book on Marx and his work is likely to be valued, however poor its quality. This makes it necessary to review critically the latest addition to books on Marx.
It can be said in favour of Rühle’s book that it brings before the English reader quotations from the correspondence and works of Marx that are either not available or difficult to obtain in English. The extracts from the letters of Marx and Engels, from articles and from some of the works of Marx are of great interest and for this reason the book has some interest for the student of Marxism.
But the manner and methods of Rühle are poor in the extreme; he gives no evidence of understanding the period during which Marx and Engels developed and matured; he fails to present an analysis of the Labour movement of the time and he does not attempt to relate the genius of Marx to the period in which he lived. His picture of Marx is a picture of an irritable intellectual with many vices, jealous, and one who imposed himself upon the working-class movement of the time, fought for the leadership of the movement and then withdrew into obscurity out of spite, after having almost broken the working-class movement.
Rühle fails to see, and in failing condemns himself and his book, the development of Marx as part of the development of the Labour movement of the period; that Marx is only great and enduring because Marx embodied in his teachings the spirit of the new class that was finally to end the rule of capitalism and bring in Socialism; that Marx developing with the rising working-class movement drew from the experiences of the movement in its different phases an outline of its future struggles and the tactics necessary for the march forward to success.
A book by a Marxist on Marx and his work would have been invaluable as an outline of the teachings of Marx and the relation of Marx to the contemporary working class. It could have shown the rise and development of the early working-class movement and as part of this the development and maturing of Marx and Engels. It could have been a guide to the work of these two in their task of showing the basis of society, the relation of the class struggle to the development of society, the role of the working class in modern society and the immediate tactics of that class in its struggles. Instead, Rühle sees the development of Marx as apart from his time and the struggles of his time. His is a bourgeois conception of history; the materialist conception of history is foreign to his outlook; Marx’s rise and development is explained as being due to his “sense of inferiority” which “increased his urge towards compensatory achievement.”
This fundamental weakness is further revealed in his treatment of the relations of Marx with other sections of the working-class movement. As an example of this we can take the section dealing with Lassalle and Marx. According to Rühle the differences between Marx and Lassalle were due to the personal weaknesses of Marx.
Our minds tend to react with sympathy towards those from whom we expect advancement and profit and with antipathy towards those from whom we expect danger and loss …. It is fairly obvious that Marx regarded Lassalle as a dangerous rival … that was why his letters to Lassalle were sparse and so cold. (Page 229)
In dealing with the reception accorded by Marx to Lassalle’s book Heraclitus, Rühle explains Marx’s contempt for the work by the fact that “Marx had to pay excess postage to the amount of two shillings” which “ensured a bad reception for the book.” (p.230) To those familiar with the real political differences between Marx and Lassalle, this treatment of the question is more than ridiculous; it is a sheer distortion of the facts. Professor Riazanov’s articles in the Labour Monthly (May and June 1929) showed Lassalle’s policy as a policy of repudiation of the Communist League and previous German revolutionary movements and as a policy of alliance with Bismarck and the Prussian State. The danger of this policy to the rising working-class movement was seen clearly by Marx and opposed and fought by Marx, precisely for this reason. Rühle’s account of this episode and of others in which Marx differed from individuals and groups is contemptible.
In this and in many other examples that could be cited, as well as in his general treatment of the period and the working-class movement, Rühle demonstrates his failure to grasp the fundamentals of Marxism. The book is a typical product of the German revisionist school and cannot be recommended. Professor Riazanov’s smaller work Marx and Engels is of far greater value to the student of Marxism and beside it this book stands as a cheap and shoddy work on a subject never understood by the author.
On many occasions one has regretted the high price of books on revolutionary theory—but there are times when one is grateful that the price of a book prevents its too wide circulation.
R.G.
 

Groves: Folded Arms! (May 1930)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
Folded Arms!
(May 1930)

First Published: Reg. Groves, Folded Arms!, Labour Monthly, May 1930, pp.298-304.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

Four years ago this month of May the General Strike began and ended. May 1926 began with the mobilisation of class against class, but within nine days the betrayal was consummated; the most powerful and profound event in the history of the British workers was broken from within, and the courage, spirit and heroism of those nine days were sacrificed to capitalism. But this betrayal, tragic as it seemed at the time, closed one chapter to open another. That new chapter in the history of the British working class now rapidly unfolds itself before our eyes.
The purpose of this article is not to deal with the events of May, 1926, in detail, but to take the idea of the General Strike, interpreted as a strike with “folded arms,” to see when, where and how it arose; to survey briefly its attempted use by the Chartists; and also to see how the “folded arms” conception of the General Strike – either as a weapon to win economic demands, or as a weapon in the struggle for power – has been demonstrated to be utterly false by events of 1926.
 
Benbow and the General Strike
It was in the eighteen-thirties that this idea of the General Strike emerged with consistency. It did so partly through the activities of William Benbow and partly through the growth, during those years, of national working-class organisations.
There were several causes which led to the development of workers’ national organisations; experience had proved the weakness and isolation of the craft and district trade unions; these lessons had been reinforced by defeat in many sectional struggles; there was also the growing tendency of the employers to combine; all these factors contributed to build up a recognition of the importance of national trade unions and national strikes.
Throughout these years of movement among the workers for national organisation to carry through national action, Benbow’s conception of the General Strike was preached; it spread with amazing rapidity.
Benbow’s conception was of a general stoppage of work; he claimed that the workers had “only to say we must be free” and “they would be so two days afterwards.” Benbow held that violence was not necessary; Benbow would never “recommend violence of any kind.” He wanted the workers simply to dress themselves in their Sunday clothes and take a month’s holiday. This conception Benbow developed still further in his pamphlet, The Grand National Holiday, urging the workers to set up local committees to organise the holiday and see that violence was avoided.
The theory outlined above became amazingly popular among the workers; and the rise of the various national unions of the workers naturally in creased the support for the “National Holiday.” This, theory of the General Strike was carried a step further forward by the Left Wing of the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union in its declaration that the delegate conference of trades was a better form of government than parliament, and that it represented the government of the workers as against the government of the employers.
But the pacifism inherent in the theory of Benbow remained. Moral force was to be looked to as the power that would decide the issue between the classes . The idea that it would be impossible for a workers’ government and a capitalist government to exist peace-fully together was not considered. Appeal to armed power and decision of the issues by the use of guns and troops they did not include in their range of possibilities. It was taken for granted that the issues would be settled simply by the obvious superiority of the new form of government over the old being recognised throughout the land, but should pressure be needed that would be provided by the ever-increasing mass support for the National Holiday – which they regarded as being the peaceful way to power.
 
Challenge Voiced by Harney
These conceptions existed without challenge until the time of Chartism. The Chartist Convention of 1839 – faced by the rejection of the Petition – discussed “ulterior measures”; one of these was the “National Holiday” of Benbow, called by the Chartists the “sacred week” or sometimes “the sacred month.” Benbow emerged again; his pamphlet sold even more widely than before.
The advocates of moral force in the Convention supported the General Strike; they regarded it as a peaceful weapon. Their point of view was challenged by the revolutionary elements: George Julian Harney – Secretary of the London Democratic Association, and later the close friend of Marx and Engels – declared that, to be successful the general strike meant “nothing less than civil war.”
In the London Democrat, for May 4, 1839, Harney showed how impossible it was for the workers, on their low wages, to provide themselves with food to carry them through the strike, and described how they would be faced with starvation after the first few days, and so be driven to take food from the rich. This would bring them into conflict with the military and, he asked, “what would this be but insurrection and civil war?” He continued:–
I should not object to this plan, but that those who have been its loudest advocates have at the same time denounced the arming of the people. Suppose such a conflict, such as I have imagined, to take place in some petty district, the people, being unarmed, would suffer a murderous defeat. The news of the slaughter of the people in this one district would fly like wildfire throughout the country; the effect would be that the rest of the people (dispirited with hunger and but too conscious that they too were unarmed) would be compelled to return to their taskmasters soliciting again to be enslaved ...
What then should the people do? These are not the times to be nice about mere words; the fact is that there is but one mode of obtaining the Charter and that is by Insurrection.
Here, in an undeveloped form, is the first challenge, from the revolutionary point of view, to the theory that “folded arms” can defeat the power of capitalism. Here is an awareness that the General Strike means preparing to meet the troops, the police and the armed forces of the ruling class – which is precisely what the “moral force” supporters of the “National Holiday” did not intend to do.
 
The Chartist Strike
In the year 1842 the great “Plug Plot” took place; this was the nearest approach to the General Strike dreamt of and advocated by Benbow. The strike, which originated in Ashton and Hyde against a reduction in wages, spread rapidly to other parts of Lancashire, to Yorkshire, Staffordshire, the Potteries, and to parts of Wales and Scotland. Benbow’s dream of the workers in their Sunday clothes, on holiday, was rudely shattered. Hungry, shouting and grim bands of strikers invaded the various towns, carrying such banners as “They that perish by the sword are better than they that perish by hunger.” For days Manchester and other towns were in a state of siege; shops were shut, factories invaded, and the workers brought out – willingly or unwillingly – to join in the strike. Trains were stopped and frequent con-flicts took place between the strikers and the Government forces. In Preston and Blackburn the troops, who were poured into the strike areas by the Government, fired upon the crowds, killing six workers.
The delegate conference of the strikers decided to turn the strike into one for the Charter; all work was to cease until the “Charter became the law of the land.” The winning of the Charter could only be achieved by the forcible overthrow of the bourgeoisie – by the transformation of the strike into an in-surrectionary struggle for power, but the strikers’ decision was based, not upon a recognition of the need for revolutionary struggle but upon the belief that the General Strike would compel the ruling class to abdicate from rulership. “Never,” said the Northern Star, “for one moment let it be forgotten by any Chartist, that, to be successful, they must be peaceful”; the Chartist Association issued a manifesto:–
Englishmen! The blood of your brethren reddens the streets of Preston and Blackburn and the murderers thirst for more. Be firm, be courageous, be men. Peace, law and order have prevailed on our side; let them be revered until your brethren in Scotland, Wales and Ireland are informed of your resolution and when a universal holiday prevails, which will be the case in eight days, then of what use will bayonets be against public opinion?
The Government, however, far from surrendering its power, turned all its attention to repressive measures; whilst the factory owners formed themselves into volunteer forces of “specials.” The strike, however, did not develop further towards insurrection than a number of isolated conflicts between the strikers and the police and troops. In September the workers resumed without having carried the Charter into law and without having prevented the wage reductions.
So the theory of the “Sacred Month,” of the “National Holiday” was tried; Harney’s analysis of 1839 was vindicated in 1842, and it was demonstrated that “folded arms” is not the method by which the workers can achieve class power.
 
The Syndicalist Theory
The “folded arms” theory does not reappear as the theory of a movement until the years 1911-1914. These were years of developing “industrial unrest.” The principal sections of the working class were engaged in tremendous struggles with the employers; faced with serious decline the ruling class used every method to defeat the workers and the State was used more and more in these disputes; this and the discrediting of Parliamentary action, through the failure of the Parliamentary Labour Party, drove the workers increasingly to action on the industrial field. Out of this rising wave of militancy arose the Syndicalist movement, with its doctrines of “direct action” and its advocacy of the General Strike. The development of this powerful movement was turned aside by the war.
The Syndicalists were still under the illusion that the General Strike could achieve the emancipation of the workers. During the “Don’t Shoot” trial an article in the Syndicalist explained:–
The violence that the Syndicalists advocate is a strike of men united in such a powerful and solid industrial union that there will be no scabs for the troops to protect ... We think that nothing will conduce to a peaceful transfer of capital from the capitalist to the community as the realisation on the part of the capitalist that the Syndicalists have it in their power to annihilate their profits by withdrawing the workers. – (The Syndicalist, March 1912.)
The increasing use of troops in industrial disputes forced the Syndicalists to face up to the question of fighting the capitalist state, but beyond appeals to the soldiers “Not to shoot,” little was done. There was clearly no awareness on the part of the Syndicalists that to get power the workers must build a revolutionary party that would prepare for insurrection.
 
The General Strike
With the end of the war came the renewal of the struggle, with its political character evidencing more clearly. From “Black Friday” onwards the forces of the working class were moving towards mass action to meet the capitalist offensive, seeking ways, means and weapons to smash the capitalist front. From the end of the war onwards the employers and their State machine were expressing in words and deeds their conviction that the only hope for them lay in the driving down of the standards of living of the British working class. Upon this basis of starvation wages the existence of British capitalism depended. Any challenge to this basis meant a challenge to the whole capitalist class and to the rule of capitalism. Such a challenge the bourgeoisie would meet by the use of the whole forces of the State. Thus the struggle for bread and butter becomes a struggle for class power, and behind the nominal issues on which struggles were waged lay the fundamental issue – Which class was to rule ?
During the Nine Days the General Council did all it could to weaken and to hold back the strikers and to disguise from them its real character. Day by day they announced, through the British Worker, that “this is an industrial dispute; the General Council does not seek to challenge the constitution.” The Government, on the other hand, mobilised all its forces. Troops and armoured cars menaced the workers of London; in Hull, Middlesbrough and elsewhere they were used to break the strike; the police batoned workers, broke up strike meetings and arrested the most militant. To this, in spite of their leaders, the workers replied by action; scab buses were stopped by huge crowds of workers and turned back, scab trams were stoned, and in many cases overturned; mass pickets were organised to prevent blacklegging and Workers’ Defence Corps formed. Clearly within a short time the General Council would have lost its control over the workers, and the struggle, under a new leadership, would have gone forward to open civil war.
Then came the betrayal; the surrender by the General Council. When the full meaning of this was known there was a widespread wave of fury among the workers; from all parts came resolutions of anger, of protest, and of decision to fight on.
We cannot now deal with the rally of May 13; with the efforts of many local committees to link up and fight on; with the end of the strike; and with the subsequent struggle of the miners. For us the question is – is the General Strike still a weapon in the struggle of the working class and if so how has its form been changed by the events of 1926?
 
Never Again?
The Labour leaders united in declaring, after the General Strike, that it could never happen again – that the weapon of the General Strike had been finally discredited by the events of May 1926.
The reason for these statements can be found in the fact that the events of May, 1926, demonstrated that every industrial struggle of the workers is, in the period of capitalist decline, a revolutionary struggle; that a fight against one section of the capitalist class is a fight against the whole capitalist class raising the issues of class power, and raising the question of the fight against the capitalist State. It is no longer possible for the workers to fight for improved conditions or even to fight against worsened conditions without challenging the basis of capitalist rule.
For this reason Labour leaders will never use the General Strike weapon again. May, 1926, presented the alternative to the Labour leaders of revolutionary struggle for power or class collaboration with the bosses in reorganising capitalism on the basis of worsened condition for the workers; they chose class collaboration. It showed the need for a revolutionary party of the working class to link up the various struggles of the working class and lead them against the capitalist state.
The weapon of the General Strike remains a weapon in the class struggle; the events of 1926 killed the “folded arms” illusion for ever. In future it can only be used as part of the revolutionary struggle of the working class for power. In this sense and in this sense alone can we regard the General Strike as a weapon in our fight for emancipation; the events of May should be to us not only a lesson in this respect but an inspiration to us in the mighty conflicts of to-day.
 

Groves: The Dotage of the Hammonds (November 1930)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
The Dotage of the Hammonds
(November 1930)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), The Dotage of the Hammons, Book Reviews, Labour Monthly, November 1930, pp.699-701.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

The Age of the Chartists
By J.L. and Barbara Hammond
Longmans, 1930. 12s. 6d.
J.L. and Barbara Hammond have already earned the gratitude and commendation of all students of working-class history. Their work, set out in the pages of The Village Labourer and The Town Labourer, displayed both insight and ability; both books were finely written and intensely moving; the bitterness of the class struggle was revealed on every page, almost it sometimes seemed in spite of the authors.
They have now written a book dealing with the period of Chartism—1832-1854; a period that should offer even greater opportunities than that covered in previous books. This period, 1832-1854, saw the climax of the whole period that began in the middle of the previous century; they witnessed the decisive triumph of the new system over the old England and the triumph of the new class, the industrialists, over the working class. “The Age of the Chartists” was one of bitter social conflict; an age in which the struggle of the preceding years reached its highest point in the struggle of the Chartists for the political rule of the working class.
How do the Hammonds approach their subject? They set out, in the second chapter of their book, to explain the causes of discontent in the nineteenth century by seeing “what light” can be drawn “from well-known facts about ancient history.” Headed The Remedy of the Ancient World this chapter sings of the “glory-that-was-Greece” and of the “peace-that-was-Rome.” The Hammonds argue that in these empires:
The class struggle was veiled or softened by the moral influence of common possessions; the practice of social fellowship was stimulated by the spectacle of beautiful buildings.
With the wholly misleading character of this plea and the obscuring of the real character of Roman-Grecian civilisation, we have not the space to deal fully: perhaps by re-adapting it to our own time we can estimate it at its true worth. It is as though some future historian should write of our own time:
The student of English history may well wonder at the tranquillity of the English political situation during the years 1918-1930.
We fancy the explanation of this is to be found in the many cultural compensations enjoyed in common by rich and poor. The poor man might starve, but he and his children could still gaze with wonder and delight at Bush House, Euston Station and the Albert Memorial. As times grew more difficult he could still, equally with the rich, find solace in the museums, the palatial public lavatories and luxurious Corner Houses of London.
Ridiculous? Yes, but no more so than the contention of the Hammonds. They set out to show that for the “hard, distasteful, and monotonous toil” that has fallen to the lot of the vast majority of the people, all through the ages, “the ancient world offered one consolation,” that of common cultural possession and “the world of the Industrial Revolution another,” the doctrine of Samuel Smiles. The remedy of the new world, that of individual opportunity, did not satisfy the people: they needed amusements, education, music, beautiful buildings and failing to get them, exhibited strong discontent. The Hammonds prefer the remedy of Greece and Rome and put the question as though the capitalists had a choice and chose wrongly. Nowhere does it seem to occur to the Hammonds that there was no choice in either case: the change in the forms of expenditure (which were forms of re-investment out of surplus) were inevitable to the development of the industrial system. To talk of the development of art in Greece as part of a “common life” is to ignore the conditions in the ancient world; in these things the rich found a way, the only way for them of expending their surplus; in the industrial revolution it was needed for developing industry. Why Capitalism was forced to develop discontent and why that discontent intensifies they do not ask.
The book therefore suffers from carrying an untenable thesis: the material presented is written with a view to driving home the peculiarly unreal contention of the authors. Their method of approaching and dealing with the period makes the great movements, the outlook of the workers, the deep anger and discontent, part of some ethical problem and, consequently, meaningless; while the book ceases to be a living work and becomes a mere compilation of Blue-Book matter, plus the philosophy of R.H. Tawny and of Dr. Bridges, and enlivened by the excellent literary style of the Hammonds.
Nowhere does their failure to relate their material to the class struggle come out so manifestly as in the section on the Churches. The vast majority of the church “reformers,” especially the Christian Social Movement, were mainly driven by the power of revolutionary ideas over the workers. The workman spent his leisure in the Chartist or Owenite halls or attending Chartist meetings; his reading consisted, in the main, of Chartist and radical papers; because of this, he began to understand the class character of the new society and of its tools, the churches, the existing educational schemes, and the “moral” reform movements. Where Chartism was strongest, all efforts of the various dissenting sects, Methodist, Wesleyan, and Congregationalists, were least successful. Lancashire was an example of this. “Visit,” said one writer of Manchester in 1840, “the churches, and chapels, of this great town; look around at the various congregations, richly and gaily dressed … and say how many of the real horny-handed workmen will be found among the group.” Charles Kingsley, the Christian “Socialist,” said:
The devil has got the best long ago, for the cream and pith of working intellect is almost exclusively self-educated and therefore also infidel.
The ruling class began to see the importance of the working class “receiving in school or in places of worship that religious instruction that is necessary for knitting together the inhabitants and classes of a great country,” and to this end, to the task of winning the workers away from revolutionary ideas, the reformers set themselves; some secured a “softening” of the most glaring examples of the class character of Church life and doctrine; others tackled education and issued instructive periodicals; others tinged their Christianity with Socialism in order to secure the confidence of the workers. Mechanics’ Halls, Schools, Clubs, popular magazines sprang up in great numbers: not due to the sudden conversion of the owning class to “the remedy of the ancient world,” but due to their fear of a class-conscious working class.
The chapter on The Revolt is, significantly enough, one of the shortest in the book: for further material on Chartism we are referred to the works: of West, Hovell, and Dolleans! Here the Hammonds estimate that the significance of the struggles of the Chartist period is that “the English poor, found in these agitations an opportunity of protesting against the place they occupied in the raw industrial settlements spreading over the North and the Midlands” and because
The rulers of this new society had forgotten that if you wish to satisfy a people you must satisfy its imagination: the leaders of revolt knew that if you want to rouse a people you must rouse its imagination. The Chartist movement, like the Owenite movement, was imagination in action.
Of Chartism’s place as a class movement in our history and of its influence upon the practice and theory of English and International Socialism, there is nothing. The greatest decade in our history becomes a movement of the people for brighter Sundays, better education, and for common enjoyment, with the rich, of music, architecture, and painting. The Chartists, according to the Hammonds’ view, set out on the road that led to the Whitechapel Art Gallery; how disappointed the Hammonds will be to learn that its experiences were drawn upon by Marx and Engels, by the International Labour Movement, and by the Bolshevists; that Chartism was the beginning of a struggle that is to-day reaching its goal all over the world—the struggle of the working class for political power.
Within these limits enough of the Hammonds’ old genius spasmodically glimmers to make their new book an interesting addition to the existing material on the period. The chapters dealing with the new towns, their government, sanitation and housing; the chapter on the Poor Law Act of 1834 the chapter on Education with its details of the extent and nature of education in that period, all help to fill in some of the many gaps in our knowledge of the England of the Chartists.
The literature of the revolutionary movement is still so deficient that even from this book we can wrest some information for the study of this important epoch in our history.
R.G.
 

Groves: Marx and the Labour Parliament of 1854 (March 1930)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
Marx and the Labour Parliament of 1854
(March 1930)

First Published: Reg. Groves, Marx and the Labour Parliament of 1854, Labour Monthly, March 1930, pp.172-176.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

“If the Labour Parliament proves true to the idea that called it into life, some future historian will have to record that there existed in the year 1854 two Parliaments, a Parliament at London and a Parliament at Manchester – a Parliament of the rich and a Parliament of the poor – but that men sat only in the Parliament of the men and not in the Parliament of the masters.” – KARL MARX.
The Labour Parliament has received but little attention from historians. Bourgeois historians have been too concerned with the “parliament of the rich” to give attention to the “parliament of the poor.” Even the historians of our own movement have almost ignored it. Almost without exception they treat it as being the last feeble effort of the remnants of the mighty Chartist movement; yet of this parliament Marx wrote “The mere assembling of such a parliament marks a new epoch in the history of the world.”
The prime mover in the assembling of the Labour Parliament was Ernest Jones. Upon his release from prison in the year 1850 Jones set to work to revive the Chartist Movement; his efforts failed, however, to secure any real and lasting response from the British workers. The revolutionary tide was at low ebb; as Jones declared: “Every year the revolutionary element has become more languid.”
The rapid expansion of British trade and the consequent concessions secured by the proletariat had detached from the Chartist Movement the most important of its adherents; increased emigration had deprived it of many of its most active workers. Ernest Jones, however, through his Notes to the People and later through the People’s Paper, kept up a constant agitation. He aimed at drawing together the now divided working class, and to that end he urged the building of a mass movement that would unite the workers on immediate demands as a stage in the mobilisation of the workers for the struggle for power.
The latter part of the year 1853 saw the struggles in the textile industry, notably at Preston and Wigan, and out of these came the “Mass Movement Committee,” which was elected in November, 1853, by a mass meeting at Manchester. This Committee worked to win the support of the whole working class for those workers at Preston and Wigan engaged in struggle, and to this end propagated the idea of a Labour Parliament. The Committee raised a fair amount of money in various ways for these workers. Ernest Jones was now vigorously propagating, on the platform and in the pages of the People’s Paper, the need for a Labour Parliament. He was constantly emphasising the need for this Parliament to unite the working class against the employing class, and to establish a central strike fund for the support of all workers engaged in struggle. Thus, in the People’s Paper for January 7, 1854, he wrote:–
Every day brings fresh confirmation of the need for a mass movement and the speedy assembling of the Labour Parliament. If it is delayed much longer, every place, Preston included, lost or at the best forced into degrading and weakening compromises ... The Cotton Lords, at a “Mass Meeting” of their own, unanimously resolved to support their brother Cotton Lords of Preston and Wigan with the full force of their funds. Under these circumstances it is class against class ...
It must, therefore, become manifest that unless the working classes fight this battle as a Class, that is, in one universal union by a mass movement, they will be inevitably defeated ...
The greater the lock-out, the wider the strike movement, the more national becomes the movement – the more of a class struggle it is rendered – and if the working classes once see that they are struck at as a class, their class instinct will be roused and they will rise and act as one man.
The work of Ernest Jones for the Labour Parliament and for the International Committee that arose out of it marks the culmination of his career as a revolutionary agitator. When, in 1858, the People’s Paper ceased publication, Jones, worn out and disheartened, closed his Chartist career and entered the ranks of Radical-Liberal politics. But his adhesion to Radical-Liberalism during the last eight years of his life should not hinder an appreciation of his work during the later stages of Chartism and of his efforts for the Labour Parliament.
The Parliament first met on March 6, 1854, at Manchester, and was attended by some fifty or sixty delegates, mainly from the textile unions. The following letter from Karl Marx makes it clear the event was considered by him as one of considerable significance in working-class history. Curiously enough this letter has been ignored by almost all those who have written on this period; it is taken from the People’s Paper for March 18, 1854:–
28 Dean Street, Soho
March 9, 1854
I regret deeply to be unable for the moment at least to leave London and thus to be prevented from expressing verbally my feelings of pride and gratitude on receiving the invitation to sit as Honorary Delegate at the Labour Parliament.
The mere assembling of such a Parliament marks a new epoch in the history of the world. The news of this great fact will arouse the hopes of the working classes throughout Europe and America.
Great Britain, of all other countries, has seen developed, on the greatest scale, the despotism of capital and the slavery of labour, In no other country have the intermediate stations between the millionaire, commanding whole industrial armies, and the wage slaves, living only from hand to mouth, so gradually been swept away from the soil. There exists no longer, as in Continental countries, large classes of peasants and artisans almost equally dependant on their own property and their own labour. A complete divorce of property has been effected in Great Britain.
In no other country, therefore, has the war between the two classes that constitute modern society assumed so colossal dimension and features so distinct and palpable.
But it is precisely from these facts that the working classes of Great Britain, before all others, are competent and called for to act as leaders in the great movement that must finally result in the absolute emancipation of Labour. Such they are from the conscious clearness of their position, the vast superiority of their numbers, the disastrous struggles of their past and the moral strength of their present.
It is the working millions of Great Britain who first have laid down the real basis of a new society – modern industry which transformed the destructive agencies of nature into the productive power of man. The English working classes with invincible energies, by the sweat of their brows and brains, have called into life the material means of ennobling labour itself and multiplying its fruits to such a degree as to make general abundance possible.
By creating the inexhaustible productive powers of modern industry they have fulfilled the first condition of the emancipation of labour. They have now to realise its other conditions. The have to free those wealth-producing powers from the infamous shackles of monopoly and subject them to the joint control of the producers, who till now allowed the very products of their hands to turn against them and be transformed into as many instruments of their own subjugation.
The labouring classes have conquered nature; they have now to conquer men. To succeed in this attempt they do not want strength but the organisation of their common strength, organisation of the labouring classes on a national scale – such, I suppose, is the great end aimed at by the Labour Parliament.
If the Labour Parliament proves true to the idea that called it into life some future historian will have to record that there existed in the year 1854. two Parliaments: a Parliament at London and a Parliament at Manchester – a Parliament of the rich and a Parliament of the poor – but that men sat only in the Parliament of the men and not in the Parliament of the masters.



 


Yours truly,
KARL MARX



The Parliament’s discussions lasted several days, and when it broke up it declared its intention of meeting again at a later date that year. The programme it finally adopted is a curious mixture. None of the demands put forward in the Charter appears in this programme. Its main point is the “organisation of a system for the collecting of national revenue for Labour” to be raised by a weekly levy on wages. The fund was to “support all towns and places now or hereafter on strike or locked out,” and also to settle unemployed workers on the land. It also stated that:–
The power of this movement shall be further extended to secure a due restriction of the hours of labour; a limitation of female labour in manufacture as also the entire abolition of the labour of young children in mines and factories; a cessation of the tyrannical system of discharge notes, of fines, abatements and other unjust modes of reducing wages.
The point of view of Ernest Jones on the role of the Parliament – “under these circumstances it is class against class” – was not the general point of view of the delegates. The Mass Movement Committee was continually emphasising the fact that the movement was in no way a political movement. Many of the workers, influenced by their Trade Union officials, were at first highly suspicious of the movement. The Lancashire miners refused to appoint delegates with full powers, and only sent delegates with a watching brief, an attitude that caused considerable commotion and discussion in the Parliament. The capitalist Press regarded the movement as dangerous and attacked it.
An executive was elected – Jones was included as an honorary member – and after the Parliament had concluded, the work of raising the “national revenue for Labour” was commenced. For a few months some twenty pounds a week flowed in and then the support dwindled; the Parliament never met again.
These facts certainly suggest that the Parliament was premature, but do not support the point of view that it was merely the dying effort of the remnants of Chartism. The Parliament was more than that. It marks an intermediate stage between the Chartist Movement and the rise of the Socialist Movement of later years. Not only was it the last challenge of the old class movement of the Chartists to the Liberal politics of class conciliation so widespread at that time; it was also the forerunner of the later Socialist Movement, of the later mobilisation of the working class under the banner of class politics. The International Committee which arose out of this Parliament did a great deal of work and helped to prepare the way for the First International.
Premature though it may have been in one sense, yet it was of deep significance; it was a stage in the development of our movement; it was an attempt to mobilise the workers under the slogan of class against class, deserving of more than the indifferent treatment that it has so far received. Let us remember that on March 6, 1854, there met two Parliaments: “a Parliament of the rich and a Parliament of the poor and that men sat only in the Parliament of the men and not in the Parliament of the masters.”
 

Groves: "Wilkes And Liberty" (September 1930)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
“Wilkes And Liberty”
(September 1930)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), “Wilkes and Liberty”, Book Reviews, Labour Monthly, September 1930, pp.509-511.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

Life of John Wilkes
By O.A. Sherrard
Allen & Unwin, 319 pp., 10s. 6d.
That Devil Wilkes
By R.W. Postgate
Constable, 288 pp., 14s.
There is a revival of interest in John Wilkes; two biographies come out simultaneously and are widely reviewed; the City of London renovates the Wilkes Memorial in Ludgate Circus; many must be asking “Who was John Wilkes?”
Wilkes, the son of a wealthy distiller, was born in 1727. He entered Parliament in 1757; there he allied himself with the group, led by Pitt, which represented trading and commercial interests. The eighteenth-century Parliament – with its “rotten boroughs,” corrupt electioneering methods and general bribery and place-seeking – formed a barrier against the efforts of the trading and commercial interests to obtain a larger share in the government of the country; behind this corrupt assembly the King and the aristocracy wielded power.
Wilkes’s fight for the right of his class to “share the spoils” began in earnest with the issuing of the North Briton in 1762. Wilkes was imprisoned for “Number 45” of that journal, his imprisonment causing great excitement. He was expelled from the House of Commons in 1764. Elected for Middlesex – which had a comparatively democratic electorate – he was four times refused his seat.
Not until 1775 was he allowed to take his seat; then – as the faithful representative of his class – he supported America in the War of Independence, and he also brought forward motions in favour of electoral reform.
Later in life he made his peace with the King and many of his former enemies. In 1780, as a magistrate of the City of London, he played an active part in the repression of the Gordon Riots, leading the imprisoning and shooting down of men and women who had supported him throughout his own struggles; for this he received the thanks of the Privy Council. Later he retired from Parliament, and he died in 1797. Postgate says: –
They engraved upon the plate of his coffin the epitaph and verdict he had chosen for himself: “The remains of John Wilkes, a Friend to Liberty!”
It is but a few years ago that Postgate wrote of Wilkes as “adventurer, libeller and adulterer ... a wit and parasite by nature; he had no fixed principles nor any fixed interests, bar seduction and indecent publications. Nature and his own choice intended him for a disreputable hanger-on of the Court, but the Court made the mistake of refusing his services and he turned in vexation to the task of making himself a nuisance.”
But this new book announces a change of front for Postgate writes:–
The writer of it began it in the usual belief that Wilkes was an amusing but entirely dishonest man. After more than three years of study he has been forced to change his opinions and believe that Wilkes was politically an honest man.
The change of opinion is not in itself important; fuller examination, new facts, more careful consideration must often reverse previous judgments. But the striking feature of these quotations is that the author’s differing estimates of Wilkes’s actions, opinions and place in history are based upon his estimate of Wilkes’s personal character. For Postgate the point at issue is not “Which class did Wilkes represent?” but, “Was he, or was he not, honest?” Prove Wilkes “politically honest” and for Postgate the “disreputable hanger-on of the Court” becomes the “Friend to Liberty.”
“Personal character” is the interest of Wilkes for both these biographers. As with Mr. Postgate, so with Mr. Sherrard who writes:–
Wilkes has been represented as utterly vile ... the following pages are an attempt to see him as he was.
Because neither of the writers have attempted to examine deeply the class struggles of the time and analyse for us the class interests represented by the group to which Wilkes belonged, neither of the books explains very much. Where the problems demand a clear estimate of the social and economic position the authors explain by references to personal character.
We give one example of the inadequacy of this method. The view of Wilkes as “A Friend to Liberty” is widely held, as is also the belief that he was “the first peoples’ member for Parliament”; both biographers encourage this idea. And yet it is manifestly untrue. True, Wilkes fought for his class – merchants, shopkeepers, traders, commercial interests – that class should do him honour; the City of London does care for his monument at this very time! But the idea that he fought for or represented the “people” – meaning the journeyman, the apprentice, the weaver, the cottager – is as completely false as would be the suggestion that Wedgwood Benn fights for, or represents, the proletariat or the peasantry of India. The grievances of the London crowds who rioted with the cry of “Wilkes and Liberty” were economic; they saw, wrongly, in Wilkes their champion; for their mistake they paid dearly. Postgate will surely not argue that because the people supported Wilkes he was therefore their champion. Neither can Postgate deny the contempt which Wilkes had for the “mob.”
Wilkes’s actions in later years show where his interests lay. Although many old “Wilkites” took part in the Gordon Riots – it was the “Wilkite mob” who formed the main body of rioters – Wilkes helped to suppress them, declaring that he “would not leave one rioter alive.” The French Revolution was denounced by Wilkes as the work of “the bloody savages of Paris.”
In the later years Wilkes was received at Court and welcomed by the aristocracy. One little incident of these later years makes his position very clear. In answer to an old woman who shouted after him “Wilkes and Liberty” he replied, “Shut up, you old fool; that’s all over long ago.”
In the face of these facts what becomes of the “Peoples’ Member for Parliament”? Neither Mr. Postgate nor Mr. Sherrard would suggest as explanation that Wilkes “sold the pass”; they would deny this. Wilkes continued to stand by his class, but that class never was the “people.” True he fought for “Liberty,” but for whom? During his years of struggle he wrote, “The merchants are firm for liberty.” The “liberty” for which Wilkes fought was liberty for the merchants; liberty to increase profits; liberty to expand commerce; liberty to crush still further the poor and drive them from their lands.
Maybe Mr. Postgate has latterly become more accustomed to view as “representative of the people” those who suppress riots; who hate revolution; who are contemptuous of the “lower classes,” and who use them but to get parliamentary place and position. We shall do well in remembering the history of Wilkes in these respects to remember also, in Mr. Postgate’s words, that “Wilkes was politically an honest man.”
Both books are well written; both use much the same material; both tell the story well; both make easy reading; the trimmings and wrappings leave little to be desired, but both writers fail to reveal the significance and place in history of John Wilkes.
R.G.
 



The Levellers in the English Revolution
edited by G.E. Aylmer
Thames and Hudson, £1.95
With a divided, debating Army taking so considerable a part in the Portuguese turmoil, Professor G.E. Aylmer’s collection of English Civil War documents comes as timely reminder that an English army once took crucial part in a revolution, and in a struggle for the liberties of the common people.
One of a series Documents of Revolution Professor Aylmer’s book is about the Levellers, a movement active and influential in 17th century army and popular life. The period swarms with groups, sects, independent congregations, communities and prophets ‘new inspired’: an energetic demand for reform – political and social – was manifest everywhere.
The very plentitude of pamphlets, proclamations, reprinted sermons and speeches probably explains why so much that went on then remains obscure or hidden; why what comes out of the researchers’ ‘lucky dip’ can baffle so many commentators; and why the Levellers have received most attention – for though moved, like most, by deep, abiding responses and beliefs, they marshalled their major agitations, inside and outside of the Army, around demands for reforms recognisable to radicals in subsequent centuries.
In an introduction to the documents, Professor Aylmer summarises the life of that valiant Leveller, John Lilburne, from 1630 when he was apprenticed to a London cloth merchant through to his death in prison in 1657, aged but 42 or so. Throughout, Lilburne was the scourge of Royalist and Presbyterian, of the wealthy businessmen and the great landowners, and was the hero of the common soldiers and common people. The rise of the Levellers to the high point of the year 1649, when their emblem, a sea-green ribbon, was on helmets, hats, caps and bonnets everywhere, is concisely and adequately summarised.
Throughout, Professor Aylmer is fair, even sympathetic to the Levellers – but orthodoxy keeps breaking in. Overall, of course, in the way he approaches his subject: he seems certain that no radical or plebeian revolution could possibly have succeeded, then, or at any other period, except perhaps, in our own present times. Directly, he has two interesting criticisms to make of the Levellers. Their tactics were clumsy, since ‘they could not win by consent of the upper classes, but made no preparation for insurrection’; and ‘their economic ideas were unconstructive’. They wanted an ‘ideal world of owner-occupiers on the land, plus self-employed craftsmen and independent traders’. The term ‘owner-occupiers’ here is, in the context of its time, misleading, but, this aside, it may well be asked what was wrong about striving for such a society? Especially as these were the sort of people who gave support to the Levellers and other forward movements, and wore the sea-green ribbons on their caps, and in their hearts, for the next century and more.
Selected studies must necessarily exclude much. Much more seriously they must snap the sequence of events, because they can take no account of what went before or what followed after. Drag a normally stagnant village pond and seeming-strange creatures and things come to the surface. But they were already there, and will be there long after the surface has become placid again. Whenever the pond of society is convulsed into motion, similar creatures and things will come to the surface, and those who know only the pond’s calm and composed surface, will be startled, and sometimes afeard.
Professor Aylmer quotes Edward Sexby’s words at the great Army debates at Putney:
‘We have engaged in this kingdom and ventur’d our lives, and itt was all for this: to recover our birthright and privilages as Englishmen.’
His hearers knew what he meant – do we? This caveat apart, Professor Aylmer provides a useful outline of the Leveller movement and an informative collection of documents for both general reader and specialised student.
 



Flame of Freedom
Clifford Lindsey Anderson
Bailey Bros & Swinfer, £1.50
Rural Discontent in 19th Century Britain
J.P.D. Dunbabin
Faber, £6.50.
IF the great rebellion of 1381 had not taken place, hardly anyone would have troubled to explore contemporary court, manorial and legal records to chart its extent and quality. Nor, probably, would more recent researchers like Professor Rodney Hilton have bothered to document the centuries-long struggle of the English peasants and craftsmen for enfranchisement from an oppressive alien feudalism.
How smoothly, too, in the absence of major rebellion, would the learned lackeys of the status quo have explained the crumbling away of feudal servitude and the apparently inexplicable emergence into the open of the long subjugated English people and their native culture. It would have been said that feudalism passed because of the spread of trade, or the rediscovery of classical learning, or the circulation of liberal ideas, or the opening up of the new world, or economic change – to one or all of them, but never, never, to the action of the people themselves.
Small wonder that the great rebellion persists in obtruding on our thoughts and preoccupations. In the last twelve months or so, the opera Wat Tyler has had a belated performance in England for the first time; a play, The Great Rebellion has been seen on the London stage; Professor Hilton’s study of the revolt and its antecedents, Bond Men Made Free, has been published; and now comes another – albeit less learned – book on the subject, Flame of Freedom, a plain, quite short narrative of the event itself, with some fictional embellishments to give it character-interest. The author, Clifford Lindsey Anderson, has already had published, in the same modest format, books on the Norman Conquest, the Wars of the Roses, Tudor England, and the English Civil War, and clearly could have had little time for, adequate original research into so many complex subjects. His sympathies, however, are with rebels not rulers, and, perhaps through lack of time and space, he spares us the ‘buts’ and ‘ifs’, the ‘on the other hands’ and ‘due allowance must be made fors’ of academic historians.
If the 1381 rebellion provides theme and explanation for those scattered, fragmented records of the people’s long struggle for freedom in medieval times, what theme can give point to the numerous inchoate tumults of rural England in the 1800s? This question is prompted by a reading of J.P.D. Dunbabin’s 300-pager, Rural Discontent in Nineteenth Century Britain, a book distinguished by a contribution from Pamela Horn, who writes on Farmworkers’ trade unions in Oxfordshire; and by one from A.J. Peacock who continues his lively and fascinating chronicle of what is here called Village Radicalism in East Anglia – though he strays sometimes beyond the strict historical boundaries of his kingdom to enlarge his references. He shows most convincingly that a rural war raged for long periods in England’s countryside. It is a pity that his brief was limited to the first fifty years of the century.
Mr Dunbabin has himself written the bulk of the book, covering with equal facility and confidence such diverse subjects as The Rise and Fall of Agricultural Trades Unions in England; Hiring Fairs and Farm Servants Combination in Scotland; Northumberland in the 1870s; Tenant Rights in Britain and Ireland; The Crofters’ ‘Land War’; The Welsh ‘Tithe War’; and three sections called Ideas and Arguments in which ideas are scarce, and arguments so judicially balanced as to cancel each other out. Mr Dunbabin has no theme to unify the study of the century’s conflicts nor to give point to it all.
Earlier outbreaks and uproars were, he says, ‘rearguard actions with little prospect of development’. But in later years, when ‘English agricultural labourers, Scottish farm servants, Scottish crofters and Welsh anti-tithers all mounted a major challenge to some aspect of their living conditions’ Mr Dunbabin writes more favourably; for though ‘these challenges were not devoid of elements of reaction ... they all groped towards positive changes.’ They constituted ‘an adaptation by the rural poor to the vast but unnoticed (!) changes of the mid-Victorian years – the spread of railways and of literacy’ and ‘the constant emphasis on sobriety and orderly behaviour’.
What is meant here by ‘an element of reaction’ is nothing less than those exalted, hopeful expectations of drastic change and social overturn which alone might have remedied adequately the conditions of the people, and diverted the nation from the disastrous course along which it was being directed by uncontrolled economic forces, and by its businessmen and politicians. As for those highly-approved ‘challenges’, it seems that they became ‘partially fused’ as the ‘Rural Question’ or so says Mr Dunbabin. To be labelled, boxed and put on a shelf alongside other such boxes, labelled ‘The Labour Question’, ‘The Irish Question’, ‘The Drink Question’ and so on; about which nothing important was ever done, or, ever will be done. Certainly nothing to change basic relationships and circumstances.
What the author means by ‘an adaptation by the rural poor’ to the changes of the time, is simply that the rural poor, too, came to accept – at least outwardly – the predominance in British life of manufacturing industry and commerce; and the inferiority of agriculture as a livelihood and as an industry, doomed to slow extinction. They accepted the role of wage earners, and lowly ones at that; asking merely for a few meagre reforms and improvements in their condition. That this is accepted by our Lefts, as well as by our Rights; and that nothing has been learned from the events of the last seventy, eighty, or hundred-and-eighty years, is truly amazing and alarming.
In between his ‘ideas and arguments’ and ‘buts and ifs’, Mr Dunbabin has gathered from many existing books on the subjects, much information on rural movements in the Nineteenth Century. Students of the period may find it useful But it is unlikely to stimulate a new and much needed rural war.
 

Groves: The Brighton Labour Party Conference (April 1929)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
The Brighton Labour Party Conference
(April 1929)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), The Brighton Labour Party Conference, Labour Monthly, April 1929, pp.678-685.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

The Annual Conference of the Labour Party assembled this year, according to the Press, “in high spirits.” It was a “victory” conference and in harmony with its decisions was the setting. An adoring capitalist Press, an admiring Mayor of Brighton and a docile conference.
The President, in his opening speech, “sounded the note of victory.” He referred in glowing terms to Mr. MacDonald’s “mission of peace,” to Mr. Snowden’s” great success at the Hague.” He scorned the suggestion that Labour was losing sight of its objective and ended by declaring that:–
Our object, in brief, is to establish justice among the nations and to save the people of the world from the horror of another war ... The Labour Government is acting in the spirit of Socialism. Socialist education is being conducted by the Party throughout the length and breadth of the land, the trade union movement is better led and directed to-day than ever before. The Conference to-day meets in high spirits; the party and the Government are doing well. Success is not spoiling us ... Let it be understood by everybody that the purpose of the Labour Party is as much as ever to secure the conquest of our country for the people of our country, the conquest of the world for the workers of the world ... We aim at a new society – the Socialist Commonwealth.
This speech was featured in the Daily Herald with the headlines: Our Aims a Socialist Commonwealth.
 
The Labour Government “Does Well”
In India, thirty-three working-class leaders, British and Indian, are on trial. This trial is only part of the imperialist offensive against the Indian and British working class. Since the Labour Government took office, the reign of terror, existing in India under the Baldwin Government, has been intensified. The attack on hours and wages has extended, public meetings prohibited, newspapers suppressed. Further arrests have taken place, strikers have been assaulted and imprisoned. One political prisoner has died in a brave protest against the vile prison conditions.
“Our Party and the Labour Government are doing well ... the purpose of our Party is to secure the conquest of the world for the workers of the world.”
500,000 cotton workers, after years of low wages and short time – years of semi-starvation for thousands – have received a reduction of 1s.3d. in the pound. The Trade Union leadership, the cotton bosses and the Labour Government combined to reduce their wages and through the triumph of the arbitration board set up by the Labour Government the cotton workers have been driven one step further towards the abyss of misery now being endured by the miners. The sacred cause of “Peace in Industry” has been vindicated; the profit-mongers have been temporarily satisfied; the Cabinet Ministers continue to receive the munificent salaries that capitalism pays to its faithful servants.
“The purpose of our Party is to secure the conquest of our country for the people of our country.”
In Palestine, the Labour Government has continued and intensified the traditional policy of British imperialism. It has fostered religious differences in order to split the Jewish and Arab workers; it has suppressed all militant working-class bodies. It has armed the Jewish Fascists and has wiped out whole Arab villages with its Air Force. It has greeted the rising provoked by its own policy with bombs, troops and warships. It is now engaged in trying, convicting and shooting scores of Arabs daily.
“Our object, in brief, is to establish justice among the nations and to save the people of the world from the horrors of another war.”
The Trade Union leaders are openly working with the Labour Government, are everywhere assisting the bosses to drive down the standards of the workers. In the name of Rationalisation, wages are being reduced, hours increased, production being speeded up and labour displaced. Strike after strike is being broken by the shameless treachery of the Union leaders. The “Socialists” of years ago, the “militants” of 1925, no longer pretend resistance to the bosses’ demands, no longer conceal their association with the employers. They are openly doing the work of their masters and driving the British workers down into unemployment, starvation and world war.
“Socialist propaganda is being conducted throughout the length and breadth of the land. The Trade Unions are better led and directed than ever before.”
What is the meaning of this seeming contradiction? How is it possible for Morrison to exalt the Labour Government’s actions in this way? A few years ago it would have been said that this marks the isolation of the Labour leadership from the class struggle. To-day it shows how close to the class struggle is the Labour Party; only on the side of the ruling class. To-day there is no longer any contradiction between the policy and the actions of the Labour Party. The Labour Government is “doing well.” The suppression of the Indian and Arab peoples, the wage-cuts, the continuing of the brutal policy of Baldwin towards the unem-ployed, the attempts to impose the conditions of the bondholders on the Russian workers – these are in no way a contradiction of their policy. The logical fulfilment of the policy of the Labour Party is unfolding itself before the eyes of the working class.
 
The “Minister for Employment”
While the Labour Government is fulfilling its promises to the bourgeoisie, the emptiness of its promises to the workers are now being revealed. Thomas’s return from Canada and his much awaited declaration of the results achieved are an example of this. It was once a commonplace on Labour platforms that the fundamental cause of unemployment was private ownership of the means of production. During the election this was noticeable by its absence. The Labour Party promised to give work and relief to the unemployed without the struggle to abolish capitalist control of industry. The failure of the Government to check the brutalities of the Labour Exchanges, their failure to alter the conditions surrounding the payment of benefit or to improve in any way the general lot of the unemployed have already caused profound uneasiness in the movement, as was even revealed at the Conference. Equally the high hopes raised and fostered about the achievements of J.H. Thomas were dashed to the ground.
J.H. Thomas stated, after speaking at length on nothing in particular:–
I am not juggling. I do not say that a million people will be found work in the next two years. I do not know how I can do that. I do not believe this Government or any other Government can do it. You cannot deal with an evil of centuries, accentuated by a hundred and one different circumstances, in such a short time. You can only make a contribution to its solution. (Evening Standard, October 1.)
Here, clearly stated, is the position. There is nothing new in this declaration. The newest Socialist recruit could have explained that no government of capitalism, no government with the capitalist class in control of industry, can solve a problem that arises directly from the control of industry by the bosses. It is “an evil of centuries.” Neither “this Government nor any other Government” can solve it. Precisely, Mr. Thomas. The only hope for the millions of unemployed is class organisation. To the extent that they are organised and led by the revolutionary workers will they force concessions from the bosses and their Labour Government. To the extent that they are linked up with the whole of their class in the struggle for the overthrow of the ruling class they will be making their “contribution,” and a permanent one, to the ending of the misery of unemployment. No wonder the delegates at the conference were disappointed!
 
“Socialism” and the Bankers
The recent rise in the Bank Rate was greeted by a storm of fury by the “Lefts” in the Labour Party – especially by the ILP. Tillett denounced it as a plot against the Labour Government; Brailsford described it in the terms “City Challenges Labour” and said, “All hope is gone of a speedy reduction in the rising tide of unemployment.” E.F. Wise said at the conference that “the rise in the Bank Rate was a disaster, especially to the Labour Government.” Labour’s Chancellor of the Exchequer replied with a direct defence of the rise in the Bank Rate. He stated that: –
In no quarter where opinion is informed has there been any suggestion that in the circumstances any other course was possible ... it was admitted that given the system we have, then the directors of the Bank of England had no other course.
The Committee of Inquiry set up had nothing to do with the Bank Rate and implied “no reflection whatever upon British banking and financial institutions.”
Thus are the critics of banking and bankers answered not only by a defence of this particular action of Finance-Capital, but by a plain declaration that as long as the present system continued such things were inevitable and that there could be no question of the Treasury or the Labour Government interfering with the sacred rights of capitalism in the slightest degree.
The only possible answer to this was an answer in the terms of the class struggle and so the ILP withdrew its resolution which drew attention to the “disastrous effect of the raising of the Bank Rate on trade and employment.” The critics were routed. The “Socialist” Chancellor had vindicated that beneficent group who control the banks and on whom “no reflection” must be cast.
 
Labour and India
The reply of Drummond Shiels, Under-Secretary for India, to the attempts of the ILP to refer back that section of the Executive’s report dealing with India is particularly illuminating. He said, in connection with the Meerut trial: –
The prisoners in the Meerut case were arrested in March, before the Labour Government came into office, but the Government accepted full responsibility for their present position. These men were not in prison because they were trade union leaders; they were not charged with being agitators or Communists, but with having engaged in a con-spiracy to change the Government of India by armed force. The Communist Party were making strenuous efforts to capture the Trade Union Movement in India. The Government of India was anxious to encourage genuine trade unionism and that trade unionism should escape from the present troublesome and dangerous conditions. They were in favour of the utmost freedom of speech in India consistent with the preservation of public order ... they took that attitude on the broad principles applicable to every civilised community, but they also took it in the interests of the uninformed humble people of India. (The Times, October 2.)
No declaration could be more open and unashamed. Even accepting the plea that these workers were not imprisoned for their trade union activities (and the facts point very clearly otherwise), no worker would argue that this justifies to him their imprisonment. In Britain the Labour leadership proudly points to the franchise as the “peaceful way to Socialism.” In India even the pretence of democracy does not exist. The Government of India shoots and batons strikers, imprisons strike leaders, suppresses newspapers and prohibits public meetings. The Indian workers must accept this terrorism with folded arms and must leave their emancipation to their gentle, kind-hearted rulers! The Government, we are assured, “is anxious to encourage genuine trade unionism.” What is meant by genuine trade unionism? Did not the Tory Govern-ment pass the TU Act in order to encourage “sane,” “genuine” trade unionism? Is not “genuine” trade unionism now being used to break the strikes of the British workers?
The Government of India has shown only too clearly what it means by the encouragement of genuine trade unionism in its support of the reformist textile union, led from outside, with its 5,000 members, and its imprisonment of the leaders of the Girni Kamgar Union with over 70,000 members. It has shown what it means by “genuine” trade unionism by its arming and protecting of blacklegs, its brutal treatment of strikers and by the imprisonment of thirty-three workers who are building up unions of struggle as against the company unions of the British and Indian Labour leaders.
The Government, we learn, is in favour of the “utmost freedom of speech consistent with the preservation of public order.” So was the Russian Tsarist Government so is every Government. What is meant, as experience has shown British workers, that any attack on property right is considered inconsistent with the preservation of public order. Propaganda in favour of industrial peace or acceptance of wage cuts, servile petitioning for Dominion status, such things are not suppressed – only meetings of the workers demanding bread, demanding freedom of meeting and organisation, demanding the ending of British rule and its attendant horrors, are smashed up and prohibited as not being “consistent with the preservation of public order,” as not being in the interests of the “uninformed, humble people of India.” Strike breaking, ten hours a day for less than a shilling, an infantile death rate of over 800 in the 1,000, victimisation, shooting and imprisonment for strikers, these are in the interests of the humble workers of India, Mr. Shiels. No worker, knowing the issues, could read this speech without a feeling of disgust and fury.
 
The “Opposition”
This conference was marked out from previous conferences most clearly by the complete absence of militant workers sharply attacking the policy of MacDonaldism. For the first time since the war the task of rallying the rank and file against the platform fell completely to the ILP. In what way was the opposition conducted?
In the first place the circumstances at this conference were entirely different to those at any previous conference. The con-ference was faced with the fact of a Labour Government and the opposition with the fact that to maintain their role they must attack not merely policies and programmes but must condemn the actions of the Labour Government. This they did to a point. The numerous rank-and-file delegates, dissatisfied with the Labour Government, in many cases indignant, looked for leadership against the platform. The ILP fulfilled its normal function – the safety valve for the dissatisfied elements – and harnessed these delegates behind their attack. What exactly did the opposition achieve? Did they change the Labour Government’s policy towards India? Did they make any change at all in the programme of the Labour Party? The answer is clearly no. What was achieved by the opposition? Firstly, it is clear that they diverted any dissatisfac-tion into their own channels – that is behind the leadership of the ILP. Secondly, they are now the recognised Left opposition inside the Labour movement.
But yet one point remains that will stamp the ILP, for the militant workers, not as the working-class opposition to MacDonaldism but as MacDonald’s chief allies. The ILP condemned, as it was forced to in order to maintain its position, the policy of the Labour Government on various issues. But the ILP remains behind the Labour Government; its M.P.’s support it in the House; its propagandists and newspapers call on the workers to vote Labour, and because of this its policy and action stand condemned in the eyes of the workers.
It might condemn the action of the Labour Government in cutting the wages of the cotton operatives, but did the ILP call on the cotton workers to resist the arbitration award? It might condemn the Labour Government for its actions in India, but beyond words of protest (uttered with apologies), what does it do to strengthen and assist the revolutionary section of the Indian Labour movement? It is on these concrete questions that the real rôle of the ILP can be gauged.
In the face of the new constitution; a constitution which brings the Labour Party more completely into line with the Social Democratic Parties on the Continent; a constitution which tightens the discipline of the Party; which gives the Executive still more power to deal with real critics and the rank and file less; in the face of this and the fact that the present actions of the Government are a natural logical outcome of their policy, the ILP continues to urge that it is still possible to alter the policy of Labour; that the place of militants is inside, accepting the discipline and policy of the Labour Party. The meaning of this should be clear to all workers, and in the fight against the Labour Government, as the enemy of the working class, the revolutionary section of the workers must bring its sharpest weapons of attack to bear on the so-called “Left Wing” inside the Labour Party.
 
Fight the Labour Government
That it was possible for this “victory” conference to meet in “high spirits,” at a time when the working class is facing heavy attacks and is entering a period of mighty class conflicts, reveals only too clearly where the Labour Party and the Labour Govern-ment stand to-day. With the struggle now taking place in the coal-fields; the isolated fights in the textile areas; the approaching woollen crisis and the developing attack on the railways, together with the development of the Rationalisation offensive in all industries, the working class must strengthen its forces, prepare its army and build its leadership. The rôle of the Labour Government has already been revealed. It is the Government of Rationalisation, of wage cuts and war. In these circumstances the central point of the coming battles will be the Labour Government; the greatest obstacle to the successful struggle of the workers will be the Labour Government; the most bitter and ruthless enemy of the workers will be the Labour Government.
In the face of this it is necessary that the forces of the revolutionary workers must be mobilised against the Labour Government and its servant the Independent Labour Party.
 

Groves: The Class Leadership of Chartism(April 1929)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
The Class Leadership of Chartism
(April 1929)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), The Class Leadership of Chartism, Labour Monthly, April 1929, pp.240-244.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

In the article, Chartism and the Present Day,” which appeared in the January issue of the Labour Monthly, an explanation was given of the causes of Chartism’s decline. “The main reason,” it was stated, “is to be found in the actual conditions that created Chartism.” In particular, the expansion of production and trade which followed on the depression of the ’thirties and ’forties diminished the antagonisms between the proletariat and the capitalists. This conclusion does not obviate the need for further analysis of the conditions determining the decline of Chartism. To isolate one single part of a developing situation, to explain the closely connected causes and effects by this single part of the whole, is to fail to understand the interaction of the various closely connected factors which operate to produce a given result.
The importance of the class divisions within the Chartist ranks; the consequent difference in aims and outlook of the divided forces; this point is of considerable importance. The purpose of this short article is to examine the various groups contending within the movement for its leadership in the light of these class divisions, always bearing in mind that this must be regarded as supplementary to the article mentioned above. An examination of this character is not complete without reference to the part played by Marx and Engels in the Chartist struggles and their attitude towards the different groups.
Generally, the Chartist leadership is divided into a “moral force” group (Lovett, Hetherington, Collins, &c.) and “physical force” group, in which is loosely included O’Connor, Cooper, Harney, Taylor and a host of others. Such a division obscures the real issue, which lies between a “centrist” group and a “left wing” group. The “moral force” group, who formed and dominated the London Workingmen’s Association, were, as the movement gathered itself for the struggle speedily outstripped, and became a negligible factor in the big struggles of Chartism. Of the “Centrist” group, O’Connor is the most representative and outstanding figure; of the “left wing” group, Harney is the most advanced; an examination of the policies and significance of these two men will afford a basis for an understanding of the division between these two groups.
Feargus O’Connor led the movement into its greatest struggles and into its greatest defeats. O’Connor’s failures and treachery are usually explained as being due to his personal character; thus Postgate argues that “vanity and love of popularity misled him.” (LRD Syllabus, No.7) The roots of O’Connor’s failures lie deeper than mere personal faults. O’Connor came to the British working class from Ireland, a purely agrarian country. His rapid accession to the leadership of the movement was due to the fact that he personified and voiced the demands of the non-proletarian elements in the movement – the handloom weavers and similar sections, who, powerful in numbers, looked to the Chartist movement to lead them, not toward the conquest of capitalism but backwards to the pre-capitalist days; their slogan was “back to the land and life of our forebears.” They hated capitalism but could not understand it, and consequently fought hopelessly and blindly. They were, in a word, reactionary in outlook and uncertain in struggle. In this lies the explanation of O’Connor’s vacillations; of his land settlement schemes; of his betrayal of the Welsh insurrection. In this lies the cause of the spasmodic and uneven nature of the Chartist struggles. As we shall see later, the failure to recognise the nature and roots of O’Connorism led final disaster for Chartism.
George Julian Harney was born amid the squalor and misery of the town. He knew no other system but capitalism, and so was far in advance of the O’Connorites in outlook. Imprisoned for selling unstamped newspapers at the age of seventeen, in his early twenties he broke definitely with the London Workingmen’s Association, and formed the London Democratic Association, which recruiting from the East End proletariat, secured within a short time a membership of 3,000 (compared to LWA’s 400). In a letter to the Northern Star (March 24, 1839) he stated his reasons for this step. He scoffed at the idea that “moral force” and “education” were weapons of any value in the immediate struggle, and asserted that the emancipation of the workers could only be achieved by their own efforts. His journal, The London Democrat, displays both the fire and vigour of the rising proletariat and the theoretical understanding of the nature of capitalism, and the rôle of the working class that later was clarified and developed by Marx and Engels. Any suggestion of an alliance with the middle classes he attacked vigorously. Harney showed his appreciation of the rôle of the middle class in the following passage:–
You see now through the delusions of your enemies. Nearly nine years of “liberal” government have taught you the blessings of middle class sway, blessings exemplified in “bastilles” and “water gruel,” in “separation” and “starvation” [Harney is referring the effects of the New Poor Law Act on the conditions in the workhouses]; in the cells of silent horror and the chains of transportation, in the universal misery of yourselves and the universal profligacy of your oppressors. (London Democrat, April 20, 1839.)
Seeing clearly the economic roots of the workers’ support for the Charter, on that his journal was equally emphatic:–
Unless the “People’s Charter” is followed by a measure equalise the condition of all, the producing classes will still be oppressed. (Ibid., April 13, 1839.)
In the issue of May 4 1839, Harney pointed out clearly that the General Strike, then being advocated as a peaceful method of carrying the Charter, would, if carried through, only end in Civil war, and for this preparation was necessary.
But Harney and his group, in the early years of the movement, were, like many others, under the powerful influence of O’Connor. O’Connor is an example of a certain type of “centrist” in action “Centrism” promises force (always with the proviso “if necessary”); “centrism” appears to advocate mass action, leads the workers almost to the point of struggle, and then falls back into confusion and defeat.
This rôle O’Connor played very successfully, as the history of Chartism tragically shows, right up to the April demonstration of 1848, when at last to the whole working class his true political rôle was revealed in the ignominious surrender on Kennington Common. But by 1848 the real driving force of Chartism was spent. The industrial proletariat was growing less and less inclined to follow a revolutionary leadership (for the reasons for this see the previous article already referred to); the failure of Harney, Ernest Jones and the other left wing members to come forward as an independent force, based on the proletarian elements in the movement, whilst the whole working class was united in its determination to secure their political and economic rights, paved the array to the disaster of April 10, 1848, and the subsequent disappearance of Chartism. The task of effecting the union of communism with Chartism (which would have decisively undermined O’Connor’s position) was not seen in its right perspective. As a result, Chartism merely paved the way to the ensuing period of blossoming reformism, when – inside the framework of an expanding capitalism, with the working class “educated,” i.e., educated in capitalist ideas and policy, with religion holding its sway over the industrial areas – the owning class could safely grant gradually the principal points of the Charter which they dared not do in the days of Chartism.
In discussing the Chartist movement, nothing helps more to clarify and illustrate the points dealt with than to examine the relations of Marx and Engels to the Chartists. G.J. Harney became acquainted with Engels whilst the latter was in England ... preparing the materials for his book, The Condition of the Working Classes in 1844. How far Harney and the experiences of Chartism influenced Marx and Engels it is difficult to judge. That both owed much to Chartism cannot be denied. But much more clear is the combined influence of struggle and the theories of Marx and Engels on the Chartists. Professor Riazanov’s discovery and publication of the articles of the World League of Revolutionary Communists (first published in English by the Labour Monthly, August 1928) shows Harney as one of the leading members of this league. Even more strikingly is the effect shown in the speeches and writings of Ernest Jones and G.J. Harney. For at a meeting of German Social Democrats, Harney, in the course of his speech, declared:–
The cause of the people in all countries is the same – the cause of labour, enslaved and plundered labour ... The men who create every necessary, every comfort and luxury are themselves steeped in misery. Working men of all countries, are not your grievances; your wrongs, the same? Is not your good cause one and the same also ... the veritable emancipation of the human race. (Northern Star, February 14, 1846 – a year before the publication of the Communist Manifesto.)
Another example, more striking still, is this extract from Harney’s journal, The Red Republican, of July 1850. (Note that by this time the hey-day of Chartism had passed.)
As regards the working men swamping all other classes the answer is simple – other classes have no right to exist. To prepare the way for the absolute supremacy of the working class preparatory to the abolition of the system of classes, is the mission of The Red Republican.
And yet there are still people who maintain that the dictatorship of the proletariat is an alien doctrine!
Ernest Jones in 1851 put forward a Socialist programme which included “Nationalisation of the land, disestablishment of the church, founding of national co-operatives, creation of people’s militia, abolition of army, abolition of capital punishment, right of poor to work or maintenance. Compare this with O’Connor’s advocacy of small-holdings and his declaration:–
I ever have been, and think ever shall be, opposed to the principle of Communism ... I am even opposed to public kitchens, public baking houses and public washhouses. (The Labourer, 1847-48, pp.549 and 157.)
A further example from the writings of Ernest Jones:–
An amalgamation of classes is impossible ... these two portions of the community must be separated distinctly, dividedly and openly, from each other, CLASS AGAINST CLASS. All other mode of procedure is mere moonshine. (Notes to the People, 1850, p.342.)
Thus are the theoreticians of capitalism answered when they cry, “alien to British tradition are the theories of Bolshevism.” In the struggles of the Chartists is to be found the answer also to those who maintain that the British working class was, is, and always will be, passive, God-fearing and constitutional. Chartism substituted class for community, mass struggle for constitutional, the General Strike and armed revolt for parliamentary petition, and on the basis of the developing struggle, Embryonic Marxism for Owenism.
The work of the proletarian group, who were precisely the group that had some scientific theory to guide them, deserves special study to-day; the failure of this group ruthlessly to expose and uproot “centrism” and take an independent line should be burnt into the consciousness of the contemporary revolutionary movement.
 

Groves: Chartism And The Present Day - The Illusion Of Reformism (January 1929)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
Chartism And The Present Day:
The Illusion Of Reformism
(January 1929)

First Published: R.G. (Reg. Groves), Chartism and the Present Day – The Illusion of Reformism, Labour Monthly, January 1929, pp.47-56.
Editing, proofing & HTML markup: Ted Crawford and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

“War to the palaces, peace to the cottages – that is a battle cry of terror which may come to resound through our own country. Let the wealthy beware.” – (The Times, June 1844)
On all sides the seriousness of Britain’s industrial position is recognised. The easy optimism of the post-war years has given way to feverish endeavours to remedy a state of affairs more serious than anything previously experienced by British capitalism. The heavy exporting industries (on which British capitalism was built), the Liberal Industrial Report admits “may be permanently threatened.” Mr. Ben Turner, fresh from the Industrial Peace Conferences which are to “revive British industry,” gloomily remarks that:–
Trade is really in a rocky condition and one sometimes wonders whether there will be that trade revival so often spoken about in recent months – Daily Herald, September 18, 1928.
The Trade Union Bill and the Mond-Turner Conferences are both unmistakable signs that the future is to be a future of mass unemployment, of continual wage-cuts – a future of increasing misery and degradation for the working class. The past seven years have seen the wage-bill of the workers reduced by some £5,000 million, hours worked in industry increased some 211 millions a year, speeding up in the principal industries and attacks on the political rights of the working-class. The decline in production continues, and unemployment, in spite of “harvesting” schemes and Baldwin’s appeals, is close on two millions. The alternative faces the working class – Capitalism with increasing misery and world war or the working-class conquest of power, a workers’ dictatorship which alone offers the real way to reconstruction and to a permanent raising of the miserable standards of the British proletariat.
The Reformist leadership is openly proclaiming its allegiance to capitalism and through a confused mass of “living wage” proposals, of programmes “mainly devoted to the expansion of industry and trade,” of fantastic utopias built amid motor car and bicycle factories, one theory is gradually becoming comparatively coherent and is gaining support from “Rights,” “Centrists” and “Lefts.” From Phillips Price to Citrine, the Reformists are hailing the advent of the “Second Industrial Revolution.” The theoreticians of the Second International are outdoing John the Baptist in their proclamation of the coming “new era,” of a “Rationalised,” “Scientific,” “Prosperity for all” Capitalism. Gone is the haunting fear (too often confirmed by facts!) that perhaps the Communists were right. Gone is the danger of civil war. Capitalism is saved and with the salvation of capitalism lies the salvation of a weakening Reformism. Mr. Snowden is a prominent advocate of this theory. As far back as 1926 (on the eve of the attack on the miners) Mr. Snowden was stating that
He did not agree with the statement of some of his Socialist friends that the capitalist system was obviously breaking down. He believed that we were to-day in a position very much like the industrial revolution that took place in this country about 120 years ago. – Daily Herald, April 17, 1926.
In defending Mondism, Mr. Walter Citrine at Swansea declared:–
The position of the workers in the post-war period, the effect of that period, the long-continued depression, particularly in the basic industries, have created something which in the view of eminent economists may be compared with the industrial revolution of the last part of the eighteenth century. We may be even now in the throes of a revolution such as that. – TUC Report, p.409. [Our emphasis]
The object of this propaganda is clear. By this means mass unemployment, wage cuts, and anti-trade unionism are justified and explained. All the 2½ per cent. “voluntary sacrifices,” the speeding up and mass dismissals, the starvation in the industrial areas, are only a “necessary” and natural part of the transition to the “new era” of national prosperity, in the same way as the misery and degradation of the early nineteenth century was followed by the Victorian era of industrial peace and prosperity.
There is in this picture of suffering as the prelude to the “new era” an element of truth (conveniently ignored by the reformists) in so far as the breakdown of capitalism and the consequent misery heralds the rise of a new class to power. In the days of the first industrial revolution it was the industrial bourgeoisie that was rising to power; to-day it is the industrial proletariat.
Upon the basis of their belief that to-day we “are in the throes” of a second industrial revolution the Reformists calculate that the new era of rationalism and international agreements (in the place of wars!) will smother the revolutionary movement of to-day as the Victorian era smothered the revolutionary movement which sprang from the starving workers of early capitalism. An examination of this belief is necessary before an estimation of its value can be given and its real nature revealed. Three points call for special attention.


The nature of the revolutionary movement of the early nineteenth century; its rise and decline.
 
The possibility of a revival of British capitalism through Rationalisation.
 
A comparison between the revolutionary movement of the first industrial revolution and the movement of today.
 


The Industrial Revolution and the Workers
The revolt of the workers in the early nineteenth century developed and gained strength as capitalism developed and strengthened. The genesis of the capitalist system was also the genesis of the modern working-class movement and the effect of the vast changes that took place in the last quarter of the eighteenth century was seen most clearly in the rising working-class move-ment. The workers’ revolt developed from the Luddite movement, the first blind instinctive outburst against capitalism typified for the workers by the machine, through early trade unionism, through political societies, “Jacobin” clubs and secret conspiracies; taking its form from the circumstances in which it arose, first struggling against the ruthless introduction of machinery, then against anti-trade union legislation; against child labour in factory and mine; against the barbarity of the new Poor Law; struggling for Trade Union rights, for shorter hours and for an untaxed Press. So through the first thirty years of the nineteenth century, often in alliance with the middle class and nearly always led by middle-class leaders, the proletariat of England struggled sectionally against the exploitation and misery of industrial capitalism. The struggle advanced to a higher plane when the industrialists and the workers unitedly swept into effect the Reform Bill of 1832.
The achievement of a controlling part in the guidance of national affairs satisfied the middle classes; with the vote extended to them they elected their own government and ruth-lessly disowning their former allies the workers, and even many radical bodies, they proceeded to break up the remaining obstacles to successful capitalist development.
The first effects of the Reformed Parliament fell heavily on the working class. A new Poor Law Act was introduced, framed ostensibly to remedy the abuses of the old system, but in reality a terrible attack on the masses of workers who, unable to gain a livelihood under the new system, were dependent for their existence on a starvation rate of relief or on degradations of the workhouse. The real reason for the new Bill was that the old laws of settlement. (i.e. paupers confined to home district, &c.) made impossible the complete mobility of labour needed by the growing industrial system, and that the low wages of the hand-loom weavers were supplemented by relief enabling them to compete with the new factories. Its chief clause was the one by which, according to Dr. Kay, the workhouses were “made as like, prisons as possible” (Hansard, vol.xli, p.1014). Engels has graphically described the horrors of the Poor Law system and an examination of the various Commissions investigating during that part of the century completes the picture of misery and degradation. “They have built the wretched union gaols where King Starvation reigns supreme,” declared M. Harcourt, a contemporary poet in 1837, whose poetry, like most of the literature of the day, is permeated with indignation.
This Act and the subsequent industrial depression that spread like a plague from town to town added to the fury of the working class. From the sea of misery, handloom weavers, proletarians and landworkers began to seek ways of ending their misery ...: Out of their discontent arose two great movements, the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union and the Chartist Movement.
 
The “Grand National” and Chartism
The GNCTU, formed by Owen in 1834 from the wreckage of previous attempts on the same lines, rapidly gained strength and in less than a month had a membership of over half-a-million – unprecedented in the whole history of Trade Unionism. Its life was short. Whilst Owen dreamed of the millennium, the left-wing of the Executive, Smith and Morrison, declared the Union to represent the new form of government and mobilised the workers for action. The reply of the employers was crushing. Lock-outs were resorted to in order to starve the workers into abandoning the Union. The Government announced a new Bill to make such a Union illegal and in the meantime struck relentlessly at the GNCTU by conviction and barbarous sentences. Defeat followed defeat, funds began to show serious signs of depletion, and for a few months the Union’s fate hung in the balance. A rally might have saved it, but Owen crushed the hopes that many entertained by dismissing the two men, Smith and Morrison, who showed the ability to lead the movement to victory. Temporarily the attempt to unite the workers on the industrial field had been defeated. The workers fell back into their old state – fighting on different fronts with different objects. A party was needed to unite the whole working class for the struggle, and its formation was not long delayed. All over England working-men’s associations and clubs sprang up with great rapidity, with their membership open only “to members of the industrious classes.” (Radicals, middle-class reformers and others were admitted in some cases to honorary membership.) The issuing of the Charter provided the means to unity. On the slogan of “The Charter and nothing but the Charter,” the hosts of workers’ political organisations became united. The agitation for the “Charter,” universal suffrage and electoral reforms speedily embodied within itself the struggle for an untaxed Press (which in practice then meant a workers’ Press) for Trade Unions rights, for better conditions, for a repeal of the new Poor Law and gathering up these issues as an independent revolutionary movement the proletariat advanced against capitalism itself. Thus, the rising proletarian movement engendered by the first industrial revolution culminated in Chartism, the first class party of the workers which for a decade thrust the issue of class power to the front and shook the rising capitalist system to its foundations.
Between 1838 and 1842, the great years of Chartism, the Chartists passed from stage to stage of the workers’ struggle. Parliamentary Petition was followed by an attempted general strike, by propaganda to the troops, by mass demonstrations, by international organisations and by armed revolts. The temper of the workers was clearly in favour of revolution. In Birmingham, for instance, in July, 1839, the workers carried on street fighting for nearly a week with both police and military, only being disarmed in the end by the “centrists” of Chartism. In Kent, the land workers revolted and, arming, attacked Canterbury in 1838. The Newport rising, two years later, and the fights all over England against both police and military show clearly that the workers were ready for civil war, and had the mass been moulded together for a national struggle capitalism would have reaped as the fruits of the first industrial revolution a workers’ revolution. Yet Chartism failed and its disappearance in 1853 saw the disappearance of the revolutionary movement for nearly half-a-century. What was the reason for this collapse?
 
The Cause of Chartist Decline
The main reason is to be found in the actual conditions that created Chartism. The rising capitalist system with the accession of the industrialists to power gradually eased the conditions of the workers and diminished the antagonism between themselves and the industrial workers who were the only section of the movement that could lead it to a successful conclusion. The three greatest periods of the agitation, 1838, 1842 and 1848 reveal only too clearly the effects of the expansion of capitalism. After the mass movement of 1838 which culminated in 1840 in the Newport rising and the imprisonment of over 500 prominent Chartists, the movement under the effects of the increasingly severe industrial depression revived quickly, and 1842 saw, the second national petition with over three million signatures and the mass strike of August for the Charter. This mass strike revealed to the owning class, which up to then had been divided, the real strength Chartism. The Times of August 12, 1842, said that never before had Chartism shown its organisation so powerfully. The owning class united, defeated the strike and with the defeat of the strike the decline of Chartism commenced. The third revival in 1848, a reflection of the crisis of 1847, was short and revealed openly the weakness and internal disintegration of the movement. From that collapse it never recovered.
The extent of capitalist development can be gauged from the following facts. The value of exports for the years 1836-41 averaged £50,012,994; in 1842 it fell to £47,634,623, in 1843 it was £52,279,709; in 1843 it rose to £460,111,082, and after the crisis of 1847 rose steadily until in 1855 it reache £98,933,781. Between 1842 and 1845 542 new factories were built. The retail price of foodstuffs began to fall, wages began to rise. The following wage figures from Bowley’s Wages in the Nineteenth Century, illustrates this. The average wages figures for the London artisans in 1833 was 28s.0d.; in 1867 it was 36s.0d. For town labourers in 1833 it was 14s.0d.; in 1867 it was 20s. Agricultural labourers wages during this period rose from 10s.6d to 14s.0d. Between 1842-48 average wage increases of nine grades of labour in the ironworks of South Wales were 49 per cent. The building trades between 1839-1849 increased their wage by 6 per cent., and the glassworkers by 15 per cent. Pauperism decreased; thus in 1846-47 percentage in receipt of Poor Law relief was 10.1; in 1852 it was 4.8. Conditions in the factories were investigated by several Acts passed between 1842 and 1848. The new Poor Law Act was partly remedied in 1846-47. The cotton workers’ wages began to rise slowly after 1842. The woollen hand-loom weavers, who were a tremendous tower of strength to Chartism, were slowly exterminated by sheer starvation and their numbers declined enormously between 1838 and 1850. Thus a revival of Chartism was undermined by the steady improvement of conditions that set in after 1842.
 
“Revival” or Revolution
A serious examination of the actual nature of the “depression” of to-day will show that the decline thus manifested so strikingly since the war is a decline of capitalism itself and not a production “crisis” similar to those of the Chartist period. The belief that a similar era of prosperity can be embarked on by modern capitalism as the period that capitalism enjoyed after the Chartist epoch is not borne out by the facts. Then Britain enjoyed a monopolist position, had unlimited prospects of expansion and was faced with little or no competition abroad. To-day newer fresher competitors are in the field, the markets of the world are diminishing and British capitalism, dependent as it is on its exporting industries, is facing a situation from which there is no escape. So far, the attempt to meet the changed situation has consisted entirely of wage-cuts, longer hours and mass dismissals. New Reformism seeking an alternative to the class struggle and its culmination in the overthrow of capitalism is urging rationalisation, as in Germany and America, to save capitalism and at the same time themselves. To discuss the possibility of rationalisation is to tread on familiar ground and although the impossibility of rationalisation à la Germany in this country is quite clear yet, as some still find reasons for this possibility, it is necessary to briefly state the reasons why such a process is impossible. R.P. Dutt in his Socialism and the Living Wage states clearly one reason why technical reorganisation has been able to take place in France (to a limited extent), Germany (assisted by foreign capital), and America and not in Britain. The reason, Dutt states:–
Lies in the older historic growth of British capitalism. The priority which was once an advantage is to-day a handicap. The newer capitalist countries were able to start later and more rapidly with a more modern technique and a relatively more planned organisation. The new colonies outside Europe were free from feudal remains. In France and Germany the semi-revolutionary effects of war and inflation cleared the ground for reconstruction. On the other hand British capitalism is tied and fettered with an accumulation and network of individualist, sectional and vested rights and interests. In its earlier days capitalism would have struck these obstacles out of its path as the rights of the landholders were overridden by the advancing railways. To-day British capitalism is too enfeebled to take a strong line; the bourgeoisie is no longer an advancing class but is menaced by the advance of the proletariat; the whole social and political situation is too delicate for any endangering of the social fabric and every supporter of the existing order, however reactionary and parasitic, has to be preserved ... only the working class dictatorship can reorganise British industry. (pp.60-61)
What then is the meaning of the tremendous advances made in productive power? Far from marking a revival of capitalism these advances mark an intensification of the struggle for markets, worsening of the workers’ conditions on a world scale and the next world war.
The chief difference between the workers’ movement of the early nineteenth century and that of to-day is the difference of an epoch of struggle and growth. This is illustrated most strikingly by the Chartist general strike of 1842 and the general strike of May, 1926. Then the strike was only concentrated in the textile areas of the North; then only a few hundred thousand workers took part in the strike. In May, 1926, 4½ million workers answered the call and stood solid defying the State and its troops, tanks and police persecutions. The discipline was perfect, the solidarity unshakable. After the defeat of the Chartist mass strike the decline of the revolutionary movement commenced, but to-day it is precisely May, 1926, that marks the turning point in the struggle for the leadership of the British workers. Already the broken threads of proletarian solidarity are being joined and new weapons of struggle are being forged as the movement gathering its strength, slowly leaves Reformism behind and gathers under the banner of social revolution. With the pressure of the capitalist offensive making itself felt increasingly, the working class is slowly gathering its forces for the future mass struggles. Sidney Webb has declared that British Socialism began not with Marx but with Owen and that Owen’s Utopianism is the real basis of British Socialism – the class war is an alien doctrine. The Chartist movement showed in embryo that the development of the class-struggle brings a corresponding discarding of Owenism and an approach to Marxism. In the same way the contemporary British working class will through defeat and victory, in the day-to-day struggle, and awakened to consciousness by the Communist Party, learn the lessons of Chartism and march forward to the overthrow of capitalism.
Chartism, long dead and buried by Reformists and capitalists alike, has risen in a stronger, clearer and more powerful form. The “Second Industrial Revolution” which in reality is the increasing socialisation of the methods of production, is the revolutionisation of the methods of production and consequently the revolutionisa-tion of the whole system of society; in so far as it indicates the process taking place, and emphasises the differences with the first industrial revolution, it can only mean the growth of the revolutionary forces in Britain. Engels points this out in connection with the first industrial revolution saying, “Here in Britain the class struggles were more virulent during the period of the develop-ment of big industry ... It is precisely the revolutionisation of time-honoured conditions which revolutionises people’s brains” (Engel’s letter to Sorge, December 3rd, 1892; our italics). The process now taking place is the “revolutionisation of time-honoured conditions” and the effect is to be seen in the developing class-struggle of the British workers.
 

Groves: It is an Imperialist War (Spring 1940)



Reg Groves Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Reg Groves
It is an Imperialist War
A Reply to Laski’s Defence of the War
(Spring 1940)

A penny pamphlet published by Home Front, 60B Fort Road, London SE1.
Home Front was also the name of a left-wing anti-war journal that was published throughout the Second World War.
Spelling errors in the original have been amended.
Scanned, prepared and annotated for the MIA by Paul Flewers.

It is an Imperialist War
WAR, like revolution, leaves little opportunity for equivocation or ambiguity. Spokesmen of Labour, Trade Union and Cooperative organisations have said many times in the past twenty years that they never would support an imperialist war; a war fought, that is, for the interests and advantages of the governing class; a war fought to protect or extend capitalist profits, and imperialist possessions.
Unfortunately, no ruling class ever admits going to war for such sordid objects. Every war has to be a ‘righteous war’; else working men would not surrender their lives and liberties to their exploiters. British statesmen are particularly adept at presenting Britain’s wars as wars for ‘freedom’, for ‘humanity’ and ‘for small nations’.
We cannot, then, define each war according to the declarations of those heading the State. Nor should we make the mistake of identifying the purposes of the war with the social and economic aims of Labour. The chief criticism that can be made of the Labour Party leadership is that they have done both these things: have accepted the declarations of the Government as to its purpose in going to war, and have sought workers’ support for the war by suggesting that it is being fought for aims similar to those of the labour movement.
Professor Laski [1] has long been regarded as a critic of the conservative reformism of the Labour Party leadership; he is thought to be a left-wing socialist, even a Marxist. His statement on the war – published by the Labour Party under the title Is This an Imperialist War? [2] – has therefore an unusual interest and importance.
Much of Laski’s case could be discounted on the simple ground that his argument assumes a militancy of purpose on the part of Labour’s leaders that they do not, in fact, possess; which they disavow in practice every day. Laski must be aware of this: that he conceals it from the reader, allowing his case to be read as a statement of the official Labour Party view of the war makes it all the more vital that it be dealt with.
Nothing is more dangerous than that right-wing inaction, cowardice and political treachery should be allowed to shelter behind the phraseology and sentiments of the left.
On the sharpest test the Labour Movement has yet faced, Laski emerges as a defender of the official policy. He must not complain if he be judged accordingly; or if his brave sounding words are set against the actions of Labour’s leaders, and the contrast used to condemn him as well as those he champions.
 
The Cause of the War
In making a case for Labour’s support of the war, Laski dismisses as irrelevant all comparisons with the war of 1914-18. We might, with some pleasure and profit, compare the Labour Party case for supporting that war with Laski’s case for supporting this war, and find a startling and disconcerting similarity. But the New Fabians wish to be tried apart from the crimes of the Old Fabians; and as this match is being played on the Professor’s home ground we take his opening argument, which is:
Socialists have always the duty of examining each historic situation as it arises with a view to distinguishing between its progressive and reactionary elements; it is their business to support the one and to attack the other. (p.5)
True enough, but it is not a socialist’s duty to isolate each ‘historic situation’; to examine it apart from what went before, or from the conditions out of which it grew. That is what Laski does, and the main part of his case rests upon this artificial division between ‘the war’ and the conditions that made it.
What is the basic cause of the present war? We can dismiss as childishly inadequate the stale cries of ‘Hitler’s aggression’ which seem to make up nine-tenths of Labour statements these days. The incident provoking the declaration of war is not the cause of the war; we must look deeper than that.
The causes for the war are to be found in the very process of capitalist production, distribution and exchange which creates the growth of monopolies; these great trust-groups seek to establish control over markets, sources of raw materials and areas for exploitation. The concentration of production in larger units – and fewer controlling hands; the increased powers of production; the shrinking home markets and the diminishing of areas open to the trusts force them to seek monopolistic control of raw materials and territories, as markets or as areas for exploitation. This search for expanding areas for trust exploitation and operation comes up against the existing State boundaries which are in fact mainly based upon other and rival monopoly groupings. Those industrial and financial powers first in the field secured the main territorial advantages. The late-comers have been driven to contest the advantageous positions established.
Since the end of the nineteenth century, this struggle for re-division of the world has dominated world politics. The conflict between the growing world productive powers and the national boundaries maintained by capital has driven millions to poverty and despair and brought continual wars and threats of wars. It dominates all politics, internal and external.
This process, unavoidable so long as capital rules, creates ceaseless conflict. The struggle does not begin when a Government – serving one group of trusts – declares war on another State. It goes on all the time, taking many forms; some open, some concealed. Diplomatic negotiation and manoeuvres, agreements and alliances between States, subsidised economic warfare, small wars waged ostensibly between small powers, actually on behalf of great ones, and the greater disciplining and exploitation of the people – all these are manifestations of the same conflict. The formal declaration of war – nowadays more and more dispensed with – is merely the continuation of this same struggle in a sharper, more open form.
Military victory by one group over another cannot end this struggle; the losses of one group are the gains of another; the temporary cessation of one conflict gives rise to the sharpening of other conflicts.
Laski argues that the British workers should line up behind Chamberlain [3] to secure the defeat of Hitler. British imperialism, he says, has ceased expanding; German imperialism is at the beginning of its expansion; therefore the latter is a greater menace to the progress of labour.
Assuming this to be true – it is not out of place here to recall that similar arguments were put forward in 1914, only to be disproved when the ‘non-expanding’ British Imperialism added 1,125,000 square miles to its possessions – the case will not bear a moment’s examination. Victory for British Imperialism does not mean the end of the conflict; nor of the wastage of lives, the poverty and suffering of the masses that the conflict involves. The victory of British Imperialism would lead to the shifting of the conflict to other spheres. British world-domination is contested not only by German Imperialism; it is also contested by American, by Japanese and, to a lesser degree, by Italian Imperialism. (It is useful to remember that the present sequence of world wars is generally regarded as beginning with the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931.) Putting Germany out of action temporarily would merely lead to intensified struggle with other powers.
We shall see later that the whole basis upon which Laski argues is divorced from reality. It is, however, necessary to deal with the case as put forward by Laski so as to show that if the course he advocates were to be worked out it would still leave the major problem unsolved.
 
Who is the Enemy of Labour?
To strengthen further his plan that Hitlerism must be destroyed, Laski paints a horrifying picture of the awful consequences of a German victory. To avoid this the organised workers must support Chamberlain’s Government: for they cannot defeat Mr. Chamberlain and the things he represents, save as they give all their energy to the defeat of Hitler.
‘It should’, says Laski, ‘surely be obvious that the danger to democracy from Mr. Chamberlain and M. Daladier [4] is, in the present circumstances, far less than the danger represented by Hitler.’ (p 11)
It is hard to follow the working of the (New) Fabian mind. The French workers have lost all the gains won by the stay-in strikes and the Popular Front Government. Their wages are subject to confiscation by the State; their hours have been lengthened; their trade union rights drastically limited; their political freedom abolished – by M. Daladier! Long before the war began, M. Daladier used conscription to break a general strike of the French Trade Unions.
In Britain itself, the looming offensive against workers’ wages is being led, not by Hitler, but by the present Cabinet. Great suffering has been imposed by the Government on the people; our man-power is being conscripted for the forces, and soon will be for the factories. Once Laski’s argument is accepted – that for fear of a worse evil from an outside enemy we should tolerate the evils imposed by our own ruling classes – Labour is on the defensive. Step by step we shall be driven to surrender everything that has been gained over the last fifty years. Put the war first and the needs of the workers must come second. Accept the capitalist framework of society and inevitably the cost of the war will be fastened on to the shoulders of the workers. For, on Laski’s argument, to fight Chamberlain is to crab the fight against Hitler. An opposition that jibs at carrying its verbal criticism to the stage of open struggle against the Government is an opposition doomed to servile flunkyism.
 
That German Revolution
Having made the first part of his case by ignoring the relationship between capitalism and the war, Laski seeks to get over the second part by disproving the first; he says:
The war cannot be separated from the capitalist forces which produced it; it is an inherent function of their nature, not something willed apart from them by the deliberate designs of malevolent men. War is the expression of the bankruptcy of a Social Regime, an opportunity to the creditors to reorganise the estate ... (p.13)
If these words mean anything they mean that the task of the workers is to overthrow the capitalist war-making order; that war makes this all the more urgent and possible. They apply to the peoples of all countries – who live and suffer under capitalist exploitation – but Laski addresses them to the German workers exclusively.
Naturally, Laski sees the duty of the German worker more clearly than he sees the duty of the British workers. He is all in favour of a German revolution. He wants the German workers to overthrow their capitalist government, but urges the British workers not to overthrow theirs. If his argument that to fight Chamberlain is to help Hitler be true, then the German workers may also say; first let us beat Chamberlain, representative of Versailles and of British Imperialism, then we will see to Hitler.
 
Labour and the Government
At this point Laski will say the Labour Movement is not supporting Chamberlain’s Government. His arguments now get about as hard to hold as Jack Warner’s favourite eels. [5] ‘Such support as Labour has given to the Government has been, and is strictly conditioned upon the degree of coincidence of Mr Chamberlain’s aims with those of Labour.’ Or is it the other way round? At no point is it clear where this coincidence comes. Not surely on the home front; and certainly not on war aims. Laski does not reveal the point of agreement. There must be agreement for he urges us to maintain ‘that national unity which is a condition of victory’. He suggests that in waging the war Labour and Chamberlain part company perhaps on the kind of Germany they want after the war. A Socialistic Germany is the Labour – or Laski’s – aim. We might well ask: what kind of Socialist Germany will it be that is established not by the rising of the German workers but by the bombs and bayonets of the allies? Even the Professor shows some uneasiness on this point. He admits the danger that the Allies want a palace revolution in Germany; a change of governors, not of systems. That is more than a danger, it is clearly part of Britain’s war strategy.
But do Labour part company with Chamberlain over this? This is open to great doubt. The Labour Party is largely committed to the restoration of the old prewar Europe. Not a Socialist Europe but the old system of alliances and puppet powers. They are backing Beneš, [6] and the return of the old democratic system to Czechoslovakia. They give official countenance to the work of the reactionary groups now uniting to return to power in Austria. [7] They back the restoration of reactionary Poland. The Labour Party shows no sign of uniting the labour movements of Europe for an independent drive for a Socialist Europe. Without this all the rest is sham. Nowhere is this betrayal more clearly conveyed than in the significant paragraph especially inserted in Labour’s newest declaration on its war aims ; so far unnoticed save by the reactionaries in France and Britain who welcomed it. It is worth quoting in full:
Whatever else may be contained in the Peace Treaty, this will assuredly not be the last war in Europe, unless, when this war ends, we can succeed in reconciling the French claim to Security with the German claim to Equality. If Britain is either inattentive or impatient towards either of these claims, she will already have incurred a share of responsibility for the Next War.
The French people, who have suffered so often and so cruelly, must be assured of protection against violence and menace, and the German people must be given acceptable and peaceful outlets for their energy and ambition.
In reply to the just claim of the French the Labour Party answers: ‘We share your determination that this recurrent German menace, requiring these repeated mobilisations of the whole manhood of France, shall not plague your next generation and ours, if our strength and foresight can prevent it. Henceforth in resistance to any German aggression, our two peoples must not be merely allies for a season but brothers for all time. [8]
The prospect of lasting peace is not a Socialist Europe but the reconciliation of ‘French’ and ‘German’ claims! To speak of the French and Germans as nations is to destroy the whole basis upon which the Socialist case rests. It jettisons even the feeble ‘Peace Aims’ statement to which the Party is committed. The Socialist seeking new Europe would be working for the union of French, German and British workers through Socialist governments, and see in this the destruction of all the old measurements, standards and fears. This statement reveals clearly the fact that Labour’s alleged difference in war aims with Chamberlain is window dressing – no more.
 
War and Revolution
War forces life away from the beaten track; it throws values and systems into the melting pot. At first it strengthens the ruling-class grip on the people; later it breaks that grip. War is revolutionary in its effects. Laski sees this and makes some play with the fact. But successful revolutions are made possible not only by the impact of war upon the social structure; they also require the existence of men and women with the purpose and courage and knowledge to carry them through.
The organised workers cannot conquer political power by struggle against foreign capitalists but only by struggle against those in their home country who hold to and maintain the existing social structure. The demands of war invade every sphere of industrial and civil life; it is impossible to support the war and the Government waging it and to hope to create revolutionary opinion and leadership which will radically change that social system.
The will of the Government is ... finally determined by the character of the class relations in Society. If these give a different and unequalled interest to different classes in the results of the productive process then the power of the State will always be used to protect the interests of the class which owns the instruments of production. [9]
So wrote Laski some years ago on one of his daring excursions into revolutionary politics. He cannot argue that this difference no longer exists in wartime. That the peace-time capitalist state becomes in war-time an impartial organ standing above class interests and bias. He would not say this, yet he appeals for unity to secure victory; victory for whom and over whom? Let Laski tell us at what point he distinguishes between the war being fought against Hitlerism, and the war against the standards and rights of the British workers?
Laski is uneasily aware of the revolutionary material likely to be brought to the top by the present war. Great explosive forces have accumulated beneath the surface of the present social structure since the end of the 1914-18 war. The efforts of the workers to change the social order have been frustrated. The peoples of the world have therefore suffered two decades of impoverishment and disillusion. The antagonisms fostered by capitalist decline – class conflict, colonial aspirations, and national revolt – have not been removed but intensified by reactionary triumphs. The development of the war will release all these repressed forces. Social systems, armies, nations, and empires will be thrown into the melting pot of war and revolution. This explains the hesitancy of the older and wiser British statesmen to be drawn into war which may shatter the existing social order; why both sides have hesitated to let loose the powerful and destructive engines of modern war upon the world.
This fact demands of organised labour that it cut through the tangle of vested interests and lies and prepares itself for – and helps to make – the great struggles for social change. That is, set out to make political power, for Socialist change, its dominating purpose. The blows of the British workers against their own imperialism will awaken wider reverberations in Germany than all the leaflets and radio appeals made by Labour men serving as the mouthpieces of an imperialist government. If the Daily Herald [10] is to be believed, Labour’s line-up with Chamberlain has weakened, not strengthened, opposition to war and fascism in Germany.
 
A revolutionary war can only be waged by a revolutionary class
Centre of the scene in Britain today – and throughout the world – is the social question. To live, to eat, to end war, the masses must be set in active movement to secure power.
Laski asks us to support gouty old British Imperialism, and to put the victory of that imperialism – which is by no means the same thing as the defeat of Fascism – before the struggle for socialism. Mr Greenwood [11] proclaims his willingness to sacrifice a million lives now to save such a sacrifice in twenty years time. How easy it is to dispose of human beings! We know – and Laski knows – that such a sacrifice will lead to greater sacrifices in the future as long as capital rules. Chamberlain’s Government fights this war for the advancement of monopoly-capital; at home as much as abroad. The strengthening of monopoly in finance and industry means a similar process in government forms as well; democracy in its present form is doomed – it must give way to the slave state of capital, or the democratic government of the workers. This war is as much a war to defeat the workers’ fight for social change in Britain as it is to maintain imperialist power abroad.
First step to the arousing of the British workers to the fight for power – which is also the arousing of the German and world workers to the same struggle – is to call things by their right names in the Labour Movement. Those who replace the flag of Socialist internationalism by the jingo flag of imperialist war must be denounced. Clarity is an essential preliminary to the creation of new and vigorous leadership from the ranks of the workers, from the workshops, foundries, mines and mills of Britain. The hope for all mankind depends upon the determination and courage of the working men of Europe; let us rise to our task.


Endnotes
1. Harold Joseph Laski (1893-1950) was a prominent British left-wing political theorist and academic. A leading member of the Fabian Society, he joined the National Executive Committee of the Labour Party in 1936, and chaired the party during 1945-46. He was appointed Professor of Political Science at the London School of Economics in 1926, and was a prolific writer on political topics.
2. Harold Laski, Is This an Imperialist War?, pamphlet published by the Labour Party, February 1940; also included in Labour’s Aims in War and Peace , London, nd [1940], pp 22-33.
3. Neville Chamberlain (1869-1940), a Conservative, became the Prime Minister of Britain in 1937, and headed the government which declared war on Germany in September 1939.
4. Edouard Daladier (1884-1970), a Radical, was Prime Minister of France in 1933, 1934 and 1938-40.
5. Jack Warner (1896-1981) was a popular British music hall and wireless comedian and film actor, Eels; was one of his songs (‘really slippery eels’).
6. Edvard Beneš (1884-1948) was a leader of the Czechoslovak independence movement, Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia during 1918-35, and President during 1935-38 and 1946-48 until the Stalinist takeover.
7. In Austria the workers in the factories are strongly organised in an underground movement. The blessing of the Labour Party of the work of the coalition of all the old Austrian parties implied by their official presence at the opening of the propaganda office is a blow at these workers. [Author’s note]
8. Peace Declaration of the Labour Party, 9 February 1940, in Labour’s Aims in War and Peace, pp.90-91.
9. Harold Laski, The State in Theory and Practice, London 1935, pp.198-99.
10. The Daily Herald was a daily newspaper that reflected the views of the Labour Party leadership.
11. Arthur Greenwood (1880-1954) was Deputy Leader of the Labour Party and subsequently a member of Winston Churchill’s wartime coalition government.
 



That winter’s night the snow was falling softly in the darkness, as it had been for days, on the climbing, twisting roads, on the clusters of stone houses, on the encircling hills and wide moors of Derbyshire, until nothing could move on the highways and the great slopes were wide expanses of white and cloaked silence.
As in most winters, the snow closed the place in, liberating all there from the bustle, traffic, tumult of the acquisitive world. People were their true selves again.
In homes and farms fires were banked high, and, in the bright, glowing inns, men supped mulled ale, talked sport and farming. Jests and tales – it could have been any century, any year, yet nowhere else but England.
In the village hall, the local Silver Band was playing heavily and faithfully music for old-time dancing. The cause was a good one – the raising of money for the bandsmens’ uniforms. The need was obvious – the band members wore fine tunics of red and gold, but their trousers were ordinary and everyday.
The attendance was smaller than usual, for the most numerous and enthusiastic supporters of ‘old time’, the farmers of hill and dale, were shut away in their farmhouses behind the climbing snowdrifts blocking all roads to the village.
* * *
Past the hall and the strains of Bradford Barn Dance, past another merry inn, slowly up winding road we walked, the snow crunching under our feet, the wind stirring flurries of white from festooned tree branches.
A path in the churchyard among the slanting gravestones took us to a long grave fenced by low iron railings. Two ancient yew trees, one at foot, one at head, threw a close protective covering of dark green over the surface of chipped stones, on which a few patches of white snow glowed in the darkness.
By torchlight we read the inscription on the headstone – ‘Here lies buried Little John, the friend and lieutenant of Robin Hood, who died in a cottage (now destroyed) to the east of the churchyard’.
* * *


 


Tales told and songs sung at winter firesides kept green through the centuries the memory of Robin Hood, Little John and the rest of the merry men. In this Derbyshire village of Hathersage people remembered from generation to generation the cottage where Little John died, and the spot in the churchyard where he was buried.
His long bow, inscribed with his surname, Naylor, hung on a wall in the church for centuries, until, in 1792 it was taken away by the squire, to vanish from sight until, a couple of hundred years later, it was put on show at Wakefield Museum. It is of spiced yew, 79 inches long, weighs two pounds and requires a pull of 160 pounds as against the 50 pounds usual today.
Robin Hood, reports one old narrative, ‘joyned unto himself many stout fellows of like dispocicioun, amongst whom one called Little John was principal ...’ An old ballad tells us that ‘by hym stode Little John, a good yeman was he’ and it is striking that of all the things remembered and recorded about Robin Hood above all else is the fact that Little John was a friend of Robin Hood; that Robin recruited his band from men who bested him in combat; that though chosen captain he was but one among friends and equals and betters, not master but comrade, not head but friend and fellow.



Robin was a proud outlaw,
Whyles he walked on ground,
So curteyse an outlaw as he was one,
Was never none yfounde.



So the oldest and most beautiful ballad tells us, using proud in its older sense of free and masterless, and using courtesy to describe Robin’s gracefulness and humility to his comrades and to the poor, the defenceless and the oppressed.
* * *


 


Historians, particularly those dedicated to so-called scientific methods, dismissed the tales of Robin Hood as they did much else that has been since proven beyond argument. In place of the clear, simple, intelligible ballads and stories they advanced wildly incredible theories to account for the centuries-old belief in the outlaw and his fellows.
Robin Hood never existed, they said. He was myth created by superstitious people, a hero sprung from a misty Teutonic paganism, or an Aryan sun god, or a relic of tree worship, or a forest elf, or, said some marxists, an expression of popular rebellion against authority. He was everything highly improbable and impossible; anything but the real man honoured and remembered by the foolish English poor.
Amid the spreading of such doubts, Little John’s grave was opened. The size of the grave and a 29½ inch thighbone in it suggested a man of some seven feet tall. The old ballads spoke of him as ‘seven feet high’. Good enough for the academic historians? Not a bit of it. Unlettered men must be wrong.
What evidence was there, demanded the authorities, that there was ever a cottage on the site pointed out? Stung by endless repetitions of these doubts, a retired market gardener of Hathersage reached for his spade, went to what the guide books still call ‘the reputed site of Little John’s cottage’ and dug.
He went deep and his spade unearthed the remains and foundations of a medieval cottage! If anyone else has any doubts let him or her go to Hathersage and argue it out there.
* * *
We walked from the graveside, and down to the village. Across the silent hills an occasional light flickered in the windows of. a lonely farmhouse; footsteps crunched along the street; ‘good nights’ hung on the cold air. From the village hall came whoops and shouts and the strains of the Gay Gordons, played by the indefatigable Silver Band.
In the warm, friendly bar parlour of the inn – The Little John – a man was blowing blasts on a forester’s horn, amid a hubbub of friendly comment, derision and laughter. Where else but in high Hathersage should sleep the friend and lieutenant of Robin Hood – Little John?
 

