

The Communist Party is in a grave crisis.
There are different opinions on the causes; there are disagreements on the cure; but every leader and member knows that the discussion which involves the Party from top to bottom arises out of the crisis and seeks an answer to it.
Yet while Communists are plunged into unprecedented debate, outside their ranks every wing, group, tendency, publication stemming from the socialist movement talks of a new alignment, a regrouping, a new beginning; they look not toward the decline of socialism but toward its rise. New opportunities are opening everywhere.
The Communist Party can no longer go on as before. In truth, it stands at the crossroads. If it chooses one road, it will travel speedily toward decline and disintegration into an isolated Stalinist-type sect, not only rejected by the working class but detested by it. If it takes the other path, it can make a notable contribution toward the rebirth of genuine socialism in the United States; it can move together with Socialists everywhere and spur the movement on. Which way shall it be? Members of the Communist Party must make the decision but the outcome is so vital that all socialists must enter into the discussion. In such a spirit, we of the Independent Socialist League offer this pamphlet as a contribution to the discussion inside the Communist Party.
 
IF THERE IS A CRITICAL SITUATION which no one can ignore, how did it arise? It is not because members or leaders suddenly wavered in their loyalty to ideals which brought most of them into the Party. They were first drawn into the movement by the liberating inspiration of socialism; they were motivated by the goal of a society without exploitation, by human brotherhood, internationalism, democracy. As Party members, they sacrificed for causes that were unpopular; fought for what they thought was right; gave money; gave time; some gave their lives. And in recent years, when their movement came under attack from every quarter, they risked jobs, they faced jail, they felt the lash of anti-democratic persecution. And yet, they went on. They persisted courageously in maintaining and building their movement. If the Party now faces a crisis, it is not for lack of heroism, self-sacrifice and devotion by its adherents. Quite the opposite. The membership of the Communist Party displayed an unexampled fortitude in standing against the tide of opinion in their own country.
Yet the crisis is here. The outward signs are obvious to all who know even the most elementary facts about its history; the movement which once numbered a hundred thousand in membership, which inspired a million or more close sympathizers, and which led other millions is now isolated from the mass of people who once looked to it for advice and leadership, direct and indirect.
Once, vast numbers of worker unionists affiliated with the American labor movement were led by members of the Communist Party and its sympathizers. The Party was a growing force: in transport, auto, rubber, oil, packinghouse, electrical and machine – a roster of basic industry, not to mention secondary industries where its influence was no less. Now, it is all gone. In one union after another, the Party and its sympathizers have been defeated, ousted from power, often expelled from membership; where their followers and friends held on, they were expelled en bloc from the CIO and cut down.
Where they still hold a remnant of influence, it is either being whittled away or without significance to the development and course of the labor movement. As one Party trade union commentator explained:
“... a base which becomes completely surrounded and hemmed in by the enemy will not long remain a base. For the very concept of a base is that it be a strong-point from which and not merely in which to operate.” (John Swift, Political Affairs, April 1952.)
That was almost five years ago. Since then, the Party’s situation has deteriorated even further.
Once, Communists were among the chief leaders of the fight for Negro rights everywhere, inside the labor movement and out. Entirely apart from its fundamental line including the slogan: “self-determination for the Black Belt,” in fact despite its basic line, the Party led national struggles against discrimination, police brutality, and frame-ups. Inside the Party, a constant campaign was waged against “white-chauvinism”; hundreds of thousands of workers who passed through the CP learned at least one thing: the need for solidarity between white and black and the pressing need for a fight for equal rights for all.
Yet, today, the CP is isolated from the Negro movement. In the United States, a vast struggle for Negro equality is under way. Negroes in the South are ready to risk life and security in a fight for democracy; they are not frightened; they are not submissive. Their movement spreads all over the South; in the North, Negroes rally to the assistance of their comrades with moral and material aid. It is the most massive surge forward of Negroes in the nation’s history. But the Communist Party is not part of it; the fighting Negroes look to new organizations; they look to the unions; above all, they look to the NAACP. Not only do they by-pass the Communist Party; they look upon it with distaste: even though individual members of the Communist Party are often respected for their own personal devotion to the cause of civil rights.
Nevertheless, and this should be absolutely clear, the Party’s isolation from the organized workers and the Negro movement is only a symptom of the crisis and not its basic cause. Sometimes, socialists must stand alone against public opinion in the interests of truth and democracy. No movement has the right to respect and devotion if it cannot remain steadfast in the face of adversity and tell the world, “You are wrong; we are right.” If the undercurrent of public opinion were overwhelmingly conservative, even reactionary, and bitterly anti-socialist, then any socialist movement, worthy of the name, could only hold on, defend its own rights and its views, awaiting a turn in the tide. It would hold on, knowing that isolation is the harsh price it pays for unremitting service to truth, democracy, and justice. If that applied to the Communist Party today, there might be a decline in membership and in influence but not a crisis; for its followers were hardened enough to stand up under such pressures.
But is that the case? Every CP member and leader must face up to this question squarely without evasion, and without self-consoling delusions.
Has the CP been plunged into isolation because the American working people have been plunged into an unprecedented conservatism? Did the labor movement and the Negro movement fall victim to unreasoning jingoism, anti-socialism, and McCarthyism? If so, how and why? Such an explanation must be rejected out of hand. The Negro movement today has risen to new heights and cries out more vociferously than ever for democracy. The labor movement is more powerful than ever and the working class is aware of its extraordinary strength.
The workers and Negroes have won a strong position in American society. But do not “console” yourself that their victories have made them content with their lot and unmovably pro-capitalist. “The reality that even under capitalism the workers may be able to increase and defend their living standards need not, in the long run, lead them to accommodate themselves to capitalism and to turn a deaf ear to socialism.” So writes Foster in Political Affairs. (p. 41, Nov. 1956) Why, then, do they turn a “deaf ear” to the Communist Party today?
But let us clarify the question. We are not referring here to “people” as a vague, undifferentiated mass. Obviously, a majority of workers, even organized workers, has always been non-socialist or anti-socialist. Nevertheless, a whole section of the working class was socialistic in its thinking, and progressive in outlook. It is to this truly progressive section of American labor opinion that we refer. Once, the CP was respected by it; now it is rejected. Why? Was the rejection of the Communist Party by these workers a rejection of socialism, truth and democracy or was it something else?
Until February 1956 it was possible for every Communist to tell the world and, even more important, to tell himself as he looked in the mirror, that he was defending the truth. If isolation and denunciation is the price for defending socialism and democracy every sincere Communist Party member and leader told himself; then so be it! We have stood up under worse and we will again. But that inner conviction was wiped out at one blow by the 20th Congress and the Khrushchev revelations! Of a sudden, it dawned upon the thinking members that they had defended not truth for 25 years, but lies!
 
The 20th Congress
Everything had to be reexamined. The open crisis in the CP dates from the 20th Congress. The very fact that the party was shaken from top to bottom was in itself a sign of life. Only a corpse would remain unmoved. If the Party was no longer sure of the old way, a new way became possible.
It came as a shock to Party members and sympathizers to discover:

That: Under Stalin, a police tyranny crushed all critics; carried on “mass arrests and deportations of many thousands of people” and “executions without trial.” Yet, the Party detected nothing but the most perfect democracy on earth.
 
That: Sincere Communists were tried and shot, or just shot. Their “trials” were frame-ups; their “confessions” were false; they were tortured and tormented. Virtually the whole leadership of the Bolshevik Revolution was exterminated. In 1937–8, 70 per cent of the members and candidates of the Central Committee of the CPSU were shot. Yet the Party saw nothing wrong. It defended “Soviet justice” and denounced all who questioned the trials as “fascists.”
 
That: “Plots” were invented. Whole nations, enjoying a fictional autonomy as affiliates of the USSR, were wiped out and their peoples deported from their homes. “The Ukrainians avoided meeting this fate,” said Khrushchev, “only because there were too many of them and there was no place to which to deport them. Otherwise, he [Stalin] would have deported them also.” Yet, no one in the Party leadership protested against such outrages. Quite the contrary, they sought always to justify them, where they did not deny their existence.
 
That: The heads of governments in Eastern European nations were falsely denounced as “fascists” and “agents of imperialism.” Many were executed like Rajk in Hungary, Kostov in Bulgaria, Slansky in Czechoslovakia. Tito, who remained outside the grasp of the Kremlin, was excoriated as a “fascist warmonger.” Needless to say, the Party leaders followed suit, piling their own little heap of abuse on to the mountain of crimes.
 
That: Stalin was transformed “into a superman possessing supernatural characteristics akin to those of a god.” The Party leaders saw nothing wrong. They sought to discover and extol virtues which others had overlooked.

The list is longer. And to the list of official crimes must be added the questions that came to mind but which were evaded by Khrushchev. What of democracy in general, free trade unions, the one-party state, free elections?
The 20th Congress was a terrible moral blow to the old Party leadership. It was compelled to admit that for a whole political epoch it had defended as democratic what was now admittedly a police dictatorship and it had done so as a blind and uncritical apologist for Stalin and his ruling regime.
The “revelations” were new only to those deliberately kept ignorant of the fact that the crimes of Stalin against socialism had been followed and analyzed in all details by socialists from the earliest days of his rise to power. What made them “revelations” was that this time the charges originated from within the ruling bloc itself and consequently were virtually unanswerable.
One party member looked the facts square in the face.
“The American Communist Party does not approach the American people with clean hands, as far as the Soviet Union is concerned. The American Communist Party repeated as gospel truth which it sincerely believed, every lie told by the Soviet Union about its living standards, about Tito, about the Moscow Trials, about the electoral system, about the Doctor’s case, the stamping out of Jewish culture.” (L.W.M. in Party Voice, December, 1956)
That was the root of the Party crisis.
You can understand better now why militants in the labor movement hung back, refusing to spring to the defense of the Party. You can see now why the Party had to fight on, isolated and alone, a losing defensive battle not just before the bar of bourgeois courts but before the jury of working class opinion. There had been “red-baiting” many times before; in the Thirties, the infamous Dies Committee and its similars tried to rouse a lynch spirit against Communists, Socialists, liberals, and dissenters of all kinds. But they failed. They failed because millions, especially in the unions, rejected with contempt the call for a witch hunt. As a matter of fact, progressives and militants in the unions did more than defend the legitimate democratic rights of Communists from reactionary attack; they placed them in high union office; they even shielded them from justified criticisms from Socialists. But their mood changed.
Militant unionists fled from the Party’s orbit not because they were misled by lies but because they were beginning to suspect the truth. It is the same truth which Communists have begun to face only since the 20th Congress.
Even now, some Party members try to discover what tactical errors led them to lose the sympathy of progressive workers. How, for example, did they lose out in so advanced a union as the United Automobile Workers with its outstanding record of militancy and democracy? Was it the “right opportunism” of “Browderism” which led Communists to support piece work, to denounce opponents of the no-strike pledge, and to tail-end Roosevelt during the war? Was it “left-sectarianism” which led them to denounce Reuther as the “bosses’ boy”; or a dozen other errors? The answers raise more vexing problems than the questions. It was none of these errors and it was all of them! Any socialist group will make “errors.” But what became clear to every intelligent militant in the UAW was that every turn in the Party line, “leftist” or “rightist,” followed one consistent pattern: it represented an attempt to adjust the policy of the working class movement to the needs of the Russian rulers. No minor shift from “right” to “left” or back could shake off this conviction.
It was true before the Congress and even more so after. Party members began to realize that to the extent progressives rejected blind acceptance of the Kremlin’s policies, they were right. The Party could not go on as before. The growing hostility of workers had sounded a warning. After the Congress, a new balance sheet was unavoidable.
 
THOUSANDS JOINED THE PARTY to fight for socialism, willing to bum the bridges to bourgeois respectability behind them. Were they now simply to fade away in disillusionment and become a political nullity? Were they to look for a comfortable niche as obedient and docile servants of the status quo; mere beasts of burden in the factories; intellectual work-oxen in the professions? Would they join the swarming throng of ex-radicals who had discovered that it was possible to make peace with capitalism and live comfortably as its courtiers? Would they call for the speedy “liquidation” of the Communist Party only in order to liquidate a socialist future for themselves? Those who remained in the Party but who want a radical change have given their answer. They speak of an independent socialist movement, democratic, based upon the interests of the working class, and freed from dependence upon Russian policy. They have decided to press inside their Party for a new, resurgent independent socialist movement.
Thus, this crisis inside the Communist Party gives rise to a thoroughgoing and genuine debate. And as the discussion proceeds, it is becoming clear to socialists everywhere that whole sections of the Communist Party honestly have already taken the first steps toward the only authentic socialism, that is: democratic socialism. New hope stirs for American socialism.
But it is not simple; it is not easy. In the discussion, there are many in the leadership and in the ranks who sincerely want a new course. Others, some in honest confusion and some by deliberate calculation, block the way and resist any fundamental change. Some want clarity; others throw up a squidlike ink screen. Everything come us for discussion; it is difficult to separate primary issues from the secondary and to differentiate between questions that can and must be settled quickly and those which must await a more leisurely, continuing discussion. It is not possible, instantly, to take a quick position on a dozen “fundamental” questions before taking a stand on issues which are decisive to reconstructing an independent, working-class socialist movement in the United States. In brief, it is not necessary to decide everything before doing anything.
 
The Draft Resolution: Two Tendencies
OUT OF THE FIRST STAGE of debate came the Draft Resolution which became the focus of discussion as the February convention approached.
It was obvious at the outset that it proposed sweeping tactical changes and viewed the Party’s recent past with a critical eye. But was it the beginning of a genuine change or was it a camouflage and cover for a continuation of the fundamental line of old?
When the program appeared, that question seemed hanging in mid-air; the socialist and labor public was accustomed to abrupt 180-degree turns in line which left things basically unchanged; they were scornful, too, of fake “discussions” that became nothing more than breast-beating, scapegoat-hunting sessions.
It soon became clear that the National Committee majority which had adopted the Resolution was divided into at least two sharply divergent tendencies, each of which had voted for the same resolution but for vastly different aims. Since the program was an umbrella covering opposing policies, it could serve only as the starting point for debate; it became a convenient vehicle for raising the key questions, but it could not settle them.
If it quickly became evident that this was a real discussion, in every sense of the word, it was because one wing of the Party seriously tried to face up to the Party crisis. It saw the Resolution as a spring board for a new attitude and a new movement; it maintained that the Party would founder unless it became democratic – democratic in its inner regime and democratic in its conception of socialism; that it had to be genuinely based upon the interests of the working class and to reject the role of blind apologist.
It was this group that turned the discussion into a genuine one.
John Gates, editor of the Daily Worker, in Time for a Change (Political Affairs, November 1956) called for a real turn:
“This tragic situation cannot be cured by a few patches here and there as we have been doing for many years. It can only be solved by drastic and basic changes....”
He rejected “uncritical acceptance of Soviet mistakes.” He pointed out that “the expansion of democracy is not automatic under socialism but must be fought for.” He insisted upon inner-Party democracy and “the right of dissent after policy has been adopted and while it is being carried out.”
Gates is only one among many. They have only made a beginning but it is a serious beginning by people who know that trivialities and clever maneuvers are futile and that without a drastic reorientation they are doomed in the United States.
It was no accident that those who rose to the occasion centered around the Daily Worker. Here were the Party’s public propagandists, the men who faced the non-party public.
They sensed the mood of progressives and union militants who had become suspicious of the Party and were deserting it after the 20th Congress. They were eager to drive the lessons home to the Party and induce it to make a real turn.
But there are others – others for whom the draft program was not the beginning of a new era but a subtle maneuveristic device. With unruffled equanimity, they were willing to admit a multitude of errors – in the past – so long as they were not required to make a real turn in the future. They imagined that by repudiating the “crimes of Stalin” in his “later years” they could be absolved from the duty of drawing up a real balance-sheet.
They hoped to go on fundamentally as before, with new apologetics and cliches for the old. The working class public, they hoped, would forgive or at least forget. They sought a “new look” but the old substance; old wine in new bottles.
No one better represents this redecorated, wall-papered conservative wing than Eugene Dennis.
For a fleeting moment after the 20th Congress, it seemed as though the Khrushchev regime might tolerate, even encourage, a critical attitude by foreign Communist Parties toward limited aspects of Russian policy. The bureaucrat, skilled in the arts and crafts of old-line Stalinism, cultivated a sixth sense that enabled him to anticipate what his higher-ups would appreciate. The successful Stalinist flunkey was one who required not direct orders but only subtle hints. Perhaps Eugene Dennis suspected that his new mentors might welcome a certain line of inquiry. At any rate, he wrote a rather mild note to Pravda suggesting that the rise of the “cult” of Stalin needed a deep Marxistical explanation.
(Leave aside the pitiful mood of such a query: the most urgent demand put to those who shared power with Stalin is that they think up a cogent explanation for crimes they once concealed. It is as though a murderer’s accomplice were called to task, not for killing, but for failing to lecture on the social causes of crime.)
Under the pressure of labor, liberal, socialist, and now Communist public opinion, Dennis mentioned the execution in the USSR of Jewish cultural leaders and the suppression of the Jewish language. Pravda reprinted his missive in full, with one deletion; it deliberately cut out all his references to the destruction of Jewish rights!
Months pass. Dennis defers, submissively and politely, to this disgraceful censorship and refuses to raise his voice.
Here is a man, then, who is ready upon command to call out stridently against murder, frame-ups, terror, and tyranny ... for the past and upon orders from above. But in his breast stirs not the meagerest hint of audacity, not enough to protest against a mean act of censorship and suppression of the truth. Who will now take him seriously if he begins to speak of “independence”?
A short history of the Dennis line is preserved in the Daily Worker for December 4, 1956. Joe Clark proves in pitiless detail that he never dared to utter a criticism until it came through Russian channels first: “Dennis evidently does not object to the Daily Worker criticizing anything said or done by Soviet Communists but only after the Soviet Communists have themselves made such criticism.” With perfect accuracy Clark summarizes Dennis: “Dennis ... assigns to the Soviet armed forces in Hungary the role which Marx considered fell to the working class.”
Yet Dennis, Clark and Gates all support the Draft Resolution; the real line of division, then, is not between those who voted for and those against the Draft. It lies elsewhere.
While Dennis voted for the Draft, it soon became obvious that he had far more in common with William Z. Foster, Party chairman. For one passing, hesitating moment, Foster reluctantly voted for the Draft Program but after rapid calculation changed his mind and his vote. He is against – and properly so from his basically Stalinist point of view.
The Draft is heavily laden with old baggage. But there is little point to a microscopic word-by-word dissection of its political line. Apart from its exact contents it cleared the way for a searching criticism of the Party line; it legitimized not only a consideration of secondary tactics and slogans but a new look at some of the most sacred party dogmas.
It opened a path for those who wanted fundamental changes; in particular, for a change in the relation between the Party and the regime in the USSR.
That is exactly what those who hang on to the past cannot tolerate. They want not a real discussion but only the appearance of one.
They tolerate a genuine discussion with distaste and, doubtless, would suppress it if they could by bureaucratic machine methods. But since that is not possible in the present atmosphere, they try to smother it with other methods.
Not every supporter of the Resolution desires a fundamental break with Stalinism; but its opponents, open and not so open, rally round a still-Stalinist line, in politics and in method. The unquestioned leader and organizer of this tendency is Foster, an unreconstructed holdover from the Stalin era whose politics have not budged an inch despite routine disavowals of “Stalin’s crimes” especially in “his later years.”
The discussion takes place around the Draft, with amendments, supplements, addenda, and what not. But all this serves only as a convenient rallying ground for the battle between the two main tendencies and as a temporary shelter for those who vacillate between them. Convention action on the Draft cannot end the discussion; it only opens a new phase.
Those who have nothing better to do spend their time picking out “revisionist” flaws and “opportunist” deviations in it. In the end, they know no more about the depths of the divisions between the two main tendencies than they did at the beginning. To understand the real scope of the fight in the Party, it is essential to turn to the course of the discussion as a whole.
One group takes form and looks for leadership to men like Gates and Steve Nelson. It is a distinctive tendency; that is, it leans in a certain direction. It is not of one mind on every question; its views are not consistently or fully developed; it has a distance to travel; but its direction is already marked out: toward democratic socialism. On the other side, a truly Stalinist wing clusters around Foster.
Democratic socialism or Stalinism: these are the two main poles. The party must ultimately choose between them. That and nothing less is at stake.
 
FOSTER DENOUNCES HIS OPPONENTS as “revisionists” when they propose to revise his monstrosities in the field of Party policy. He accuses them, too, of representing a “right” wing.
Who is “right” and who is “left”? One can get lost wandering around the points of the political compass; but such direction signs give a rule-of thumb guide to tendencies in the labor and socialist movement.
If we could find “pure” examples of right and left tendencies (as we never can in practice), they would be distinguished approximately as follows: A Marxist “left” wing is one which leans toward the independence of the working class and for its establishment as a class organized in its own interests. A “right” wing leans just in the opposite direction, toward the subordination of the independent working-class or socialist movement to other social groupings or their representatives.
In the multitude of questions up for debate, a flood of tactical and strategic divergencies relate to the “American question.” Foster has ample scope for his talents. Yet, despite grotesque contortions and outright distortions, no one of the Foster-Dennis camp has been able to demonstrate, or even seriously suggest, that their line represents the policy of independence in American politics as against critics who propose to capitulate to the bourgeoisie. In any case, party history refutes any such claim; no line of demarcation has appeared here.
But what does separate the two sides – clearly, unmistakably and admittedly – is their respective attitude toward the USSR, and differing conceptions of the relationship of the Party to it. Foster and Dennis are united in a determination to subordinate the movement. Gates, Nelson, and the Daily Worker group, on the other hand, despite the vacillations of their politics, call for an attitude of critical independence from the USSR, and demand an end to serving as blind apologist for it.
Not that they follow out the full implications of their position. Ironically, both they and Foster insist in common that Russia is “socialist”; but the difference in tendency is there nonetheless.
The Gates wing moves toward independence; in that sense, compared to its rivals it is the “left” wing in this dispute.
However, the terms “right” and “left” can be misleading. It would be more accurate to say that the democratic socialist tendency is the working-class wing, while the Foster group is the “Russian” wing. Their incompatibility arises not simply from differences of opinion but from class roots: the former is groping for real roots in the American working class, while the latter is bound firmly to the bureaucracy of the Russian state.
 
Stalinist Methods
AT FIRST GLANCE, THE DISCUSSION seems knotted up in a tangle of hopeless confusion. Everything and anything is up for consideration and posed for decision ... a stream of bulletins, magazines, letters, articles, papers, columns ... an unending series of subjects ... a multiplicity of clashing opinions. In the Daily Worker alone, perhaps 1,000 letters from readers have commented on the issues!
And on what subjects! Minor matters and important ones; trivial questions and decisive ones: The Program; the Negro Struggle; the Trade Union Movement; Constitution; Organization; Marxism-Leninism; Democratic Centralism; Peaceful Coexistence; USSR and relations with national Communist Parties; Hungary; Election Policy; Left-Sectarianism and Right Opportunism; A New United Party of Socialism; Roads to Socialism; Capitalist Stabilization; American Economy and American History; Dogmatism and Creative Marxism. All this is only a partial list of subjects stretching from Past to Present into the Future, and covering all the spaces in between.
Beneath it all, two definable forces are exerting their pull. But it is not always evident what they are.
No one could possibly end the present discussion by rude decree. But a bureaucratic device, to serve the same end is to prevent it from leading to anything in particular and to drown it in a forrest of cliches. A master at this technique is Foster, trained and reared in the Stalin school. In 30 meandering pages entitled, On the Political Situation (Political Affairs, October 1956) he proceeds at length to cut the discussion into a thousand hanging fragments to prevent it from becoming concentrated and clarified. He uses up the alphabet from “a” to “u” listing no less than 21 positively burning questions that must be probed before anything can be decided, ending his list with “etc.” Not satisfied, he rakes up no less than 16 basic “errors” of the “right wing” that must be censured. He is only scratching the surface. With his private thesaurus of “deviations” and “orthodoxies” the man could go on indefinitely. He is ready to talk his opponents to death while they grow old politically and die.
Then, without turning a hair, his friends accuse them of wanting to turn the Party into a discussion society!
Do you raise questions? Nothing short of liquidationism, revisionism, he replies. Consequently, let the discussion proceed not on what you want to discuss but on what I do.
Do you suggest new views? That is irresponsible, he replies. Before your views could be adopted, or even seriously considered we must discuss everything and anything from the formation of primitive protoplasm out of raw matter to the creation of the Warsaw Pact; we must follow every ramification, every detail fully, “scientifically.” We must study, we must investigate, we must think. That, by the way, applies only to your views. But not certainly to mine which can and should be adopted instantly, long before the devious ends are tied together in a beribboned bundle.
Before taking a position (that means, of course, your position) on America, argues Foster, we must begin to study American History, and U.S. Economy in a deep way – which, by the way, he insists has never been done. Don’t make a move without consulting Lincoln – and Lenin. He, himself, however, is not hindered by such diffidence and stands above such prescription. He is trigger-ready to “reaffirm” all “fundamentals” and their applicability to America without a second’s hesitation or a moment, even, of contemplative study.
It seems absurd? It sounds incredible? Yet, the danger is that this assault upon human intelligence, or something like it, will win out in the end!
Understand that Foster’s program is nothing more than a dusty collection of hollow formulas, stale slogans copied mechanically out of books, a running series of familiar cliches. If life gets in the way of his philosophy, let life be adjusted; a simple act of legerdemain, easily performed for a select credulous audience and reported in sympathetic publications, privately printed.
Yet its appeal is understandable. The membership listens for months to a discussion of new views and still newer views. Objections, rebuttals, surrebuttals. Criticisms and replies to criticisms. Months pass and nothing stands out with any starkness; nothing seems in order except new investigations into still newer fields.
Then comes Foster. “Marxism-Leninism, Proletarian Internationalism, Vanguard of the Workers, United Front of Struggle, Mass Work.” At last! The collective sigh of relief is almost audible. Here at last is something that can be understood! Concert goers listen with untutored ear to modern music, respectful perhaps but ill at ease. It is hard to concentrate until, at last, comes a popular piece with old familiar tunes; they relax in relief and hum the harmony along with the orchestra.
Foster’s method is simple. Keep up a constant bedlam and rely on natural conservatism to assert itself in the face of confusion. What if those who know that a change is needed become discouraged; what if hundreds are driven away in impatience. Let them go, so long as a Stalinist machine can reach back for Party control. Keep the pot of irrelevancy boiling and bubbling until your critics quit in disgust; then, perhaps, the time will have come to put an end to discussion.
By his methods alone, Foster reveals the unregenerate Stalinist at work.
 
Dogmatism and Marxism
THE BANNER OF CREATIVE MARXISM is raised against dogmatism. Those who want to re-examine policy in the light of living events are indubitably right in rejecting dogma. But as they pause in contemplation of everything-at-once, they inadvertently overlook the trap which Foster has set right at their feet. The task is to focus attention sharply on what must be decided now; and help everyone reach a position. But Foster diverts attention precisely toward his dogmas, which ring so familiarly, and casts a diffusive haze over every living question.
For that, he and his friends play at being the true apostles of “Marxism-Leninism.” But the dogmas that fascinate him have little in common with the theories that guided Marx or Lenin. He appeals to the “laws” of Marxism- Leninism as a body of juridically fixed statutes; his “laws” are like a criminal code and not the guiding principles of a socialist movement. What he decrees now, as in the past, in the name of “Marxism-Leninism” are nothing but the rules and regulations laid down in every sphere of theory and practice by those upon whom he is ever dependent. He cannot arrest anyone for violating the “laws” but he can subject them to a heavy sentence of verbal vituperation.
He wants to “reaffirm” everything. It was not the laws of “Marxism-Leninism” that led us astray, complain Foster and Dennis, it was our own failure to carry out its prescriptions; instead of sniping away at it, let us criticize our own shortcomings. What we must do, they insist, is to reaffirm the old dogmas; carry them out, at last; and go forward, the flag flying high.
If they never get around to accounting for their own basic errors, it is doubtless for lack of time. They are busy self-criticizing others. Meanwhile, by their own admission, they could never distinguish between genuine Marxism-Leninism and a counterfeit. For years, Foster confesses, the Party and its leaders violated and perverted these principles; the energies of a generation of writers and theorizers were dedicated to presenting the false as true. By what right can Mr. Foster who, like the others, couldn’t tell one from the other, offer himself as the official, accredited, certified representative of “Marxism-Leninism” ready to reaffirm in less than a moment all that he never understood?
When all dogma is cast in doubt, it is only natural that Party members are dismayed. For years, they imagined that the “dogmas” were clearly understood by all; the distilled essence of truth, categorical precepts for all eternity, the guide to action, the theory. Now they are puzzled and confused. Do you mean that we didn’t know what we were talking about? What is “Democratic Centralism” really? (to use only one example). They enter into prodigious researches to uncover its “true” meaning so that it can be voted up or down, once and for all. One club finds the nugget of truth buried in a directive issued from above to the Chinese Army! The editors of Party Voice, New York discussion magazine, extracts a definition from the official rules of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
Consider what all this implies.
A hundred years after the Communist Manifesto, it is necessary to redefine Marxist fundamentals. Thirty years after the death of Lenin, you are compelled to refine your conception of Leninism. Every generation from the vantage point of its own experience has the right to examine all programs with a critical eye. It will require years of political and scientific confrontation to unwrap each and every principle that guided Marx and Lenin from the mud and silt of misunderstanding, distortion and plain falsification that settled upon them like archaeological deposits.
And meanwhile?
While all fundamentals come up for investigation, the pressing tasks of our day remain: To decide what type of socialist movement fits our needs in the United States today; to reply to insistent questions on events in Hungary, Poland; to choose or reject independence from the USSR as it is today, under a regime unknown to Marx or Lenin and foreseen by neither. Study commissions are not a substitute for politics.
It has taken a political lifetime first to suppress, then to pose, finally to formulate all questions inside the CP. From the bursting locked attic of the Party memory, an accumulated storehouse of politics is now strewn about. It will not be carefully sorted, rearranged and tucked back neatly in order in a passing few minutes; not at one convention or two. The full encyclopedia of subjects belongs, too, not on the Party’s private discussion shelf, but in the socialist public arena.
 
THE ATTENTION OF THE PARTY must be focused on what is urgent and its passions aroused for a truly independent socialist movement. The greatest freedom of debate, the widest expression of views should be not simply tolerated but encouraged and insisted upon. It is not a question of limiting, certainly not of closing, the debate for that would be a calamity. But at some point the discussion must be brought to a head and concentrated.
The salient task for a leadership which wants to show the way to democratic socialism is to turn a spotlight on those issues which light up the way. Not everything can be treated on the same plane. Some matters can be left for time and the leisurely confrontation of opinion. But others must be grappled with quickly. Out of the welter of discussion the key issues have already taken shape and force their way to the forefront. They need to be formulated more clearly:

Democracy inside the Party.
 
The fight for democracy by socialists, everywhere; not only in countries dominated by capitalism but in those ruled by Communists as well, including the USSR.
 
Realignment of forces to build a broad independent socialist movement in the United States; one which would unambiguously reject capitalism and Stalinism.
 

Democracy in the Party
The whole Party is in arms against bureaucracy. Everyone repents the past and pledges to protect inner-party democracy in the future; gone are the days when the most elementary rights of rank-and-file members were passed off with a shrug.
So universal are democratic professions that the matter seems raised above dispute. Yet it would be foolhardy if the Party members trusted to simple expression of good intentions.
The future of Party democracy depends not on the good will of leaders, not even exclusively upon the alertness of its membership, but upon the political means chosen to solve the Party crisis. Foster’s road leads ultimately back to bureaucracy; not necessarily because he is a willful man but because he wants to overcome the Party crisis in a certain manner.
What has caused the crisis and what is the way out? The answers to these questions will in the end determine the fate of internal democracy.
Consider the approach of John Gates, Steve Nelson and their supporters: For them, the Party dilemma is rooted basically in a failure of Party policy in a fundamental sense to meet the needs of our times. The Party and its policies must be changed radically if it is to make its essential contribution to socialism in the United States.
Once this view is carried out consistently, democracy becomes more than a mere preference; it becomes an indispensable instrument.
In the first place, it would be impossible to make the essential turn now and tomorrow without the most thoroughgoing participation of the membership in action, in decisions and in debate.
But this is the minor key. For there are others who would agree: So far, so good. But so far, and no farther! For them, the question of democracy is posed as though it were a code of etiquette to guide the family in the private relations among its members.
But those in the Party who move toward democratic socialism view democracy as something more than mere traffic rules and see it in its deeper significance. It is not enough to grant each other the dispensations of democracy; they must convince trade unionists, Negroes, all peoples fighting for democracy, that they are actively turning away from dictatorial methods, away from dependence upon any authoritarian regime and toward democracy.
Party democracy becomes a life-and-death matter for them, not only for private purposes but because without it Communists are doomed before working-class opinion.
Some socialists, who regrettably have not followed the discussion with the attention it deserves, demur.
“You claim there is a democratic socialist tendency in the CP, even among some of its leaders,” they object. “But look at their past; see how they still refer to Russia as a socialist state and shy away from a full and frank criticism of its role in Hungary. Do you imagine that they can be sincere in this turn?”
But it is not a question of “sincerity” as some disembodied spirit. Look upon the past in a new light; insist upon a change in a given direction; and you are led willy-nilly toward a new view of Party democracy, flowing from a whole political outlook. Such a leaning or tendency arises in the Party; we can only hope that it continues consistently along the road which it has charted for itself.
To understand their outlook, contrast their views with Foster’s.
For him life is quite simple. The only crisis that he notices is the annoying fact that others persist in talking of a crisis! What is fundamentally wrong, he thinks, is that there are too many comrades who insist that there is something fundamentally wrong.
The 20th Congress? The Khrushchev report? Events in Eastern Europe? Isolation from the mass movement? No problem for Foster: just don’t think too much about them.
Why bother, in any case? The basic difficulties have been handily settled for us, now and forever, just as in the past. “Now, however, upon the initiative of the leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the Stalin undemocratic cult is being liquidated root and branch.” (Political Affairs, September 1956) What more do you want; let us go on to “constructive” work and leave such things to our highest “leaders.”
Everything could have easily been straightened out by Foster, given a little time to think up a good apology and to acquire a prefabricated Marxistical explanation. As he puts it (Political Affairs, October 1956):
“Although the situation created by the Stalin revelations presented certain problems no doubt the Party could have overcome them without great difficulty, absorbing the immediate lessons from the Stalin exposure and studying the long-range implications of this important matter.”
Just a bit of a problem, nothing different from what he juggled successfully many times before. But alas, it was not to be because there were Gates and the others.
To quote from Foster (Political Affairs, October 1956): “This Right tendency is now menacing the Marxist-Leninist foundations of the Party.” And “If it were desired to liquidate our Party no more effective means could be used to this end than the current discrediting of the Party and its leadership by ascribing to them endless ‘errors,’ many of which never happened.” And “These wrong views included bitter attacks upon the Soviet Union, upon our Party, and upon its whole leadership.”
There is no doubt in Foster’s mind where the crisis originates; the cause can be pinpointed exactly: it is the rise of the Gates-Daily Worker tendency.
The solution? It follows inexorably, from Foster’s bizarre conception of what is happening in the world and in the Party, that the way out of the crisis, for him, is the defeat of the Gates tendency and the return to “normality.”
Remember that we are dealing with the keeper of the seal, the man who will countenance no deviation from “Democratic Centralism” and who longs for the “monolithic unity” of the Party – whatever it means to anyone else, we know what it means to him. For Foster this discussion can be nothing but an annoying, unavoidable overhead.
What follows from his line and from his whole conception of the nature and solution of the Party crisis is that the Gates group must be smashed and the buds of Party democracy cut off.
“This time,” says Foster (Discussion Bulletin No. 2), “there will be no Duclos article to bail us out of our folly.” A thought scented with nostalgia for the good old days when everything could be decided by a nod from above, or a letter.
Not only that, things have gone far enough; that is: too far. “Such an exaggeration of mistakes as we have had in our Party during recent months would not be tolerated in the Communist Party of the USSR, Peoples China, Italy, etc.,” he warns. Why then tolerate them in your Party, Foster? Doubtless he asks the same question of himself and has an answer ready for the proper time.
Everyone pays lip service to inner-Party democracy. In keeping with the spirit of things, all kinds of constitutional changes, organizational devices and structural novelties are advanced to safeguard the rights of members. But the real test will come in the fate of the opposing tendencies.
Can democracy win out in the Party, can the Party advance if Foster and allies take it in a stultifying grip? The most ornate constitution devised by the human imagination could hardly maintain democracy if the Gates-Daily Worker tendency comes under his heavy hand. If they are penalized in any way for their views, or removed from posts of responsibility, or their right to speak bridled, what will be the fate of the Party then?
Nelson, Gates and the others take on nothing less that the task of defending democracy in the Party and its reputation outside. Before they can face the working-class public, they must face their own Party.
Can they tolerate an appeasement of Foster’s Stalinist conceptions? There is the first hurdle.
 
A Peaceful Road
A FIGHT OVER DEMOCRATIC socialism is at the heart of the problem in the Party discussion; it is the crux of at least three questions which pose the relationship between socialism and democracy, 1. peaceful transition to socialism in the United States, 2. the right of every nation to its own road to socialism, 3. Hungary.
Everyone assures everyone else that a “peaceful road to socialism” is possible in the United States; no one protests. By a process of natural selection the question should disappear.
Yet it does not. Debate continues; more accurately, two debates: the real debate and the fake one.
Knowing Foster’s methods, we expect him to steer the discussion up a blind alley. We are not disappointed.
As far back as the first CP Smith Act trials, he posed the possibility of “achieving socialism” in the United States by peaceful means if democracy prevailed at home and world capitalism continued to decline. He, at least, should have little objection when others speak of the same possibility. But we are dealing with a Foster. Where there is no real difference, he is ready with a false substitute.
True, he admits, a peaceful development is possible. But you, you compromisers, he cries to the dissidents, insist that the peaceful road is inevitable? That’s the difference: is it merely possible or is it inevitable? And there follows from him and his imitators an interminable flow of disquisitions, complete with digressions, on overestimating capitalism, revisionism, class-collaboration, etc. – all of which is presumably contained, tightly compressed, in this simple original difference.
It is all arrant nonsense; it is an argument concocted out of nothing but sheer malice. And if fog settles in a shadowland, if everyone gropes about blindly, so much the better! That is the ground on which he prefers to fight.
His task is made easier by those on the other side; for they do not make clear what they are driving at, or they are not able to say.
In the December 1956 issue of Party Voice, Norman Schrank contributes an article entitled Strengthen the Draft Resolution. By title alone we locate him in the political spectrum. He is for the Party’s Draft Resolution as a beginning but he sees the need for a deeper analysis and more extensive changes in Party policies.
“Sometimes I feel,” he writes, “the stand-pat dead-center comrades are still too much hynotized by the international movement. They wait for distant winds to blow.” And he concludes: “the charge that we move to extremes is being used today by those who hold the stand-pat position who want no change and by those who want to return to old policies. Under today’s conditions, this criticism which was once sound becomes harmful. It becomes a pernicious thesis against change!”
All this is simple truth. What is even more significant is this: “I believe,” he says, “there is a serious omission in the resolution’s failure to describe the socialism we seek as democratic socialism.”
Democratic socialism! If this phrase is conceived in all its depth and not as a catchword, it summarizes the whole crisis in the Communist movement and points the way out. The crisis derived from a failure to come forward truly as a democratic socialist movement, and the solution lies in moving toward it.
It seems to us that when the Gates-Daily Worker tendency speaks of the peaceful road to socialism it is already reaching toward an even deeper concept: the democratic nature of socialism, in general. Perhaps that is what really irritates Foster.
Notice how Schrank returns to the point in the same piece:
“Given the democratic, peaceful and constitutional path to socialism in America, what is wrong in characterizing the socialism we seek as democratic socialism? Is the socialism we seek undemocratic?” (His emphasis.)
In his mind, then, the peaceful, constitutional road is virtually synonymous with the democratic road to socialism.
 
IT IS TRUE THAT A PEACEFUL road to socialism is possible and desirable in the United States. As humanitarians and champions of civilized methods in every respect, socialists will do everything to make this possibility a reality. There are countries ruled by dictatorships where a “peaceful road” is barred, not only the peaceful road to socialism but the peaceful road to almost anything else of importance to the people! But even where the peaceful road is blocked, socialists hold to the democratic road; that is the only road to socialism. For the democratic way to socialism is not necessarily dependent upon parliaments and constitutions where these do not exist.
In November 1917 when the Bolshevik Revolution took place in Russia there was literally no constitution in existence. Yet the revolution became a triumph of democracy; it was based upon the support of the masses of soldiers, workers, and farmers, and was not imposed upon them. In 1933 Hitler came to power in Germany under the forms of the old Weimar Constitution. Yet this “constitutional” method was the road of totalitarian dictatorship.
Socialism remains democratic under all conditions and under all constitutions. The road to socialism in the United States, with its democratic institutions, will be vastly different from that in Spain where a dictatorship suppresses every democratic right. But in both countries, as in all, socialism must come with the support of the majority of the people. Without such support, it will not come; or what will come will not be socialism!
Socialism always and everywhere insists upon the rights of democracy. And more: it seeks its objective not against the will of the people, not over them, but with their support. That is why any authentic socialism is democratic socialism.
 
National “Roads to Socialism”
EVERY NATION FOLLOWS its own “road to socialism.” This truism is repeated on all sides, especially since the Russian leaders consented to legitimize Tito. By now, it has been uttered so often that it becomes a commonplace, its content slurred over; it becomes a clot on thought. What does it mean?
“Roads to socialism” are not picked out and ground to taste like brands of coffee on a supermarket shelf. Did anyone imagine that socialism would come to Britain exactly as to India; was it conceivable that to imperialist nations and colonies, big nations and small, farmers, workers, semi-serfs socialism would come cut to one master pattern? What is the latest discovery? That each nation strives for socialism under conditions peculiar to it, guided by its own traditions? Such an elementary, even primitive, conception could hardly become the basis for a clear division of opinion. Naturally, the Foster-Dennis wing reduces it, like everything else, to a downright absurdity; they pick up what they say from Pravda and repeat it mechanically. That’s good enough for them.
But for the Daily Worker group, it was quite a different matter. “Many roads to socialism” as a programmatic idea became the first “legal” device for raising the banner of independence from the USSR, for themselves and for the Party. The Party membership hesitant and confused was encouraged to take the first necessary steps without revolutionizing its entire outlook. In effect, they were told, we want nothing different from what Tito demanded and what Khrushchev conceded to him.
Russia has its road to socialism; we have ours. It was a simple enough beginning. But complications came. For the Gates-Daily Workerites were not hunting for a tidy formula just for their own puzzled members. (For Foster that is the beginning and end of everything.) They wanted a bridge to people who sympathized with socialism but who rejected everything that smacked of totalitarianism. They were confronted with basic questions. “Russia’s road to ‘socialism’ is dictatorship, one-party state, anti-democracy. Is that what you propose?” It was easy to find a reply. “No, we insist upon our own democratic road.”
“How do we know you are sincere,” came the rejoinder. “Why don’t you criticize dictatorship in Russia.” And that became the great dividing line in the Party. Members became increasingly critical; they openly questioned the “necessity” for a one-party state in Russia; they suggested that perhaps democracy might be proper, even in the USSR. It is this that Foster will never forgive.
Still, as matters stood up to yesterday, each nation’s road to socialism was equally legitimate. But big events brought harsh questions.
In Poland a revolutionary surge among the people brought a new government to power, the Gomulka regime, against the will of the Russian rulers.
Russian troops were mobilized menacingly against the Gomulka regime which threatened to order Polish troops to open fire if the Russians marched. The two countries teetered on war; an open armed battle was averted only by a last minute compromise. What was at stake? Was the USSR trying to impose its “road to socialism” upon Poland which defended its own “road to socialism”?
Now, Pravda demands that “proletarian internationalism” supersede “nationalism.” But its internationalism is nothing but the right of the USSR to dominate the peoples in its orbit without regard to their nationality and indifferent to their national needs and feelings. Genuine internationalism is not imposed by bayonets; it is possible only when every nation is free to associate or not with any other; it is totally alien to the forced dependence of small nations upon powerful ones. When Russian troops marched toward Poland they did so not to subordinate “bourgeois nationalism” to “international socialism”; or “national communism” to “proletarian internationalism.” They say “proletarian internationalism” when they mean Russian foreign domination. Troops moved to impose the rule of the USSR over Poland.
 
NOTHING IS MORE EMPTY IN THE EYES of the Daily Workerites than mere “dogma” – and they are right. Yet, in all the struggles and conflicts between nations in the Communist bloc and in the struggles inside them, they detect nothing more than a conflict of doctrine, a difference of opinion, varying conceptions of the doctrine of “roads to socialism.” Doctrinairism is no substitute for dogma. If life will not submit to Foster’s dogmas, neither will it be limited by bookish doctrine. In Eastern Europe, they talk of doctrines; but they fight against exploitation and national oppression.
Two distinct questions are hidden in the formula, “own roads to socialism.” 1. the right to national freedom, 2. democracy and the road to socialism.
Yugoslavia and Poland defended their independence from foreign domination and here, as everywhere, socialists stand on the platform of self-determination, support those who defend their own nationhood, and congratulate them upon their successes. What kind of socialist and what kind of socialism would deny small nations their right to free, national existence?
The sympathy of socialists for the national aspirations of Poland and Yugoslavia is no less, even though inside each country the fight for democracy goes on! All roads to socialism lead through democracy. In Poland, any democratic socialist worthy of the name will support those who demand full democracy, free elections, free parties, and who reject all apologia for dictatorship. Not to turn the means of production back to capitalist exploitation, no socialist wants that, but to give social and political power to the working people.
Under Tito, it is said, Yugoslavia has the right to its “road to socialism.” But that is only the beginning of the question: for now, Milovan Djilas, former partisan fighter, former President of Yugoslavia, former member of the Communist Party, stands up and demands to be heard. He is truly a democratic socialist and a courageous one who will not be cajoled or coerced into silence.
We know from his article in the New Leader (November 19, 1956) where he stands on democracy under socialism. On Poland, he writes:
“Given independence from Moscow, Gomulka took a historic step forward. But with half-hearted reforms he will soon reach a dilemma – which Moscow had foreseen. He will have to choose between internal democracy, which has become inseparable from complete independence from Moscow and the ties with Moscow required to maintain the Communists’ monopoly of power.”
He explains why the USSR decided it had to crush Hungarian resistance:
“Had the Hungarian Revolution not only brought political democracy but also preserved social control of heavy industry and banking, it would have exercised enormous influence on all Communist countries, including the USSR. It would have demonstrated not only that totalitarianism is unnecessary as a means of protecting the worker from exploitation (i.e., in the ‘building of socialism’) but also that this is a mere excuse for the exploitation of the workers by bureaucracy and a new ruling class.”
Tito’s rule in Yugoslavia, he said, was based upon “narrow ideological and bureaucratic class interests.”
Tito, with his “road to socialism” had only one reply, the classical reply of the offended dictator: Djilas was arrested, tried, and sentenced to jail for three years. In the United States, we protest against the Smith Act convictions of Communists who are sent to jail for the sole “crime” of advocating their political opinions. Can we do less for Djilas who is jailed for nothing more by a government that calls itself socialist?
To its credit, the Daily Worker protested, if only mildly.
“We deplore the fact that he was tried for his opinions,” it editorialized on December 14, “We do not believe he should have been convicted. We do not think he should go to jail ... In the worldwide battle for the minds of men, we hold that believers in socialism, such as ourselves, cannot accept in the name of government necessity actions that are a denial of the things for which we fight.”
What now of Yugoslavia’s “road to socialism”? Djilas demands democracy. Tito throws him into jail. Who then truly represents the road to socialism inside Yugoslavia? The answer of every democratic socialist should come instantly: We are for Djilas and we are for his road.
Yes, every nation will take its own road to socialism. Does that mean then that the road to socialism in Russia is through a one-party dictatorship? That in China the road leads through the illegalization of all opposition parties. That in Yugoslavia it leads through an independent one-party dictatorship. But that in the United States, fortunately for us, it leads through real democracy?
That would be a serious distortion of the “road to socialism” and a perversion of the meaning of socialism itself. But leave that aside. Who will believe it? If “socialism” comes through dictatorship everywhere else, or at least everywhere it presumably has come, then who will give credence to your assurances that in the United States the democratic way will be held open. Only when a movement demonstrates that it supports the democratic road everywhere can American workers have faith in its attachment to the democratic road in the United States.
 
Revolution in Hungary
IT WAS IN HUNGARY that the fight for national freedom, democracy, and socialism reached its climax. It was here that the Gates-Daily Worker tendency began to mobilize Party opinion for a fundamental change; but it settled for a compromise that disarmed it. Foster rose to clamor loudly against the bogy in his own imagination: a “fascist” revolution. The Daily Worker was finally trapped into the vain task of stimulating support for a question mark.
Russian troops entered Budapest on October 24 and fired on crowds demonstrating in support of the Gomulka government in Poland. In the first days of November, the Party National Committee disavowed responsibility for the action of the Russian tanks in a public statement, from which we call attention to these excerpts:
“The events in Poland and Hungary cannot be explained as the result of reactionary pro-fascists plots or the operations of Project X. Such an explanation flies in the face of well-established facts.”
It condemned the policies of the Stalin regime as responsible for the peoples’ discontent which led to their uprising: “These policies ran counter to the whole philosophy and outlook of Scientific Socialism.”
Of the Communist movement in Hungary, it declared:
“At the last moment instead of meeting the legitimate grievances of the Hungarian working class and people, they again resorted to repressions. Their calling in the Soviet troops stationed in Hungary to put down the popular demonstrations was a tragic error. This dramatized the bankruptcy of a policy which was not based securely upon the national needs and sentiments of their own country – of the working class and popular masses of Hungary.”
Who should rule Hungary? “The Hungarian people have now had 11 years in which to test parties and leaders. They alone have the right to decide whether to change or retain them.” They alone! Mark that well.
Where was the Hungarian rising going? The National Committee had no doubts those days:
“We are confident that despite all the difficulties and temporary setbacks, the Hungarian people will find their way to Socialism, based on their own national traditions and requirements and secured by the will of their own working class and people.”
And what of the promises made in abundance?
“The events in Poland and Hungary show that despite the promises of the 20th Congress which aroused these great expectations, these principles [equality of nations] are yet to be fully applied in practice.”
On Nov. 4, after throwing the Hungarians off balance by holding out the hope of ending the occupation, Russian tanks and soldiers shot their way back into Budapest and installed Kadar as puppet ruler over the masses who hated him. The universal Hungarian resistance began: general strikes; armed fighting; extension of Workers’ Councils; demonstrations. A seething and irrepressible hatred of the occupation and its stand-in government.
The Party National Committee statement had already been adopted. On November 5, as the first news of the re-entry of Russian tanks into Budapest was flashed to the world, the Daily Worker hardly wavered and held to its position. In an editorial, it declared:
“The action of the Soviet troops in Hungary does not advance but retards the development of socialism because socialism cannot be imposed on a country by force; it does not help but damages the relations between socialist states ... We are for the withdrawal of all troops from all countries to their own borders. We are for the right of all people, the Hungarian people as well as those of Cyprus, of Egypt, of Israel, of Kenya, of Okinawa – the list could be greatly extended – to rule themselves in complete independence. We oppose the use of force against those people no matter who originated it.”
No matter who originated it! And the editorial continues:
“The use of force by the Soviet troops in Hungary will bring no lasting solution to that country’s problems. That is why we support the Hungarian masses who sought to solve their own problems as they were settled in Poland without violence, without foreign troop intervention and without allowing the supporters of the old fascist regime to remain in power.”
While Soviet tanks were rumbling into Budapest the Daily Worker could write, “We support the Hungarian masses.”
Criticism of Russian intervention was in a “comradely” spirit; the errors, it found, were the wrong way to build socialism! While declaring support for the Hungarian masses, both the National Committee and the Daily Worker still assumed that the Russian army was an instrument of socialist policy, even if tragically misdirected. They said only the least that could be said. BUT THEY DID SAY IT. They opposed Russian intervention in Hungary! Looking back, we know now that a significant section of the Party had been making a determined effort to begin taking an independent policy. But it wasn’t until they spoke out on Hungary that their course became clear to others. The editorials in the Daily Worker and the Committee statement were, in effect, a declaration of independence.
But, having made its declaration, the Party began to slip back under the pounding of Foster and Dennis.
Until events in Poland and Hungary, it was easy enough to talk of an independent policy; but revolutionary events tested everyone and compelled them to come forward with their real policies. Foster and Dennis were revealed as true Stalinists, in policy and in methods. They denigrated the Hungarian revolution and whitewashed Russian intervention. Their technique is succinctly and perspicaciously described by Max Gordon of the Daily Worker as the process of blind apologetics, defined as “this process which starts with the assumption that all Soviet action must be championed and then erects its own structure of ‘fact’ to accomplish that aim.” (Daily Worker, December 17, 1956) We feel free to speak more bluntly than Gordon: they lie to cover up for the policy of the ruling Russian bureaucracy.
We saw the process of “blind apologetics” in action when the Stalinist wing went openly to work.
On November 21, Foster wrote on the Hungarian situation in the Daily Worker. He was blandly ready to admit “that the Communists in Hungary, both Soviet and Hungarian found it necessary to conduct an armed struggle against a mass movement which undoubtedly had the backing of the bulk of the Hungarian people.” (The bulk? It was one united people against foreign armies.) Yet, this mass movement of the majority had become “fascist.”
“When the leadership of the mass movement was thus seized by reactionaries, which happened under the Nagy regime, the basic issue was changed from one of a just struggle of the people for more democracy and for national independence, to an attempt by the reactionary forces, stimulated and organized by American money, to transform the Hungarian Socialist regime into one of fascism.”
How and when did a struggle for democracy by the majority become transformed instantaneously into a struggle for “fascism?” No need to scrutinize the question closely. All Foster has to know is that Russian actions must be justified and he will find a way. If an outright lie will help, so much the better, as “It was ... upon the request of the Kadar Hungarian government that the Soviet Union, under the terms of the Warsaw Pact and the Potsdam agreement stepped in to restore order in Hungary ...” Upon the request of the Kadar government! But everyone knows that there was no Kadar government until Russian troops entered Budapest, drove out the Nagy regime and imposed Kadar over the Hungarians.
On November 15, James Allen made his contribution:
He justified the reentry of troops because, “in the face of a counter-revolutionary attempt, force has to be used to safeguard socialism” and “a counter-revolutionary government would have been installed if Soviet troops had remained passive.” And here, when the first mass struggle for democracy had burst out in Eastern Europe he learned only that “Hungary has shown how the general, abstract idea of democracy can be made to serve the purposes of counter-revolution.”
On November 28, Benjamin Davis:
“The second use of Soviet troops, after fascist elements had gained or were gaining the upper hand, was in my opinion a grim and painful necessity ... and he wanted “a more positive attitude toward the Kadar government.”
The Daily Worker and the National Committee had spoken out for the “masses,” against Soviet intervention, confident that the Hungarian workers themselves would defend socialism. From the Stalinist wing came the old song: the uprising was now “fascist,” Russian intervention was justified. It was doubtless under the impact of this Stalinist-type campaign of slander and abuse that the Party retreated. On November 19, the National Committee adopted a new statement in the form of an Open Letter to CP Members. Presumably it was a “compromise”; it gave way before the Stalinists, attack. And in vain. Their abuse against the Daily Worker continued without let-up.
A mass struggle was in progress. On one side a united Hungarian people fighting for democracy; on the other nothing but Russian arms. The Open Letter tried to straddle the barricades:
“We do not seek to justify the use of Soviet troops in Hungary’s internal crisis on November 4. Neither do we join in the condemnation of these actions. Was there no alternative? Was it a grim necessity? There are no ready answers and we are in no position to give final judgment on the Soviet action. On this there are different viewpoints in the national committee and in the Party. With the unfolding of events further clarity on this point will be achieved.”
But “with the unfolding of events,” Hungary was allowed to slide out of sight.
While the Open Letter was ready to write a question mark over Russian intervention – it was neither for nor against – it did give support to the slanderous accusations of Foster, Dennis and the other Stalinists:
“The role and influence of the reactionary elements within Hungary were bolstered by an influx of exiled fascists, interventionists and agents of Project X across the Austrian border. The Nagy government retreating before the reactionary pressures lost its capacity to govern and was unable to halt the lynchings, anti-Semitic outbreaks and reign of terror against Communists and progressives.”
Meanwhile, the vast majority of worker Communists and progressives, in fact the whole Hungarian nation was up in arms against the interventionists and an irrepressible general strike gave evidence, against all the lies, that the working class was united for democracy and socialism.
Why the compromise in the Open Letter? It was the product of suicidal “diplomacy.” Those in the Party who want independence were ready to appease the Party Stalinists – or did they thus compromise themselves on the ground that it was necessary to stall for time in the internal fight?
But what about the “fascists” in Hungary? For that, we must turn to the story of the “exiled fascists” who presumably crossed the Austrian border to fight for reaction.
But first, let us make a few things clear. Those who called the movement “fascist” are the same men who were ready to denounce Tito as a fascist upon demand of Stalin. They lied then; they lie now. The whole story is a pure fabrication; a blatant falsehood, a cynical trick! And the staff of the Daily Worker knows it well.
First fact: On November 23, the Daily Worker wrote:
“On November 8, the Daily Worker ran a story culled from the London Daily Worker by foreign editor Joe Clark, which reported that since last April when the Austrian-Hungarian border was opened to tourist traffic an estimated 60,000 counter-revolutionaries had entered Hungary. As far as we’ve been able to discover, no other English language daily paper published this news item. Yet several people have demanded to know why we’ve ‘suppressed’ it.”
There’s a lesson here. You help manufacture a story but get no gratitude in return. We’ve learned, so far, that only the London Daily had discovered this story; how, no one knows. For it refused to print the accurate account sent to it by its own Budapest correspondent, Peter Fryer. Still, what about the 60,000?
Second Fact: On December 4, Clark told the full story himself in a reply to Dennis, an account which so utterly destroys the whole basis of the “fascist” slander that we will quote it at length:
“Dennis accuses my typewriter of writing off the danger of fascist attempts in Hungary. But the sole specific ‘fact’ about such fascist danger which Dennis cites came from my typewriter. Dennis names forces of Horthyites and ‘60,000 diverse other fascists agents and bands which infiltrated Hungary via the Austrian border.’
“Now the story of the 60,000 appeared in the Daily Worker via my typewriter and it was picked up from the London Daily Worker. The dispatch in question did not come from Hungary because at that time the Budapest correspondent of the London Daily couldn’t get his on-the-spot reports into his paper. It was based on dispatches from Prague, which mentioned 60,000 as the total number of persons who crossed the Austrian-Hungarian border over a period of months. These included all tourists, delegations, and persons whose policies ranged, from Communist to Fascist.
“To cite this as evidence that the 800,000 members of the Hungarian Communist Party and the millions of organized Hungarian workers and the Hungarian army of 250,000 could not prevent fascism is to deny facts and the class struggle.”
Enough said. The only question that remains is this: why did Clark peddle the story? Obviously just to appease Dennis and the others. But it does no good. When they insist on apologetics, they want the real variety.
The Hungarian revolutionaries weren’t fascists; that’s clear now. But what were they? That is clear, too. The struggle in Hungary, to this day, is led by fighting democratic institutions of the working class, Workers’ Councils as it was in Russia in 1917. And their goals are fundamentally the same: socialism and democracy. Here are excerpts from the monitored broadcasts from Hungary during the revolutionary days:
October 27: over Radio Gyor. The local Defense Committee of the Hungarian Workers (Communist) Party demanded:
“They must insure that Soviet armed forces in Hungary cease fire and leave the country, being granted free departure. This is not a counterrevolution but the national movement of the Hungarian working people. The workers and peasants in Gyor-Sopron County do not want the restoration of the power of manufacturers and landlords, the national revolution is not aimed at the restoration of the old regime.”
October 30:
Radio Miskolc:
“We have proposed a socialist state form which will guarantee the full development of our people ... We are fighting for peace, for socialist truth, for the guarantee of the free development of our peoples. Help us in our fight.”
November 7:
Radio Rackoczi: appeal to Soviet troops.
“Your state was created at the cost of bloody fighting so that you could have freedom. Today is the 39th anniversary of that revolution. Why do you want to crush our liberty? You can see that it is not factory proprietors, not landowners, and not the bourgeoisie who have taken up arms against you but the Hungarian people, who are fighting desperately for the same rights you fought for in 1917.”
November 12: Slogan from Manifesto of Armed Revolutionary Youth “For a neutral, independent, democratic and Socialist Hungary.”
November 12: From the demands of the Workers Council of the 11th District of Budapest.
“We wish to emphasize that the revolutionary working class considers the factories and the land the property of the working people.”
And there is the evidence of Peter Fryer, Budapest correspondent of the London Daily Worker who resigned when the paper refused to print his eyewitness accounts. This is from his letter of resignation;
“... power was in the hands of the armed people, and they were fully aware of the danger of counter-revolution and were themselves fully capable of smashing it.
“The great mass of the Hungarian people have no desire to return to capitalism, and want to retain all the positive social achievements of the past 12 years.
“Nor did the Soviet troops who entered Budapest on November 4 fight fascism; they fought workers, soldiers, and students; and they could find no Hungarians to fight alongside them.
“These are the conclusions I reached after hundreds of interviews ... No honest Communist can now ignore the truth about Hungary. The Hungarian people were the victims of tyranny and oppression masquerading as socialism.”
We have irrefutable documentary evidence of a senseless capitulation to the Foster-Dennis wing when we put two issues of the Daily Worker side by side and watch how it turned tail in analyzing the Warsaw Pact and events in Hungary.
Daily Worker, November 5: NC Statement:
“The response of the Soviet authorities to the request for armed intervention also cannot be justified by the argument that they had the legal right to do so under the Warsaw Pact. This was not a matter of formal rights. It violated the essence of the Leninist concept of national self-determination because the call for the troops was not in accord with the wishes of the Hungarian people.”
Here, then, the Warsaw Pact did not justify intervention. Now read on ...
Daily Worker, December 2: Editorial on America and Hungary:
“Of course, the issue isn’t the same in those two countries [Egypt and Hungary]. Foreign troops – British, French and Israeli – are in Egypt as a result of one of the most brazen acts of aggression in the long sordid history of imperialism. Foreign troops – those of the Soviet Union – are in Hungary by agreement between the two countries under the Warsaw Pact, counterpart of NATO, as well as under the Potsdam Agreement; Hungary was part of the fascist Axis.”
We note only this: Now the intervention is justified by the Warsaw Pact.
What caused the switch in line? Again, we can think of only one answer: appeasement of the Stalinist wing in the Party.
Socialists talk of brotherhood, of democracy and of the working class and its ceaseless striving for human dignity and socialism. “You and your workers,” laugh the cynics, scoffers and bandwagon jumpers.
“Look at them in their pitiable state. See how they fall for the crude trash of the bourgeois press in the United States. See how they swallowed the farcical tales of Stalinism in Russia. Watch how they come to heel when ordered about by real power. That’s the stupid, common herd for you. That’s your ‘democracy.’ Better to take care of yourself and to the devil with them!” Isn’t that the theme song of many who passed through the socialist movement on their way to greener pastures, coming from all political directions fanning out into all others?
Yesterday, the snobbish gentry, contemptuous of all mass movements for human freedom, might have pointed to Hungary as a typical example of the degradation that humans will suffer like so many beasts of burden. We owe to none other than William Z. Foster a picture of the regime under which they groaned. According to his account (Daily Worker, November 21), the government “lowered living and working standards”; it was guilty of “bureaucratic blunders and tyranny” and “excesses and brutalities” and “great-Russian chauvinism.” Moreover, “the national independence of the Hungarian people was virtually liquidated” and “they were stripped of their civil liberties and subordinated to the vicious domination of the secret police”; they suffered “needlessly severe economic strains.” And “the several political parties ... were either emasculated or liquidated.” Finally, “these harsh and unjust measures, alien to the principles of Socialism could not be justified.”
If one does more than simply put words down on paper but feels what they mean and understands the misery and oppression which they represent in life, he can only rejoice with all his heart that the Hungarian people revolted. They proved themselves men and not stolid cattle. So long as the spirit which inspired them lives on, socialism will be invincible.
Democracy and socialism won a triumphant vindication. And not for the first time! From 1914–1917 the cynics of their day pointed, too, with scorn at those who called for international socialist democracy. “Internationalism? How absurd! Watch while the workers of every nation plunge bayonets into one another at the command of their rulers. Where is your internationalism; where is your democracy?” In the great Russian Revolution of March 1917 and again in November they received a fitting reply. The way opened for a rebirth of socialism.
In 1956, the vindication of mankind’s struggle for freedom came in Hungary. The Hungarian Revolution is not a passing incident that must regrettably be fitted into a discussion of other things. It goes to the very heart of all discussions of democracy and independence.
And what a rising. For months, the united population of a small nation refused to bow before the military power and deceptive ruses of one of the two biggest military powers.
It was more than a victory of the spirit of democracy, It was a true triumph of socialism. The heart of the resistance was the working class which created its own parliament and its own leaders in the Workers’ Councils. And they defended their rights under the very turrets of Russian tanks, by perhaps the most heroic and united general strike in the history of the world working class.
They did not have to improvise. The Hungarian workers followed the path outlined in 1917 by the Russian workers; the Hungarian Workers Councils were a replica in 1956 of the Workers Councils of Russia in 1917, the Soviets.
And yet, the foreign occupiers, the destroyers of their nationhood and freedom, the Russian armies were dispatched in the name of “socialism.” What a terrible blow to the name of socialism; and it is this travesty upon it that makes it imperative to speak out loudly and clearly on the events in Hungary so that no one can mistake the anti-democratic intervention of the Kremlin for socialism in any respect whatsoever. In defending the Hungarian Revolution, then, we do nothing less than defend the very name of socialism itself. We defend it while the Stalinist wing in the Party defames it.
Inside the Party, one tendency demands independence and a democratic policy; presumably if it wins it is ready to fight before the world for its program. But can it take itself seriously unless it is ready to fight without deference to the Party Stalinist apologists. No apology for the apologists! Hungary has become a test for socialism. Its people fight for free parties, free elections, free press, national independence, and socialism. Foreign troops dominate their country and suppress their rights. Are you with them in the fight for democracy? Can a democratic socialist mumble in reply?
 
Socialism Without Democracy?
WE HAVE EMPHASIZED THE NEED to hold uppermost that which must be resolved soon and not let it be buried in a mass of disputation. True, the stimulating course of controversy has uncovered a forest of neglected theory, principle and practice. But before the whole forest can be explored, as it must, the first roads and trails must be cleared. What should guide those who seek democratic socialism inside the Party at this stage has, in the main, governed the presentation of views here as part of the discussion. This is not an effort to present, at last, complete in all detail, a “finished program” on all the issues of world and domestic politics. It is a contribution toward a discussion of next steps for socialism in the United States as reflected inside the CP.
However, dogmatism in general and many dogmas in particular have been subjected to searching, even scathing, criticism. This is all to the good. It is fitting, then, to confront the discussion with one unmentioned dogma. If, like all the others, it cannot be “settled” now, it must be faced along with them, in time.
It is the dogma of dogmas; it is sacred and untouchable; it is sacrosanct and inviolable; it is so holy a holy that everyone talks of it only with reverence; even the most ardent protestant against all other dogma shrinks from casting the doubting light of dispute upon it.
That dogma, of course, is the thesis that “Russia is socialist.”
It is impossible to begin without instantly touching the fundamental question for every socialist tendency today: the relation between socialism and democracy. Those who assume that Russia is socialist today insist that it remained socialist all through the Stalin era. Yet, it is conceded by all, that for decades democracy in all forms was wiped out and the country fell prey to terroristic dictatorship. When and how? Before answering that question, another must be faced. If Russia under Stalin was ruled by a police dictatorship-then for that period if for no other was it socialist? If your reply is “yes,” you are confronted, swiftly and inexorably, with what follows: can you have socialism without democracy?
Do not reply hastily for there is too much at stake! If socialism is truly possible without democracy, what happens to your professions of the “democratic way”? Your attachment to democracy becomes a matter of taste, a praiseworthy preference but a bit of luxury. Democracy becomes not the living heart of socialism, inseparable from it and essential to it, but a piece of fluff, the frills and furbelows with which it is decorated by well-meaning people. You and I, no doubt, are men of good taste. But others speaking in the name of socialism, explain that democracy may very well be discarded, and justify its extermination in the name of their “socialism.” In your view, is what they strive for “socialism” as well as yours? If so, how can the people know, with confidence, where socialism as a movement, leads: toward democracy or away from it?
In referring to socialism, we include all possible popular political variants and synonyms for it, like: workers state, deformed or degenerated workers state, etc. Can the working class rule without democracy?
Russia is not a capitalist society ruled by a bourgeois state; the basic means of production are nationalized; the capitalist class was expropriated long ago, wiped out, disappeared from sight if not from the imagination of some; prospects for its return are as dim as the dinosaur. It is not capitalist. But is it a socialist society ruled by a workers government?
“Yes,” comes the reply, “for despite everything, the means of production remain state property and that is socialism (or workers rule).” But is it? Many matters are up for reconsideration. Consider, then, the quintessential difference between the nature of working class power and the power of all exploiting classes.
The basis of bourgeois rule is private property, in particular the private ownership of the basic means of production and exchange. Through this, the power of capital, the capitalist class extracts surplus value, amasses great pools of wealth and by consequence is able to dominate the political life of the nation. Economic power guarantees its political power under all forms of government. As long as its possession of the economy is maintained, it can rule under democracy; not because of democracy but despite it. It makes up in the power of money for what it lacks in the power of numbers. Democracy under capitalism is limited and restricted because the bourgeois can “purchase,” so to speak, the basis for political power. Under certain conditions, it might prefer democracy but democracy is never essential to it. As long as it keeps a tight grip on its property, it can rule under dictatorship as well as under democracy. Sometimes even better! The form of government, then, is not decisive to its rule.
But how different is the working class!
The proletariat can become the standard bearer of socialism because it owns no property in production. If the bourgeoisie dominates the state by virtue of its domination of the economy, the proletariat can dominate the economy only by its domination of the state. The working class cannot “evolve” into the ruling class by slowly taking possession of the means of production; for first, it must make a radical change in the state power so that it can become an instrument of working class rule and socialism.
The workers cannot own the means of production directly as does the capitalist class which holds them as personal private property. It can “own” them only collectively. Between the workers and the means of production stands the State. If the working class gains control of the State, and if the State, in turn, moves toward possession of the means of production, then a workers social revolution has taken place and society takes the road to socialism.
To dominate the economy, to rule society, the working class must have control of the State. For when the State takes over the means of production (or is in the hands of those who seek to take them over) the key question becomes: who “owns” the State? The working class as an unpropertied class, can “own” the State, i.e., control it, only under democracy; its power lies in numbers and in organization and in class consciousness, not in ownership, and this power can be fully expressed and exerted only where it has the right to organize, and to choose its own government. That is, under democracy. The working class cannot be indifferent to the form of government for it can rule only under democracy. That is its peculiar class nature. Wipe out democracy and you have wiped out workers rule.
If the workers are denied the right to control the State-which-owns-the- property, then State power passes into the hands of other social groups or classes and becomes an instrument, not of socialist evolution, but of exploitation.
Thus, in the most precise and scientific sense we must say: no genuine democracy without socialism; and no genuine socialism without democracy.
That, tragically, is the story of Russia in capsule form. In 1917, the Russian working class won state power; it became the ruling class and took the road to socialism.
Under Stalin, democracy was ruthlessly wiped out; consequently, the working class lost state power. How? When? Why? Each question is burdened with a thousand lessons for socialism. But even without an answer to everything, the basic fact is there to see.
Everyone asks the one question that cries out for a reply: how is it possible that the power of one man could subject a whole nation to systematic police terror? Pravda answers that Stalinism was the product of deep material pressures acting upon the Soviet Union; but it assures its readers that the socialist system survived despite Stalin.
We suggest a totally different reply: Profound social forces acting in Russia brought Stalin to power and destroyed the rule of the working class at the same time. Stalinism was not the rule of one man but the rule of the new bureaucratic class which ousted the working class from power by destroying democracy. If under Stalin, the loftily placed members of the Political Buro felt helpless and without power, what was the status of the lowly worker, as an individual and as a class? In no sense could the workers under such conditions be considered a “ruling” class but only a subjected, exploited class.
In the Soviet Union there is still no democracy! Some people believe that tomorrow a change will come. Perhaps, they hope, as a free, peaceful gift from above. Are such hopes illusions? We think so; for we are convinced that in Russia as everywhere democracy must be wrested and won by the masses below in struggle. And it will be. But leave that aside. The fact is that there is no democracy today in Russia.
Whatever it may be without democracy, it is not socialist.
Can we have been wrong for so long in accepting such a “dogma”? If you consider yourself a democratic socialist, you must face the question; for, to repeat, it raises one of the most fundamental problems for Marxists in our time: the relation of socialism to democracy. In the socialist movement it will force itself to the fore and in the end will have to be faced squarely and unambiguously. That, regrettably, cannot be expected in the Party today as it is. But changes will come.
 
Socialist Regroupment
AN UPHEAVAL IN THE PARTY comes because serious people know that it is impossible to continue in the old way. There is no unanimity, nor could it be expected, on what must replace it but a fresh start must be made. Communist Party members, necessarily preoccupied with an inner debate, may imagine that the search for a new way is prompted exclusively by their own dilemma But it is not. Every alert socialist tendency avidly talks of a new beginning, of a regroupment, of a resurgence and reorganization of socialism. The wide-ranging discussion in the Party, opening up every question, has not created the new potentialities but it has reinforced them.
Fresh winds blow everywhere. Not a country on earth but the people demand national freedom and democracy. Empire building belongs to the dead past; the future belongs to the struggle against oppression in every form. Every big power feels the whip lash of popular power: in North Africa, French imperialism can never reestablish its hold; in the Near East, the pressure of world opinion forced Britain and France to abandon their Suez adventure in ignominy and pressed the United States to look for a niche of neutrality; in Yugoslavia, in Hungary, in Poland – each in its own way – stands up for national freedom. At the bottom everywhere is the rising of people against oppressive rulers. If after the dangerous days of cold war, the imminent world war is thrust back and an era of peace looms, it is not because the two blocs of Big Powers have suddenly become reasonable, peace-loving, and wise. Peace is possible because neither of the two blocs was able to rally the peoples of the world unitedly behind it and each felt the hostility of peoples even among its allies. Resistance of masses everywhere made dangerous adventures unwise. Russia in Hungary; England and France in Suez felt the backfire of world opinion.
The United States is not an untouched island of conservatism in a rising sea of world democracy. The witchhunt era of McCarthyism is fading; people take courage and speak out. For the first time, the industrial working class is organized in its majority and united. It remains tied to bourgeois politics but its political consciousness is at the highest point in history. Side by side with the great movement of the working class, a movement of Negro people for equality arises: irrepressible, destined to be victorious and thereby to revolutionize the whole structure of politics in the United States. The rule of Southern reaction is doomed and with its doom, democracy the nation over, can only rise. The Supreme Court decision on school segregation was only a token of the unconquerable struggle for equal rights in every sphere. These are great days. Now is the time for socialism to rebuild.
But the socialist movement is fragmented into splinters and sects, each with its own program or ideology, each with its own origins and history. Not one has the strength or the authority to speak in the name of any significant section of the working class; and none, by itself, is on the verge of attaining such influence. Meanwhile, the Communist Party of necessity turns inward to reorient itself; in the midst of an undisputed rise of the workers and Negro movements, its influence declines.
A new generation of socialists cannot simply be ordered into ready made forms and cramped into custom-built complete and “finished” programs conveniently prepared for them. They will embrace Marxism in time, we confidently expect, but they will have to find their own way to Marxism. The rebirth of socialism calls out for new forms, new methods, a new appeal.
In Time for a Change (Political Affairs, November, 1956) John Gates writes:
“The advance of the American workers to socialism is impossible without a conscious and organized vanguard. In all candor we must admit that we are not that today. Nor are we likely to be the exclusive channel through which such a leadership will come into existence, but I do think we are an important and essential part of this process and can make a decisive and distinctive contribution if we face up to our present crisis and make the necessary changes to surmount it.”
And he adds:
“To achieve this, we need to create an atmosphere which welcomes all new ideas no matter how unorthodox they may be and debates them on their merits without resort to name-calling as a substitute for thinking.”
Note that he does not insist that workers must rally round the CP as the vanguard; the Party can make its contribution but only if it “surmounts” its crisis and considers all new ideas; that is, it must change its policies.
As an immediate step, but not a final solution, he proposes that the Party be transformed into a Political Action Association to point up the new orientation. Naturally, his critics, captained by Foster, rush in to charge that he wants to resurrect the Browder line and to re-establish the Browder form of organization. It is to be expected; they will never face the issues; their charges are pure diversions.
Browder’s policies were not a private idiosyncrasy; they represented a Party tactical turn which left the fundamental basis of its line rigidly intact. The best evidence of this fact is that Browder and Foster alike continued to act as the blind apologists for the Stalinist policy in Russia and everywhere else. The formation of the Communist Political Association was a mere organizational device. Gates proposes not a minor shift in organizational form but sweeping changes in every respect including organization. If he did not, it would be a trivial proposal.
Gates’ line is not the old Browder line in any important respect as Lillian Gates, legislative representative of the New York State Party, explained at a Jefferson School debate. The form of organization, she pointed out, was secondary. First comes the need for a new outlook. It is not sufficient, she said, for the Party to correct its errors; it must seek to unite with all socialist tendencies in the United States; it must prove that it is based on the interests of the American working class; it must prove that it stands for democracy and can solve the “problem of democracy in a socialist society.” It must throw overboard the uncritical acceptance of Soviet policies. What all this could have in common with Browder’s CPA remains a mystery.
Another Party leader who sees the way is Steve Nelson.
Nelson looks toward A New Party of Socialism (Political Affairs, November 1956) uniting all currents, including the Socialist Party; although he realizes that the actual formation of such a party “is some distance away.” To those who oppose raising this proposal he says:
“This view refuses to concede that there were any serious mistakes in policy and that there ever could have been anything wrong with our organizational concepts. Those who take this view tend to play down the present discussion in the world Communist movement and treat it as a surface phenomenon. They apparently draw the conclusion that no fundamental problems are to be reconsidered anew. Everything in the past is taken for granted as if everything was answered for all time.”
Thus, the way out of the Party crisis leads through socialist regroupment.
There are those who treat everything “as a surface phenomenon.” Take someone who imagines, after all that has transpired, that the Party remains the guardian of sacred truth; that after the 20th Congress; after the repudiation of Stalin and the shame of those who apologized for him; that after events in Poland; that after the bloody suppression of the Hungarian revolution by Soviet troops – after all this, take someone who is convinced that the Party need only fix things up a bit here, make a slight alteration there, a twist, a turn; take someone who anticipates that socialists, organized workers, embattled Negroes will then gaze upon his trifling work, pronounce it good, and that the Party will be on the road to “overcoming its isolation” – in other words, take William Z. Foster.
Foster, immune to life, demands the impossible: to go on as before.
“Almost certainly,” he writes (Political Affairs, October 1956), “in the United States the fight for socialism will be made not by the Communist Party alone, but by a combination of economic and political groupings among which the Communist Party must be a decisive leader. The present immediate path as the workers proceed to the building of a mass socialist movement in this country, therefore, is the strengthening of the Communist Party upon the basis of Marxism-Leninism and the development of broad united-front mass struggles.”
There it is, unchanged. The Party must be the decisive leader. It could have been written two years ago or ten. It overlooks only this: it is impossible today! He is willing to pay lip service to a new movement but cautions, “The resolution also should de-emphasize the slogan for a new mass party of socialism from its present implications of immediacy to the status of a possible long-range objective.”
Eugene Dennis is another. He hit upon the slogan of a “Mass Party of Socialism” in his report to the National Committee in April 1956. For him, it was a handy maneuver. Purpose? To avoid drawing up a balance sheet before the socialist public. But he is utterly dismayed to learn that Gates, Nelson and others take the idea seriously. Now he issues a stern warning against his own formula:
“To reject the perspective for a new united party of Socialism would weaken the possibilities of unity of action of all socialist-minded forces in the coming period ... On the other hand, to attempt to realize this perspective immediately would be to abort it, to create a sectarian caricature of what it should be and to disperse our ranks and negate our vital role.” (Political Affairs, October 1956.)
Of course, we committed gross errors in the past; of course, we defended Stalin’s crimes against socialism; we have admitted it and naturally you will now rally to us. To prove how fundamentally we have changed, we will now proceed to reaffirm everything; then we will permit you to unite with us – under our leadership of course. That is the Foster-Dennis line. Will anyone do more than laugh?
Declaim as it may against “liquidationism,” the Foster-Dennis line leads swiftly toward liquidation of the Party into an isolated Stalinist sect. Foster voted against the Draft Resolution; Dennis, for. But they are united on what is basically a Stalinist policy in the most scientific sense of the term. They differ only on how best to preserve a Stalinist-type organization. Once it was possible to build a mass Stalinist movement in the United States. But no more.
Thousands of Communists have devoted their full mature lives to the fight for a world of socialism, as they saw it, risking personal well being, gaining experience in the class struggle. Are they now to be scattered to the winds and squandered; are they to waste away in a hopelessly Stalinist sect, justly scorned by the working class? That, and that only, is the grim and inexorable result of a victory for the Foster-Dennis line, a victory which would bring a spurious vindication for them as Party officials, but at what a cost! It would mean the destruction of the potentialities and possibilities already created inside the Party by the discussion.
If the Party makes the necessary changes in policy and outlook (and in this Gates, Nelson and the others, are a hundred per cent correct) Communists will be able to make their contribution to the new socialist movement that is destined to come.
 
Stalinism Doomed
THE FORMATION OF A GENUINE SOCIALIST PARTY of the working class, and not an illusory, self-deceiving substitute for one, is not the matter of a moment. The working class will not suddenly rally to the call of some self-appointed saviors and that is a good thing! It requires a long period of political experience in which the working class is able to test socialism and socialists; a new socialist movement can gain the confidence even of a significant socialistically conscious sector of the working class, only by its participation in the living class struggle and by permitting events to test its platform and policies.
Under the best of conditions, it would be foolish to expect socialism to emerge quickly as a leading force among the workers. With all their insecurity, with pools of unemployment, with the dislocations of automation – the list of evils and shortcomings could be extended at will – American workers compare their lot with the workers in other nations and realize that on the whole they enjoy a standard of living and economic and political rights above the others. And they are not receptive to those who propose a fundamental social change, even in the name of socialism and democracy.
A majority of the workers distrusts socialism; even the socialist-minded minority remains aloof from existing groups. And not because they are unthinking dupes of capitalism. The American working class distrusts big business; it rejects all politicians who are obviously the outright representatives of the capitalists as a class. A working class which is organized into gigantic class unions; which is led into politics by these unions; which casts its ballot on the basis of class interest as it interprets it; such a working class has no confidence in the bourgeoisie as a ruling class. It accepts capitalism without reconciling itself to the domination of big business.
If the majority accepts capitalism, there is the minority. Always ... always in the history of the labor movement in the United States, in good times and bad, in prosperity and depression there has been a strong minority, avowedly anti-capitalist in outlook. At one time, it was led by the old Socialist Party of Eugene V. Debs; sections were led by the old I.W.W.; and closer to our day, big sectors once looked to the Communist Party.
With justice, one points to the strong position of U.S. capitalism at home and abroad to explain the weakness of American socialism. But that is only one side of the question. Despite its relative weakness, measured against socialism in other capitalist nations, there was always a significant, if minority, anti-capitalist, pro-socialist tendency in the United States. What has happened to it?
Let us face it squarely. Yesterday, it looked to the Communist Party. Today, it does not. It has not disappeared; it has become disorganized, and disoriented. Because this socialist tendency has been cut loose and is drifting, a socialist realignment is absolutely indicated even inevitable.
At bottom, the decline of the Communist Party was not just the inevitable by-product of cold war and witchhunt, although these played a part. To explain its precipitous loss of influence on that basis would be sheer evasion. As we have said, Communists withstood such pressures before. The question is: why did the witchhunt succeed this time?
The truth is bitter, but it must be faced. Increasingly, unionists, Negroes, liberals became convinced that the Party acted as a blind apologist for Russia; that its turns, this way and that, could be explained by a mechanical determination to fall in line with policies over which it had no control and which were made and unmade in a twinkling by the Politburo.
Hold on! Do you mean to say, it will be protested, that the CP is weak because it apologized for Stalin’s Russian tyranny? Who are you to talk; what about you and your movement? If we have lost strength, we are by far the strongest of those who profess to stand on the platform of socialism. Weak as we are, it is added, we are stronger now than you have ever been.
Such objections have been put many times in the course of the discussion, by all tendencies. For example, Steve Nelson argues:
“At the same time, it may be worthwhile to call to the attention of those who attach so much importance to the matter of being ‘hopelessly compromised’ that other socialist groups did not grow even though they were not so ‘hopelessly compromised’ as we were.”
Nelson is arguing against those who want to “solve” the crisis by simply dissolving the Party; we would agree: what is necessary is not that the Party just vanish off the political scene but that its members work their way through to democratic socialism in the course of this serious discussion. What is “hopelessly compromised” is Stalinism and all those who defend it. By truly turning away from it, Communists can play their part in reviving socialism in the United States. But we are not talking of this but of the question implied by Nelson: you rejected Stalinism, why didn’t you grow? The question is a weighty one and deserves a serious reply.
To understand the causes of the Party’s weakness today it is necessary to understand its sources of strength yesterday. Despite what is said by anti-socialist ideologists, socialism has powerful traditions in the labor movement, traditions which offer a rich soil for socialist renaissance. For a time the stream of socialist sentiment flowed toward the Communist Party and made it a real mass movement.
The Party was born with the Russian Revolution but it was during the depression years of the early thirties that it assembled and trained the basic cadres that carried it into the CIO and toward mass influence. Even with a fantastic “leftist” policy on every conceivable question, in fact despite its policies, the Party could lead thousands during the depression in mass struggle and win their confidence. In the late Thirties, with the rise and expansion of the labor movement, the Party gathered enormous power and became a significant mass movement. This, despite a policy that became “right-opportunist.” Thus, come “leftism,” come “rightism” the Party moved forward because it received an enormous impulse from the outside, despite itself!
And that was the USSR. In truth, the Party’s attachment (even its unthinking attachment) to Russia was a source of great strength in those days. In those days but not today – that is what has changed. Anyone who cannot understand this change instantly removes himself from effective politics today.
Remember that the Communist Party rose in the United States (as did the CIO) at a time when the world socialist movement and the international working class was suffering one defeat after another and was beset with imminent reaction! Mussolini had taken full control for Fascism in Italy in 1926. Hitler wiped out the organized working class movement in 1933. Dolfuss wiped out Austrian socialism and set up a clerico-fascist regime in 1934. Franco seized power in Spain after a three-year civil war 1936–39. Late in 1939 the Second World War erupted. In this series of setbacks and defeats only two consoling elements seemed to stand above the mountain of disappointment: the Soviet Union under the Stalin regime and the United States under Roosevelt. Stalinism and the New Deal. It was between these two stones that the socialist movement in the United States was pulverized. Those who remained anti-capitalist looked to Stalin’s Russia as a source of strength and hope. Most of those who were disenchanted with Russia lost faith in socialism and became liberal New Dealers. The anti-Stalinist socialist movement was fragmented into small sects of varying sizes and fortune, but ultimately on the decline. The Communist Party, which was pro-Stalinist, thrived, grew and prospered as the vehicle for anti-capitalist sentiment.
All that is done with! Gone, finished, ended, no more – and never to return!
Now people see not the continuing downfall of democracy but its rise; not the further defeat of socialism but its resurgence. They look at Russia now and see dictatorship while all the world fights for freedom; they see their proud and strong unions; they strike with confidence to improve their own conditions. In the USSR they see only state-controlled labor groups, without the right to strike, without the right to speak freely, without the right to fight. Is this your “socialism”? they ask. If so, we want no part of it. And they are right. A renewed socialism will be democratic, independent, anti-Stalinist and anti-capitalist.
This is a new period, with new problems, new opportunities. It is no longer possible to build a movement which depends upon Russia or any other power. And, as Foster will learn, it is impossible to build anything that is presented as a twin substitute for Stalinism. Those who speak of a new mass movement for socialism are on the right track. Those who oppose it are doomed: if they refuse to see, they are just as used up and finished as the period in which they once lived.
 
All-Inclusive Democratic Socialism
IT WOULD BE LUDICROUS TO SEARCH for worked out recipes and hallowed formulas prescribing a form for organized socialism good for all time. Nor could anyone predict in elaborate detail what forms a revived movement may finally take in the United States. To attempt either would be a pointless pedantry. Whether it be called a party, an association, a federation or a league is not now decisive. What is decisive is that it be suited for the tasks of our day; not for days gone by and not necessarily for the distant future; but for now.
The reconstitution of an effective socialist movement will not come overnight; yet, it is not an abstract dream but a concrete possibility. A fluid situation calls for a flexible approach. No one, at this time, can do more than indicate tentatively and only in general outline, the conditions and characteristics that would make it possible for a renewed movement to grasp the opportunities arising for socialism in this country.
We begin with what we have. It is not a question of political trading, each group giving a little and taking something from the others; nor of attempting an impossible reconciliation of diverse theories; nor of concocting a new program by extracting small pieces from everyone. No one could possibly be satisfied with such a melange and everyone would be disoriented. It is a question of finding a minimum basis for socialist political collaboration, a basis which permits a viable regroupment and not one which is destined to fly apart after a day. No group can be asked to discard its own views or to capitulate to any other. A minimum platform, and that is what we are discussing at this point, should serve two ends:

To permit every democratic socialist tendency to live within a unified movement and retain its own theories and principles;
 
Establish the necessary political basis for building a healthy socialist movement in the United States.

Reunification is an urgent task for all socialists and it is imperative to find the foundation for a viable, healthy and lasting regroupment. Could a common program be found in the realm of theory, Marxism or non-Marxism; or in a mutually acceptable interpretation of historical questions; or in an estimation and re-estimation of old questions which have been debated time and again in the world socialist movement? We, ourselves, base our program upon a Marxian view of social questions and try to analyze the historical past as well as the tasks of the day from that standpoint. But it must be recognized that all such questions have divided the movement for decades and are not likely to be resolved promptly after any concentrated course of discussions. If we await final clarification of fundamental theory we may indeed wait forever. A renewed movement could not take form around theoretical and historical questions if it is to include all those who rightly should rally to it. It is a question of unifying all those who genuinely adhere to a political platform which is unambiguously for democratic socialism and against Stalinism and who are ready to participate in the common fight to apply such a platform to the issues and struggle of the day.
We do not propose to establish a discussion circle or a mere educational society. A socialist movement must engage in the struggles of its time; it must give support to the workers in their fight against exploitation; it must support the Negroes in their struggle for equality; it must give moral and political aid and encouragement to all those in the world who strive for freedom.
This is not to say that theoretical, even historical questions, are of little importance. Quite the contrary. They merit serious discussion and will be attentively pursued in any intellectually alert movement. But they cannot be put on the same plane with immediate political tasks if the movement is to emerge from its present fragmentation. In the past, such questions led to bitter factional conflicts and splits. It would perhaps be better not to try to unify if it were to be merely the prelude to new splits; the movement has endured enough splits and more would only further discredit it. To reconstruct a new movement on firm foundations and give it a chance to root itself among the people it may be necessary by common agreement to leave certain questions “open,” or to postpone others. In any case, all discussion will have to be conducted in an atmosphere which protects the unity of the movement and its maximum effectiveness. If this means that a series of questions are left unclear, unanswered or ambiguous, it will not be fatal. There will be time to discuss everything in a fraternal spirit.
But what about Russia? Isn’t it necessary to take a forthright position? It is here that the line of division between all groups which stand on a socialist platform becomes sharpest. For our part, we would distinguish between two quite different aspects of the question. One aspect deals with the theoretical and historical questions; these need not be settled as a condition for political collaboration but could be very well left open. Another, however, deals with pressing political tasks; these could be left ambiguous by a movement only at the cost of mortal injury to its chances of survival.
In a renewed movement in the United States, as in the socialist parties of other countries, different tendencies will define differently the nature of the social order in Russia and other Communist countries and will estimate differently the tasks of socialists within them. Some will refer to Russia as a “state of the socialist type”; others, a “workers state”; others, “state capitalism”; others, a “bureaucratic collectivist” state; others, a “managerial society.” Some will call for the “reform” of the regimes; others will look for a “gradual evolution to democracy”; some will favor a “political revolution”; still others, “a political and social revolution.” Likewise, a whole rainbow of theories and tendencies will be evident on the nature of the Russian Revolution of 1917, on the evolution of the Russian state, and on the causes for the triumph of Stalinism.
A broad movement can encompass all these views and all these tendencies can live together as they do in the European socialist movement provided proper conditions are observed by all. And all these questions can be discussed on the proper plane of theory and history.
But if a movement is to have any impact upon the American people, its platform cannot be ambiguous or silent on one question: if it characterized the Russian regime as socialist it would be instantly discredited and would meet the suspicion and hostility of the American people. It would have to make clear that no despotic regime can be a socialist regime; it must emphasize over and over, that socialism and democracy are indivisible. Without democracy in Russia, there can be no socialism.
There is no socialist worthy of the name, and we know of none, who suggests that the achievement of democratic socialism in Russia requires the denationalization of industry and the conversion of the means of production into the private property of capitalists. That would be as absurd as it would be reactionary. What is required is democracy.
The movement must be for democracy everywhere.
 
For Democracy Everywhere
It will not be difficult to agree on an attitude toward democracy under capitalism. Socialists must be for democracy and equality in the United States. For democracy and national freedom in Algiers. For democracy in Spain. For freedom for the colonies of capitalist imperialism.
In raising the standard of democracy, we refer not to the illusive plaything of sociologists and political jugglers but to basic palpable rights: the right to form parties, trade unions, and other mass organizations free from state domination and free to oppose the government and free to replace it at will by democratic means; the right to publish an independent press and to hold public meetings, for critics and oppositions as well as supporters of the regime; the right to free elections.
“Yes, we know that you want democracy here; but are you for it there?” will come the insistent question that any socialist movement must answer without evasion. By there, we mean of course the nations now ruled by Communist governments. Every tendency without exception, whatever its distinctive theory must be ready to call for democracy now in every country and to give moral and political support to those who fight for democracy within them and to disassociate itself unequivocally from the opponents of democracy. For all countries! For capitalist imperialist countries; colonies; Russia; all the countries now ruled by Communists.
If you are not for democracy now where you insist socialism is in power today, who will believe you when you insist that democracy will prevail when socialism wins power in other nations tomorrow? Who will trust a movement that calls for democracy only where it is a minority?
In sum, a socialist movement must be a genuinely democratic socialist movement, avowedly against capitalism and against Stalinism and not ashamed of that view but proud of it. With less, no movement can make even a serious beginning in America.
Even if it were possible or desirable to initiate some combination of forces that proclaimed to the world that Russia is “socialist” it would be under a cloud of suspicion and its future would quickly be in doubt. It might, perhaps, serve as a convenient, if temporary, resting place for some existing groups and sects as they are but it could hardly be of any significance in reestablishing a viable socialist movement. To our working class, the Russian system is the symbol of everything dictatorial; any movement which puts it forward, in any sense, as an example of what it strives for – that movement is doomed.
 
For Internal Democracy
IF OUR TASK IS TO FACILITATE a peaceful coexistence of a wide rainbow of tendencies, the organization form must be one of full unrestricted inner democracy.
If the political basis is a concrete declaration for socialism and democracy, a platform for regroupment rather than a worked out theory and a “finished program,” then it requires a loose organizational structure rather than a tightly disciplined one. It requires, too, a wide autonomy for its sections and an emphasis upon decentralization rather than centralization. It would not simply permit but encourage the issuance of books, papers, magazines, pamphlets, scholarly works and popular educational material by its adherents as individuals and as cooperative groups without necessarily subjecting them to rigid censorship and organizational control. It would rely upon and stimulate the individual initiative of all. It would be a product of a new mood and at the same time it would create a new atmosphere, a concentration upon a new audience; the diffusion of socialist education.
Such a movement, intellectually alive, encouraging freedom of thought and expression could attract the most serious and talented professionals and intellectuals as did the Socialist Party of Debs.
It would mean the end of warfare among the sects and groups and the beginning of the battle for the minds of the people; the beginning of a movement which would support the organized workingclass in its struggles; encourage every tendency toward class independence and suffuse it with the ideals of socialism.
 
For a Movement Like the Debs Socialist Party
A LOOK OF AMAZED DISBELIEF will spread over the faces of many Party members. What about iron discipline, monolithism, centralism? All the dogmas they took for granted seem to rule out every one of our propositions without exception. Is it possible to build such a movement?
It is not only possible; it is necessary. It is not only necessary it is virtually inevitable Let us ask a question in return. How else, after theoretical and programmatic disarray, after the fragmentation of socialism, do you think that it is possible to reconstruct the socialist movement now?
It is not an idle dream. There was just such a movement in the United States. What we are describing is nothing less than the Socialist Party of Eugene Debs. We need such a movement brought up to date; one which takes into account the reality of today’s politics on the national and international arena.
There is a shop-worn fable that the old SP was a futile do-nothing outfit that could accomplish nothing. Dismiss it from your mind! Let us not genuflect before the memory of Debs but learn from what he and his comrades were able to accomplish. It was Debs and the all-inclusive Socialist Party which he helped to build that brought a whole generation of workers, intellectuals and professionals to socialist consciousness. It was this party which broke out of the sectarian isolation of the tightly-knit, closely disciplined, “monolithic” Socialist Labor Party and brought socialism to millions.
In some ways, our task today is similar. Once again we must unite socialism; end a sectarian form of existence, and win over a new generation to socialism, a generation which must reach socialism in its own way.
This is the opportunity that awaits us. Are you ready to grasp it? Others will. Will you make the necessary transformation in your policies, organization and outlook? As you answer these questions you are deciding the fate of your movement and the future of its membership. You are deciding nothing less than this:
Toward democratic socialism or back to Stalinism?
 



To what extent is American industry unionized? What is involved is not a mere statistical query but an investigation into the very nature of the working class. Marxists often refer to the “backwardness” of the American labor movement, a term which is accurate but only relative. Backward compared to what? In every industrially advanced country where democracy prevails, generations of workers have given allegiance to socialist and labor parties, or, in the case of the Communist Party, to a party which appears to them, however mistakenly, as a class party. Except in the United States. Here, the labor movement rejects in principle the formation of a class party and supports bourgeois candidates. It is organized essentially as a labor-union movement and in this respect remains in the first stages of its political evolution. Nevertheless, though it does not exist as an independent party, the working class does exist as an independently organized class. Twenty-five years ago, only one generation, the American working class was disorganized, except for a small minority; today, it is overwhelmingly organized. It appears backward compared with the social needs of our times and measured against its own future. But look at its past and a giant advance in organization and in consciousness is obvious.
In 1954, the total membership of labor unions, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, was no less than 18,000,000. An impressive total. But bare membership figures only hint at the pervasive influence of unionism. If we estimated an average immediate family of 3 for each member, the total population directly linked to organized labor totals 54 millions: one-third of the national population. This is disconcerting because there is no space reserved for classes in American ideology; perhaps a happy middle class but nothing so vulgar as a working class. There is mutual cooperation; there is balance of forces; there are no classes; there is no class struggle; all chant this litany; industrial statesmen, once known as capitalists; labor statesmen, once known as workers’ leaders; in between, writers, editors, lecturers, educators.
Yet unions are class organizations par excellence. Membership is nearly everywhere open only to those who work for an employer; and employers are strictly barred from holding membership and denied the right to speak at union meetings of their own employees. What cements the union together in the first place and then holds it together in good times and bad, what distinguishes it from all other organizations is the fact that it draws workers together in the workshop, mobilizes them to improve their daily conditions and organizes them strictly, even narrowly, as wage-earners.
The union begins by drawing a sharp line between worker and employer. To. the extent that they enroll large sections of the working class and enlist their conscious and active loyalty, to that extent class lines are deepened. But since this simple truth is not permitted to circulate as a free citizen, an annoying problem is posed for official sociology. How to interpret this labor movement? To put it more bluntly, how to explain it away?
But must it be explained away? There are other possibilities. Reactionary Democrats and conservative Republicans are not particularly concerned with delicate sociological legerdemain. For them it suffices, without philosophical speculation, to act as though unions represented one class and they another. Their unstated theory is expressed in deeds: Taft-Hartley laws; “right to work” laws; illegalizing labor political action. All aimed at curbing and restraining the power of unionism. But there is a limit: if you make us second-class citizens, warns George Meany, we will be forced to form a labor party.
The labor movement cannot be wiped out by any devices available and conceivable today. Intelligent ideologists of capitalism cannot permit themselves to understand the class position of American unionism, much less proclaim it publicly lest the labor movement be pushed into recognizing itself.
It is impossible to explain away the class struggle without explaining away the modern labor movement. Here lies the importance of analyzing our most powerful union movement.
Labor leaders grope their way unperturbed by thought processes. They reject a labor party on the grounds that it would create class division.. A moment later, they “divide” workers from bosses by unionizing them. It is not that they notice no contradiction; they simply don’t think about it.
Just before helping to create the biggest and most powerful labor union movement in U.S. history, George Meany told the printing industry:
“Now, as to those who fear the merger, I would say that there is no possible fear of this so-called labor monopoly, because even when we get merged we will have less than 25 per cent of the total work force of the nation and that will certainly not look like a monopoly.”
His intention is innocent enough; by pointing to labor’s weakness, he hopes to silence those who want to curb its power. The basically underprivileged position of labor lies not in lack of organization but in the monopoly of industry by a small class of owners. Workers must work to live; they can forego wages in strikes but not forever; the owner has enormous resources and great powers that go with ownership. No matter how strongly unions succeed in organizing, the power of the working class remains limited compared to the power of ownership. But Meany cannot do much with such an argument; it reveals too much about capitalism, the limitations of its democracy and its built-in class rule. Instead, he points, not to labor’s limited social rights, but to its presumably limited organization. But look up at the mountains! What stands out is towering unionism, intensive and wide-ranging.
What is the degree of organization in the various industries? Such a question would seem readily answerable in passionless statistics. We should already be forewarned, however, that the subject is overladen with political and sociological preconceptions.
Take a passing comment from American Labor and the American Spirit, a pamphlet issued in 1954 by the Department of Labor and distributed widely in unions.
The necessarily limited role of present day unions is indicated by a comparison of union membership with the entire labor force – the labor force is nearly four times as large as the number of workers in unions. The term labor force as used in the United States includes self-employed workers; salaried workers as well as wage earners; casual and temporary workers; and those who are not at work but looking for jobs.
The comparison between the size of the organized working class and the total labor force is misleading. “Labor force” conjures up visions of men, sleeves rolled, hammering away with sledge and chisel. But beware! If the National Association of Manufacturers employs a director, who retains a firm of attorneys, who hire labor-relations advisors, who use a strikebreaking detective agency – with the aim of preventing or smashing unionism-all the individuals engaged in such unique human endeavors are duly recorded in the ever-patient and tolerant category of “labor force.”
If its statistical significance in society is to be judged, then the whole working class, organized and unorganized, must be measured against other classes. If the weight of the organized working class is to be compared, let it be gauged by the organizations of other classes.
The Department of Labor selects part of the working class, its organized sector, holds it up against all classes, organized and unorganized, and finds that one out of every four gainfully employed (all classes, all professions, all means of payment; employers, owners, storekeepers; city, town and farm) is a unionized worker. What hits the observer full in the face is the amazingly large section of the whole employed population already enrolled in unions.
But let us put this aside and consider another aspect of the question. Before labor can organize other classes, before it can lead the nation, it must organize itself. How far has it succeeded? What is its self-consciousness? We want to know something about the inner state of the American working class.
For this, we compare the organized working class, not with the population in general, but with the whole working class.
Naturally, our interest lies beyond the laudable desire for accurate statistics and pure information. The rise of socialism in advanced industrial nations, (and ultimately in all), depends upon the rise, organization and class consciousness of the working class. And in time, history turned upon these factors – so it was in the past and will be in the future. We avoid, too, sociological generalities and precise definitions of what is included and what is not in the term “working class.” The impact of the labor and socialist movement is linked to tendencies among workers in industry: those engaged in manufacturing production, in transportation, in mining, and in construction. Here lies the heart and spine of the modern working class.
From various political and social standpoints it is argued that other classes or sections of classes are growing at a relatively greater rate than the industrial working class. Sometimes this thought is linked to notions of the rise of bureaucracy and administration in general, or to a new middle class, or to automation, or to atomic energy. But regardless of what looms in the somewhat shadowy future, we begin with what we have. The political and social tendencies of new social strata will be shaped by the most powerfully organized class of modern times: the industrial proletariat; and the social results of new techniques of production and science will be determined by what this class does or does not accomplish. In terms of its self-consciousness and organization, the industrial working class is rising, consolidating, viable and decisive. Leo Wolman, in the 36th annual report of the National Bureau of Economic Research estimates that union membership rose 148.8 per cent between 1939 and 1953, from 6,500,000 to 16,217,000. The percentage of trade union membership in non-agricultural employment rose from 21.5 per cent to 32.6 per cent in the same period.
In 1953, Daniel Bell, writing in Fortune on The Next American Labor Movement, minimizes the impact of the labor movement and underlines, as he sees it, its basic adjustment to capitalist society. The following statistical fragment is a piece of the whole:
“In 1946, US unions had organized about 15 million – 48 per cent of 31 million potential members, since 1946, the working population has expanded but union membership has remained stationary.”
We note a more impressive ring: from 25 per cent of the “labor force” to 48 per cent of the “potential members.” Still, Bell emphasizes stagnation and limitation.
Three years later, Bell is even firmer in his view, reiterated now in the context of AFL-CIO unity. Fortune, June 1956:
“In the past ten years, membership gains, as the AFL-CIO has admitted, came ‘primarily from economic expansion in establishments and industries already organized.’ And even this growth, a membership rise of three million or about 21 per cent in ten years, has barely kept pace with the percentage increase in the American labor force over the same period.”
And the chief lesson:
“But the basic fact about the labor movement today is that it has lost its elan. Its leadership is aging; its rhetoric is dulled and unconvincing even to its own orators, its emotional appeals, such as Reuther’s speeches to the AFL-CIO convention, evoke response primarily because of sentiment about the past. In part this is a paradoxical ‘loss through victory.’ The fact is that American business today is pledged to an expanding economy; once management became committed to annual productivity increases in wages over and beyond rises in cost of living, unionism lost much of its fire power.... Vast changes within labor reflect not labor’s efforts to change the economy but changes in the technology of America and in the location of industry.”
And concluding, “blue collar unionism has been and will remain a phenomenon of American industry and ... in the changing aspects of American life – the rise of services, recreation, research – it will play no great role in economic organization.
We fear that a bubbling lack of enthusiasm tempts Bell to exaggerate his own underestimation. Note his contention that between 1946 and 1953 “the working population has expanded but union membership has remained stationary.” This conclusion is directly contradicted by a study of union membership 1897–1953 by Irving Bernstein in the June 1954 American Economic Review. According to Bernstein, the change between 1946 and 1953 was as follows:



Year


 


Union
Membership


 


Union Membership
as % of Entire
Labor Force




1946


12,980,000


22.6




1953


17,010,000


26.8



These figures demonstrate a big advance in total membership and an appreciable increase in relative membership.
Bell detects many little things but misses what is big. He is under a compulsion to highlight, underline and emphasize everything that reveals weakness, stagnation, limitation, triviality and passive adaptation in the union movement. The grand evolution, the main line of development escapes him completely. In a maze of detail he hits upon the “basic fact” in loss of “elan.” But consider his introduction to a graph of Union membership: “U.S. union growth ... occurred largely in the 1935–45 decade ... But this growth was largely under hothouse protection: first of the NRA and the Wagner Act; later, the War Labor Board.” It is incredible that Bell cannot see the obvious. His own “Hothouse” theory (which this writer contends is misleading) emphasized not stagnation but spectacular advance. Bell leaves the impression of a labor movement that could hardly stand alone and leaned on crutches of government help. But contrast the fate of unionism in two wars. During the first World War, it rose truly under “hothouse” protection only to be driven back after the war was over. Now, the hothouse is gone; the glass panels shattered, the steam heat turned off. Instead of the Wagner Act, icy winds blow: Taft-Hartley; right-to-work laws; curbs on union political action. Yet, the union movement holds on to every position; it grows; it unifies, it intends to grow even more. The “basic fact,” demonstrated in the last ten years, is this: the American working class is fundamentally, permanently, organized; its unions are deep rooted and ineradicable. This is clear and obvious for the first time; a powerful, newly-organized class has taken its place on the political and social arena; such an event must decisively affect the nation’s history. Unless this “basic fact” is clearly understood, every discussion of union problems will bog down in trivia.
Bell’s finger remains pointed at the loss of “elan”; his doubts remain on its ability to organize the South or to expand into new fields. But is the stagnation inherent in the very nature of labor organization today? Is it rooted in the basic long term power of capitalism? Is it linked to the limitations of the role and consciousness of America’s working class? Or is it a transient phenomenon, a passing stage in the growth of unionism and the rise of working-class consciousness, destined to be overcome as labor moves on to a new stage? Is it deeply rooted in the very nature of our society or is it a phase of labor’s political evolution?
In answering such questions, we need a rough picture of what the American working class looks like.
 
SINCE WE ARE CONCERNED HERE with the state of the industrial working class, we will compare two figures.

The number of production workers in a given branch of industry with,
 
the size of unions in that field.

Our figures are rough with no claim to statistical refinement. As we noted, the Bureau of Labor Statistics does not publish figures on the degree of organization by industry.
The Auto Workers Union, for example, organizes thousands of workers outside the strict limits of its stated field of operations. The Machinists Union spreads over almost every branch of every industry. The Carpenters Union with its base in the building trades takes in furniture workers, lumber mill workers and others. We take one precaution in order not to exaggerate the total picture and list each union under only one heading, a device which will tend to exaggerate the degree of organization in some areas by minimizing it in others. Figures on union membership are almost all from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Directory of Labor Unions which lists claimed membership in 1954; figures on employment are from approximately the same period.
Manufacturing
According to the estimate of A.H. Raskin, labor editor of the New York Times, three-fourths of all workers in manufacturing are organized: out of 13,400,000 production workers, more than 10,000,000 are in unions. But even this impressive figure understates the real spread and power of unionism. The more basic the industry, the stronger is unionism. By this fact, unionism exercises vast social power and makes its ideological impact even upon workers who are not organized or only weakly organized. Consider the expanse of unionism in the industrial heartland of the U.S.
Primary Metals
Workers employed: 1,140,000 of which 700,000 are employed on production in the basic steel industry: foundries, mills, furnaces.
Union membership: The Steel Workers Union alone 1,200,000. Part of this membership covers metal fabrication. On the other hand, thousands of workers in basic aluminum, copper and other non-ferrous metals are organized into other unions. This industry is virtually 100 per cent organized.
Transportation Equipment
Workers employed: 1,400,000 of which 1,100,000 are employed in auto and aircraft plants.
Union membership: The UAW alone accounts for 1,239,000. Part of this membership, however, is employed in agricultural implement plants and others in assorted metal fabrication. On the other hand, a large section of the aircraft industry is organized by the International Association of Machinists. Virtually 100 per cent unionized.
Clothing Industry
(Apparel and other finished textiles)



Employed:


1,100,000




Union membership:




United Garment Workers


     40,000




ILGWU


   441,000




Amalgamated


   385,000




Hatters


     40,000




Glove Workers


       3,000




Hosiery Workers


     15,000




Lace Operatives


       3,000




Total


   927,000



Paper and Allied Industries



Employed:


 


440,000




Union membership:




AFL Paper Makers


 


  73,000




CIO Paper Workers


  50,000




Pulp, Sulphite and Paper Mill Workers


150,000




Total


273,000



Leather and Leather Products



Employed:


335,000




Union membership:




Fur and Leather Workers Industrial Union (defunct)


  50,000




Leather and Leather Goods AFL


  28,000




Shoe and Allied Workers


    6,000




CIO Shoe Workers


  64,000




AFL Boot and Shoe


  40,000




Total


188,000



Tobacco



Employed:


100,000




Union membership:




Tobacco Workers Union


  34,000




Cigar Makers


  10,000




Total


  44,000



Stone, Clay and Glass



Employed:


430,000




Union membership:




Brick and Clay Workers


  23,000




Cement, Lime and Gypsum


  38,000




Glass Bottle Workers


  51,000




Clay and Ceramic Workers


  47,000




Flint Glass Workers


  30,000




Potters Union


  24,000




Total


213,000



Lumber and Wood Products



Employed:


 


680,000




Union membership:




CIO Woodworkers Union


 


105,000



Here it must be noted that the AFL Carpenters Union which is listed under construction is not included although it has a large membership in lumber camps and sawmills.
In the Northwest, this industry is completely organized. In the South, however, it is only 15 per cent unionized.
Furniture



Employed:


300,000




Union membership:




Upholsters Union


  53,000




Furniture Workers


  50,000




Total


103,000



Here, too, we omit thousands of members of the Carpenters Union.
Printing



Employed:


520,000




Union membership:




Bookbinders


  54,000




Engravers


  16,000




Lithographers


  28,000




Pressmen


  99,000




Stereotypers


  14,000




Typographers


  78,000




Total


285,000



Food Industry



Employed:


1,100,000




Union membership:




Packinghouse Workers and Amalgamated Meat Cutters


   450,000




Bakers


   160,000




Brewery Workers


     62,000




Distillery Workers


     25,000




Grain Millers


     32,000




Total


  729,000



These figures show about two-thirds organization but that would be misleading. Packinghouses are totally organized. The two big unions in the industry, United Packinghouse Workers, formerly CIO, and the Amalgamated Meat Cutters, formerly AFL, are about to merge. Once this merger is finally consummated, a vigorous organizing drive is inevitable. Independent unions which have a sizable membership are not counted at all.
Rubber Products



Employed:


 


200,000




Union membership:




United Rubber Workers Union


 


175,000



Textile Mills



Employed:


 


990,000




Union membership:




AFL


 


  90,000




CIO


292,000




Total


382,000



This is a relatively poorly organized industry. Yet well over a third of the workers are organized.
Chemicals



Employed:


 


530,000




Union membership:




AFL Chemical Workers


 


  90,000




CIO Gas, Coke and Chemical Union


100,000




Total


190,000



The low degree of organization in this industry is generally recognized. Large unorganized plants in the South must still be unionized. Yet close to one-third of the workers are already organized. In the Atomic industries, whose workers are scattered among many unions, A.H. Raskin estimates that 75 per cent are already organized.
Oil



Employed:




Oil mining


 


135,000




Products of petroleum and coal


175,000




Total


310,000



Union membership: The former Oil Workers Union, which merged with the Gas, Coke and Chemical Workers, claimed more than 100,000 members and was the backbone of union organization. But unionism in the oil industry is not yet consolidated and membership is spread over a host of small independent unions not listed here. In early 1954 an abortive unity conference attracted 149 delegates from 31 oil unions representing a claimed membership of over 212,000. Unionism is firmly established but not unified. Bell estimates that independent unions have a membership of 100,000.



Employed:




Bituminous and Anthracite Coal


 


250,000




Metal mining


  90,000




Non-Metallic Mines and Quarries


  90,000




Total


430,000



Union membership:
The United Mine Workers did not report its membership to the BLS. Our figure is an estimate. The Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers Union has declined sharply in membership but its losses have represented not a decline in union membership but a transfer to CIO unions.



United Mine Workers


 


400,000




Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers


100,000




Total


500,000



Obviously, these 500,000 members are not all miners. District 50 of the UMW organizes chemical workers and others. MMSW organizes smelter workers and its membership figures are probably exaggerated. But, on the other hand, these figures omit metal miners organized into the Steel Workers Union.
Despite all qualifications, the picture is clear: unionism dominates the mining industry.
Construction Industry



Employed:


2,527,000




Union membership:
(almost all in Building Trades Dept. – AFL).




Asbestos Workers


       9,000




Boilermakers


   150,000




Bricklayers


   147,000




Carpenters


   804,000




Electrical Workers


   630,000




Elevator Construction


       9,000




Operating Engineers


   200,000




Granite Cutters


       4,000




Hod Carriers


   433,000




Iron Workers


   139,000




Lathers


     15,000




Marble Workers


       6,000




Painters


   220,000




Plasterers


     65,000




Plumbers


   241,000




Roofers


     17,000




Sheet Metal Workers


     50,000




Stone Cutters


       2,000




Total


3,141,000



Obviously union rolls include thousands of workers who are not employed in construction. On the other hand, thousands of others who should be listed are not. The Teamsters, for example, who organize construction drivers are not listed at all. In small towns, building trades workers are weakly organized; but this doubly emphasizes the fact that in the great industrial centers, where the basic character of the working class is established, they are almost 100 per cent organized.
Transportation



Employed:


2,800,000




Union membership:




Teamsters


1,000,000




Firemen and Oilers


     60,000




Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen


     90,000




Bro. of Maintenance of Way


   219,000




Pullman Porters


     15,000




Signalmen


     17,000




Trainmen


   204,000




Railway Telegraphers


     51,000




Yardmasters


       4,000




Carmen


   170,000




Conductors


     32,000




Railway Clerks


   293,000




Switchmen


     15,000




Locomotive Engineers


     74,000




Railway Patrolmen


       3,000




Transport Workers Union


   100,000




All Maritime Unions [1]


   106,000




Total


2,458,000



Note: This list omits the International Association of Machinists
which organizes railroad machinists.
On the periphery of the organized labor movement, unionization is relatively weak. Of the 5,750,000 workers employed in the Service and Miscellaneous industries, A.H. Raskin estimates that it is “doubtful that more than 1,000,000.” In finance, insurance, real estate, he guesses that less than 5 per cent are in unions. Of 11,000,000 in the wholesale and retail trade, he thinks about 500,000 are organized. Government workers are perhaps 10–15 per cent organized, and agricultural workers negligibly so.
Organizing the unorganized is not a matter of simple administrative efficiency and energy. In organizing the South, labor will have to examine its political line and its relations with the Democratic party, dominant one-party in the non-union South. To organize white collar workers, labor must create an atmosphere of sympathy for unionism among the people; that too is a political question.
But in grappling with its problems, labor begins with 18,000,000 organized workers; while it is true that thousands among them are indifferent to unionism and its goals, other thousands among the unorganized workers are undoubtedly eager for unions. It would be a miracle if the organized body of 18 million hadn’t made its impact on the minds of all, organized and unorganized. Where it is weak, unionism does not begin with nothing. In such areas as chemicals and textiles 25 per cent at least are already organized. Among government workers and retail clerks, thousands are already in unions. Such footholds, backed by the resources and influence of a united labor movement, become the starting point for an inevitable expansion of unionism in the United States.
The majority of the industrial working class is already organized. So, far, our statistics only tell us where they arc. The next question is: what do they think about their unions? For them or against?
 
WHO CAN PROBE THEIR MINDS or test their enthusiasm? The National Association of Manufacturers campaigns for the “Right to Work” convinced that men are “coerced” into joining, herded by mighty “union bosses” and “labor monopolies,” unwilling shanghaied victims. Sponsors of the Taft- Hartley Law, in revolt against “labor dictatorship,” rose in public indignation to give good Americans, imprisoned in unions, a chance to shake free. The closed shop was, and remains, outlawed. At first Taft-Hartley also ruled out a union shop unless a majority of those eligible to vote in any collective bargaining unit elected for it. By its provisions, those who failed to vote were in effect counted as voting against the union. The results were startling.
In 19 years (1936–54) since the adoption of the Wagner Act, workers were given the chance to express their private feelings in secret government elections of three types:




collective bargaining elections;
 
union shop elections under the Taft Hartley Law;
 
strike ballots under the wartime Smith-Connally Act.




In all types of elections during these years, more than 19,000,000 ballots were cast. In actuality, at one time or another virtually the entire organized working class voted in secret. Here, in the dark privacy of government protection they could, if they so desired, lash out against the unions. Almost 16,000,000 votes were cast for unions, or 82.7 per cent.
Most impressive were the union shop elections under the Taft-Hartley Law. These voters were no raw recruits to unionism; they were not swayed by momentary illusions or passing promises; as old-time union men they had to decide whether to make membership compulsory for others and for themselves. Between 1948 and 1951, over 46,000 union shop elections were conducted; more than 5,500,000 votes were cast; of these, over 5,000,000, or 91.4 per cent went for the union!



Union Shop Elections Under the Taft Law
(in all tables figures are by fiscal year ending June 30)




 


Votes Cast


 


For Union


 


% for Union




July 1–Oct. 22, 1951


   210,507


   185,847


88.5%




1951


1,335,683


1,164,143


87.1%




1950


   900,866


   805,189


89.4%




1949


1,471,092


1,381,829


93.9%




1948


1,629,330


1,534,981


94.2%




Totals


5,547,478


5,071,978


91.4%



The law was defeating its purpose! Instead of “freeing” workers from “compulsory” unionism, the elections became a weapon for mobilizating [sic] pro-union sentiment. Pressure was built up for the union shop where it never had existed before. Congress hastened to expunge this provision from the law in 1951.
In 1944, in an atmosphere of wartime strikebreaking, the Smith-Connally Act was passed making it illegal for unions to declare strikes without a government-sponsored vote. In 2½ years, over 2,000 elections were held. Close to 2 million votes were cast; of these nearly 1,600,000 or 82.8 per cent voted for strike as (in most cases) recommended by their union.



Smith-Connally Strike Votes




 


 


Votes Cast


 


For Strike


 


% for Strike




1944


     98,224


     69,978


71.2%




1945


   540,242


   442,769


80.0%




July–Dec. 1945


1,288,345


1,081,190


84.3%




Totals


1,926,811


1,593,937


82.8%



But the most far-reaching and continuing test came in nineteen years of NLRB collective bargaining elections. More than 11½ million votes were cast; more than 9 million or 78.7 per cent for the union. The totals are even more impressive than they appear. As the years pass, most large factories are organized; elections take place in anti-union strongholds and small shops. By 1954, 56.7 per cent of all collective bargaining elections took place in units of less than 40 workers; and 84.7 per cent in units of less than 100. Unionism begins to reach down where workers are most influenced by petty personal relations with their boss, most easily intimidated and influenced by trivial considerations. In 1948, a sharp drop in the percentage of pro-union votes is noticeable, opening the Taft-Hartley era. The employer is granted new means of intimidation; he can call meetings against the union on company property; he can threaten to move out of town; he can turn his workers into a captive audience. Yet, elections continue to go pro-union by a large majority:



NLRB Collective Bargaining Elections
1936–1954




Year


Valid Votes Cast


 


For Union


 


% for Union




1936


         7,572


       6,162


81.4%




1937


     164,135


   142,428


86.8%




1938


     343,587


   282,470


82.2%




1939


     177,215


   138,032


77.9%




1940


     532,355


   435,842


81.9%




1941


     729,933


   589,921


80.8%




1942


  1,067,037


   895,091


83.9%




1943


  1,126,501


   923,169


82.0%




1944


  1,072,594


   828,583


77.3%




1945


     893,758


   706,569


79.1%




1946


     698,812


   529,847


75.8%




1947


     805,474


   621,732


77.2%




July 1–Aug. 21, 1947


       58,162


     45,988


79.1%




Subtotal


  7,677,135


6,145,834


80.1%




(Under Taft-Hartley Law)




1948


     333,900


 


   256,935


 


76.0%




1949


     516,248


   377,360


73.1%




1950


     781,382


   649,432


83.1%




1951


     587,591


   442,066


75.3%




1952


     674,412


   506,212


75.0%




1953


     648,686


   501,844


77.0%




1954


     458,762


   319,016


70.0%




Subtotal


  4,000,981


3,052,865


75.0%




Grand Total 1936–1954


11,678,116


9,198,699


78.8%



Summing up the results of the balloting in all types of elections, we see the emerging picture of an organized working class, overwhelmingly loyal to its unions.



Composite Results of Labor Elections




 


Total Votes


 


For Union


 


% for Union




Representation Elections 1936–1954


11,678,116


  9,198,699


78.7%




Union Shop 1948–1951


  5,547,478


  5,071,798


91.4%




Smith-Connally Strike Votes 1944–1945


  1,926,811


  1,593,937


82.8%




Totals


19,152,405


15,864,614


82.7%



These are majorities that any politician would envy. The results are so preponderantly and consistently one-sided that it would be difficult to pick out free elections of any other type for comparison.
 
WHEN THE NOON HOUR WHISTLE blows and the noise of machine, motor and drill are silenced, millions of union workers in every town, city and state pull up stools to the nearest bench and, in little groups, chat over lunch. Their conversation continues on the way home in cars, buses, and trains. Or at the bowling club, on the fishing trip, at the union meeting, at the bar, at home visits. Naturally, among other things, they talk about their union, their work, politics, the events of the day. Sometimes a big event takes place: a strike, an important election, but not often. In this ceaseless, endless, permanent exchange of views, arguments, ideas, opinions, prejudices and thoughts the union consciousness of the American working class is being created.
Some of them are just union members, dues payers who tolerate the union, perhaps among the 75 per cent who have voted for a union in NLRB elections. Others are definitely and positively pro-union, perhaps among the 91 per cent who voted for a union shop in Taft-Hartley elections. But there are still others:
There are those who are not merely members of a union; not merely intensely loyal to the union. They are the ones whose attachment to the union is part of a whole outlook on politics and social problems; they are the living embodiment of the emerging traditions of the workingclass; their unionism is part and parcel of their general social consciousness; they are the union conscious cadres of the American working class, the tangible, unifying, human force that cements together the modern labor movement. And they number, conservatively, in the hundreds of thousands.
How do these men and women think about political and social questions? We can watch the labor movement in its daily routine; its resolutions, its strikes, its conventions, its conferences, its official pronounciamentos, its elections. We live, however, in an epoch of polls, surveys and samplings, an era when few self-respecting analysts can feel at ease without a buttressing mass of evidence gathered by public opinion interviews, social research workers and sociologists.
A uniquely valuable survey is now available, published in June under the title When Labor Votes. [2] This study of the attitude of auto workers in the 1952 elections, prepared by three Wayne University sociologists, is based upon detailed interviews with randomly selected UAW members in the Detroit area. Eight hundred and twenty-eight unionists were questioned once before the elections; of these, 351 were interviewed a second time after the election results were known. Detroit auto unionists are not exactly the “average” worker, or even the average organized worker. They belong to the most progressive wing of the labor movement. But neither are they peculiar or atypical. They resemble millions of others, especially in the mass industrial unions. If they arc more advanced, their attitude today foreshadows the labor movement of tomorrow. From them we get a roughly accurate picture of modern union consciousness. Their reply to one question gives us the key to everything. They were asked: “If you were asked to use one of these four names for your social class, which would you say you belong in: the middle class, lower class, working class, or upper class?” Only one replied, “upper class,” and two, “lower class.” But 206 said that they belonged to the “working class” and only 72 to the “middle class.” Union consciousness bring a realization of an identity with the working class. This generality, the survey fills in with ample detail.
Three out of every four voted for Stevenson, most of these on the straight Democratic ticket. Of 678 UAW registered voters 80 per cent indicated that they were Democrats or leaned toward the Democratic Party. Only 13 per cent voted a straight Republican ticket. Why so many Democrats? The survey points to “frequent mention of the interests of workingmen, the view that Democrats and Stevenson are for unions and labor, whereas Republicans are for business and similar reflections of belief in opposed group interests” (p. 103).
Should labor have more influence in government? Fifty-five per cent answered, yes; Should business? Only 19 per cent said, yes; 41 per cent said, no. The authors point out that a “source of surprise is that so many Eisenhower voters thought that business should have less to say.” And, “substantial numbers of Eisenhower voters were in full agreement with the Stevenson-supporting fellow members in wanting to see the political influence of unions increase and that of business groups decrease.” If the responders are measured by their degree of trust versus distrust of the political recommendations of various groups we find that:




They trust unions 4–1;
 
They distrust business 4½–1;
 
They distrust newspapers 5–1.




In sum, “the reasons predominantly express belief in opposed group interests and a sense of belonging to or being identified with one side.” One of the most frequent explanation for political sympathies was, “They’re my class of people; I’m a labor man; they represent my interests.”
Naturally, not all union members are equally union conscious: this commonplace is frequently decked out in multifarious disguises to prove that there is no labor vote, no general union outlook, no working class. The Wayne study helps sift the membership into categories. By posing a series of revealing questions (the full questionnaire is reprinted in an appendix) the authors differentiate broadly between degrees of attachment to the union and participation in its activities, with these conclusions:



Strong union attachment


 


35%




Intermediate


41%




Weak


24%



Similarly, opinion on union political action and policies is grouped as follows:



Strongly for union political action


 


55%




Intermediate


24%




Not for or against


21%



Looking more closely at the strong 55 per cent, the authors conclude, “The evidence suggests that most of these people see the political world in terms of opposed goals and group interests as between organized labor and business.” And in general, it is the members most closely attached to the union who support its policies most firmly.
Fundamentally, the social influence of the union depends upon this stratum which reaches 35-55 per cent of the membership. This is its basic union conscious cadre.
There is “little doubt that a large sector of the membership (approximately one-half of all members) feels that they have political interests opposed to those of Business and Newspapers, interests that they can protect and advance by supporting the union’s position on the political front ...” The authors are impelled to report the same fact again and again; under one heading, then another. As:
“The predominant political outlook or ‘philosophy’ is clearly one that conceives of workers’ and union’s goals as opposed at many points to those of business and wealthy groups. This is not translated as ‘class consciousness,’ belief in ‘class struggle,’ or a desire to overthrow the ‘capitalist system.’ We shall return to this important distinction in the final chapter. Contrary to common assertions, moreover, a majority of these unionists trust union organizations and leadership on the political as well as on the economic front.”
We can hardly wait for the “final chapter,” anticipating a refutation of class consciousness,” or at least an attempt. We seek in vain; what the authors promised, they forgot. Perhaps they became too engrossed in what they actually saw; for their last chapter cautions not against the concept of class consciousness but against the view that organized workers are becoming “middle class” in outlook.
Let us grant, however, that the advanced union worker is not class conscious. If asked, he would probably nod his approval of the capitalist system and disavow the class struggle. But he is intensely union conscious and that union consciousness is no bulwark against class consciousness. Quite the contrary, in union consciousness lies the underlying elements of class consciousness that must in time assert themselves.
 
THE UAW IS COINING a new slogan: “First organize them: then unionize them.” It is intended to underscore the “education” of new members; actually it points up a profound idea: workers come into unions as raw recruits but in time their whole outlook tends to change. At any rate, that is the union’s aim.
From a few hundred thousand in the heartland of the auto industry, Detroit and Flint, the UAW expanded to over a million. The industry decentralized; the union grew and extended its jurisdiction until two-thirds of its members were outside the two old centers. These hundreds of thousands who flocked into the union knew little of its early militant struggles and hardly comprehended its deep significance. Physically, they were organized; it remained to “unionize” them, i.e., to change their way of thinking. The union sought to teach them a new language and code of solidarity; a new attitude toward the boss and fellow workers; it aimed to deepen their interest in politics. In short, the membership had to be lifted from the level of mere dues payers to conscious unionism. And it is this union consciousness which, in one degree or another, pervades the organized working class; its future history begins with union consciousness not only more widespread and deeply rooted than ever but permanent.
 
IN UNION ORGANIZATION is the consolidation of the American workers as a class; and in the spread of union consciousness, the emerging understanding of its class position. This we see without idealizing the labor movement as it is. Bureaucracy still weighs down rank and file democracy; union leadership is reinforced by a narrow-minded machine of paid officials; in politics, continued attachment to the patronage apparatus of bourgeois parties; in foreign policy, a basic identification and defense of the “bi-partisan” Democratic-Republican line. There is prejudice, there is pettiness, there are superstitions, there is racketeering. Before the labor movement can become what it will become, the instrument for reconstructing society on the basis of full democracy it has a long way to go. Its internal regime must be revamped and its policies reoriented.
Nevertheless, in all our criticism we remember that we are dealing not with a sect; not even with a movement of a hundred thousand like the old Socialist Party. This is a movement of millions. Normally, the changing of their ideas and condition of organization takes place slowly but upon a massive scale. We are witness to a great movement; the consolidation of a class, its emergence onto the political scene; its developing consciousness.
Twenty years ago, the traditions of the labor movement lived on only in a small minority of the working class. American labor made its first mass effort to organize industrially as a class after the First World War; but despite the sweep of its strikes, the greatest in the nation’s history, it was defeated and unionism reduced to impotence in the twenties. Its minority, undefeated in spirit, was able to inspire the rising CIO movement a decade later. The decisive change in the spirit of our times lies in this: unionism is now deeply implanted in the minds of the great majority of our industrial working class, not in the minds of thousands alone but of millions. The creation of a working class consciousness is a long and difficult process, especially in the United States; it is the product of the experiences and traditions of generations, handed down from one to the next. That process is at last under way in American life.
* * *
Footnote
1.
Maritime Unions:



NMU


  43,000




SIU


  44,000




MEBA


    9,000




MMP


    9,000




ARA


    1,000




Total


106,000



2.
When Labor Votes: a Study of Auto Workers, by Arthur Kornhauser, Harold L. Sheppard and Albert J. Mayer, 1956. 352 pages, $5.00. University Books, Inc.
 



Immigration and the United States
edited by Poyntz Tyler
H.W. Wilson Co., 201 pp., $2.00, 1956.
Here is an odd assortment of articles and fragments of articles that have already been published elsewhere. Their source is as wide-ranging as their subject matter. The reader will find comment for and against the McCarran-Walter Act as well as observations on the immigration problem in the early days of the Republic. Articles are reprinted from newspapers and periodicals as different as the New York Journal-American and the Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. Best of all is the format: the thin pocket-sized volume will take up little space on your shelf.
 



Way down in America is the Southern Negro. His economic exploitation and political disfranchisement form the base upon which Southern reaction rules locally and bans social progress nationally. But the Southern Negro is rising; the brittle structure that rests upon his degradation begins to crack and a tremor passes through the country. This is the immediate effect of the fight to end segregation in the South, a struggle which prefigures a shaking-up of U.S. politics, surpassed in recent times only by the consolidation and victory of the CIO.
Consider 1952. The banner of liberalism was limply borne by Adlai Stevenson and John Sparkman; the labor movement rallied enthusiastically behind them. Skeptics who pointed dubiously to the Senator from the white state of Alabama were hastily assured that he was the prototype of emerging Southern liberalism, taking its place in the march of civilization. Through the election campaign and in the years that followed, the mind and spirit of labor-liberalism throbbed in sympathy and harmony with its appointed political leaders.
But abruptly, this slate became obsolete. The combination that seemed so glorious in 1952 had become politically impossible in 1956. Impossible? Yes. Not that ward-heelers and bosses couldn’t rig up some such hodgepodge again, which unions could conceivably support. But only at the cost of an utter debacle. It would prove impossible to rally the voters in the cities, the unionists and minorities who are the organized mass base of American democracy. For 20 years, American politics has moved steadily rightward; and, except for a fleeting few moments, the labor movement has trudged along. Now, for the first time, standard bearers of liberalism come under sustained attack from their followers not because they are too extreme but because they are not radical enough. Stevenson and Sparkman have not changed since the days when they received the plaudits of cheering admirers. What is changing is the mood of the nation. And the most portentous single factor in effectuating this change has been the movement of Southern Negroes for equal rights.
For 4 years Democratic leaders of every faction have strained their nerves to maintain “unity” at all costs in preparation for the 1956 presidential elections. Liberals chatted politely at party gatherings with reactionaries and racists. But this rotten alliance is suddenly torn apart when the victim of racism, overlooked before, stands up to demand his due.
 
NEGROES ARE DEMANDING their full rights as citizens in the South. Not submissively and not pleadingly, but insistently. Their movement has all the characteristics of a profound, ineradicable, deep-seated popular movement. These people are stirred by a yearning for simple justice. But more. They sense that the mood and trends of our time combine to make this the decisive moment for action.
In Montgomery, Alabama, 50,000 Negroes boycott bus lines in a movement supported actively by 10,000, acclaimed nationally and internationally. While this is the most spectacular and perhaps the most effective mass action so far, it is only part of a pattern spreading throughout the South.
In Dallas and Houston, Texas, Negroes try in vain to continue what was started in Montgomery. Those who board buses and take seats in defiance of local segregation laws are arrested; but when a Negro pleads not guilty and makes clear that he is ready to go through a court test, his case is dismissed. It is not the Negro but the local authorities who shrink from the test and so far it has been impossible to bring a legal case to court.
In scores of small communities and big cities, NAACP chapters are formed. They concentrate now on mass petition campaigns requesting that schools be desegregated and Negro pupils admitted. Where they are refused, they institute court suits.
Early in February, a writer for the New Yorker magazine enroute to a national NAACP conference in Atlanta, Georgia, asked his traveling companion. Thurgood Marshall, national NAACP counsel, for a summary of the situation in the South. Marshall couldn’t answer. “That’s what I’m going down to find out,” he remarked, “That’s what the meeting’s about.” But, came the query, isn’t the NAACP leading the movement? In reply, he told this story:
A curious bystander watched a massive parade moving quickly down a broad avenue. As it passed he noticed one straggler dragging up in the rear straining to catch up with the crowd. The onlooker buttonholed the straggler and asked, “Say, what’s going on?” “Don’t stop me,” came the frenzied reply as the laggard shook himself loose, “I’m the leader of that parade and I’ve got to get up front.” That parade leader, Marshall pointed out, is the NAACP.
The NAACP rises to a national membership of 400,000. Of 1,500 mass membership branches, 700 are in the South where it has gained a foothold even in Mississippi. Thus, the movement becomes organized, a symptom that this is not a passing flush of protest but a persistent, permanent campaign. Yet, it is not created and organized by officials above; it wells up from below as the NAACP is transformed from a committee of eminent citizens into a popular mass movement.
“The morale and militancy of local Negro leadership is such,” reports Herbert Hill, NAACP labor secretary in the New Leader, “that spontaneous forms of dynamic action are developed and pressure is for the most vigorous challenging of the Jim Crow system.”
“When I came to Miami in 1943,” recalled Rev. Edward T. Graham, Negro Baptist, “Negroes were not supposed to be downtown or on Miami streets after dark. If a Negro was ever in a white neighborhood, he had a lot of explaining to do. Now a man can go where he wants to.” But they not only “go,” they demonstrate. Last fall, Negroes demonstrated at Sarasota for the use of municipally- owned Lido Beach. In Miami, they organized a mass petition campaign for the use of the municipal golf links.
These are courageous men and women. Some face up to economic reprisals that threaten impoverishment. Others face death. Some are killed. In Mississippi, last year two NAACP leaders who had been rallying Negroes to register and vote were shot and killed; a third was critically wounded. In January, shot gun blasts were fired into the home of Rev. Hinton in South Carolina, a man who had been leading local protests against school segregation. In Columbus, Georgia, Dr. Thomas Brewer who had led the movement which tested the right of Negroes to vote in the Democratic primaries was shot by a white tenant in his building. In Montgomery, the homes of boycott leaders were bombed. An NAACP member in the Deep South risks far more than, say, an active Communist Party member in the North. But the movement goes on. “Marshall Says NAACP May Go Underground” reads the front page headline of the Pittsburgh Courier on March 17, reporting that laws enacted by five Southern states aimed to drive the NAACP out of existence. To the New Yorker reporter, Marshall explained that many NAACP representatives do not send in written reports. “Some are leery about putting everything they know on paper. And when they phone, and hear clicking on the line all the time, they get leery about that too. I can’t blame them. It’s not safe to be an NAACP leader in some parts of the South today.”
When the murder of Brewer was announced at the sessions of the NAACP conference in Atlanta, a delegate from Bessemer, Alabama, said, “Everybody is armed there now, white and black both.” And a Negro woman NAACP leader in Alabama told reporters that she would start to carry a gun or get out of the state. Roy Wilkins, obviously anxious to calm his own followers lest their protest go beyond assigned limits, told reporters, “We will consider it a private dispute. We certainly wouldn’t want you people to headline it as a racial killing.”
In Orangeburg, South Carolina, site of the all-Negro State College, students, Negro students it should be remembered, hung in effigy the figure of white state representative Jerry Hughes, who pushed through the state legislature a law making it illegal for state, county, or municipal employees of the Democratic state of South Carolina to belong to the NAACP. Hughes represents (shall we say) the city of Orangeburg. Negro students are boycotting dining halls, demanding the end of milk and bread purchases from local merchants who support White Citizens Councils. They insist that College President Banner C. Turner speak out in support of integrated schools; when he evades and squirms at student-faculty meetings, they pound their feet and refuse to let him continue. When the state legislature retaliated by dispatching a committee to investigate “communism” in the university, students replied by a four- day student strike.
In Houston, Texas, 200 Negroes picket outside the all-Negro university protesting the appearance of Governor Shivers as a speaker. Outside the South, such an incident would hardly appear remarkable. But here it is an event. This group of Negroes feels ready for a mass demonstration in Southland. That alone expresses the turn in historical situation. And a demonstration against whom? Against the white governor of their own state. And their action goes off successfully, not only without reprisals from organized whites, but without the intervention of the state government. No police and no jails.
Scarcely more than a generation ago, the Southern Negro was literally whipped and terrorized like a cheap work animal. Now he demands not a civilizing tinsel on the chains of degradation, but nothing less than full rights. He challenges white supremacy and the political and social structure erected upon it. The Negro movement exudes self-confidence, a mood that is activated by the very air and spirit of the times. The South which yesterday was a united and closed world of white enemies, is now divided in itself and the Negro moves out for equality.
Here, in the heartland of the South, respect, deference, and humility before white rulers and white supremacy is disintegrating. Negroes fight as equals for equal rights. Although the struggle is only taking form, slowly enlisting wider sections of the population, the moral struggle of Negroes for equality has already been won; for they have affirmed it in action and wrested it from the ruling classes by their deeds. The Southern Negro will never again be reduced to the status of a pariah in political and social life. He emerges in combat into a key place in the politics of the South and thereby profoundly alters the political life of the whole nation.
Government and economy in the South are in the grip of white supremacists and segregationists; they dominate the state legislatures and executive chambers; they man the police force; they don judicial robes and run the courts. They own the textile mills, the tobacco factories. They own big cotton, tobacco and sugar plantations and processing plants. They own the Democratic party. They evict tenants and sharecroppers who try to exercise elementary democratic rights. In one South Carolina county alone 30 families were thrown out of their sharecropping homes. Foreclosure, the denial of crop loans are powerful pressures against tenants and croppers never out of debt. In 1950, the percentage of farmers who were tenants in five southern states was as follows: Alabama, 41.4 per cent; Georgia, 42.8 per cent; Louisiana, 39.6 per cent; Mississippi, 51.6 per cent; South Carolina, 45.3 per cent.
Here are millions of families, Negro in their majority, never out of debt, always needing loans and advances who are at the mercy of the planters.
In the face of what would appear to be an overwhelming force, a combination of economic and political power that would seem invincible, the Negro demands democracy. What gives him the courage to begin and the stamina to persist in what appears, at first glance, an unequal struggle?
It is not only that the Negro has slowly and painfully won a position in society, that the inevitable encroachment of industrialism and civilization upon the Southern way of life has slowly created a place for the Negro; that sections have been educated, organized, and wrested a higher standard of living. Above all, they know they are moving with history; that a powerful and progressive movement of labor spreads through the nation and sympathizes with their struggles; that the moral feeling of the country and of the world is with them; that the international position of the United States and its world reputation weigh against the racists. They know that they are not alone but that they fight together with millions of others in their country and with tens, hundreds of millions throughout the world for freedom: at home for democracy, abroad for freedom from imperialist domination.
According to one observer, Reverend Martin Luther King told a mass meeting of Montgomery boycotters, “You know, whether we want to be or not, we are caught in a great moment of history ... It is bigger than Montgomery ... The vast majority of people of the world are colored ... Up until four or five years ago, most of the one and one-quarter billion colored peoples were exploited by empires of the West, in India, China, Africa. Today, many are free and the rest are on the road. We are part of that great movement.”
Rooted in a worldwide surge for emancipation, the movement is irrepressible. The Southern Negro who moves into action under the impact of world events and the rise of the labor movement shakes national liberalism out of its lethargy. Yesterday, the Negro was led and stirred by the rise of a labor movement. Today, he prods the labor movement forward pushing it inevitably into collision with their common enemy.
A fight begins for the end of segregation in schools. But instantly, the broad question of democracy arises. The Negro must defend the right of the NAACP to exist, and his right to belong to it. He must intensify his drive to win political rights and to make his weight felt in government and in politics. But the whole South ern system, the class rule of white planters, merchants, and capitalists rests directly upon the disfranchisement of the mass of millions of Southern Negroes and to a lesser degree upon the disfranchisement of white workers. What is challenged is not merely segregation in schools, not even the oppression of Negroes in general but, the whole Southern socialsystem and the nature of its social and political rule.
The Negro challenge to the dominance of Southern reaction is already recorded in the struggle for the right to vote. According to Herbert Hill, 700,000 Negroes were registered voters in the South in 1948; in 1952, this figure rose to 1,300,000. Their break through is revealed in some state figures:



In South Carolina


 


35,000 voters in 1946;


 


1952: 130,000




In Florida


40,000 voters in 1948;


1956: 120,000




In Louisiana


60,000 voters in 1948;


1956: 150,000




In Arkansas


85,000 voted in 1952




In North Carolina


55,000 voters in 1948;


 


1952: 100,000



This is only the beginning. There are 6,000,000 potential voters among Southern Negroes. Southern reaction is based on their disfranchisement. It required only 100,848 votes for Mr. Eastland to return in 1954 as Senator from Mississippi, a state with a population of 2,100,000. To elect Senator Lehman from New York required 2,630,000, approximately as many voters as the whole population of Mississippi. But that is not the full story. It required over 17 per cent of the New York population to send a Senator in an election in which 36 per cent voted. But Eastland’s position is based on the votes of less than 5 per cent of the people of his own state. It is on such a thin base that Southern rule is perched. The Negro struggle against segregation, inseparably connected with a struggle to expand democracy, in fact to achieve it, threatens this whole system of narrow rule.
In 1943, the United Auto Workers published a study entitled, Labor’s Stake in Abolishing the Poll Tax. At that time, 8 states had a poll tax. But the Negro is barred from voting, not principally by the tax, but by intimidation and violence; hence, the UAW report presents a picture, accurate in essentials, despite the inevitable changes in detail after 12 years. In sum: 12 per cent of the population voted in the poll tax states in 1936; 44 per cent, in the non-poll tax states.
The following table, based upon UAW figures, gives a state by state survey:



Disfranchisement in the South




 
State


 


 
Senator


 


 
Year


 


Votes received


Voters disfranchised 1940




White


Negro




Alabama


Bankhead
Hill


1942
  ’38


     69,000
   131,000


   463,000


521,000




Arkansas


Caraway
McClellan


  ’38
  ’42


   137,000
     99,000


   426,000


271,000




Georgia


George
Russell


  ’38
  ’42


     70,000
     62,000


   558,000


581,000




Mississippi


Bilbo
Eastland


  ’40
  ’42


   143,000
     51,000


   238,000


564,000




S. Carolina


Smith
Maybank


  ’38
  ’42


     46,000
     23,000


   326,000


384,000




Tennessee


McKellar
Stewart


  ’40
  ’42


   417,000
   160,000


   568,000


309,000




Texas


Connally
O’Daniel


  ’40
  ’42


1,038,000
   274,627


1,458,000


541,000




Virginia


Glass


  ’42


     87,000


   574,000


364,000



More voters were excluded from the polls than those who voted for the winning candidate. Even more pertinent to our subject, in most cases the winner received a smaller vote than the number of Negroes alone barred from the polls.
Thirteen Southern states elect 26 Senators and 120 Representatives. This alone gives them impressive power in a Senate of 96 and a House of 435. But mere arithmetic hardly tells the full story. In 1954, the Democrats won 49 Senate seats, a narrow majority which permitted them to organize and dominate all its committees. The South, by itself has a majority inside the Democratic caucus. (26 out of 49). And in the House (252 Democrats to 203 Republicans), the South again controls the Democratic caucus (120 out of 232). And so, after labor’s "victory” in the ‘54 elections, the South dictates the choice of Speaker of the House (Rayburn of Texas); imposes its choice as majority leader in the Senate (Johnson of Texas); dominates party committees and decides the party’s real line in everyday affairs. Not every Southern congressman is equally tied to the racist bloc, only 100 signed the segregationists manifesto; but the figure of a predominant Southern conservatism emerges nevertheless.
That is not all. Consider the so-called customs and traditions of Congress. Chairmanships and prize committee seats are awarded by “seniority.” We only just witnessed the grotesque elevation of Eastland to chairmanship of the Senate Judiciary Committee. The Supreme Court has ruled segregation unconstitutional; Eastland, a Mississippi cotton plantation owner, who arouses and organizes resistance to its decision, now occupies a strategic position to block civil rights legislations. Why? He is senior member of the majority party. And how did he accumulate seniority? In the Democratic South the election of white Democrats is guaranteed by guns and clubs. Thus, Mississippi terror reaches into the Senate chambers to decide what shall be lawful.
 
DISCRIMINATION EXISTS in one degree or another everywhere, North and South. Wherever it persists, it is pernicious and detestable, and must be eradicated. But in the South it is erected into a code of law imposed and enforced by the power of government.
In the South governmental power itself is erected upon segregation; social rule depends upon maintaining the Negroes’ legal disabilities and upon their forcible exclusion from political life. Adlai Stevenson, in a futile effort to dodge the fight for democracy in the South, levels a finger at anti-Negro riots in his own Chicago. Does he contend that the rule of the Democratic Party in his state depends upon Jim Crow? Hardly. But it does in Mississippi and Alabama. The representatives of Southern planters and mill owners whose support Stevenson seeks, occupy seats in Congress only because the Negro cannot occupy unsegregated seats in buses, schools and polling booths. Grant the Negro lull equality and they fade away. This is true nowhere, but in the South.
 
NEGROES ARE CONFIDENT of success. “Many years ago, we asked for school equalization,” said Dr. C. J. Gilliam an NAACP leader in Baton Rouge to Look magazine reporter Carl Rowan, “Then we couldn’t get it. Now, we don’t want it. We want nothing less than total integration in all facets of American life – and we won’t stop until we get it.” Rowan, reporter for Look magazine said “I found Negroes confident of victory.”
And white racism? The mood is quite different.
Sam J. Ervin, Senator from North Carolina, writing on The Case for Segregation in Look magazine cringes before national opinion. “Southerners of both races,” says he, “practise racial segregation in those areas of life which are essentially social in nature. There is little other racial segregation in the South.” He hardly speaks like a man convinced of the righteousness of his cause. By denying the evident fact of segregation in all spheres of life, he becomes apologetic. He lies. A bold lie can inflame a movement, but not a shamefaced lie. By shrinking from a defense of segregation in general, he concedes, in effect, that it is not defensible – in politics, on buses and trains, on the job.
And why is he for segregation? “The reasons for my belief in social segregation based upon race are simple. They do not rest on any theory of racial superiority or racial inferiority.” He just has a feeling that segregation is the natural way of life of humans and animals.
This man signed the Manifesto of Southern Congressmen; but he has neither the courage, confidence or conviction to proclaim the superiority of the white race. When Southern reaction could reach into the lofty realms of white superiority, it might dream of standing on solid moral ground; pure civilization stood with rope and faggot against the pressures of savagery. But now, its security has vanished. It stands over an empty pit. Here, a Senator who signs the Southern call to action is ashamed to defend racial superiority before the nation’s public.
Contrast the spirit of militant U.S. Negroes; they have no hundred Congressmen to sound the alarm; they control no governments; they run no political parties. Yet, every word and action trumpet: “We are right; you are wrong.” When one side radiates rectitude and the other is driven to shamefaced lies –  (Southern reaction still clings to the ludicrous claim that Negroes want segregation) the outcome of the struggle is determined.
Look at racist leader Senator James O. Eastland of Mississippi. Proudly and firmly he stands for the purity of America and its white man. In Congress he takes his position uncompromisingly against the liberalization of the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act. He will, if he can, preserve the South white, American, undefiled by modern civilization or other foreignisms. The man however, owns 4,000 acres of good Southern farmland: cotton, oats, soybeans, and corn. Under terms of the Refugee Relief Act he has already settled a Hungarian family on his land as share croppers and seeks to bring in another of Russian nationality. The call of humanity, liberalism, democracy, internationalism find no echo in his soul. But to the appeal of sordid economic gain he quivers in sympathy. If he only troubled himself to conceal the hypocrisy, he would show a certain respect for public opinion. This way it is too coarse, too crass. Such is the leading champion of the Southern cause.
Unlike the Negro, who is aware that his cause is spurred on by peoples the world over, the representatives of Southern reaction feel the glance of contempt, if not from a unanimous population, at least from that section of the population which is politically active and thinking. Thus, the “fear” that pervades the South, meaning the racist, white South. This “fear” is nothing less than the realization that national and world opinion stands against prevailing relations in the South and that these are on the verge of a momentous change.
Take for example, the careful admonitions of Louisiana Senator Allen J. Ellender. In radio address on March 17, he told his constituents, “What the South must avoid at all costs is violence, lawlessness, hatred, and bloodshed. The outside agitators who seek the subjugation of both white and Negro races in the South are hovering like greedy vultures for the time when racial antagonisms lead to chaos ths breakdown of governmental authority, and general lawlessness. If this condition should occur, then all our people could look forward to would be a reputation of the reconstruction regimes which brought the South only oppression and self-seeking exploitation.” (Irresistible habit compels him to pose as protector of the Negro, but his plight consists in this: everyone laughs. So we will not take it seriously.)
Nor can one take seriously his comic opera warnings of the impositions of “reconstruction” regimes upon the South. A hundred years after the Civil War, the social scene has altered. When Ellender and the narrow class stratum he represents are driven out of office and democracy extended to the South, they will be replaced by governments which rest not upon Northern bayonets but upon Southern masses. The aim of the rising movement in the South is to free the land from the domination and rule of an anachronistic class whose power is waning.
Southern reaction balances itself delicately in national politics and Ellender realizes that he can do nothing drastic to quell the Negro movement. The reconstruction bogey is a device for frightening his extremist followers from demanding of him what he cannot deliver. Not reconstruction by military rule from without, but the free play of social forces within the South – there is the doom of Ellender.
In a democracy, where issues are finally decided by the will of millions, the mood of contesting forces is crucial. A rising determination and confidence on one side; spiritual diffidence on the other is at last transmitted to the masses. At such times we say, the “mood” of the nation is changing. Such a change, for example began in 1929. Through the twenties, Republican “normalcy” prevailed; it was an era of conservatism, of open domination by big business, a “chicken in every pot,” permanent prosperity and continued progress through the open domination of big business. Even in prosperity, the labor movement faltered, the AFL declined, liberalism declined, progressivism vanished. But the crisis changed everything; big business lost its own self-confidence in the crash and the mass of people came out from under the spell. The spiritual domination of the capitalist class was and remains mortally stricken. Even now, while Americans are ready to support capitalism, they reject whatever appears as the direct rule of capitalists. The mood of America, yes, even powerful capitalist America, changed. Just such a change of mood, in the South, is foreshadowed in the struggle against segregation.
It is a change that threatens to overwhelm Southern reaction.
But, if racism cannot hide the fact that even the South feels that its cause is morally rotten, can it perhaps hold on by violence bolstered by dilatory legalisms?
For a hundred years, the exploited mass of Southern Negroes has been kept in check by open violence and legal manipulation. The doom of the Southern system can be read in this fact: its room for juridical maneuver has been drastically curtailed while the resort to violence is ultimately hopeless. This is not to say that all matters will be settled peacefully and painlessly. Violence, or the imminence of it, remains as a threat, for example, to the Negro in Mississippi who wants to vote. The situation teeters constantly on the edge of violence precisely because a decaying ruling clique may be driven to desperate measures. In the end, however, it is futile. The Southern Negro probes for weak spots in racism and finds them. Any attempt to repress this movement by terror would succeed only in unleashing a nationwide wave of revulsion and indignation.
A call for sending Federal troops to the South has already been voiced, conjuring up visions of the deposition of local governments by military rule. Rule from the outside has always tended to unite the local population against the occupier. But it can hardly ever come to this. A hundred devices are available to an aroused national democracy short of military occupation: federal laws and their simple enforcement; arrests of those who prevent citizens from voting; in sum, a program to make acts of discrimination, segregation, and antidemocracy a criminal federal offense. The days of Civil War and Reconstruction are over and with it the impenetrable unity of white supremacy. Like the nation, the South is divided in itself: unions against employers; tenant against landlord; city against farm; reactionaries, middle-roaders, liberals. So far, these antagonisms have not been forced to the fore in the course of the Negro struggle. But this seems clear: if it comes to an open struggle between a united national democracy and Southern reaction, there will be no united South.
Law offers as little refuge as violence for the legal climate has become dark and cloudy for them. Seventy years ago, planters ran the South, while outright tools of Big Business ran the country. Racism took shelter under Supreme Court decisions which perpetrated Jim Crow despite the 14th and 15th amendments. Now, there is a new “legality” and a new Supreme Court decision which undermine racism and stimulate the struggle for equality.
Nevertheless, for generations, the South held the Negro in bondage, exploited his cheap labor and robbed his political rights. If all that was possible despite the Constitution, perhaps it is still possible despite the Supreme Court. Such seems the illusory hope of Southern racism, as for example, Senator Ervin:
“The Constitution in other words does not require integration, it merely forbids discrimination. It does not forbid such segregation which occurs as the result of voluntary action. It merely forbids the use of government power to enforce segregation.” Thus: one line of maneuvering is indicated. And he concludes literariously, “Thomas Carlyle said: ‘Our main business is not to see what lies dimly in the distance, but to do what lies clearly at hand.’ I believe, as he, that it is best to solve today’s problems today and to leave tomorrow’s problems to tomorrow.” Put off equality for another hundred years? Is it possible? If everything depended upon law and law alone, yes. From that viewpoint the racist view is not totally illusory. Stave it off five years; ten years; fifteen. Perhaps the world will change: perhaps the nation will change; perhaps the labor movement will decline; perhaps ... who knows what? The factors that favor the Negro struggle are not etched in eternity. Just as reaction gives way before labor and democracy, so, alas, human freedom is sometimes forced back. The hope of Southern reaction lies in delay, in awaiting the unknown. The Negro movement on the other hand rejects “moderation” and “gradualism,” fully aware that the time is ripe to strike mortal blows at Southern racism and perhaps exorcise it forever.
The possibility of delay lies in the very nature of the Supreme Court decision. Remember that no law has been passed to make segregation a criminal offense. And thus far, no one in authority pants impatiently for such a law.
Fred Rodell, Professor of Law at Yale University explains what this means in the April 3, issue of Look magazine. “Without a criminal statute, desegregation has no teeth – save only that a state official can be jailed or fined for contempt of court if he disobeys an order specifically and personally directed against him. Without more and more Supreme Court decisions, the South can go on using all manner of devices that get around the letter of the original ruling until each in its slow turn is forbidden.” To end segregation merely under the terms of the Court ruling would take decades. There are 10,000 school boards in the defiant states, he points out. In each county Negroes would have to press for admission, in the face of local intimidation from their landlord. They would have to appeal to the Court against local boards, then for contempt citations, and then? Years pass. The child who appealed for admission to elementary school becomes a man while the legal machinery creaks on. He grows old and dies, segregated as ever.
But all that is speculative, for the fight cannot be limited to “law.”
The Court decision gave an impulse to the struggle for Negro rights, but did not create it. Quite the contrary. It would be more correct to say that the struggle created the decision: the minds of the eminent justices were not molded by a close scrutiny of old law journals. They overruled their predecessors who had sanctioned Jim Crow in the schools because the struggle of Negroes had pushed through into their consciousness. In the United States, the Negro was not quiet; during the war he had extracted an FEPC by a threat to march on Washington; and now, the whole world talked of Jim Crow. While America postured in the world as the champion of liberty, millions of newly freed colored colonial peoples knew that the American Negro remained legally oppressed.
The decision, prompted by the struggles of the past, becomes in turn the starting point for an intensified struggle. In the same way, section 7A of the NRA and the Wagner Act, concessions to rising demands of labor, stimulated it to new demands. The parallel is very close. Section 7A did not organize a single union; it established the right to organize but set no criminal penalties for violating this right. A cumbersome machinery was erected: appeals to Labor Boards; appeals to the courts to enforce the decisions of Labor Boards. Where employers resisted Board decisions, cases dragged on for months, for years. One case, against Weirton Steel, finally reached a weary conclusion some ten years after it had been begun; by then, the union was dead. The NRA was dubbed the “National Run Around.” The Wagner Act symbolized the new mood of the country; the breakdown of the morale of open shopism and the rising confidence of the workingclass. Nevertheless, in the end, the legal logjam was broken, not in the courts but in the class struggle, as unionism won its decisive victories in sit-down strikes and on picket lines.
The Supreme Court decision does not in itself desegregate a single school. It puts the question in a new legal framework and prepares a thousand court cases. But equality can become a reality, the decision can be enforced only by unremitting pressure from below.
The issue then will not be resolved within the sedate walls of courtrooms, it will be fought out in politics. In Raleigh, North Carolina, 125 delegates at a state-wide NAACP conference mapped out a campaign to register and vote. A Negro weekly in Durham editorialized: “The job of defeating those who would deny Negroes the full right to democracy can only be done at the ballot box ..." But to bring these ballots to the Southern box, to have them counted, and to assure that governments will be based upon their will ... that struggle will shake up the whole nation. It is already doing that.
 
AS THE SURGE OF NEGRO STRUGGLE widens, Herbert Hill notices, “An aspect of these developments that has ominous implications is that, by and large, the Negro has so far fought this battle alone ... With very rare and isolated exceptions, white institutions and individuals have not come forward to join in the fight – even though now the Negro who demands his rights is acting within the law and the whites who insist on segregation have declared themselves outside the law. Where are the responsible and moral white people?” He might properly pinpoint his query: where is the labor movement?
Leadership in the fight for democracy in the South has momentarily passed out of the hands of the labor movement. In a certain sense the Negro does fight alone; but he is not isolated ... it would be impossible otherwise to account for the high morale and determination of his struggle. It was the rise of mass unionism that paved the way for the big advance of the Negro struggle; in return, it is the Negro who paves the wav for the next big advance by labor.
It was behind the banner of unionism that Negroes last fought the big battle for equal rights. As the CIO penetrated major industrial centers where Negroes worked by the tens of thousands – auto, steel, rubber, oil, packinghouse, racial barriers were torn down; Negroes poured into the labor movement with equal union rights; they won job security; they raised their standard of living; they became union leaders, trained and able. A dent was made in the prejudice of millions as white workers and Negroes joined in united class action as the CIO demanded equal rights for Negroes and condemned the poll tax. Negro and white steel workers marched together through the streets of Birmingham and in open defiance of local segregation ordinances sat together in the same hall to organize their union. It was a union leader, A. Phillip Randolph, president of the Sleeping Car Porters, who emerged as one of the leading spokesmen for the Negro people and led the March on Washington movement. The CIO “preempted” the struggle for Negro rights. In 1947, Rev. Horace White, Detroit Negro minister, commented, “The CIO has usurped moral leadership in the [Negro] community ... Sadly, I must admit, the Protestant Church gives no moral leadership in Detroit.”
Men like R.A. Nixon, one of the leaders of the Montgomery bus boycott, were hard at work. He became president of a Sleeping Car Porters local. In his spare time, he organized Negro building trades and clothing workers. He became an active member of the NAACP and organized a pressure campaign to force election officials to place Negroes on Alabama’s voting lists. His name has shot into national prominence. There are scores, hundreds like him all over the South; men reared in the labor movement ready to give leadership in the struggle for equality.
But the labor movement, after its initial burst forward, bogged down. It lost momentum, not only in the struggle for Negro rights, but in the struggle for democracy in general. First, the war; the unions fought their own battles less, cooperated with the government more and shunned all conflict. Then, the progressive section of the labor movement, above all, the CIO, remained a minority of the organized working class as conservative sections of the AFL moved in competition with it. Millions came off the farms and into the factories for the first time.
Now there is a united labor movement and in their unity AFL and CIO prepare to root out discrimination where it has taken hold in the unions. At the same time, it meets a strongly entrenched inner foe: organized racketeering and begins a campaign to break its hold. The new federation is preoccupied with its own internal revamping, preparing itself to lead ... perhaps tomorrow. But the struggle over the Supreme Court decision erupts today and the Negroes begin pressing hard. The labor movement which should be the spearhead, the rallying fighting center, confines itself to declarations of solidarity, moral support, and counteracting the agitation of racists in southern locals.
The most stubborn obstacle in the path of unionism has been its own political policy. In general, labor is paralyzed by its attachment to the Democratic Party. In particular, it is blocked in Congress by a Republican- Dixiecrat majority. Let us for the moment put all “prejudices” in favor of a labor party aside. Even within the framework of bourgeois politics, it would be simple common sense for the labor movement to insist that the liberals whom it supports break with the Southern reactionaries. But it has never risen to this elementary demand. Labor gives all for unity with liberal Democrats; liberal Democrats hold tightly to Southern reactionaries; and Southern reaction combines with conservatism generally to knife labor.
Negroes are intimidated in the South? So are labor organizers. Unionists are beaten by thugs or jailed by police in the South as a matter of routine.
In 1953, Louisiana sugar cane plantation workers struck during the harvest season. In October, after they had been on strike for 60 days, a state court issued a sweeping injunction at the behest of plantation owners, that made virtually all strike activity illegal. Two years later, the union’s appeal reached the U.S. Supreme Court and lo! the state court was reversed; the injunction set aside. Regrettably, in that two years, the strike had been broken and the local union wiped out.
The legal victory was of some interest but hardly oversignificant to the plantation workers who were driven out of the area or to those who remain at a wage of 41½ cents per hour, the legal minimum set by the Secretary of Agriculture.
The labor movement protests. Its publicists pen indignant editorials and news releases which are privately printed in its own press. Telegrams and long distance phone calls pour in to the Attorney General’s office demanding federal intervention. But nobody listens; it is soon forgotten. With such contempt an organized body of 15,000,000 workers is shrugged off ... 15 million! almost as many organized trade unionists as there are Negroes. The union is ignored but not the Negro. Why? And when injustices fly thick and fast, where are the Democratic liberals? Busy with other things. It never occurs to union leaders to put it plainly and simply: we insist that you speak up in public and begin a fight in “our” party to rid it of the influence of Southern reactionaries.
But the Negro movement shows no such diffidence. Sensing its new power, it insists upon a strong and clear stand against the racists; no catering to reactionary pressure, no weasel words. Behind this insistence lies a threat, a threat that the compromiser will find himself deserted. If the Negro rejects compromise with Southern reaction, the labor movement can do no less. Stevenson felt the whip of labor hostility from George Meany. Significantly, it was not a complaint that he had ignored labor’s big struggles: Westinghouse, Perfect Circle, Florida hotels, Kohler; rather, it came as an attack for compromising the struggle for democracy in the South. Now, the mass unions can support another compromise between New Dealers and Slave Dealers only at the risk of an unprecedented political split with their own Negro membership.
But there are limits. Like labor, the Negro is confined to the two major parties. Yet, no one can claim that he is indefinitely or permanently attached to them. In the heat of the fight, Adam Clayton Powell does not hesitate to talk of a new party if neither of the others will fight for democracy. He is a man whose slogans come and go. The fact remains that the Negro, fighting for equality in the South, pushes to free American politics from the doldrums where it has been becalmed for 20 years. That is its contribution to the fight for democracy. It is no small thing.
 
THE NEGRO STRUGGLE reminds labor of everything that it has left undone. For one thing, it has left the rule of Southern reaction fundamentally intact. The union movement has been dissuaded from its clear duty to itself and to the nation by simple homilies: the lesser evil; half a loaf is better than none; moderation and evolution. Now, the Negro too, is pressed to be modest and retiring in the name of “gradualism.” Gradualism and moderation, how felicitous a thought in America, the land of the happy middle class. It is the ideal solution for a vexatious difficulty. Are we not all moderates except for “extremists”?
Yet, gentle and genteel liberals are astonished that the Negro movement, all its wings, rejects moderation; and not because they are extremists. The NAACP, respectably and cautiously led; the churches, calling for prayer; pacifists, unionists heap a unanimous ridicule upon the exponents of gradualism, sparing not President Eisenhower and his erstwhile chief rival, Adlai Stevenson. Clearly the issue cannot be “gradualism vs. extremism” but something else. Hear James Reston, New York Times columnist. Eisenhower, said he, “has a vast body of moderate opinion working with him, but the extremists who want ‘enforcement’ and those who want ‘nullification’ are better organized than the moderates ...” The Negro becomes an extremist because he insists upon “enforcement”; meanwhile, “moderation” is counterposed to enforcement. (One side, in the service of human freedom, insists upon application of the Constitution; the other, in the name of racist tyranny, demands that it be set aside. It requires a finely developed sense of aloof impartiality to dismiss both as “extremists.”)
Enforcement requires human action; politicians must do something: pass laws, see that they are executed, if necessary, jail those who disobey –  a fate ordinarily dispensed without qualm to ordinary criminals, Communists, alimony shirkers, and pickets. It requires that an Eastland be repudiated and Montgomery boycotters be encouraged. But “gradualism” is far more lenient. It simply describes the slow accumulation of social forces, the decade and century long evolution in opinion, standard of living, intangible advances, unnoticed setbacks – all of which takes place autonomously, virtually independent of conscious human will. Above all, gradualism makes no demands upon politicians; it doesn’t ask for patronage; nor does it demand that they take a stand.
Liberal gradualists are dismayed by the struggle for equality. But this is not to say that they oppose the trend to equality. Quite the contrary. They undoubtedly welcome it. Some, perhaps, only in private. After all, they are humane, civilized and ... realists. But why, they bemoan, force us to act and press us to repudiate party colleagues like Eastland and the signers of the Southern Manifesto whose votes we have always appreciated. There is a subtle difference, too, between the gradualism of the Southern liberal and that of his Northern brother.
Occasionally, the racist talks of "gradualism” but exclusively for national consumption. On home ground, he demands not the gradual advance of Negro rights but active resistance to it. But the Southern liberal is thinking of something else. Here, where tradition, public opinion, law, and plain physical force hold the Negro in bondage, "gradualism” becomes the refuge for those who cannot summon the courage to fight for their convictions in a hostile environment. Obey the Supreme Court, uphold the law, gradualism, moderation ... this is their timid stand against aggressive reaction. The gradualism of the Southern liberal will not give active aid to the Negro struggle. But one thing is already certain; the Negro will not be disoriented by it. At any rate, it represents a deep fissure in the white wall of racist unity.
But the North? Here racism is not elevated into ruling government and liberalism dominates. It should be easy to stand up for democracy among democrats. Yet, Northern liberalism finds it difficult. Here, one can arouse popular indignation, rally support for the Southern fighters, protest, demand Federal laws, demand democracy in the South. In the North, in sum, the call for gradualism and moderation weakens and disorients not the racists but the fight for democracy. And why? Only because the Democratic party remains a party of New Dealers united with Slave Dealers and liberals have been determined to keep it so.
 
DEMOCRACY IS CHALLENGING Southern reaction. The elements of the challenge have been accumulating, gradually, for generations, until the issue is at last posed: will the old rule be deposed or can it resist this assault until the surge for democracy recedes? This question cannot be settled “gradually.” First, the fight for democracy must be won; then reaction and racism can be slowly and gradually liquidated. Or, the Negroes can be defeated and their fight for democracy demoralized.
Everything combines now to the advantage of those who demand a change: the labor movement is strong, united and overwhelmingly in solidarity with the Negro; Southern reaction is under pressure; the constitutional foundations of Jim Crow have been undermined; the cold war relaxes and attention can be focused on the inner battle for democracy; the United States is under irresistible pressure from the newly free, colored peoples of the world. Everything is ready and ripe for the final blows. The Negro seizes the initiative and brushes aside those liberals who call upon him to act with restraint. His public contempt for false compromise has thrown liberalism off balance. Yesterday, liberals and labor were content to wait for the self-liquidation of the Republican regime maintaining unity in the Democratic party with the Southern reaction. But now, the Negro will not permit it and this is the rejuvenating force in American politics.
 



Review And Reflection
by Cyrus S. Ching
Forbes Pub. Co. 204 pp.$3.95
Cyrus Ching was labor relations director for the Boston Elevated Co. and then the United States Rubber Co. before becoming Federal Mediator. In 1951, during labor’s walkout from all war boards, he served as chairman of the Wage Stabilization Board; during the 1952 steel strike he was director of the Federal Mediation Service.
In his book of discursive reminiscences, Review and Reflection, he tells of the time he and a co-thinker addressed the employers Metal Trades Council in 1920, suggesting the establishment of joint worker-management plant committees. “We did not suggest anything so ‘radical’ as unionization of the plants.” When they had been finished, the chairman, a they had finished, the chairman, a prominent industrialist, commented, “Gentlemen, you have just heard two talks on Bolshevism. We will now proceed with the business of the meeting.”
Such an attitude, he deplores. His homely philosophy belongs to the “There’s a lot to be said on both sides” school; and he says it. He stands firmly for the happy medium applying himself to the Taft-Hartley law, as follows: “I do not think the law is half as good as industry thinks it is and I do not think it is half as bad as labor says it is.” He looks forward to an era of peaceful understanding between enlightened management and labor; an attitude publicly shared by most labor officials but still unable to avoid big strikes and political struggles over all decisive matters.
The book is of occasional interest for its sidelight stories of important events. The UAW gets credit for the defense of wage levels during the 1951 fight over wage freeze.
“I realize,” he writes, “that the reason this ‘escalator’ principle was approved was that it had been written into the big automobile industry contracts, and apparently the emergency was not considered great enough for the government to override existing contracts.”
Because he is a mild man who hates to make a categoric statement when an ambiguous one will serve as well, his testimony on the question of “emergency” strikes is significant.
“Although there is a terrific amount of shouting about the ‘grave’ problem of ‘national emergency’ strikes and how to handle them, I don’t think this country, as a whole, ever really suffered seriously as a result of a strike, for the last 50 years ... A good case can be made for the statement that the nation has never really suffered seriously from a strike. I am not ignoring the impact of strikes on certain of our industries and communities but there have been few, if any, real national emergencies resulting from labor-management conflicts.”
 



Social Responsibilities of Organized Labor
by James A. Fitch
1957. Harper. 237 pp. $3.50
This volume is part of a series published by the Federal Council of Churches, a project headed by F. Ernest Johnson who writes the introduction. As he sees it, the book attempts “an appraisal [of the labor movement] by the conscience of the community in accord with the requirements of social justice.” The author, John A. Fitch, who wrote The Steel Worker in 1910, was a sympathizer of early steel unionism, a rare thing in those days. He begins by defining social responsibility from the standpoint of religion; consequently, this work illustrates the state of mind of the liberal pro-labor churchman, revealing his attitude toward unionism at a time when it is no longer a feeble force fighting defensively for a precariously held position but a permanently established social power. As the text indicates, it is an attitude based in part upon an exaggeration of this power: “it is ... patent,” writes Mr. Johnson, “that the strength of organized labor in many key industries has now reached approximate equality with management in terms of bargaining power.”
Mr. Fitch has set himself a two-fold task, to present organized labor to the churchgoer and to confront labor with its social responsibilities. He portrays labor’s goals, its activities, its program in a light of unvarying sympathy, ever careful to prevent criticism from implying hostility or from stimulating it in his readers. Where he feels obliged to criticize, he goes out of his way to dissociate his views from labor’s enemies.
But now that unions are established and influential, he feels free to admonish them to face up to their responsibilities, as he sees them. And he is ready, in mild fashion, even to question some of their hotly held opinions.
He describes the extent of racketeering in some detail and is happy to record the labor movement’s drive to eradicate it; he criticizes restrictions upon democracy in many unions. In this, he finds supporters inside the labor movement.
He deplores the use of force on picket lines as undemocratic although he understands that strikers are subjected to terrible provocations. He thinks, too, that in the interest of democracy labor ought voluntarily to discard the union shop and other forms of compulsory union membership. But he opposes any restrictions by law on the union shop and has no sympathy for the motives of those who campaign for “right to work” laws, understanding their anti-union bias. Perhaps, he says too, it is time for the “community” to be represented at the bargaining table not, however, “in its political role, i.e., as the state” but “in their economic capacity as consumers.” These opinions are inseparably linked to another; he is convinced that we live now in an era of labor-management harmony in which the fears that motivate the unions (as in their insistence upon the union shop) are an obsolete relic of the outlived past when unions were broken by government intervention and employers violence.
In these respects, Mr. Fitch’s advice misses the point. The antagonisms between capital and labor have been restrained but not eliminated. Yet his book is evidence of the challenge to labor. By its friends and by its enemies unionism is viewed as a vast social power in national life. How does it intend to apply that power? Mr. Fitch is eager to underline that question. At one time the labor movement was content to pass from one minor task to the next oblivious of the great issues of the day. With power comes responsibilities; not those that Mr. Fitch would enumerate but great responsibilities nevertheless.
 



Facts are facts and logic is logic; but there is still such difference of opinion on what they really are and, alas! so little time with this last issue of the New International for Comrade Draper or anyone else to go into it all. But Draper is determined to place himself on record and that is his right. Comrade Shachtman is away on vacation and so I would like to keep part of the record clear, too.
Draper meticulously places the word “repudiate” in quotation marks; an unwary reader might get the impression that this is a quotation from Shachtman’s article, or even a paraphrase of it. Nothing of the sort. There follows, similarly, the welcome news that Draper continues to defend the Russian Revolution of 1917 which, he presumably insists, Shachtman proposes to “repudiate.” Nothing to it. He must have read someone else’s article; or perhaps he is thinking of the article that Draper might have written if he were Shachtman and has contrived to fit the article to Draper’s letter. It is all a product of his own political imagination.
Lastly, there is the once-familiar charge that Shachtman’s article is a “transitional stage,” in “the reactionary climate” toward the evil theory that “Leninism ‘invites’ Stalinism.” This little bugaboo deserves a short comment before it is mercifully forgotten. As he himself reminds us, Draper wrote a long three-part article over almost a whole year of the New International criticizing Lenin; (were they “strictures”?). Draper has complete confidence in his own socialist integrity and is not disturbed. But if some outsider wanted to be nasty; or if he was determined to examine every word with a microscope so fine and so powerful that it picked up what was not even there, he could quickly discover a Draper “transitional stage” under the pressure of reaction and exult in heralding it to the world.
That method of argumentation was once common practice and it once effectively stultified thought. Even then, I recall, Draper was never one to be impressed by it. Now it has lost all power to frighten people. A fine time to decide to turn it against others!
 



Black Bourgeoisie
by E. Franklin Frazier
The Free Press. 264 pp, 1957.
The “black bourgeoisie” rejects any identification with the Negro masses, according to Mr. Frazier, and strives more than any other element among Negroes to make itself over in the image of the white man; but it, in turn, is rejected by the white ruling classes. “As a consequence of their isolation, the majority of the black bourgeoisie live in a cultural vacuum and their lives are devoted largely to fatuities.” This is the running theme of Mr. Frazier’s account, one which comes forward in different variations and in each of his ten chapters.
The characteristics he describes are presumably based upon and derived from this unique contradiction of a black bourgeoisie in a white world; yet, the picture he draws can describe the white middle class without much adjustment. And in the end he, too, notices it. What gives the “black bourgeoisie” its basic stamp, its Negro or its middle class character? The author swings between the two halves of this question.
In any case, Mr. Frazier, who has written several books on the Negro and is chairman of the Department of Sociology at Howard University, has assembled a wealth of background detail and current facts on Negro life. It is surprising what he can pack into so few pages on fraternal organizations, churches, schools, business ventures, newspapers. For this alone, it is a rewarding work.
The term “bourgeoisie” is used without precision, not that we necessarily expect Mr. Frazier to hold to Marxian terminology; for him the concept of bourgeoisie is elusive and elastic, changing its meaning from one discussion to the next. Sometimes it seems to include all educated Negroes; or all white collar workers and professionals; or all businessmen. At times it takes in all but the mass of unskilled laborers counting as “bourgeois” the skilled Negro labor force. Most frequently and consistently, however, it simply refers to those who have a lot of money.
He does an impressive job of debunking the myth of “Negro business,” the concept that “a solution to the Negro’s economic problems” lies in Negroes owning their own enterprises. He documents the insignificant share of Negro industry in the American economy and its trivial importance in the Negro community.
In sum, he offers a thoroughly unattractive portrait of the Negro upper strata. Unrelieved pettiness, narrow social outlook, an unwillingness and therefore an incapacity to lead the Negro people in the fight for a better life, self-centeredness ... all under the ideological influence and sway of the white bourgeoisie.
“... the black bourgeoisie have shown no interest in the ‘liberation’ of Negroes except as it affected their own status or acceptance by the white community ... Because of its struggles to gain acceptance by whites, the black bourgeoisie has failed to play the role of a responsible elite in the Negro community.”
In five pages on the NAACP, he gives it credit for “significant victories for the Negro in his struggle for equal citizenship” but with severe qualifications.
“From this analysis of the various intellectual elements in the black bourgeoisie,” he writes, “it is clear that they are dependent primarily upon the white propertied classes. Even the NAACP, which has stood for ‘racial radicalism’ and has received a large part of its support from Negroes, has been influenced by the middle-class outlook of its white supporters and has sought support primarily from Negroes with a middle-class outlook.”
At all times, the book is absorbing and provocative but when it is finished, the reader will be unsatisfied. One of the key facts in American life today is the rise of a militant, mass Negro movement for equality; yet this occupies very little of the author’s attention. If the condition of the Negro professional and educated strata is as one-sided and bleak as Mr. Frazier maintains, where has the modern Negro movement come from; who leads and stimulates it?
“... instead of their old resignation toward the world, the Negro masses are acquiring a confidence in the efficacy of their efforts through the use of the ballot and in joining with fellow-workers in the labor unions.”
So he writes, but only in a passing sentence without examining the impact of this fact upon the black “bourgeoisie.”
 



There has been no sudden eruption of racketeering in the labor movement. The tale, dripping with crime, deceit and betrayal, and rehearsed at the Senate hearing was known in outline and sometimes in detail for a long time. It reaches back many years in a long uninterrupted line, sometimes new names, less often new methods. Yet, the discovery of what everyone knew becomes the occasion for the first big national, public investigation of unions; the first attempt at an “exposé” of organized labor.
Every period in our country’s recent history has had its own celebrated investigations, each corresponding to some strong current of public opinion: investigations of monopoly, recording widespread resentment against domination of economic life by big business; of munitions makers, reflecting disillusionment with the first World War and a distrust of the pious slogans that were used to justify it; of violence against labor and the denial of the right to organize, revealing sympathy with labor’s underdog struggle against a ruthless enemy; and most recently, of Communism, flowing from a hysterical fear of Russian power and a feeling of utter helplessness before its social appeal. And now, the Senate labor hearings.
There is no doubt that the revelations of widespread corruption provided a setback to unionism; every union reports the same thing: resistance to organization has risen; it is almost impossible to join new shops. Yet, in the end the union movement will regain all that was lost, and more. The 1929 crisis and with it the investigations of the sordid machinations of big business finally destroyed the dream of a “business government” and implanted in the American people a permanent distrust not of capitalism as a system but of the capitalists as a governing class. Business man’s rule was repudiated. But there can be no corresponding repudiation of unionism now. For unionism today enjoys the fierce loyalty of millions. Union consciousness is deep and ineradicable, instilled in America’s working class after 25 years of organization and strikes. In the end it will be reinforced by getting rid of crooks and grafters – something that has just begun.
But is is the very strength and influence of unions which now brings them under public scrutiny. With the ability to affect the lives of the whole population comes a new responsibility: to use this power to further peace, democracy, rising living standards for all. Is labor using its mighty power for good or for evil? That is the question that arises in the minds of all. One answer, or at least the shadowy outlines of a mood, can be summarized this way:
“Big capital has its evils and they had to be curbed. Now Big Labor has its evils and we must curb them too.”
Such is the mood which makes the hearings possible, a mood which ranges all the way from outright hostility to labor, to resentment and misgivings, down to friendly criticism from its friends. Mixed together are opposition to the legitimate labor activities by its enemies, pique at labor’s ability to shut down industry, fear that high wages have something to do with prices, resentment of the unions political power, suspicion of its “communistic” purpose, hostility to closed shops. It is not a question of the justice or validity of any of these reactions; the fact is that they exist.
Joseph Loftus, comments in the New York Times:
“Labor’s decline in the public esteem is traceable to more than criminal acts. There are contributing factors, from unethical (though legal) practices to bad manners; a disregard of the fact that the labor movement received public support as a force for social justice not as a business. This view happens to be held quite widely among the friends of labor, even those on the inside.”
He goes on to quote The Practice of Unionism a recent book by Jack Barbash, staff member of the AFL-CIO Industrial Union Department who says:
“I find it more difficult to defend what may well be an inevitable outcome of ‘bigness’ – a bigness perhaps made necessary to cope with the bigness of the problems. I miss most of all the kind of personal humility – a consciousness of doing God’s work, as it were – on the part of many union leaders, that, for me, is a necessary quality of human movement, whether it is a labor movement or any other kind.”
The Carpenter paraphrases a speech by Andy Beimiller, AFL-CIO legislative representative:
Labor is no longer the underdog. The day when we could automatically expect some sympathy from liberal jurists or politicians or public figures is long since gone. The general public no longer sees those of us who work in the labor movement as champions of the oppressed and exploited. The union members of today enjoy working conditions as good or better than most white collar workers and even some professional people. Under the circumstances, the climate of sympathy for labor that existed even 15 years ago is gone. What we win from now on we must win by merit and merit alone.
The sooner we face that fact, the better. Here then is the liberal-laborite calling labor to account. What he does in his way, millions do in theirs. In politics, the unions come forward as a force that speaks for social justice but acts with prudent expediency, as it ties in with suspect elements. In civil rights they call for equality but act with gingerly caution. Despite all defects, however, it is plain that their motives, at least, are the best. But in the sphere of racketeering, their arrant neglect has been especially damaging and it is for this that they are first called before the bar of public opinion.
 
>THOSE WHO PRESSED MOST INSISTENTLY for the investigations were the extreme right-wing elements who want to undermine the prestige of the union movement at the very least and at best, to curb its political and social rights. Unionism is basically a progressive, democratic social force; in their distorting mirrors, the rock-ribbed conservatives see it as nothing short of subversive, an unpredictable assemblage of rabble that must be quelled and controlled. For them, the look at racketeering is merely a convenient start ... but not as a dirty maneuver or dishonest trick. All unionism, to them, has the aspects of a “racket” which merely takes on different forms, some legal and some illegal. In every strike, in every big wage boost they see the workings of “labor monopoly” forcing its will upon helpless employers. Morally, it is hardly more legitimate in their eyes for labor to “extort” higher pay from their employers than it is for a thug to extort “protection” money from his victim. In fact, they would admit that in some ways the thug is less dangerous to them; he only threatens an individual while the honest labor leader, a dangerous radical, threatens our whole way of life. Even Senator Ives of New York, a "modern" Republican, declared that the way to deal with irresponsible labor leaders would be to put unions under the anti-trust law ... echoing the opinions of his fellow Committee member Mundt who is a not-so-modern Republican.
But it would be misleading to interpret the hearings simply as the product of a plot by reactionaries to knife labor. After all, the crude rantings of political scissorbills are no more of a novelty than the labor rackets they choose to discover. At other times, they might have been laughed to death; at least, ignored; or denounced in chorus by liberals, laborites and plain realistic politicians with a feel for what is expedient. If they can have their way now, at least to the extent of getting their show on the road, it is because everyone senses somehow that the issues raised cannot be swept under the rug; that public opinion, that elusive guide to aspiring politicians, is ready for a thorough airing of the inner life of union leadership.
It is upon this background that the unions confront the Senate hearings. The motives of the bourgeois right-wing conservatives are transparent enough: to prepare public opinion for restraints on unionism. Knowing that, however, what are the unions to do? They might denounce the committee as anti-labor and refuse to appear before it. That might have sufficed when the labor movement appeared weak, on the defensive, and fighting for elementary rights; then, it might have aroused sympathy by a refusal to submit to investigation. Perhaps. But now the labor movement is powerful; it proposes not merely to defend the living standards of its membership but claims the right to influence all social policies, domestic and international. Such a force cannot claim exemption from public scrutiny and to do so would play into the hands of those who are in ambush against labor. To the Committee, the official labor movement has, in effect, replied: if you uncover criminal activities or even unethical practices within the labor movement we will act against them; but we warn against trying to smear labor and we will fight all laws against our legitimate rights. With this in mind, Reuther has challenged the Committee to call representatives of the UAW before it, but so far in vain.
There are some who argue that Dave Beck and his similars who refuse to testify, pleading the Fifth Amendment, are standing up to the witchhunt against labor. From this curious premise, it follows that union militants should busy themselves with a public campaign to defend Beck against his Senate inquisitors: meanwhile, they reserve some of their most thunderous blasts of reverberating wind against Reuther and Meany for “capitulating” to the employers by acting against Beck! This is a novel twist. For decades, union progressives have demanded action by the labor movement against crooks and have been withering in their criticism of the complacent labor officials who passively tolerated the rackets. At last, with labor unity it has become possible to push for a real campaign to clean out the grafters. At this juncture, it is suggested, we must rise to defend Beck’s right to conceal his sordid record. It is the incredible conclusion of a contorted policy.
But what of the Fifth Amendment? In the Daily Worker Sept 8, George Morris writes, “progressives would far sooner accept the position of the Teamsters on the Fifth Amendment than Reuther’s although not overlooking the fact the former’s leaders use the Fifth to conceal corruption.” He appears to draw a parallel between the use of the Fifth by those charged with “communism” and by those who refuse to answer charges of racketeering. But it is the difference, not the similarity, which is decisive. The communist or former communist appeals to the Fifth for protection against persecution and prosecution, against jailing or blacklisting for his political opinions and activities. He truly faces a witchhunt. But the racketeer, not in theory but in plain simple fact, uses the Constitution in general and the Fifth Amendment in particular to ward off legal punishment for ordinary crime. That is his right; it is necessary to protect that right in order to protect innocent men. That is one thing. It is quite another to portray him as the innocent victim of a witchhunt. Beck uses the Fifth Amendment to dodge an investigation of his unusual practices as union president. Shall the labor movement itself demand an accounting from him or shall it demand that the Senate Committee cease its “persecution” of him. That is what the whole argument boils down to.
It has been widely stated that AFL-CIO policy demands the automatic removal of any union official who resorts to the Fifth Amendment. But this is simply not so. By now the policy is clear: the right to take the Fifth is recognized; but any union official charged with personal corruption who refuses to testify on the basis of the Fifth Amendment must explain his action to his union. The union must investigate why he took the Fifth. If he did so for legitimate reasons, it takes no action; if, however, it concludes that he did so merely to cover up for crimes, he must be removed. It is a policy that is designed to protect the union against the racketeer as a union official while conceding his right to take the Fifth as an individual.
We are dealing not with labor officials who are being hounded for their defense of the workingman but with grafters who use the labor movement as a base of operations for private rackets. Let that fact be clear to all.
 
>RACKETEERING IS NOT SPREADING inside the union movement. The clatter and clamor comes from the crash of the racket principalities. It will take a long time to eradicate them completely. But they are on the way out.
One reason why the Senate Committee can proceed with ease against crooks in the labor officialdom is because they had already been isolated in the labor movement. The Hoffas, and their lesser known imitators, still have influential, if silent, allies but they can no longer find refuge behind the banner of legitimate unionism. Yesterday, they might count upon the official AFL speaking up on their behalf but today they stand alone. That was one of the first achievements of labor unity. In the September issue of The International Teamster Dave Beck appeals to the spirit of Samuel Gompers.
“In effect, Samuel Gompers was enunciating at El Paso a doctrine of freedom for the individual union member. He was telling that convention that democracy must reign in the labor movement to make it effective; that autonomy and home rule are the cornerstones of its strength and the hallmark of its endurability.”
Not long ago, Beck’s appeal to “autonomy” would have won him nods of sympathy. But no one listens any more.
The CIO was launched in the struggle against grafters, thugs, racketeers, corruptionists, bosses’ agents and plain bureaucrats and had to triumph over them. In many ways, the idealism and political consciousness of the CIO declined as its influence rose and its scope widened to include new millions. But one achievement was permanent. It brought into existence a new socially conscious type of unionism free of corruption and so it remained. But once the boundaries of its domain were staked in its early victories, it remained constrained within its borders. The AFL crafts remained dominant in their own spheres and grew more so as the labor movement as a whole rose. Where rackets were entrenched they remained, spreading into some of the more powerful AFL unions; the independent CIO was unable to carry the fight into the old established unions and was impotent before entrenched rackets within them.
The AFL remained basically united in its battle to contain the CIO. Except for the Ladies Garment Workers Union, the racket-ridden outfits were left in peace by the AFL majority. In fact, in the struggle against the radical CIO, racketeers infiltrated the AFL. In the ILA, Joe Ryan built a machine of thugs under the cover of defending the AFL against “Communism.” On the West Coast, the Beck machine became respectable in the fight against Harry Bridges. In the Teamsters Union, the entry of thugs was facilitated by the prosecutions of Trotskyist Teamster leaders in Minneapolis under the Smith Act: with the help of the government, the Midwest teamsters were turned over to the mercies of a rotten machine which was installed firmly in power. When Minneapolis teamsters tried to join the CIO in an effort to save union democracy, they were blocked, again by government intervention. The rise of racketeering in labor undoubtedly has its deep sociological causes and explanations, like everything else. Concretely, however, it is linked to the fight of the right wing in the labor movement against progressives and radicals.
But the same historic factors that in one burst had created the CIO slowly made their impact on the AFL. As unionism expanded it was thrust into politics. Its arena was no longer some out of the way crossroads but the stage of national life. During the war, laws were proposed, some passed, to curb union freedom; after the war, unions fought to solidify the gains of the past decade. But big business campaigned to illegalize some traditional union practices winning their greatest success in the Taft-Hartley Law. The AFL had to be transformed. The propaganda of anti-unionism was feeding upon its defects. It was easy enough to make the plunge into national politics by endorsing Adlai Stevenson. But did the Federation come into court with clean hands? Millions of Negroes knew that it tolerated Jim Crow; millions knew that it tolerated racketeers. Something had to be done. But little was possible given a balance of power where racketeers controlled big unions and could count on the moral aid of conservatives against interference in their corrupt affairs.
It was the impulse for change inside the AFL which made unity with the CIO possible. Merger was a victory for the CIO; we see it now far more clearly than a year ago. In one year, the powerful Teamsters Union which had treated its fellow AFL affiliates with scorn, which raided and broke strikes with utter contempt for labor opinion ... this officialdom was reduced instantly, at the merger convention, to a position of cautious defense. With unity the balance of power shifted; the racketeer elements were reduced to a hopelessly minority position. The stage was set to move against them.
Before merger, Meany quizzed United Textile Workers leaders on corrupt practices. It came to nothing and he was ignored. Later, he succeeded in expelling the racket-ridden International Longshoremen’s Association but couldn’t give it the coup de grace. The ILA, he discovered, was aided secretly and publicly by powerful forces inside the AFL, above all by New York State AFL leaders and Teamster local officials. (And in the end by John L. Lewis and Joe Curran of the National Maritime Union.) Ironically, it was Dave Beck, none other, as a member of the top AFL longshore committee, who was assigned to help clean up the New York waterfront for the AFL. That was just a few years ago but it seems longer.
However, it came too late; it was too slow. Even now, with everything that is being done by the Executive Council it is belated.
The official leadership deserves rebuke, not because it refuses to defend crooks at the hearings; not because it demands an accounting by those who refuse to answer questions about corruption; not because it uses every public revelation as a club to smash the rackets; not because of what it is trying to do now; but for what it has not done and for what it refuses to do even now.
The top leadership employs the slow, tedious official action from above to clear labor’s good name. That is in order. But it is not enough. It is not enough to expel the Teamsters’ union – it is necessary to rescue more than a million Teamster unionists from the control of the crooked leaders. And that cannot be done so easily, if at all, merely from above.
How have racketeers managed to hold on? A favorite explanation of those who are cynical about the capacities of union members is that the ranks take no interest in decent unionism so long as their ordinary human and animal needs are satisfied. But in every racket-ridden union, men have been fired, terrorized, expelled, killed for fighting against crooked union dictators. Usually, they and their rank and file supporters were alone; ignored, like Peter Panto, ILA rank and file leader whose scarred body was dug out of a New Jersey ditch – no big campaign, no fanfare, no inner union investigations. To fight the rackets from below, when they may be tied in with government officials or police, without whose collusion they could not continue, requires more than good citizenship. It calls for real personal courage; for facing death to self and loved ones. The CIO found thousands with such courage; everywhere and always there are others like them. But men are not heroes without inspiration. To take such risks they must feel deeply that it is really worthwhile; that they are not alone; that their actions are respected and spurred on by those whom they in turn respect. But that is what they do not find.
Our union movement, our labor leadership, since the CIO, have never called upon the ranks to rise, never given moral aid or encouragement to them, never urged ordinary unionists to organize inside their own unions against bureaucratic officials; never defended them against terror and expulsions. Never. Even when the CIO expelled the CP-controlled unions, Phil Murray would not call upon the ranks of these unions to organize against their leaders. No. Quite the opposite. The mood, the code has been that there is something illicit in any movement of the ranks against their leaders. When Reuther, even as president of the UAW, led a rank and file struggle against the majority of his Executive Board he had to do it against the opposition of Phil Murray.
It is this lack of a democratic spirit; this essentially bureaucratic approach that is indubitably the worst single feature of American unionism and it is this that has permitted racketeering to rise. The labor movement is paying for it today in a giant public spectacle.
But so far this is only one side of the story. The unions are on the defensive. Yet, the racket exposures will create a vexing problem for those who are dancing with delight at labor’s discomfiture. For, in the end, labor will emerge free of crooks. What then?
 
>HENRY FORD IS NOT HAPPY OVER the type of labor leader he confronts at the bargaining table. In this, he speaks for big business whom he aptly symbolizes and for those ultra-right wing politicians who represent it; precisely for those who are eager to use the hearings against unions. In a recent exchange with Reuther, Mr. Ford observed, “True labor leadership today would consist, it seems to us, in labor leaders resisting pressures from whatever source, for excessive and inflationary wage increases. It would consist in union leaders acting for the common good and refraining from the use of the extraordinary leverage and monopolistic power of today’s big industrial labor union. We commend this course of action to you.” But where to find such leaders when the choice is so very limited. Mr. Ford and his friends have to pick their lesser of two evils.
The big line of division in the labor movement at this juncture is between Reuther-Meany, on the one hand and Beck, Hoffa et al. on the other. It was Reuther and Meany who made labor unity possible and with it a drive against the corruptionists. It was not only the crooked elements who felt uneasy but that whole layer of conservative officials who view any stirring and change as suspect.
Walter Reuther is rising more and more as the ideological leader and symbol of the modern American labor movement whose union, the progressive-minded UAW, gives him a prominent public platform. He has strayed away from the socialism of his youth and compared to his own views of yesterday, his outlook has become moderate and liberal. But measured against his contemporaries in public life he appears radical indeed and speaks for a radical kind of union. True, he professes his admiration for the virtues of capitalism; and periodically, he and his adversaries engage in lofty disquisitions on the mutual interests of labor and management, social engineering, and mutual cooperation. Regrettably, these philosophic discourses break down in fits of vituperation and invective. Trust in a permanent state of fraternity between labor and capital is as vain as a hope for the end, under capitalism, of the class conflicts which have produced a Reuther. As the representative of modern unionism, he agitates and presses continually for new social gains. His confidence in our social system is displayed by insistent demands upon it: steadily rising wages, lower prices, guaranteed wages, full employment, shorter hours. And he wants a larger role for labor in politics. He presumes to speak out for a democratic foreign policy, for peace. He expects so much from capitalism that its authentic representatives, the capitalists, become uneasy. Latest of all, he demands an immediate reduction of car prices and when the auto companies reject this simple formula to cut inflation, he denounces them as conscienceless, selfish, irresponsible monopolies. Worse: he criticizes their profits. His lectures on the glories of free enterprise scarcely make up for all this. It is very vexing and we can understand Mr. Ford’s desire to meet a labor leader with a somewhat different approach. But, increasingly, labor’s progressive wing gathers around Reuther as it did when he won the presidency of the CIO.
If business would like an alternative to Reutherism, they are not alone. In a few years, there have been several attempts to mobilize and organize a more conservative section as a counterweight to growing influence of labor’s progressive wing. Dave Beck, Dave McDonald, and John L. Lewis went through mysterious motions of setting up some new outfit. They promptly forgot when the AFL and CIO united. The Hod Carriers, Carpenters, Teamsters and Operating Engineers formed a joint committee to protect their common interests but without noticeable effect on the balance of power. Building Trades Councils work together with Teamster locals to sabotage the merger of AFL and CIO local councils. But every effort to organize labor’s right wing into an effective force has foundered. Most dismal was the fiasco of the invention of Dave Beck.
It sounds farcical now but not long ago a new star was rising. It was a man of social vision, a new type; a real American who was elbowing Reuther aside; he was a labor leader’s businessman and a businessman’s labor leader combining in his own person the common interests of labor and capital; a millionaire in his own right; a man who could parlay a few thousand dollars into a huge personal fortune. His exploits were recorded in admiring detail in the leading periodicals. It was a full scale effort to invent a new conservative labor leader as a buffer against Reuther. That was Dave Beck before it was discovered that his peculiar talent lay in borrowing union money without notice or interest and in profiteering from a trust fund he handled for his pal’s widow. And, assorted rackets, too. Even then, one Senator would not give up the attempt to manufacture a rival to Reuther. In a Chamber of Commerce speech, Goldwater said that Reuther and the UAW “have done more damage to freedom than the peculiar financial transactions of Dave Besk.” But his transgressions were too crass.
When Beck fell there was Hoffa. For one strange moment it seemed as if even he was being groomed to supplant Reuther. When he appeared for the first session of his hearing before the Senate committee, he was treated with proper deference. He was encouraged to expound his broad philosophy of labor relations and when he had finished lecturing, Senator Goldwater was inspired. For the full flavor, we quote from the New York Times account:
“Senator Goldwater asked some questions too and got along fine with the witness. ‘We have labor leaders in the country – labor leaders who would like to get control of the teamsters’, the Arizonian said. The colloquy veered to unionism and politics as Hoffa said he was not going into a room and be told what to do ‘without consulting my members.’ In a related context a moment later, Senator Goldwater remarked, ‘riding in the clouds is an individual who would like to see that happen. I am very hopeful your philosophy prevails.’”
It was Reuther whom the Senator disliked.
Later, Hoffa met Senator Ives at lunch. Ives told him “You’re a good witness. I may disagree with you on a lot of things but I think you’re honest.” It was a remarkable testimonial for a man whose fame was to be far more ephemeral than Beck’s. A day later, his “philosophy” was examined in sordid detail. Exit Hoffa as a great new labor leader! The difficulty for Goldwater and his friends lies in this: the very elements in the labor leadership to whom they look with respect turn out to be allies, at least, of racketeers. Beck boasted of voting for Eisenhower. Hutcheson of the Carpenters, now in difficulties over land deals in Indiana, is a well known Republican. On a lower level, Hoffa’s New York aide, John O’Rourke, served as labor adviser to Thomas E. Dewey when he ran for president and for governor of New York. Hoffa started out as a Democrat but the exigencies of politics drove him toward the Republican Party. In Michigan, he supported Republican Homer Ferguson for Senate; Republicans nominated a Hoffa lieutenant for membership on the state Board of Education in 1957 and a Republican appointed Hoffa himself to membership on the Wayne County [Detroit area] board of supervisors. And in November 1953, a Congressional investigation of Hoffa ended mysteriously when pressure came from high sources in the Republican Party to end the probe.
 
>FOR ITS PRIME MOVERS, ONE unhappy by-product of the hearings has been the public exposure and weakening of labor’s ultra-right wing. Soon Mr. Goldwater and his friends would like to turn to other things; but it is not easy. They are interested not so much in exposing the Becks as in reaching the Reuthers. They want to know whether workers are coerced into joining unions; they want to know whether unions violate the Taft-Hartley laws by boycotts, as at Kohler; they want to know if it is illegal for unions to support candidates for office; they want to know if labor causes violence as at Perfect Circle (where strikers were shot by scabs from within the plant). They want to know? Not exactly. For they are already convinced that labor is responsible for these “crimes” but they have to try to convince others. Let them try! They will be amazed by what follows.
Meanwhile, they make their start by exposing not the labor movement but its rotten elements, the crooks and grafters. The racketeers are on the run; the unions will get rid of them in one way or another and will be strengthened by it. Perhaps some new laws will make organizing more difficult but no one can wipe out the power of modern unionism. In the end, labor’s antagonists will hit up against that force which makes unionism invulnerable and which guarantees the end of racketeering: the union conscious millions who constitute the organized working class.
 



What Do You Know About Labor?
by Harry W. Laidler and James Myers
John Day, 1957. 301 pp. $4.75.
Some people know no more about union labor than what they learn from the man who repairs their plumbing. For this great middle class, the authors present an elementary textbook-type work for easy reading. Laidler is executive director emeritus of the League for Industrial Democracy and once a frequent socialist candidate for public office; Myers is industrial relations secretary of the Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America. Unionism is painstakingly described so as to stimulate maximum appreciation for its aims; occasionally, it is admonished to make improvements.
In some detail and with obvious sympathy they describe various plans for labor-management cooperation and mutual understanding; in these schemes they see a constant trend toward co-determination in industry leading increasingly toward an extension of “democratic ownership" in industry. Their own views are best summarized in this paragraph:
It is imperative that the saving principle of democracy shall find expression not only in political life but in labor relations and in economic systems ... the extent of participation in the ownership and management of economic enterprise by the common people, in one form or another, is at once a final test of democracy in industry, and one of the surest guarantees that industry will be run primarily for the service of all and not for the profit and prestige of the few.
Socialism, it could be added, is nothing more than the complete and consistent application of this principle: the extension of democracy into industry.
But our authors seem convinced that the road to democracy in industry runs through the harmonious collaboration of the owners of industry and their employees. We suggest a simple democratic device to test this thesis. In politics, every man gets one vote and everyone agrees that such a system is fair enough: apply that principle, then, in industry. Let every worker have one complete vote and no less while every manager gets one vote and no more in running industry. I am afraid that even the most ardent employer advocate of cooperation would shrink away in horror at such “subversive” democracy demonstrating that industrial democracy must be wrested away from capital by labor.
 



DETROIT – Who captured whom at the Michigan State convention of the Democratic Party? Did the ward-heelers capture the CIO or did the CIO capture the ward-heelers?
Richard T. Frankensteen, vice-president of the UAW, turned up as keynote speaker at the Democratic Party state convention held in Detroit over the week-end of April 16 and a slew of CIO members and leaders were added to the list of delegates to the national convention of the Democratic Party, including R.J. Thomas, Frankensteen and Shelton Tappes, secretary of Ford Local 600.
In return for this “recognition,” the leaders of the CIO will turn over the support of their Political Action Committees to the Democratic Party and will wage an irreconcilable campaign against the Michigan Commonwealth Federation, independent party formed recently by representatives of many local unions for the purpose of running candidates independent of the Democratic or Republican Parties.
 
Democrats on Decline
Realizing that only the officials of the labor movement could keep up the drooping Democratic banner, the politicians have been setting a snare for the CIO Political Action Committees. And now the clever CIO fox boasts that it has “captured” the Democratic trap!
The Democratic Party went into hiding after its stunning defeat in the last state-wide elections. During the mayoralty campaign which followed, it left to the CIO the task of rallying support for the Democrat, Fitzgerald. The stock of the party went down to the near-zero point when a group of its representatives in the State Legislature were indicted for graft. They sold their votes, at $65 each, to a combine of insurance companies.
The top leaders of the CIO are anxious to dig the Democratic Party up out of its grave in order to offset the progress of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation and to stymie the trend toward independent labor political action in Michigan. They fear that the MCF will put the Democratic Party out of business.
In his keynote address, Frankensteen admitted that the Democrats have been steadily losing support among the working people. “It is significant of the thinking of the ranks,” he said, “that the trend of the Democratic Party has been away from liberalism.” At the Political Action conference of the CIO on March 12, R.J. Thomas announced: “The Democratic Party in the State of Michigan has been shot to hell.”
 
Search for Candidate
Even the assistance of the CIO officials seems inadequate for reviving the party. The convention adjourned without finding a candidate willing to risk his reputation as DP candidate for Governor. Frankensteen took over the job of finding a candidate, but did so in vain. He preferred the distasteful candidacy to Frank Isbey about whom R.J. Thomas spoke last month in these words: “Isbey? What has he done? He is just a good war bond salesman.”
Isbey turned the offer down. Frankensteen tried a local banker, Theodore I. Fry, hut since the convention had already adjourned, Fry was unwilling to accept.
Thus far the CIO-Democratic combination has been unable to find a candidate. The Detroit News characterised the Democratic Party as “floundering through a state convention fantastic in its leaderless ineptitude ...”
 
“Liberal Principles”
“We are ready to shake the bushel for votes,” said Frankensteen, “but feel that the Democratic Party must give us principles worth fighting for.”
Thomas and Frankensteen are already “shaking the bushel.” But what “liberal principles” did they get?
Not a single resolution was passed at the convention denouncing the Little Steel formula, the wage freeze, the labor draft. No endorsement was given to the chief points in the CIO’s own platform. That, of course, is only natural, for it was a DEMOCRATIC PARTY convention!
One might suppose that at the very least the CIO officials would demand the endorsement of some planks in the CIO platform ... at least the most important ones. But no! Our labor leaders participated in the Democratic Party convention, as stooges of the Democratic Party politicians.
Working men can well ask: “You sold out to the Democratic Party. but what did WE get?”
 



DETROIT – The organizational convention of the Wayne County Political Action Committee, attended by 519 delegates from 112 local unions, held in Detroit on April 23 and 24, elected a governing executive board, called for a guaranteed annual wage for workers and for other labor legislation, endorsed Roosevelt for a fourth term and called upon CIO members to unite with “liberal” Democrats to demand progressive candidates on the Democratic ticket. In the elections for executive board, the Stalinist slate was defeated, three to one, by an anti-Stalinist ticket which included the supporters of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation. A motion to endorse only those candidates for public office who publicly support a guaranteed annual wage was defeated, 156 to 223.
 
Labor Wing of the Democratic Party
Despite Walter Reuther’s opening remarks at the convention that “the policy of the CIO is to build an independent political action group of labor, and not to become the tail to the kite of any political group,” the convention turned the Wayne County PAC into the liberal-labor wing of the Democratic Party. This course was a foregone conclusion, for only one week previously Richard T. Frankensteen, vice-president of the UAW, was the keynote speaker at the Democratic Party’s state convention (an account of which appears elsewhere in this issue), and took over the job of digging up a Democratic candidate for Governor. At the same time, R.J. Thomas, who is national secretary of the PAC as well as a vice-president of the CIO and president of the UAW, was elected a delegate to the Democratic national convention, together with Frankensteen and a whole group of CIO leaders. The Wayne County PAC convention gave tacit endorsement in its resolutions to this line of action.
The CIO, said Thomas at the PAC convention, must unite with liberal Democrats to try to “convince the Democratic Party” to run “candidates who have the interests of the people at heart” and who “we hope will be for labor.”
 
Endorsement of Roosevelt
The PAC convention voted almost unanimously to support Roosevelt for a fourth term. The resolution passed was so unambiguously pro-Roosevelt that the Stalinists refrained from introducting their usual “draft-Roosevelt” resolution. Another resolution state: “In our county we must work with progressives in the Democratic Party to get liberal candidates.” One delegate who proposed that this resolution provide for unity with all progressives, not only those in the Democratic Party, was waved aside by the chairman of the resolutions committee.
The Wayne County PAC, following the policy of the CIO nationally, makes no plans for getting on the ballot in its own name and obviously intends to support regular Democratic Party nominees.
Only one delegate, Ernest Mazey of Local 140, spoke against the pro-Democratic Party, pro-Roosevelt policies of the convention. He pointed out that the Democratic Administration of Pres. Roosevelt, as well as the Republican Party and the right wing of the Democratic Party, are responsible for attacks upon the labor movement. It was Roosevelt who devised the Little Steel formula. It is Roosevelt who is responsible for the policies of the War Labor Board. In answer to Reuther, who stated that labor must unite in politics today as it united in 1937 against the big corporations, Mazey recalled that in 1937 the CIO had to unite against the bosses AND the company unions. Support to Democrats and Republicans is company unionism in politics, he said, and we must fight that kind of company unionism by labor political action independent of the Democratic and Republican Parties. Scattered applause followed his speech.
 
Tucker Smith Amendment
As the convention reached a conclusion, Tucker P. Smith, a vice-president of the Michigan CIO and a member of the state committee of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation, proposed an amendment to the resolution on the guaranteed annual Wage as follows: “The convention makes publicly pledged support to the guaranteed annual wage a condition of its endorsement of any candidate running for public office and urges this policy upon all Political Action Committees of the CIO.”
The main speaker against Smith’s amendment was Nat Ganley, delegate from UAW Local 155 and a leading Stalinist spokesman. Ganley argued that the amendment was in conflict with the decision previously adopted to endorse Roosevelt for a fourth term: It meant that if Roosevelt “for tactical reasons” failed to support the guaranteed wage, the CIO would be compelled to withhold its support.
Smith’s amendment was defeated, 223 to 156. The delegates who voted against chanted, “We want Roosevelt.” Those who voted for shouted, “We want a guaranteed wage.”
The defeat of Smith’s amendment underscored the impotence of the whole CIO political policy. The CIO favors a guaranteed wage but -endorses Democratic candidates regardless of their stand. The CIO has entered politics to support Roosevelt but NOT to support its own program!
 
MCF at the Convention
Members and supporters of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation who had expected that their party leaders would take an independent position were disappointed when the latter submitted in silence to the political policies of the PAC convention.
R.J. Thomas threw a bombshell into the MCF when he reported that at. a meeting with Sidney Hillman in New York, held at the request of “leading members of the MCF,” the latter pledged to support the candidates endorsed by the PAC and that this was the policy of the MCF. NOT ONE SPOKESMAN OF THE MCF CHALLENGED THIS REPORT ON THE FLOOR OF THE CONVENTION. On the contrary, their role at the conference sessions confirmed Thomas.
Matthew Hammond, state chairman of the MCF, was prominent at the convention as chairman of the credentials committee, but was silent on every political question. Paul Silver, organizational director of the MCF, failed to take the floor on a single important issue. He and other MCF supporters accepted posts on the PAC executive board, aware that the PAC intends to endorse Democrats and that the constitution adopted by the convention provides for the removal of any executive board members who campaigns against any candidate endorsed by the PAC. Silver’s only course of action now must be to oppose the running of MCF candidates in opposition to PAC endorsed Democrats. He will be compelled to oppose only “bad” Democrats and not to oppose “good” Democrats.
Ben Garrison, former president of Ford Local 400 and one of the sponsors of the MCF, played the most ignominious role of all. He was chairman of the resolutions committee and reported out resolutions endorsing Roosevelt, favoring an alliance with “good” Democrats, and pledging to Roosevelt uninterrupted production by the workers.
The MCF leaders vigorously condemn the “friends of labor” policy of the CIO – but only at their own private MCF meetings. At the PAC convention they give their tacit endorsement to this same policy.
The above reported amendment by Tucker P. Smith came as a last-minute face-saving device, for he had previously permitted the pro-Roosevelt, pro-Democratic Party resolutions to pass unchallenged.
 
For Labor Political Action
The official policy of the MCF is as follows: “The party shall never endorse a candidate of a rival party.” On the basis of this policy the MCF can become a powerful factor in Michigan. It deserves the support of every working man in the state. Hammond and Silver weaken MCF by rejecting its policy in PAC.
The strong vote for the Smith amendment proves that a large potential support exists for the MCF within the CIO. If the MCF leaders, instead of capitulating to the Thomas-Democratic Party policy, had reached these elements by putting up a clear-cut fight for the above policy of the MCF, the convention could have been the scene for a big advance in labor politics.
A denunciation of the Thomas-Democratic Party deal, an exposure of the fake liberals of the Democratic Party, an opposition to endorsement of Democrats or Republicans, a demand for support only to independent labor candidates – these are real issues before the CIO and should have come before the PAC convention. But instead of fighting for their own policies the MCF leaders permitted their followers to become dissolved in the movement for unity with the Democratic Party.
Thomas emphasizes over and over again his desire for unity with the leaders of the MCF and THEREBY . ADMITS ITS STRENGTH. In the first place he needs their support to ensure against the capture of the PAC by the Stalinists, and in the second place he fears that a consistent fight for independent political action will win over the best elements within the PAC and expose it as a wing of the Democratic Party.
Thomas wants to trap the MCF leaders into the pro-Democratic Party movement, swallow up their supporters and render the MCF impotent. The MCF leaders are falling into the Thomas trap.
To follow one policy inside the MCF and a contrary policy in the PAC is not only impermissible but suicidal for the MCF. MCF leaders must carry out MCF policy.

No support to Democratic or Republican Party candidates regardless of who endorses them.
 
For independent labor candidates under the MCF banner.

 



Two articles dealing with the Zionist question recently appeared in Labor Action, one entitled Division in Palestine Labor and the other Change of Policy on Palestine. Both are characterized by entirely impermissible political concessions to the ideology of “leftist” Zionism, in particular to that a Hashomer Hatzair.
Reporting on a meeting of the executive of the Histadruth, the anonymous writer in Labor Action of March 13 states that the left wing voted against the slogan of a “Jewish Commonwealth” and called for the creation of a “Bi-national state with the Arabs.” What is this bi-national state?
 
Criticizes Bi-National State
Meir Yaari, one of the theoreticians of the Hashomer Hatzair, in a pamphlet entitled Analysis of Zionism, points out that the principle aim of Zionism is to obtain a majority for the Jews in Palestine. A “bi-national” state which in principle must have a Jewish majority – what is that but a leftist formulation for a JEWISH state with an Arab minority?
In the same issue of Labor Action the author states that the left wing is for an agreement with the Arabs as against an agreement with the British. The slogan of the left wing for unity with the Arabs bears a purely liberal and sentimental character.
In the first place, where does Hashorner Hatzair come out for the slogan of “Independence of Palestine from Imperialism”? In April 1938, a thesis of the HH in the United States read: “The demand for the institution of a direct fight against English imperialism is one we have always considered valueless ...” And further on in the same: thesis: “The best solution for us in this historical period is the Mandate ...”
In the March 20 article in Labor Action, Jessie Kaaren points out that the Arab masses are landless.
Where does the left wing issue the slogan of “land to the masses”?
 
“Leftist” Cover
No “left” wing which refuses to raise the slogans of “Freedom from British Imperialism” and “Land to the Masses” can establish unity between the Arab and Jewish masses. All its pious hopes for unity only serve to give a “leftist” cover for Zionism.
It is because of these political concessions to Zionism that Kaaren can write that the Arab chiefs could not continue to keep the masses subjugated to British and American imperialism “if Palestine were to continue to be industrialized and developed under Jewish leadership.”
This is 1,000 per cent false. Under the present Zionist leadership, including that of the Hashomer Hatzair, it is GUARANTEED that the Arab chiefs will be able to keep their hold over the Arab masses – regardless of the industrialization of Palestine under that same Jewish leadership.
 



DETROIT – Whose friends are the “friends of labor” congressmen?
Labor flocks to the polls on election day to vote for these gentlemen, and after the voting is over prays that these same “friends” will refrain from passing anti-labor legislation.
But labor’s prayers are seldom answered. And sometimes these “friends of labor” end up as corporation executives.
Such a “friend of labor” was former U.S. Senator from the State of Michigan, Prentiss M. Brown, Democrat.
Brown ran for re-election in 1942 as a “friend of labor” with the support of the same CIO leaders who today boss the Political Action Committee of the CIO. But thousands of working class voters couldn’t get very enthusiastic about Prentiss. They remained away from the polls in such numbers that Brown went down to defeat.
But a “friend of labor” need not remain idle for long. He has too many valuable services to perform for the “people.” Another “friend of labor,” Franklin D. Roosevelt appointed Brown to watch over the interests of the common man as director of the OPA.
When Brown lost his job as OPA head he was again for hire. Working men who supported Brown in the last election will be happy to learn that he is no longer unemployed, and will be able to continue to earn an independent living for his family.
But will they be equally happy to learn that Brown has left his trade of “friend of labor”? He has just taken over the post of chairman of the board of the Detroit Edison Co. This time Brown was not the candidate of the CIO. HE WAS THE CHOICE OF THE AMERICAN LIGHT & TRACTION CO.!
The A.L.&T. Co. is a holding company which owns 20.2 per cent of the stock of the Detroit Edison Co. It was ordered by the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell its 1,298,505 shares within the next two years. Before this deadline it wants to fulfill two aims:

To raise the market value of its stock.
 
To retain a degree of control over Detroit Edison.

Its candidate for this job? Labor’s “friend,” Prentiss M. Brown!
Who was fooled? Were CIO and AFL members tricked into voting for a corporation stooge, or was the American Light & Traction Co. tricked into voting for a “friend of labor”? In matters involving hard cash, corporation executives usually display amazing wisdom.
Enough of these “friends of labor”!
All out for independent labor candidates with no ties to the Democratic and Republican Parties of big business!
 



DETROIT – The final daub of whitewash to cover the dirty role of the Detroit police department under the administration of Police Commissioner Witherspoon and Mayor Jeffries during the June race riots was administered by the police trial board hearing charges against two Negro policemen.
Jesse Stewart and William McKinley Williams, the two Negro patrolmen, were found guilty, according to the board, of “neglect of duty.” They were suspended from the department for four months. They were accused of failing to intervene when a group of five hundred Negroes was urged to go to Belle Isle Park on the eve of the rioting.
Two, and only two, Negro patrolmen were expected to attempt to deal with the crowd! But what of the scores of policemen who were on the scene of the actual rioting at Woodward near Peterboro when thousands of white persons, under the influence of Ku Klux Klan elements, beat Negroes, destroyed their property and attempted to invade the Negro neighborhood nearby? The police there used “kid glove” methods and stood by idly while Klansmen had free hand. No investigations there! No suspensions!
What of the shootings of Negroes by the police? No investigations! Were the shootings unjust and indiscriminate attempts to terrorize the Negro population? Who cares? – as long as the police department gets a clean slate and as long as Negro patrolmen are made the scapegoats! The real culprits are the Klan elements and the police who refused to act against them. The suspension of the Negro patrolmen is another attempt to hide this fact from the public.
 



Michigan Meeting Fumbles in Forming New Party

Michigan Forms New Party
 



(This is the second and concluding article reporting the formation of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation.)
CIO Political Action Committees
Intimately connected with election policies was the attitude toward the CIO Political Action Committee on a national and local scale. The conference arrived at no policy whatsoever. This was inevitable. Unable to reach agreement on where they stand in relation to the “friends of labor,” they could not have any unified opinion on the chief defenders of the “friends of labor” within the CIO, namely, Sidney Hillman’s Political Action Committee.
Brendon Sexton, one of the “wise” strategists at the conference, found this formula to straddle the issue: There is no guarantee that the PAC may not support some of our candidates.
But there is a guarantee that the PAC will support so-called “friends of labor” within the Democratic Party. Where does the conference stand on that? No reply. Some delegates spoke of going into the PAC local groups to capture them for the new party. But without a policy in opposition to the PAC it will be extremely difficult to shake it. Moreover the conference decided that the new party will be neutral where it does not run a candidate. The greatest likelihood is that the members of the new party in the PAC will go along with the policy of the PAC and not vice versa. He who has no policy generally finds himself towed along by someone who has.
Here again an irreconcilable divergence of opinion was revealed on the floor. The recommendations committee report proposed that members of the new party must “renounce the old-line parties.” This seemed to puzzle Tracy Doll. Does this mean, he asked, that I would be thrown out of this party if I campaigned for a Democrat in the next election? Doll is one of the leaders of Labor’s Progressive League and works closely with the PAC.
The question stunned the conference leaders. Paul Silvers stated that it was his opinion that one could not go out and campaign for Democrats and remain a member of the new party. Hammond, however, mumbled a few words to the effect that Doll could do so as an individual but not in the name of the new party. What is the policy? No one knows because there is none.
 
Communists, Socialists and Trotskyists
The recommendations committee proposed the following statement: “It [the new party] shall never accept into membership any individual or group belonging to a rival party or espousing principles contrary to its own policies and platform.”
A motion was made from the floor and opposed by the leadership that the reference to “policies and platform” be deleted and changed to “basic principles.” This motion was carried after one of the delegates explained that they must permit legitimate differences to exist on what their program and policies should be.
But this discussion led to a series of questions addressed to the leaders of the conference. One was: “What rival parties are referred to?” It was obvious that the Communist Party was not aimed at here because by the rules of the conference one had to sign a pledge in general agreement with the aim of establishing a Labor Party. That already ruled out the CP.
Blaine Marrin, chairman of the recommendations committee, replied: “That refers to communists, socialists and trotskyists.” But Silver had a different interpretation: “This refers to the Democratic and Republican Parties.”
 
Constitutional Convention
Discussion of the constitutional convention centered around two points:




the date;
the basis of representation.




The conference leadership proposed that the convention be held within seven months. This was adopted after several other proposals, aimed at a speedier convention, were defeated.
One of the delegates revealed the real reason for the long delay. “Let’s wait,” he said, “and see what the Democratic and Republican Parties do.”
After the Democratic Party convention and after the PAC has already chosen candidates for endorsement, it will then be possible for the leadership of the new party to run candidates in “safe” districts where they will not conflict with the so-called “friends of labor” and the PAC. In that way the possibility of rupture between the “friends of labor” advocates and those who oppose this policy in the leadership can be avoided.
The existing committee will determine the basis for representation at the forthcoming convention. What its basis will be in outline was made clear by the speeches made by the leadership on the floor of the conference. They stated that this party must not be dominated by any one group but must include workers, professionals, farmers, small business people and others.
But in Michigan the CIO dominates. Therefore, if representation is in proportion to membership all the non-labor elements might be scared off. Some method of representation which will give unwarranted influence to non-labor and middle class groups will be devised.
 
The Name of the New Party
The name finally decided upon was borrowed directly from the CCF: “Michigan Commonwealth Federation.” The same spurious line of reasoning employed in discussing the basis of representation was employed in this connection as well. Silver spoke at some length, complaining how difficult it was to find a name. He said, in effect: “We cannot call ourselves Farmer-Labor Party because we are not a party only of workers, nor are we only a party of workers and farmers. We are a party of the common people.”
The “common people” came into their own at this conference. One delegate took the floor to point out that the middle class sections of the “common people” could only get what they want by supporting labor and that the labor nature of the party should not be hidden.
When the matter came to a vote “Labor Party” received about half a dozen votes. “Farmer-Labor Party” received about twenty-five votes. “Commonwealth Federation” was carried by an overwhelming majority. This vote can be attributed more to the success of the CCF than to any other single factor. It is to be noted that the word “Cooperative” has been dropped. The Canadian organization is the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation, but the Michigan party will be called Commonwealth Federation.
 
The Program of the Conference
The conference hardly began to discuss its program and platform. This will come before the constitutional convention.
But the fate of our poor socialistic liberals in this connection is very comical. They had hoped that in return for being reasonable and cooperative and of covering up for the “friends of labor” policy, they would be permitted to write the program.
All their attention was devoted to the panel on Platform and Policy. None other than Maynard Krueger was present for this historic occasion. The panel labored for hours. Their program was reported out briefly and then it was forgotten. When they complained that their report was not discussed and not even given to the delegates in mimeographed form they were told: Not enough time; and we ran out of paper.
 
For Consistent Labor Political Action
The conference left every important political question unsettled. Supporters of independent political action by labor must go to the coining convention and FIGHT for a CONSISTENT policy. First place is occupied by the crucial question of the attitude toward the so-called progressives in the old parties. The policy must be:




No support to the “friends” of labor.
 
For independent political action.




 



DETROIT, Mar. 6 – A constitutional convention: for the organization of a new Labor Party, to be known as the Michigan Commonwealth Federation, will convene here within the next seven months. This was the decision of a “study conference” called by the Michigan Committee for the Promotion of a Farmer-Labor Party at its sessions on March 4 and 5 in Detroit.
The committee, headed by Matthew Hammond, president of Local 157, UAW, composed of some fifty-odd officials of CIO and AFL local unions, and disowned by the top leadership of the CIO and UAW, will convoke the convention as a regularly delegated body with full authority to set up the new party. Delegates will be invited from union, farm and neighborhood organizations.
The study conference, which met early in March, was a loosely organized body comprising some 250-300 delegates. Any individual or representative of any organization who signed a pledge declaring himself “in sympathy with the general purpose of this committee,” was entitled to one vote. The decisions of this conference are recommendations to the committee and to the forthcoming state convention.
Many large locals sent official delegates or observers – including Bomber Local 50, Ford Locals 400 and 600, Briggs Local 212, Local 157 and Local 351.
At the beginning, the conference sounded a clear call for independent political action by labor. The “call” for the conference denounced the Republican and Democratic Parties alike as tools of big business. A statement distributed by the Chevrolet Plant No. 3 policy committee and printed by the “Flint Committee for the promotion of a Farmer-Labor Party,” declared: “The two old parties, Democrats and Republicans, are merely PUPPETS OF BIG BUSINESS AND ENEMIES OF THE WORKING CLASS.” Speaking of Roosevelt’s concessions to labor under his first administration, it said: “Roosevelt took the only possible course consistent with his strong desire to have a second term.”
Matthew Hammond, in his opening address, declared: “We are not here to debate the question of a new party. We are here to discuss the best methods of bringing one into existence. Some people tell us that now is not the time. We must begin NOW to lay the foundations for a Labor Party ... in the country as a whole.”
Paul Silver, organizational director of the committee and president of Local 351, in an almost naively frank speech at the conference dinner, spoke of his experiences in following the CIO line of “support your friends and punish your enemies.”
He said that half of the time labor urges the election of old party candidates and the other half it is apologizing for them. The CIO, he pointed out, was thoroughly sick of Fitzgerald and his vacillating campaign for Mayor within a few days after it had announced its support of him.
David Lewis, national secretary of the Cooperative Commonwealth Party of Canada, was vigorously applauded when he declared that the common people, through their own democratic party of workers and farmers, must take over control of the government. And there was animated clapping in response when he said that if the CCF comes to power in Canada, the power of the bankers and industrialists and their privileges would be destroyed.
 
Main Problems Taken Up
These speeches reflected the general spirit of the conference. The delegates, most of them from unions, were there for one main purpose – to take steps toward an INDEPENDENT Labor Party and to renounce the two old parties. That is what they were there for and NOTHING else.
It is extremely significant in this respect that in the entire conference, in all the official speeches, and in all the discussion from the floor – with the exception of one or two passing and incidental references by David Lewis of the CCF – THERE WAS LITERALLY NO ALLUSION TO THE WAR. There was not a statement or remark – with the above exception – calling for support of the war. But together with this absence, there was also no posing of any of the questions directly tied up with the war, such as: the no-strike pledge, the War Labor Board, etc. These problems will inevitably come before the constitutional convention and demand a solution.
The chief problems that did come before the convention were the following:




candidates and elections;
the CIO Political Action Committees;
the constitutional convention and the basis of representation;
the name of the party;
the program and platform.




The ambiguous and compromising formulas on the key question that came before the conference and that face the new party stand in glaring contrast to the opening tone of the conference. There is a big gulf between what the delegates came to do and what they actually accomplished.
 
Candidates and the Elections
The key problem that any mass labor political organization must face today is this: “What is your attitude toward the ‘friends of labor’ in the Democratic Party?” and “What is your attitude on the fourth term for Roosevelt?” There was no clear-cut discussion on these problems.
The policy on the elections was embodied in three main decisions:

to initiate petitions to get on the ballot in 1944;
 
“That this party shall not have a candidate for the office of President of the United States”;
 
“That between candidates of other political parties, this party as such shall adopt an attitude of neutrality, though it may be critical of all and though its individual members may support candidates of other parties for posts which this party does not contest.”

These formulas were adopted for the purpose of uniting two different blocs at the conference. One group was openly in favor of supporting Roosevelt. The other was not willing to declare support to Roosevelt but was unwilling to place this question on the floor and present any position.
The second group was composed mainly of followers and sympathizers of the Socialist Party and its entourage, who were over-represented at the conference because of its loosely organized nature. A legal technicality facilitated the compromise. Michigan law, it was pointed out does not permit, one candidate to run for office on two different tickets.
These two groups never came to grips at the conference and did not appear openly as such, but the fact that these two tendencies do exist was made evident in a revealing exchange of cross remarks.
Brandon Sexton, reporting for the panel on elections, emphasized point (2) above. Silvers interrupted: “May we construe this as endorsement of Roosevelt?” Sexton replied: “No. It does not mean endorsement of any candidate for President.”
But Hammond, unable to restrain himself, took the floor on a point of special privilege and stated with some heat: “As far as I am concerned the best way of re-electing Roosevelt is the formation of this party. That is the only way he will carry this state. We will bring thousands of voters to the polls. Who do you think they will vote for if not for Roosevelt? Most of us will vote for Roosevelt, no matter who runs on the Republican ticket.”
Not a single leading member of the committee took the floor to challenge this point of view.
In view of this statement by Hammond of the fact that the only legal possibility for running a presidential candidate would be in opposition to Roosevelt and of the failure of the conference to issue any statement in this connection, the three daily papers in Detroit, including the Hearst press, announced that the conference gave tacit endorsement to Roosevelt.
The pro-Roosevelt forces won out and, thanks to the “clever” strategem of the socialistic-liberals, they won out without a struggle. One delegate did propose a motion that the conference go on record “opposing support to or endorsement of any candidate running on the tickets of the Republican or Democratic Parties for any office.”
But this proposal received no consideration from the delegates bith because of the absence of any significant grouping for consistent independent political action by labor, and because the ambiguous “pro-friends of labor” formulations presented by the socialistic-liberals made it difficult to bring the real question into the open.
One of the delegates from Fleetwood Local 1 stated at the panel that he had no intention of voting Democratic or Republican, but that he would be against any motion opposing Roosevelt.
*
This is the first of two special articles on the important development in labor politics reported above. The second article will deal with the position taken by the convention on the CIO Political Action Committee; on Communists, socialists and Trotskyists; and on other matters considered. This second article will appear in the next issue of Labor Action.
 



DETROIT, Mar. 12 – The CIO Political Action Conference held here today under the auspices of the Sixth Regional CIO Political Action Committee makes several facts stand out clearly:
 
Four Points Clear

Despite all the fanfare accompanying its formation and all the energy devoted to its construction, the CIO Political Action Committee has been unable to arouse any real degree of enthusiasm among the membership of the CIO and is making progress, if at all, at a snail’s pace.
 
The policy of the PAC is to function as a labor adjunct of the Democratic Party. The leaders of the CIO are fully decided on support to Roosevelt for a fourth term, and they subordinate all their political action to this objective.
 
The Communist Party is the most virulent enemy of the formation of a genuine Independent Labor Party, and in this connection serves as front line fighter for the top leadership of the PAC.
 
The leaaership of the newly formed Michigan Commonwealth Federation, favoring the formation of an independent party but following a confused and inconsistent policy, are unable to reply to the policy of the PAC with a clear call for support to a Labor Party.

August Scholle, Michigan CIO regional director and chairman of the Sixth Region CIO Political Action Committee, pleading time after time at the conference for volunteers to get the work started on a local scale, emphasized thereby a complete inability to get precinct and ward captains to enroll the membership of the CIO into the PAC.
R.J. Thomas said: “We are in a very confusing position about political action in the state of Michigan.” He complained that local unions pledged to send hundreds of delegates to the conference but never came through on their promise.
It is significant that this conference, officially sponsored by the CIO, could gather together little move than two hundred delegates, which is fewer than the number that attended the conference of the “unofficial” Michigan Commonwealth Federation one week previously – a conference repudiated by the official top leadership of the CIO.
 
President Thomas Speaks
R.J. Thomas devoted four-fifths of a speech to attacking the Michigan Commonwealth Federation. He made clear that he is for the re-election of Roosevelt. “That's my individual position,” he said. “It is not the official position of the CIO. But, on the other hand, the CIO has not said that it will not take such a position.” Thomas repeated his opposition to the Little Steel formula and the national service act. The CIO program, he said, is the most progressive yet devised and that is the program for the elections.
In his lengthy speech, Thomas was completely unable to solve one big contradiction: If labor is to oppose the Little Steel formula and the “draft labor” act in the elections, how can it further these objectives and at the same time support Roosevelt, who stands for these anti-labor measures?
Senator Novack, in a speech seconded later by Nat Ganley, Stalinist leader, stated: “We must go into the Democratic primaries and get some of our people nominated.”
 
Role of the Communists
The most virulent speech at the conference against the formation of a Labor Party came from Nat Ganley of Local 155, chief mouthpiece for the latest line of Stalin and Earl Browder: “Either you are for the present CIO policy, which means support to Roosevelt, or you are against it in the third party movement,” he said. It is not necessary to report his speech at length here – one can read it every day in the Daily Worker. Scholle, speaking after Ganley, said: “I am in complete accord with what Ganley said here.”
Paul Silver, organizational director of the MCF, spoke in reply to President Thomas.
The policy of the MCF established at its conference last week favors “neutrality” in the elections wherever the MCF does not run its own candidates. Members of the MCF, in such instances, may vote for whomever they please. In his speech at the PAC conference, Silver made it clear that he is for the re-election of Roosevelt and looks upon the formation of the MCF as the best method of carrying Michigan for FDR in 1944.
Silver is also unable to get himself out of a major contradiction. Favoring the formation of an independent party and critical of the Democratic and Republican Parties, he is at the same time in favor of supporting Roosevelt as a “friend of labor.” But if you can support one friend of labor, why not support them all? If you are for the LEADER of the Democratic Party, how can you oppose rallying behind him WITHIN that same party? This dilemma is what takes the edge off all of Silver’s otherwise fine argumentation for a Labor Party.
It is this same dilemma that compels Silver to string along with the PAC and at the same time prevents him from fighting for his own policy. As he put it: “I am here as a member of the CIO with no thought of capturing the ward and precinct organization of the CIO. I have always gone along in favor of ward and precinct organization.”
No other leaders of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation took the floor. Very eloquent last week at their own conference on the possibilities of winning over the PAC to the support of MCF candidates, they were as close-mouthed as clams at the PAC conference.
 



“The UAW faces one of the greatest crises in its history,” said R.J. Thomas in ordering the striking Chrysler workers of Local 490, UAW-CIO, back to work.
It is this crisis that will confront the ninth annual convention of the United Auto Workers Union when it opens at Grand Rapids on September 11.
What is the origin of this crisis?
Thomas and his lieutenants, concerned above all else with currying favor with the Roosevelt Administration, place first responsibility upon the “undisciplined” rank and file of their own union, who are goaded into one “unauthorized’’ strike after another in a desperate attempt to defend their own union. They thereby blame, not those who have created the crisis, but those who try in the only way familiar to them, to overcome it.
The real danger to the union comes from the big monopolists, who are arrogantly whittling away the rights of the union in the shops and who seek to demoralize its membership by an unending series of provocations, all in preparation for a mighty offensive to destroy the union once and for all, and to restore open shop rule. In this campaign they have many powerful allies.
The big corporations are aided by the Democratic Party’s representatives in Congress of the reactionary Southern landowning class and by the anti-union Republican Party, who together spearheaded the drive to put over the strike-breaking Smith-Connally bill and who are ready with a barrage of extreme anti-labor legislation.
They are aided by the Roosevelt Administration, more subtle and far more clever than the open reactionaries, which has avowedly replaced the now abandoned New Deal with “Dr. Win the War” – a phrase designed to make more palatable the program of job-freezing, wage-freezing and the Little Steel formula, exorbitant taxation on wage earners and War Labor Board run-around.
And they are aided by a retreating union officialdom, headed by Thomas, Walter Reuther and George Addes, who, despite the differences among them, unite to stick a knife into the rank and file every time it acts in self-defense, suspend their local officers, and give the go-ahead signal to the companies for the firing of union militants.
As though this were not enough – the capitalist owners of industry are setting aside billions in post-war reserve funds, accumulated from their even greater billions of blood-stained war profits. This is its war chest against a labor movement which during the war finds its wages frozen while prices rise, and which after the war faces mass layoffs and unemployment.
That is the real cause of the crisis in the UAW.
What program can the UAW adopt to meet the crisis and emerge from it with renewed power and vigor?
The brass hats of the union cling frantically to two dogmas: 1. Uphold the no-strike pledge and 2. Support the Roosevelt Administration by building the Political Action Committee of the CIO and oppose the formation of a genuine Labor Party. These stultifying precepts must be abandoned.
Every worker who has been active in his union for more than a day, every committeeman and every steward knows by now that when the union officialdom surrendered the right to strike the unions became impotent, unable to enforce their contracts, and helpless in settling important grievances. Aware of this, the rank and file has been and is compelled to act without and against their own top leadership in hundreds of “unauthorized” walkouts.
In most cases, these stoppages, isolated and sporadic, attacked by the Thomas-Reuther-Addes combine and persecuted by the War Labor Board, end without victory for the workers and succeed only in making the management hesitate only momentarily before the next provocation.
The Communist Political Association is the most vicious strike-breaking outfit inside the labor movement. It put out a feeler to discover how far it could go with reactionary policies when Harry Bridges announced publicly that he favored retention of the no-strike pledge in the post-war period. The CPA pulled in its horns when this proposal met with the unanimous condemnation of the entire labor movement.
At the Michigan state convention of the CIO, the Reuther faction introduced its usual resolution endorsing the no-strike pledge, but this time it felt constrained to repudiate. Bridges, condemning those “inside or outside the labor movement who propose to continue the no-strike pledge in time of peace.”
Change the Course
Why repudiate the pledge in time of peace? Obviously because it disarms labor. But is labor not equally disarmed NOW? Of course! Reuther himself knows it. During the recent strike of Chevrolet Local 25, he said: “Collective bargaining in too many plants has become collective begging.” And months ago the officers of the UAW announced publicly: “In entire sections of the industry ... collective bargaining is being denied our workers.” There could be no clearer statement of the direct results of the no-strike pledge.
Why not withdraw the no-strike pledge NOW and do away with “collective begging”? Reuther, Addes and Thomas will explain for the thousandth time that we are now engaged in a great “War for democracy” and that nothing must interfere with its progress. The boys in the foxholes don’t strike, etc., etc.
Supporters of Labor Action realize that the slogans of “democracy,” “freedom,” “national liberation” in this war are deceitful camouflage to hide the real aims of the ruling capitalist class. But, of course, there are scores of thousands of UAW members who are not yet convinced of this and who hope that somehow the war will further the fight against fascism and advance the cause of democracy.
Democratic rights are justifiedly cherished by all working men. That is the reason why we cannot permit our unions to become weakened and destroyed. The first act of victorious fascism has always been the destruction of the right to strike and with that the complete wiping out of the trade union movement.
The aim of the big corporations NOW is the crushing of the UAW and the undermining of our democratic rights. That is why THE FIGHT FOR DEMOCRACY BEGINS RIGHT HERE AT HOME!
Referring to the General Motors Corporation, Reuther charged: “It is becoming increasingly apparent that the corporation is using every pretext to weaken and undermine the UAW-CIO in the hope of destroying its power in the post-war period.”
The same is true of the Ford Motor Company, which in Windsor, Ont., tried to revoke its contract with the UAW, and of the Chrysler Corporation, which at a WLB hearing said it was willing to deal with the union after the war “if they are here.”
 
End No-Strike Pledge
If the companies are NOW “undermining” the union in order to “destroy its power” and if the no-strike pledge ties our hands, then is it not clear that we must revoke the pledge to counter this attack? No, says Reuther! And he explains: “We do not feel that the showdown with General Motors Corp., which must come sooner or later, should be fought under circumstances and in an atmosphere favorable to the corporation.”
Reuther has things upside down. If we go through the entire war period bound by the no-strike pledge – and how long the war will last no one can say – we will then permit the company to fight out the battle when it is strongest and we are weakest – “under circumstances favorable to the corporation.” He is a general who would permit his army to be cut to pieces, battalion by battalion.
According, to Reuther’s defeatist formula, we passively allow the corporations NOW to undermine the unions – by firing the best militants, by refusing to settle grievances, by ignoring the contract, and by provoking isolated sporadic partial walkouts which can very easily be smashed. What this is leading to we all know – the slow dissipation of the strength of the unions and the gradual demoralization of the membership. Hundreds of workers, especially those who have been in unions only since the war, put the blame for all the petty persecutions visited upon them not where it really belongs, on the companies and the Thomas-Reuther-Addes leadership, but where it does NOT belong – on the union itself. The companies carefully nurture this error. The Reuther-Addes-Thomas policy leads to the undermining of the union!
In the post-war period we face unemployment and job shortages. NOW, however, many companies are desperate for labor. When did a long line of unemployed outside a factory gate become a circumstance favorable to labor?
Yes, we still may win that battle, even under the worst circumstances, but it will be a far bloodier, more costly and more drawn out battle than what we need face.
The time to revoke the no-strike pledge is NOW.
No worker likes to strike. But every thinking worker wants to defend his union. When other methods fail to protect the union and working conditions, he is compelled to strike. Those who propose to rescind the pledge do not fayor a “wild spree” of strikes, but insist that the defense of the unions be taken up in a systematic plant-wide and company-wide basis to reinvigorate the union movement and put an end to company provocation.
The restoration of the right to strike is of first importance, but that step must be supported and defended by other measures.
Behind the employers stands the notorious War Labor Board.
If workers are on strike, insists the War Labor Board, it will not consider their demands. Just as the employers reject every union demand and jeer: “What are you going to do about it?”, so the WLB folds its arms and orders despotically: “Go back to work or we won’t talk, and what are you going to do about it?” And if you are “reasonable” and don’t strike, the WLB will consider your demands in due time – at its leisure – and then reject every important demand, on pretext of fighting inflation through the Little Steel formula.
The WLB is not an impartial public board, but a “War Bosses Board”; its decisions and decrees are those of the big capitalists and their lawyers. Labor representatives, captives of the employers and of the pro-boss professors, who use the nom de plume of “public representatives,” make diplomatic protests, propose resolutions which are rejected, and accomplish nothing. To expose its anti-labor nature to all, we must insist – Let all union officials GET OFF THE WAR LABOR BOARD.
To defend the right to strike and to be free of the dictates of the WLB, the labor movement must organize its own independent Labor Party. That is a subject discussed elsewhere in Labor Action.
 




Herman Benson was a founding member, along with Max Shachtman, Hal Draper, and others, of the Workers Party, which broke from the US Socialist Workers Party (no relation to the British group of the same name) in 1940 following a debate about how to understand the Stalinist state in Russia.  
While the SWP majority maintained that the USSR remained some kind of “workers’ state”, however “deformed” or “degenerated”, a large minority, which went on to become the Workers Party, argued that it was a deeply oppressive society based on a new form of class exploitation. They developed their ideas into what became known as “third-camp” Trotskyism, arguing that the global working class must constitute itself as an independent force against both the two camps of US-led capitalism and Stalinism.
Herman was a member of the Workers Party National Committee, and labour editor of its paper, Labor Action. Later, he founded the Association for Union Democracy and was its first Executive Director. In 2012, he contributed to a Workers’ Liberty symposium of recollections and reflections from activists involved in the “third camp” tradition, which can be read here.
He spoke to Daniel Randall of Workers’ Liberty about the debates which are examined in The Fate of the Russian Revolution Volume 2: The Two Trotskyisms Confront Stalinism, in which some of his writing from the time is included.



*
What, for you at the time, were the primary motives for siding with the opposition in the 1939–40 battle?
In 1939, I was not an old-time Trotskyist. I had joined the Young People’s Socialist League (YPSL), the youth wing of Norman Thomas’s Socialist Party (SP), in 1930, at the age of 15. By the time the Trotskyists joined the SP, the depression, the rise of Hitler, and the destruction of German Social Democratic Party turned me into a kind of Leninist, but one repelled by crazy antics of “Third Period” Stalinists and then by their popular-front turn. When the Trotskyists left the SP in 1937, I, along with many other YPSLers, went with them.
I mention this to explain why I never gave much weight to the complaints against Cannon’s bureaucratism. They [the “old-time Trotskyists”] went through unexplained factional frictions and personal combinations in the Communist League of America (CLA, the first US Trotskyist group, founded by Cannon, Max Shachtman, and Martin Abern in 1929), not me. Even now, I don’t think our disputes of that period shed any light on the question of the party.
Old-timers could vent their grudges against Cannon, but for me, and most in early opposition, the immediate issue was clear: the Russian invasion of Poland and Finland was an oppressive “imperialist” attack, to be condemned.
At that point, everybody would still be for defence of the Soviet Union if it really came under attack. It took a long period of intricate debate over complex ideological issues to free even us from notions of defending one of the most oppressive regimes in history. The “orthodox” majority said, “we’re not defending the regime, only nationalised property”. People like [Albert] Goldman and [Felix] Morrow needed more time.
Do you think The Fate of the Russian Revolution Vol. 2 accurately conveys the substance and the balance of the disputes between the two strands of Trotskyism in the 1940s?
I think the editor does a great job, although I may be prejudiced. For me, reading it at 100, it activates the juices of a 24-year old zealot. One minor quibble, though: what’s the point of the final extract from Trotsky on dialectical materialism?
Looking back, do you see any of those issues in a new light?
Of course. More than half a century has elapsed. The world refused to evolve as we hoped or expected. But that’s the big story.
The Workers Party/Independent Socialist League (WP/ISL) tradition didn’t hold up in a discrete form, but rather diffused, in different ways and in different directions, into other organisations. Do you think that was inevitable? If not, how could it have been avoided?
I do think that the demise was “inevitable”, whatever that word means. Both sides in the 1939/40 dispute counted on worldwide socialist revolutions in the post-war period. When capitalist democracies and Stalinist dictatorships emerged intact, the political-social foundation of that position was undermined. The WP splintered, and the SWP , as the book describes, was transformed into something alien.
A kind of desiccated, academic Marxism found refuge in the universities, without connection to workers’ revolution. In the United States, most nominally “socialist” currents lost any distinguishable socialist quality. Once, socialism meant concentration of industry in the hands of the state (nationalised property) and a planned economy in a democratic society. Now, each group has transmuted socialism into an amorphous dissatisfaction with the status quo plus whatever their hearts desire. The perspective of a traditional socialist society emerging from a workers’ revolution and a workers’ state has vanished and is not likely to be revived here. In that atmosphere, the WP could not survive.
Do you think the debates of 1939/40 have relevance for socialists today? If so, what is it?
I believe there is a lot to learn from the old WP/SWP dispute, not only for socialists, Marxian and others, but for all crusaders for social justice. In the broadest sense, it reminds us that when our ideology appears somehow to justify a horror or an act of oppression, maybe there’s something flawed in our ideology.
More to the point, especially for me, those discussions restore the defence of democracy in society as a central theme not only for socialists but for all who seek social justice. In that sense, reflection on those debates, for those who undertake it, is an antidote for the persisting residue of Stalinist thinking in the labour and socialist movements.
*
Herman Benson was in 1940 a founding member, along with Max Shachtman, Hal Draper, and others, of the Workers Party, and was later labour editor of the WP/ISL paper Labor Action. He founded the Association for Union Democracy in the mid-1960s, and remains active in it.


     The letter below appeared in the Detroit Tribune, Michigan Negro weekly, on October 20. We reprint it here for the information of anti-fascists in every city:    * To the Detroit Tribune: In your issue of Oct. 6, Mr. Judah Drob rises to defend the rights of Gerald L.K. Smith to free speech and free expression, and by implication denounces all those who picketed his meeting as “totalitarian liberals.” As organiser for the Workers Party, whose Detroit branch was one of the sponsors of the Sept. 27 picket line and whose Los Angeles branch single-handedly organized a similar action against Smith in that city, I request space in your paper to reply to this accusation. Mr. Drob is not alone in his viewpoint. In an editorial on September 29, the Detroit News writes: “The behavior of the pickets was tarred with the mark of fascism at least as much as anything that went on inside the hall.” The News, however, carries its opinions to their logical conclusion, supporting not only the right of Smith to hold his meeting but the right and duty of the police who defended him to beat two pickets into unconsciousness. I wonder if Mr. Drob confines the defense of Smith’s rights to a verbal and literary plane, or if he too condones the actions of the police. For our part, indignation and protest are justly directed not against the pickets but against Smith and against the brutality of the police.  The Aims of Smith Gerald L. K. Smith is a fascist. He seeks by his rantings against the labor movement, against the Jews, and against the Negroes, to do in this country what Hitler did in Germany. For proof of this contention, I refer you to the pamphlet, The Truth About Gerald Smith, published by the Workers Party, a copy of which I enclose. Fascism aims at the brutal wiping out of the organised labor movement and at the destruction of the democratic rights of all the people. It would no doubt be preferable if this matter could be settled by amicable round table seminars, but unfortunately for fence-straddlers whose good intentions lead them astray, it cannot. What we must face squarely is this: a powerful fascist movement will cause violence, bloodshed, and deaths. A “live and let live” attitude toward this developing movement will not prevent or eliminate these evils but will merely permit the fascists the luxury of choosing when and under what conditions to initiate their terror. I have no doubt in my own mind that Mr. Drob’s sympathies will be, extended to the victims of any such fascist movement and that his protests against its violence will be forthcoming. (In fact, he himself might be one of its victims.) But we prefer that there be no victims, or if there must, then as few as possible, and that condolences become unnecessary.  Cut Out the Cancer Cancer must be cut out early or the body perishes. The time to act against the canter of fascism is NOW when there is still time to cut it out with the least injury. That is the only way to reduce its anti-working-class violence to a minimum. Powerful mass action today can prevent a repetition of bloody anti-Negro riots tomorrow. Mr. Drob should know, these lessons well, for he heads the Socialist Party of Michigan, which was affiliated to the German Social Democratic Party through the Labor and Socialist International. The SPD, the socialist party of Germany, was the most powerful single party in Germany prior to the rise of Hitler. It received 9 million votes in 1928 and enrolled 900,000 members. Despite this power, precisely because it shared fundamentally the same views as Mr. Drob, it permitted the Nazi bands to rise from a fanatical handful to a dangerous army. Did its passivity and tolerance prevent violence and terror, and preserve democratic rights? The answer is now history. One might reply: if fascism attacks us physically, we will defend ourselves, but if it confines itself to meetings, we will ignore it. But this, is a strange argument. Accordingly, if I see the fascist sharpening his knife to cut my throat, I must not take up a club and knock the knife from, his hand; but once the knife is whetted and is on its way to my heart, then I may resist. No! We say: Organize against fascism NOW, The. way to prepare now is for the trade unions to form antifascist Workers Defense Guards to train and organize to protect the labor movement and ail the people against fascist violence. Finally, Mr. Drob might say: “But some people, for example the Communist Party, call all their opponents, including the Workers Party, ‘fascist.’ Must I then support any violent measure that they may initiate against these opponents?” My answer is, simple. The Communist Party lies.        Ben Hall3773 GratiotDetroit 7, Mich.      
  DETROIT – If you own a newspaper and want to learn how to help fascism, take your tip from the Detroit newspapers. The press here rose in indignation after the anti-fascist picket line thrown around the public meeting called by Gerald L.K. Smith. But their ire is directed not against Smith and not against the police who brutally clubbed several CIO pickets, but against the pickets themselves! Briggs Local 212 carried the slogan, “Drive the Fascist Rev. L.K. Smith out of Detroit.” The Detroit News editorializes against this slogan as follows: “Those who deny freedom to others run a grave risk of losing freedom for themselves and for all of us.” Smith’s right of free speech must be upheld, the News declares, and adds: “The police were not merely justified but duty bound in their use of force to oppose the forcible efforts of pickets to prevent the Smith meeting from being held.” Remember ... the News and other papers like it have been denouncing the German people for “permitting” Hitler to come to power! If we follow the advice of the News we will permit fascists to come to power in this country. Hitler’s rise to power in Germany was facilitated by capitalist newspapers just like the Detroit News here. Like the News, these papers misled the German people, taught the people to remain defenseless against the Brown Shirts and denounced attacks on the Nazis.  For Workers’ Defense Guards Why did the union workers picket Smith? Because he stands for fascism, for anti-Semitism, for Jim Crow and for smashing the labor, movement. The antifascist workers want to protect their own democratic rights and they want to do so NOW. They don’t want to wait until the fascists get so powerful and impudent that THEY are prepared to initiate their anti-working class violence and to break up workers’ meetings. In 1943, the fascists succeeded in organizing anti-Negro riots which caused many deaths. That is enough. We don’t want any more of that. If we follow the advice of the News we will wait until the fascists reorganize and are ready to renew their violent attacks. The pickets must not use force, says the News. But the police MUST use force, it continues. Why? Why are the police justified in cracking the heads of the pickets in order to defend the fascists while the anti-fascists are not justified in defending themselves against the fascists? Will the police defend the workers against fascist violence? At his mass meeting Smith said to the police in his hall: “When you see that scum outside and these citizens here in this hall, you know where your interests lie.” Smith believes that the police have more in common with the fascists than with the working people. He probably reached this conclusion during the 1943 riots when not a single fascist was shot by the police, while many Negroes were killed by them. The News helps the fascists. It would give them time to organise and prepare. It would mislead us into abandoning our own self-defense. The workers must not follow this advice. Instead the union movement must organise the self-defense of the working class through Workers’ Defense Guards.   


In twenty years the character of the labor movement in the United States has been radically transformed. Compared to the European movement, it remains backward, dedicated to capitalism and attached to bourgeois parties. In Europe, the term “labor movement” automatically includes the labor and socialist parties, parties which in most cases took the initiative in creating unions as part of a broader struggle for working-class emancipation.
In the United States, however, the labor movement is restricted almost exclusively to unionism. But it has already seen the birth and ascendancy of a radically new unionism which has carried it far from narrow concentration on trade conditions to politically conscious unionism, a peculiarly American type of social reformism. It has created a new type of labor officialdom, with far-reaching aspirations and a corresponding ideology; while not at all union leaders share this outlook to the same degree, and some not at all, its prevalence and dominance is now unmistakable.
A momentary lull in the class struggle obscures the emergence of new features; in these, its days of doldrums, the unions are incapable of meeting the key issues of the day – domestic political strategy, foreign policy, and war – and so, are unable to rouse their own members, much less the people as a whole, beyond a moderate pitch of boredom. The calm is relative and temporary. Even in the most placid periods, the struggle does not vanish; spectacular routine-busting strikes are replaced by smaller little publicized conflicts which persist and repeat. And even these serve only as a preface to big strikes and quasi-political actions in which the labor movement reveals its nature, as in the immediate post-war years.
*
In the previous stage of its development, the dominant craft section of the old AFL determined the character of unionism. Now, the AFL has risen to a claimed membership of 8 million outdistancing the CIO with its 5 million. But this AFL revival by no means signifies a rebirth or re-invigoration of old line unionism: the growth takes place in a new atmosphere. When it arose, the CIO was the prototype of the new unionism, which went far beyond a new form of organization to a new class orientation. With time, the AFL has been slowly forced away from its old positions toward that of the CIO. In this sense, while the CIO has not supplanted the AFL it has in fact conquered it and the triumph is final and irrevocable.
Unions are not merely bigger and more powerful; they are changing in their outlook. The affect of this change is curiously reflected and noted in the sequestered circles in which academicians and scholars move. In professional journals sociologists and their research workers detect important sociological phenomena in every commonplace of union life, translating them into their own trade jargon complete with charts. This is itself a sociological phenomenon. Professors write books proving that unions are altering the whole fabric of society, however they may disagree on the causes and significance of their discoveries. In their own way, they reflect the impact of modern unionism on American intellectual life.
In the winter of 1951, the now defunct Labor and Nation, published by what has been termed the “labor intellectuals,” devoted most of its issue to a symposium re-evaluating the Perlman-Commons interpretation of the labor movement. This school of thought which dominated the thinking of non-socialist liberals for decades saw the labor movement as inherently job conscious rather than class conscious, basically non-political and pro-capitalist; consequently they recorded the doom and futility within it of all socialist aspirations. Its old-guard defenders in the pages of Labor and Nation are hard pressed to fit the CIO into such a pattern. One stresses “the inner likeness of the unions in the two labor camps” without troubling to inquire whether the AFL which resembles the CIO today resembles itself of yesterday. Another writes:
“But the term, job interest, cannot be interpreted too narrowly. The worker does not operate in a social and economic vacuum. His position in the shop is influenced, not only by the political climate in the community but also by government and social policy.”
Here is the crux of his difficulties, for once “job interest” is linked with broad political and social questions it crosses over into working-class consciousness. In his own contribution to the same symposium, Selig Perlman is constrained to refer, in passing, to the Reuther General Motors strike program; but he dismisses it simply as “keen public relations.”
In only one aspect does there remain even an apparent verification of their theses; the weakness of socialism in America.
 
Socialism in the United States has in fact dwindled from a mass movement into a group of uninfluential sects. The causes of this disintegration, however, are to be sought not in any putative “nature of the labor movement” but in the concrete effects of world and domestic politics upon the working-class movement. The victory of fascism in Germany weakened the self-confidence of socialism and labor; the New Deal revived faith in the potentialities of capitalism just as Stalinism succeeded in plagiarizing the name of socialism, on behalf of an anti-labor totalitarianism. Thousands of former socialists drifted out of the movement, so imperceptibly that it is impossible to record when their membership and dues lapsed, to take positions inside the labor movement, in its officialdom or paid staff. In the UAW they literally dominate its leadership. But in abandoning their socialism they did not simply revert to the old AFL ideology which so dominated the thinking of the Commons school. The process of adaptation could be so natural and painless because the new labor movement augered a wide scope for a peculiarly American version of laborism, a social-democracy devoid of its socialist form and content. Thus, socialism disappeared as a mass force but the ground was cut from under the Commons thesis simultaneously.
And this is remarkably demonstrated by the critics who reject this thesis in the pages of Labor and Nation, even though they are not quite sure what must replace it. The present stage of development is so clearly a phase of evolution toward a new class policy that they approach with diffidence any effort to evaluate and define it.
 
The most obvious aspect of new unionism is the industrial form of organization. The battle for industrial unionism has been won, against employers outside and opponents inside the labor movement. As unity negotiations between the AFL and CIO proceed no one dreams of suggesting the dissolution of mass production unions. Old craft unions themselves have modified their methods to accommodate industrial organization.
In the dispute over form, a deep cleavage over the class content of union policy was revealed. Historically, American unionism began among craft journeymen; out of a multitude of experiments in organization, the AFL arose with its fundamental basis in the crafts and a corresponding craft ideology, despite the attachment of industrially organized miners and clothing workers. This form of organization proved viable in the ebbs and flows of 40 years; for decades, apart from the socialist movement, the AFL and its similars remained the labor movement. But the rise of mass production created a new working class- semi-skilled and unskilled outside the AFL which was isolated from it. The AFL became increasingly a narrow privileged minority stratum divorced from the class. In the crisis of 1929, industrial unions in mining and clothing were all but obliterated, clinging with difficulty to a shattered skeleton organization. It was after the ordeal of this near-fatal crisis that these unions faced new possibilities in the favorable climate of economic upturn. They recaptured their power but the mass of workers remained organized.
At this critical turning point in the history of labor, a decisive question was posed: shall the organized minority of the class remain preoccupied with its craft interests, seek a niche of undisturbed safety, and, in contemptuous disregard for the wider needs of the class majority, avoid the risks of battle against powerfully entrenched monopolies. Or, shall the organized minority prepare for a life and death struggle, as a vanguard of the class, to organize the whole class, or at least its decisive sections? In taking up this challenge, the CIO became a great social movement, transcending “unionism” in the narrow sense, enlisting hundreds of thousands of hitherto voiceless, disorganized workers in a popular crusade for unionism – and democracy, attracting thousands of intellectuals and liberals. In a wave of organization and enthusiasm, an American labor movement was founded anew, not the organized minority but the organized class. In the end, the CIO did not become the labor movement but it created it; and in the process, the AFL was reshaped and altered. Unity between the two federations would be a belated official expression of this historic achievement and the triumph of the CIO.
 
From birth the new unions confronted government. They were caught up in a spreading network of labor boards and then faced with government wage-fixing and virtual compulsory arbitration, during the war. Labor, just mobilized for union action as a class was immediately impelled toward political action as a class. The full significance of this simple truism deludes alike sociological investigators far from the scene and union officials in direct personal charge of political action.
Diligent research into facts cramming newspapers’ front pages leads one sociology professor to detect an exceptionally persistent labor activity in the field of politics; he concludes that unions act much like any “pressure group” concerned with advancing its own pet schemes for private advancement – say, a real estate lobby for higher rents or a sportsmen’s council for striped bass conservation. In the momentary confusion following Eisenhower’s election, George Meany, newly elected AFL president, abjured the role of political “opposition” for labor and promised to continue in the future, as in the past, the traditional AFL “non-partisan” policy, i.e., no ties to any political party. Labor’s League for Political Education, recently created political arm of the AFL, in announcing an intensified political action program, imagines that it revives and perpetuates the old Gompers policy which regrettably had been permitted to atrophy after his death. In their touching memorial to Gompers, they do not notice that his policy is dying away labor official by labor official, and that they themselves have already passed it.
In the depths of the depression, the AFL steadfastly refused to demand a national system of unemployment insurance, lest the worker, having received a bounty from government, lose his union loyalty. The fact that unemployed outnumbered employed unionists ten to one and that the organization of the unorganized was not remotely within the purview of its limited imagination made little difference so long as those who were union members were union members. When at last, it endorsed this demand, its action was hailed as a radical new departure, a turning point for the AFL. Twenty years later, it is almost impossible to discover an important public issue on which the AFL will not take a stand, good or bad.
The old AFL was never strictly non-political, but its political demands were restricted. Political action consisted in year-round lobbying and election day endorsements for a series of closely defined labor measures. To win these demands, it impartially supported candidates of either party without over-concern for their actions or views on broad social questions. The formula, “reward your friends; punish your enemies” guided its skirting sallies on the fringes of politics. It strongly opposed the formation of any labor party; this hostility was but one facet of a general reluctance to be identified with any political party. Such was its “non-partisan” character. But to define its attitude is to make it seem more definite and consistent than it ever was in life. Actually, it followed even this line in a wavering and contradictory fashion.
Labor’s new political policy perpetuates hostility to a new party and, formally, supports candidates of either old party. In this lies the similarity of the old policy and the new, a similarity which permits labor officials to genuflect before the memory of Gompers and depict themselves as nothing more than modest continuators of a hoary tradition. “In politics,” comments the U.S. Department of Labor’s Brief History of the American Labor Movement, “both the AFL and CIO, as well as most of the independent unions, officially continue to adhere to Gompers’ slogan of reward labor’s friends and defeat labor’s enemies.” This superficial glance at surface facts ignores 20 years of class struggle, a world over, the rise of a new unionism, and the evolution of labor’s politics.
As far back as 1936, Matthew Woll, AFL Vice-President, wrote in Liberty, that labor in America “differed from the labor movements of most other countries” and was content to support the prevailing parties. “But now that the government has become our biggest employer of labor, employing one out of every seven people in the United States, and has therefore assumed a position of new and possibly dangerous importance to labor as well as to industry, labor may be compelled to form new political alliances and attachments.” In the same article, appeared this oddity: “Dictatorship by anyone should be avoided. But, naturally, if there is any dictating to be done in this supposedly free country, labor is going to have something to say about who does the dictating. Labor abhors all the principles and implications of dictatorship. But labor is compelled frequently to adopt the line of action which promises to be effective.” It was a curiously phrased portent of the new line.
With the New Deal, labor stirred in politics on behalf of a social program of radical reform; it soon formed an organized wing in bourgeois politics attaching itself to the New Deal-Fair Deal section of the Democratic Party. Its occasional endorsement of Republicans ceases to express “non-partisanship” but merely indicates that to a certain extent the program and alliance it seeks cuts across established party lines. It is no longer content with the expression of a friendly attitude by politicians for its scattered requests. It seeks nothing less than a recognized voice and real influence in determining all state policy on every important question. This striving for a share in government is its own “struggle for power.”
(The last flare-up of the old policy on a grand scale fizzled in 1940 when John L. Lewis vainly tried to switch labor’s allegiance from Roosevelt to Willkie. Although by 1943, their irritations with Roosevelt had become public knowledge and led labor officials to withhold endorsement of the fourth term until the last minute, they remained loyal to the New Deal as a political tendency. Lewis’ sally into the Willkie camp, to punish an enemy, Roosevelt, was a move with no long range perspective and began his era of grand isolation.)
In its election platforms, the CIO ranges far beyond “pure” labor questions, taking its stand on foreign policy, civil rights, farmers – every question of the day. In 1951, when a United Labor Policy Committee led a walkout from Truman’s war boards, a simple struggle over wages and prices was immediately transformed into a union political demonstration for a change in the course of national domestic policy, a demonstration supported by all wings of organized labor.
With persistent regularity, one labor leader or another threatens to form a new party. Dave Beck, Meany, Walter Reuther, Emil Rieve – to mention a few. For some, it is a momentary open expression of a vague ultimate goal; for others, a mere blackmail threat to extort political concessions from the party in power. In either case, the ease with which they slip into the threat reveals how little the concept of a labor party is excluded by any formal adherence to “non-partisanship.” On the contrary, the founding of a new party is the logical and inescapable next step in the process which leads from the organization of the class into unions, to its constitution as a wing in bourgeois politics, to its independent organization in a class party.
 
A story that crops up perennially tells of a prominent labor leader who confounds his interviewer, traveling companion, or poker-party guest with a logical defense of “free enterprise,” brilliant beyond the capacities of any businessman. The tale is the same; only the hero changes as it is tailored to fit the official who breaks into current newspaper headlines. With one unanimous voice, the union officialdom proclaims undying devotion to the capitalist social system. But in their capitalism, mills are made of marble and machines of gold. It is the steady uninterrupted rise of living standards; it is the perpetual growth of union power; it is ever-expanding democracy; more security, more rights for the common man; even peace! They ask so much of capitalism that they annoy the capitalist class. Some politicians, businessmen, or economists gingerly suggest that perhaps in some unknown future we must adjust to economic downswing or that perhaps the possibilities for progress are somewhat limited ... labor leaders unhesitatingly denounce such pessimists for lack of confidence in the American way of life.
But they themselves suspect that the future may hold gloomier prospects. Their public speeches are compounded half of warnings of what may come and half of warnings against those who warn of what may come. Is the unprecedented era of prosperity founded upon war and pre-war economics; what of the Taft-Hartley law and its injunction provisions; the rise of McCarthyism and the power of Dixiecrats in the Democratic Party? And every now and then, their discontent with the dwindling liberalism of the Democratic Party breaks through their official optimism. They support capitalism because they expect so much from it but they understand this much: what they get will ultimately depend upon how hard they are ready to fight in strikes and in politics. Their official optimism will not block the way to a new policy in the long run. The labor leader, full of faith in capitalism and making demands upon it, will travel the road to a new party.
The new unionism has succeeded in organizing the main body of the American working class. Its intervention in politics has injected modern democracy with whatever vigor it possesses but its inadequacy is fully revealed in this: the “main drift” of society away from democracy, the legal and extra-legal undermining of civil liberties and the rights of labor continues. Nevertheless, there is one limit beyond which democracy cannot be whittled and chipped away: modern unionism stands as the bedrock foundation from which a new beginning and a new advance is always possible.
 



“Unity in the leadership, solidarity in the ranks” – “Make the UAW the vanguard of America, the architect of the future.”
With these inspiring slogans of two years ago, Walter Reuther rallied the delegates to the 1947 convention of the United Automobile Workers Union, won a second term as president of the union, smashed the Addes-Thomas-Stalinist bloc, and gained virtually unchallenged control of the apparatus. The road was cleared for the Reuther tendency. The old opposition, its irresponsibility further revealed in the next two years, went into complete and utter disintegration.
As the delegates assemble in Milwaukee for the opening of the 1949 convention on July 10, they will ponder this question:
“Is the UAW today, as it always has in the past, pointing the way for the whole labor movement and for all the common people? Is it fulfilling the role of the ‘vanguard of America’?
 
They Did It Then
It was the UAW which won the first major victories through the sit-in strikes and opened the way for the speedy rise of the CIO. It was the UAW which repulsed the first attempts, by Homer Martin, to bureaucratize the new militant union. It was the Rank and File Caucus in the UAW which led the fight against the no-strike pledge.
It was the UAW which led the first post-war strikes and in the course of the battle with General Motors raised the slogan: “Wage increases without price increases.” It was the UAW which showed how to carry on a progressive struggle against the anti-labor Communist Party and how to wipe out its influence without succumbing to conservatism.
It was the UAW, in the Chrysler strike of 1948, which broke the back of the employers’ resistance and led the way toward another round of wage increases to meet the cost of living.
And just because it has served the interests of the working class so admirably in the past, we expect all the more in the future.
The labor movement must take a new step forward, a step at least as significant in the social life of the country as the formation of the CIO. It must form a new political party, an Independent Labor Party without ties to the two old capitalist parties, the Democrats and Republicans. And here too, the UAW must take the lead.
The labor movement cannot move forward unless it is understood that the old political policy of the CIO and AFL, a policy which relies upon the election of so-called liberals from the two old parties, is bankrupt. The events of the last years have proved it over and over again.
In the 1944 elections, the unions won what was hailed as a “great victory.” But how quickly it evaporated!
The new Congress smashed price controls. Truman became president and anti-strike injunctions fell from his hands like confetti in celebration of the great victory.
As the 1948 elections approached, it seemed as though the labor leadership had learned something. Truman was denounced in vigorous terms by a long roster of big rumor names. Hints and threats: if you don’t watch out we will form a new party. The International executive board of the UAW passed an encouraging resolution favoring a “new political realignment” in the United States.
 
New Illusions
But these facts were forgotten too quickly. The labor leadership heard a new love song from the Democratic Party. Truman, the big strikebreaker, became Truman, the great Fair Dealer. New promises – new hopes – new illusions. The UAW resolution on political action was dumped into Reuther’s private wastebasket. Straying lambs returned to the Democratic fold and heaven sent its reward in another “great victory” observed in the 1948 presidential campaign.
But the political wind of eight months of congressional debate has blown by, not to mention the breezes wafted out of the chambers of innumerable investigations and hearings. The most acute onlooker can defect little transformation of the social climate. Not a single important measure has been won in Washington by labor. The hated Taft-Hartley Law, which was supposed to be doomed to final and merciless extinction, is still on the books and hangs over labor’s head in the 1949 contract negotiations.
But the powers of rationalization and sophistry seem unlimited. It is not our own political policy which is at fault, explain the wise leaders of the PAC – no, no, not at all. The trouble is, they tell us, we did not carry out our policy vigorously enough. If only we had been able to elect another dozen or so senators, another score of representatives, then the Republican-Dixiecrat coalition would have been defeated.
 
Disappointment To Disappointment
Only one little fact is left out. The so-called friends of labor, the liberals, the Fair Dealers themselves, have been moving steadily to the right. Give them a majority in Congress in another “great victory” of 1950 and we will see the new majority fall apart. From “victory to victory” equals “disappointment to disappointment.”
It is already difficult to draw a clear line between the standpoint of the Taftleyites and the Fair Dealers. One liberal Democrat, Paul Douglas of Illinois, proposes to substitute a provision for government seizure of plants to replace the T-H injunction law. But if the workers in the seized plants refuse to return to work, then, he says, injunctions will be in order.
Senator Elbert Thomas, reporting on his administration-supported bill, explained that while it did not mention injunctions or plant seizure, it was deliberately written in such a way as to permit the president to ask for both.
The fight in Congress on the Taft Law has become a three-ring circus. When the clowns go home, whatever they do, nothing has been changed. For the ringmaster, Harry Truman himself, told the press many weeks ago that laws providing for injunctions against strikes which “imperil the national welfare” (any big mass strike) are not necessary, since (he says) the president always has had and will have such power and can exert it without any act of Congress.
Thus, under the Fair Deal administration, after two great “victories,” fifteen years after the passage of the Wagner Act, the novel discovery is made by a “liberal” that the power of strikebreaking is the unquestioned right of the president.
 
Figure It Out
What has happened and why? Each UAW delegate will have to mull it over in his mind and realize that if this problem is not brought before the convention, the convention has failed.
You don’t have to be a diagramless-puzzle fan to figure it out. When they thought they were losing their grip on the workers, the “liberals” became liberal to woo them back. But when labor’s “friends” tied the unions back into the Democratic sack, their interest in the problems of labor dulled. They remembered how “complicated” political problems are and how “necessary” it is to compromise.
Let the labor movement break away from the two old parties and the political and social climate will change with dizzying speed, regardless of the outcome of the elections in any given year. What is the prospect of the UAW’s taking the lead in fighting for a new political line within the CIO?
Unfortunately the Reuther leadership, now firmly in the saddle, has failed up to now to carry out its promise to blaze a new political trail. Even Emil Mazey, who has been known as a leading labor party advocate, has been silent, at best.
Reuther is now unwilling to disturb a single strand in the conservative cobweb which has been settling over the head of Phil Murray. He is noted now, not as the man who carries forward the UAW tradition of taking the lead in changing CIO policy, but as a foremost apologist for continuing the old line in a hard and fast manner.
He is the author of the plan to expel every CIO union which refuses to go along with official policy, thus initiating a bureaucratic innovation in the traditional concept of the American labor movement of international autonomy. Although he proposes this new line as a blow at the Communist Party, its most important effect will be a blow at the most progressive trends in the CIO, especially a blow at the UAW, and it will make it difficult to carry the CIO forward.
 
It Can Be the Vanguard
Reuther vacillated during the recent rank-and-file Ford strike. He was afraid to scare off labor’s fainthearted friends in Washington. He made a hurried trip to see Murray to make sure that the latter’s congenital conservatism was not ruffled. And finally, he reached a rotten compromise after promising to turn the Ford strike into the big strike of 1949.
The 1949 convention of the UAW will mark a new step forward if ... if those militants who put Reuther into the presidency begin to press him forward; if they take the initiative In shoving aside those conservative elements within the Reuther camp who believe that the time is ripe for turning the UAW into a “normal” housebroken union; if they begin at this convention to take those steps required really to make the UAW tomorrow “the vanguard of America.”
 



Economic Recovery Program
by Seymour E. Harris
Harvard University Press.
Can ERP solve the key problems of Europe and its relations with the United States? Seymour E. Harris, Harvard economics professor, bids caution in his sober and scholarly book, The European Recovery Program. Writing as an advocate of ERP, but highly critical of many aspects, he warns, “Above all it is essential that the ERP should not be oversold as the Bretton Woods program was to some extent.”
Mr. Harris focuses on the economic aspects of the program without himself forgetting that “political and military developments are likely to be decisive.” By thus delimiting his subject matter he subsumes the most favorable social conditions: preservation of peace and successful neutralization of Stalinism. Consequently we can see clearly how knotty the problem of Europe really is. Even if the intricate economic factors can be brought into balance, “decisive” events can supervene. And the latter is outside the scope of this work.
The author views two aspects of European recovery. Destruction of industry, and general economic and social dislocation of the war created an acute crisis which is being overcome by ERP relief measures and by a gradual rise of production and national income. (Although even by 1951, he points out, Europeans will not live as well as they did in 1938.) He warns that ERP must not “become too much a businessman’s organization” and it must not be conceived simply as “an organization for dumping surpluses.” For the chronic crisis of Europe lies elsewhere and cannot be settled by such measures.
“The most difficult problem confronting Europe,” he writes, “is not the expansion of output but rather the elimination of the large deficit in her balance of payments.” This standpoint is thoroughly documented by statistical material. Europe requires tremendous quantities of commodities from the United States but it cannot earn the dollars for payment.
In the last 33 years, Europe received $80 billion in goods from the United States which it could not pay for at all and an additional $20 billion which it had to buy with gold shipments. It must buy in the United States but it cannot sell its own goods in markets where it can get dollars in exchange. As the competitive position of the U.S. vis-à-vis Europe improves, the difficulties of Europe multiply. Even if ERP succeeds in its stated objectives, Harris fears that the long-term obstacles to European equilibrium will not be overcome. And he concludes: “Here is the most perplexing problem of all.”
The problem is even more perplexing than the author concedes. For what he sees in terms of its manifestation in trade and finance is in reality a social dilemma of vast implications. Given a world dominated by American capitalism with its control over vast quantities of heavy industry unmatched anywhere in the world and its ability to choke opponents out of the market with cheap products, what place is Europe, also a producer of manufactured goods, to play in the worldwide division of labor and industry? Viewed in terms of historical development, what is it to produce and where is it to sell? The author gives no hint of a reply.
Will the United States be able to finance ERP without disorganizing its own political and social stability? Mr. Harris replies: Yes. But his prescription for continued social health is an ill-tasting medicine:
“... high taxes, and economies in public expenditures; control of the use of scarce resources, with particular emphasis on discouraging excessive investment and non-essential use generally; a resulting stability of prices with pressure upon labor and farmers to desist from inflationary policies.”
Possibly, possibly. But it is a program which reads more like the War Deal than a Fair Deal.
 



Dictator Hitler promised delivery of a new Volkswagen. Millions of American workers already own automobiles. In keeping with the more prosperous standard of living in the United States, democrat Truman promises a whole new New Deal.
The United States is still a capitalist democracy while Germany was a totalitarian dictatorship; but the promise of the democrat, like the promise of the dictator, depends for its fulfillment upon winning uncontested mastery of the world – and this in turn depends upon the outcome of a new world war. But preparations for this war, to say nothing of the war itself, make their own demands – demands which run counter to another New Deal.
The next period of American politics could therefore be summarized under the following head: “A new New Deal guaranteed but somewhat deferred. Small down payments may be available from time to time as conditions permit.” The labor leadership has accepted the promissory note of the newly elected administration and like honest, understanding creditors are determined to help the debtor achieve that situation in life which will permit speedy payment; hope seems to lie only in the adjustment of the economy of the whole world to the needs of capitalism in the United States.
The labor officialdom will soon be playing a new role in which they have hardly had time to become proficient: labor diplomats selling good will for American imperialism among the workers of the world.
The so-called bipartisan foreign policy unites the Democratic and Republican Parties. What domestic policy is best suited to the needs of this mutually agreed-upon foreign policy? The answer to this question divides them. The Republican policy, despite its evasive character in the ’48 campaign, can be summarized: Abandon New Dealism; it is impossible to behave both like a world emperor and a reformer.
Haggling over minor items in the imperialist expense account, the Republicans often seem like dimwitted misers; but these pinch-penny candidates for the post of administering the United States government-over-governments show that they understand how heavy the price of the tasks ahead and how strict the need for conserving resources and checking bank balances to preserve stability at home. Senator Taft demanded that the man from Missouri show him how to continue ERP and military preparations and yet at the same time increase drastically the social services, housing, etc.; raise wages and the standard of living of the people; and in addition to all that, clamp the lid on inflation. No reply.
The Republicans came to the Senate hearings on ERP outfitted with powerful reading glasses to scrutinize the small print in the reports of the Democratic officials. Can a nickel be shaved off here, a dime there?
“Even assuming the reasonable success of whatever program we adopt,” said Senator Hickenlooper of Iowa, “for a long period [nothing] will in any way relieve us from the very substantial burden of military strength ... if we spend billions of dollars in this period of time, the next few months or the next two or three years, for goods and materials that come out of the tight American economy, my view is that it is bound to increase the inflationary pressures on this economy here ... it is well to canvass the cost of this thing ... with our eyes open ... what we are getting into ...” and more and more of the same.
 
The Price We Pay
In one of his rare references to current problems not limited to artistic platitudes, Governor Dewey spoke of inflation:
“The first cause is the terrific cost of the war in money and goods ... The second cause ... is our peace-waging program which we have adopted to help free nations get back on their feet and to strengthen our own national defense.”
Paying high prices is a patriotic duty according to Stassen, who said:
“Clearly the primary causes of high prices are the world-wide shortage of goods in the wake of war, coupled with the unsound policies of the Administration after the war and the further urgent necessity of sending quantities of American goods abroad to help the peoples of other nations to regain their feet. Every time an American family or an American housewife pays a high price for food, she is paying a part of the price for America’s assistance to millions of people abroad. This is a price that we should be proud to pay.”
*
Abandonment of a policy of extensive reforms and acceptance of the inevitability – even the desirability – of inflation (desirable because inevitable under “free enterprise”; the bourgeois formula is: high prices equals high profits equals high production equals lower prices) means the abandonment of that labor policy which is associated with reforms.
The labor policy of the old New Deal bought off the labor leadership with a series of reform-ransoms; the loyalty of the union movement to the administration was guaranteed; the stability of the labor officialdom reinforced, But a policy of withdrawal of reforms would so undermine the stability of the labor leadership that with the best will in the world it could not control its ranks. A conservative leadership might in all sincerity promise to continue conservative policies; but who can promise that they will be able to keep their promises and who can guarantee that the guarantors will remain leaders?
The Republican party would cancel the policy of controlling the union movement primarily through the union leadership; it would establish direct state control of the union and its officialdom. The Taft-Hartley Law with its anti-Communist affidavits was the clearest expression of the new line. It controlled the unions and their officers. From affidavits applicable to members of the Communist Party to general “loyalty” affidavits applicable to all genuine union militants is a short step.
 
Truman and the Democratic Party
The 1948 elections settled only one thing: dreams are to be tested against reality. Truman promises to harmonize the clashing needs of capitalist world policy and liberal reformism. He was trapped into making this promise despite himself.
Nominated with Roosevelt in 1944 as a concession to the more conservative elements of his party, Truman, the president, tried his best to carry out a rightwing policy. But the more success crowned these efforts, the less did it smile on his chances of re-election. He reacted to the outraged cries of the capitalist class in the first two strike waves that plagued his administration. He unearthed statutes to justify injunctions and fines against the United Mine Workers. He dusted off moldy law books to discover the right to draft all railroad strikers; and to the almost unanimous applause of its members, dramatically interrupted his address to Congress to announce his success in breaking the rail stoppage. He could not quite decide whether to sign or to veto the Taft-Hartley Law, and when he finally acted he put himself on record for a more “reasonable” law restricting labor. Under pressure from the meat packers, he abolished meat price control and soon found himself signing away price control completely.
All was in order except one thing: the Democratic Party and the president-by-act-of-God were totally superfluous for such a policy. The Republican Party could serve just as well and had the advantage of prior copyright. While the continuation of this policy did not necessarily mean that Truman would have to re-enter the haberdashery business, it did mean that he would have to move out of the White House.
The labor leadership became more and more uneasy. Murray denounced Truman in extreme terms. Whitney of the Railway Trainmen pledged himself solemnly to raise millions to ensure Truman’s defeat in 1948. Rumors, suggestions, threats that the official labor movement would embark upon some new political path were heard. Even – lord forbid – maybe a labor party! Wallace walked out to form his third party threatening to wean away millions of Democratic voters by a very radical platform of renewed New Dealism. Inside the Democratic Party the stop- Truman movement began.
 
Strategy and Its Result
The CIO officials and their intellectual camp followers of the Americans for Democratic Action spearheaded the drive to nominate some other Democrat in ’48. Eisenhower, Douglas ... better the unknown evil than the known. Mayor O’Dwyer of New York City joined the anti-Truman bandwagon. This archetypical product of the Northern political machine whose political power has more and more come to depend upon votes of the organized workers had previously proclaimed a “Taft-Hartley Veto Day” in his own home town to hold the votes of unionists for his local party.
Things looked bad for Truman. But the trend was reversed by his shift to the left made necessary by a most realistic and vulgar estimation of his chances of holding power through any other course. Predictions about the speedy disintegration of the Democratic Party and the rapid emergence of some new political formation proved to be premature and based upon a failure to estimate the full effects of the turn in Democratic Party policy.
The most significant aspect of Truman’s election and the victory of his party was not the fact that the victory took place but the switch in policies which made it possible. The turn began toward the end of 1947 with Truman’s report to Congress in which he outlined in vague terms a program for a continued New Deal. He continued with the enunciation of a civil-rights program with drove the Dixiecrats out of the party and conducted his election campaign with vigorous attacks on “Wall Street” and denunciations of the Taft-Hartley Law as its instrument.
The new strategy was not adopted simply as a desperate measure to make an election victory possible but also to ensure the retention of party strength in the event of defeat, looking toward a possible comeback. A defeated Democratic Party was to emerge from the election as the party of the New Deal, carrying on opposition to the Republican administration as the true representative of the “people” and as a fighter for liberal principles. Now, however, the would-be New Dealers must assume responsibility for the execution of their fine promises, since they command control of all departments of government.
 
Plucking the Fruits of Imperialism
Can imperialism today be reconciled with a policy of liberalism and reform at home?
The sweeping victory of the Democratic Party in the elections made possible by Truman’s swing to the left tests this proposition again. Prosperity and stability in the U.S., upon which a new New Deal would depend, is not a simple domestic affair but a problem of the complicated connections of the United States with world economy. In the minds of the liberal Democrats, imperialism, far from contradicting their liberalism, is inseparably associated with it. Let us see how this works out.
Early 1946: President Truman transmits a report to Congress on foreign loans and the Bretton Woods agreement, a report which is signed by James M. Byrnes, Marriner S. Eccles and – none other than Henry A. Wallace, who at this time held a common view with them. These days of bright optimism have vanished, days when the thoroughgoing nature of the rift with Russia was still unclear. Nevertheless, this report still floodlights the liberal capitalist mentality. And here are its main aspects:
(1) America must have large foreign markets.
“During the war many of our important industries, particularly in the field of capital goods, were built up to capacities far in excess of any foreseeable peacetime domestic demands. With the elimination of war demands, much of this American productive, capacity may be unused.”
The foreign-loan program of the United States “is directed toward the creation of an international economic environment permitting a large volume of trade among all nations. This program is predicated on the view that a productive and peaceful world must be free from warring economic blocs and from barriers which obstruct the free flow of international trade and productive capital. Only by the re-establishment of high levels of production and trade the world over can the United States be assured in future years of a sustained level of exports appropriate to the maintenance of high levels of domestic production and employment.”
(2) But the nations of the world do not have the price – they must have dollars to purchase American goods. The United States has an enormous favorable balance of trade with the rest of the world. (In 1947, for example, the U.S. exported fifteen billion dollars’ worth of good and imported only six billion.)
The report tells us that dollars must be supplied to the world by loans and by the investment of capital abroad by the American capitalist class.
“In a world of peace, prosperity and a liberal trade policy, there may well be a revival and continuation of American private investment on a large scale including reinvestment of the profits of industry ... Such an increase of investment is a natural and wholesome development for a wealthy community.”
(3) These loans, however, will have to be repaid, with interest of course.
(Drastic steps soon had to be taken to meet the threat of Russian expansion. The Marshall Plan, devised later, involves grants, not loans, to European nations to help seal them off from Russian influence. As a weapon of the “cold” war with Russia, the Marshall Plan differs from the scheme devised in this report which presents a long-term conception based upon the exploitation of a normal, peaceful world; that is, one in which the United States has no serious rival. Grants made under the Marshall Plan make no formal provisions for payment of interest either in money or in any other way. As Paul Hoffman, Economic Cooperation Administrator, has said: “The power of the purse is more effective if it is not formalized.”)
We will keep investing and lending. These loans and investments will earn profits which must be paid by the nation blessed with the indebtedness. So long as the total of new loans and investments exceeds the amount which the foreign nations will have to pay to us in the form of (a) payments of interest and principal on the old debts, plus (b) dividends paid on the capital invested by our bourgeoisie abroad, plus (c) payments to cover their excess imports from the United States – so long as this is the case, the affair will run smoothly for the U.S. We will enjoy prosperity. They will enjoy loans and investments and the right to pay for the same.
 
Day of Reckoning
(4) But the day of reckoning will come. At some point in this scheme the nations of the world will have to pay us such enormous amounts to cover the principal and interest on loans and profits of American- owned industry that new investments will fail to keep pace. “Receipts on foreign investment will exceed new investment,” predicts the report. “Net repayment” will begin.
(5) Happy thought: the United States will then be able to live off the rest of the world.
When net repayment begins, whether this be a few years or many decades from now, it will involve an excess of imports of goods and services ... over our total exports of goods and services. The growth of our population and the depletion of our natural resources and the increase in our standard of living will increase the need for imported products and these developments together with the maintenance of a high and stable level of employment will facilitate this adjustment ... The receipt of payments on our foreign loans in the form of goods and services is entirely consistent with increased exports from this country and rising production at home and will contribute to a rising living standard in the United States in the same way that a private individual’s earnings on his investments make possible an increase in his own living standards.
*
This is the “One World” of imperialism. American capitalism is to buy up the world to provide for its old age. Such is the “liberal” perspective for world development and the inseparable connection which it establishes between foreign policy and reform politics.
Leaving aside the question of whether this perspective is possible under any circumstances, we must write across the report in heavy lines: “Net payment, deferred,” Unfortunately for this Utopian landlord’s dream of world rent collections, other dreamers dreamed dreams.
The pacific execution of this plan depended upon an agreement with Russia, which by “agreement” was to take its place as a lesser partner assigned to a slow and steady reduction by the might of the American dollar. If we could buy out the rest of the world, why not Russia? The Russian ruling class, however, saw no reason to shape the world to the needs of the American bourgeoisie when it could just as well be subordinated to the needs of the Moscow bureaucracy. The Stalinists took control of half of Europe, wrested its industry out of the American world and attached it to Russian economy. Showing no sign of altering its policy, Russia was transformed from a “glorious ally,” fighting in its own peculiar way for the freedom of the earth, into a horrible dictatorship bringing tyranny and its own trade agreements to whole countries.
The fruit of imperialism doesn’t fall into our lap. When we shake the tree we dislodge a wild bear. And so, instead of enjoying the fruit we must arm ourselves and hire assistants to kill the bear. Thus ended Experiment No. 1 in post-war New Dealism.
 
For Imperialism – at a Lower Price
The Republican spokesmen understand in their own way that in the long run imperialism is incompatible with a liberal policy. Henry A. Wallace understands it in a somewhat different way. Instead of a turn in domestic policy he proposes a turn in foreign policy, or more accurately, a return to the illusions that accompanied the first flush of victory in war.
One of the authors of the plan for a painless conquest of the world by purchase, Wallace turned abruptly away from his co-signers when it became increasingly clear that this path led toward war. To participate comfortably in an easy exploitation of the world – that is one thing. To fight a war and to prepare for it – that is something else again.
The Wallace movement, apart from its Stalinist aspects, represented a peace movement of the petty bourgeoisie to enjoy the benefits of international conquest but unwilling to bear its expense. In the absence of any leadership from the labor movement, it was the Stalinists who capitalized on the prevailing peace sentiment.
The keynote of the Wallace campaign was: war and war preparations would make a New Deal impossible.
“... in a great arsenal of two world wars,” he said in Bridgeport, “I speak for peace ... We cannot raise living standards and armies too. We cannot build homes and barracks too ... The two old parties are, after all, the same. Given a foreign policy directed against the common man all over the world, they must combine on a bipartisan domestic policy directed against the common man in the U.S.A.”
Instead of the single-handed domination of the world by the United States, he proposed a condominium with Russia, to avoid war.
The costs of war and imperialism are borne not by the working class alone but by all the poorer and even the not-so-poor sections of the population. During the last war, thousands of small enterprises were swamped by the needs of war production. Whole sections of the middle class, white collar workers and professionals were even less able than the organized working class to defend themselves against inflation.
A sympathetic audience heard Wallace ask:
“How can Democrats or Republicans or the labor misleaders who support them check inflation when they won’t cut the arms expenditures which cause inflation?”
Reform and war are irreconcilable ... From the standpoint not of the lower but of the highest sections of the bourgeoisie, Republican policy rests on the same ground.
 
Labor Leadership
The Wallaceites and the Republicans, each in their own way, comprehend the basic tendency of American imperialism. The labor officialdom, however, is bound to the Democratic administration by the common hope of reconciling the imperialist line of the United States with a continuation of liberal policies.
The leaders of the CIO hailed General Eisenhower as one of the pretenders to the throne of King Franklin. They thereby concretized the connection in their minds between the might of American arms and continued New Dealism. At the CIO convention, Supreme Court Justice Douglas stressed the importance of the international role of the American labor movement in a speech which so impressed the delegates that they decided to distribute thousands of copies of his remarks.
He said: The American workers have an international task to perform. The European labor movement, struggling to free itself from Stalinist domination, needs the assistance of its American section. But so far, only submission to American domination and dictation has been offered as a substitute for Stalinism. Not being American labor leaders, the European workers do not glow with enthusiasm. But let the most powerful section of the world working class, the American working class, which is itself striking Stalinism down, speak out openly and aggressively in defense of the democratic rights of the peoples of the world and Stalinism will have received a terrible, even mortal, blow. But that means to speak out without evasion or diplomacy against all oppression and dictatorship, that which originates from the United States as well as that which originates from Russia.
But, sadly, what Douglas has in mind, of course, is not this but the inestimable value of the labor leadership as walking delegates for American imperialism among the skeptical European workers. And, just as sadly, he is justified in his expectations. When John L. Lewis denounced the shooting of French miners by the American-financed government we listened in vain for some sympathetic echo from the labor officialdom. Walter Reuther speaks voluminously on almost every subject of current events, on plans for prosperity, on raising wages without increasing prices; but he is an “architect of the future” whose plans leave him little time to concern himself with the rights of peoples dominated by our government, peoples whose fate will affect that future.
 
“Internationalism”?
Faithful advocates of the bipartisan foreign policy, our own labor leadership parrots, with a certain delay, the phrases emanating from Washington. When the administration anticipated a long period of collaboration with Russia, the Murrays maintained a close alliance with Stalinism at home and abroad. As American diplomats exchanged friendly greetings with the Stalinist delegates at world conferences, the representatives of the CIO tipped their hats to the dictatorially appointed Russian “union” delegates at the World Federation of Trade Unions. The warm fraternity chilled when Moscow frowned on Washington. Our labor leaders awoke to their differences with Stalinism; and so the big offensive in the unions against it and the pending demise of the WFTU.
As Wallace-Truman dreamed of ensuring American, prosperity by the peaceable financial conquest of the world, the CIO smiled in its slumber. One of its pamphlets issued to popularize the above-mentioned Bretton Woods agreement quotes Murray: “In addition to a domestic program for full production in the U.S. there must be a vigorous long-term program of international commerce,” he said. The pamphlet continued : “Our hope for 5,000,000 jobs through foreign trade lies in the industrialization of nations and continents such as China, Africa, Latin America, India and a big expansion of industry in the Soviet Union.” And to avoid any misunderstanding:
“This money (loans) is invested, not spent. Countries that secure aid from both the Bank and the Fund will repay the loans. The fact that loans will be made only for productive purposes is the guarantee of that ... [some people] fear that Bretton Woods will wipe out private banking. This is not so, since banks will continue to make loans supervised by the Bank for Reconstruction and Development.”
Soon the breezes will blow a spate of “labor” speeches on the glories of internationalism. The internationalism of the American workers, however, can consist of one kind or another: that is, the American workers can hitch their fate to the progress of American imperialism abroad or they can attach themselves to the workers and oppressed peoples of the world. These are two different kinds of “internationalism.” The first is laborite imperialism; the second is genuine working-class internationalism.
In Japan, strikes broken and government workers denied the right to organize; in France, American bullets for miners; in Germany, hundreds of thousands of workers demonstrate in the Western zones for wages to meet the costs of inflation. From our own labor statesmen, the newly naturalized “citizens of the world,” we hear only the mealy-mouthed diplomatic formulations of the recent CIO convention.
 
Case of Greece
In the true American internationalist spirit is the wretched Clinton Golden, chief labor advisor of the American Mission for Aid to Greece 1947–8, trained for this noble mission as an official of Citizen Murray’s Steel Workers union. A few choice excerpts from his report, printed in the Labor Information Bulletin of the Department of Labor, illustrate how our world travelers become the weasel apologists for semi-fascist regimes – American supported.
They, [the Communists] had control tor a time of the Greek Confederation of Labor but the courts had unseated the Communist executive, because of election irregularities and appointed other persons as provisional appointees. Under their laws [everything strictly “legal” you see], the courts named twenty-one persons, seven each from the three major political groups: Liberals, Populists, and the left-wing Communist group. Six of the seven left-wingers decided they wouldn’t serve and challenged the action of the courts as being of a fascist character. This enabled them to confuse the labor unionists of the country.
So you see, the trouble with the above “legal” action was not that it was fascist in character but that it helped the Communists “confuse” the workers by calling it fascist!
The Communists had tried to convey the impression and I think they were fairly, successful [Stalinist propaganda – how artful!] that in Greece there was no freedom, no civil rights, no free speech or assembly. They had claimed the government was fascist and the American Mission was primarily concerned with maintaining that kind of government ...
An emergency session of the Greek Parliament convened because of reports of a possible Communist coup passed a law prohibiting strikes and lockouts with a death penalty. But after we had been there awhile and when the Greek government received protests from the AFL and the CIO against the anti-strike law they cooled off on that issue. Strikes have been called since and no one has been arrested or shot, and I am informed that the law will be repealed soon.
How can one call this government “fascist”? It promises not to execute strikers, when pressed. True the law is still on the books, says Golden, but “soon ...” About six months after his optimistic report on the progress of a liberalism which promises under duress not to shoot strikers, it required the intervention of a UN subcommittee to compel the Greek government to abandon preparations for the execution of ten Greek maritime unionists.
 
Just Not Interested
Accepting the same analysis of the world role of U.S. capitalism as the bourgeoisie, our labor leaders, especially those of the CIO, have been content to leave questions of “foreign policy” in the safe hands of the official diplomats. When the administration for its own reasons was denouncing the crushing of the opposition by Stalinism in the countries of the Russian sphere of influence, they were only moderately interested.
Walter Reuther engaged in a two-year bitter factional fight with Stalinists during which every conceivable issue that served the struggle was raked to the fore by both sides. One of the largest single nationality groupings in the UAW are the Polish workers, intensely concerned with the murderous actions of the Stalinist gangsters in Poland. Reuther overlooked this question. The top leadership of the CIO has just concluded a fight against the CP concentrated on the issues of the Marshall Plan and support of Wallace, both closely related of course to international policy. We saw disciplinary measures invoked, abrupt commands issued, but we heard no political exposure of the reactionary work of Stalinism everywhere in the world against the working class.
What accounts for this indifference? Simple devotion to American foreign policy would seem to demand a different attitude. We must conclude, however simple the answer, that the “world citizens” of the CIO were just not interested. And now, if they are to busy themselves with international affairs at the invitation of a government which is sorely in need of apologists throughout the world, we must be excused for our lack of enthusiasm.
The new international role of the American labor leaders is closely associated with the whole question of the new New Deal. American capitalism can provide itself permanently with effective labor ambassadors abroad only if it can afford payment at home for services rendered. The alliance between the Democratic Party and the labor movement, which just managed to survive the strains of the last three years, is an unstable treaty resting upon momentary, vanishing factors. What made the left turn of President Truman possible?
New Dealism and war preparations, as the Republicans and Wallaceites contend, tend to be mutually exclusive. But the capitalist state acquires an adequate political line in a complicated fashion under a bourgeois democracy where all classes, above all the
working class, maintain their rights, their organizations and their ability to carry on a coordinated struggle in their own behalf. Not the best policy but the best possible policy prevails. In the intricate struggle between parties and factions, corresponding to conflicts between classes and social groupings, momentary and opportunist interests play a big part. (One virtue of fascism from the point of view of the capitalist class is that it is relieved of many of these tedious problems and can reach decisions more abruptly and more drastically.)
A minimum of social conflict at home is indispensable to meet the conflicts abroad. Elections, the testing ground of political platforms and policy, show what policies can receive the maximum popular support and therefore how far the regime may go at any moment without coming into violent clash with its own working class. Those policies which receive a minimum of popular endorsement can be held in abeyance for new times and new tests. The 1948 elections slowed down the tendencies toward the right but did not and could not eliminate them.
 
Not Another New Deal
The United States today affords a short period of extended life for the antics of watered-down liberalism-in-words. War production is hardly begun and its inflationary effects hardly felt. The full impact of the Marshall Plan is not yet felt; the United States has not yet thrown its own resources fully into the effort. While not powerful enough to buy off the working class of the whole world, industrial United States is rich enough to provide its ruling class with rising profits and still, for the moment, tolerate meager concessions to its own working class.
The most authentic representatives of big capital have been willing to forgo a showdown battle with organized labor; in the strike movement of 1948 we saw General Motors, Ford and Chrysler after a brief moment of hesitation reach amicable wage settlements which set a “pattern” of peaceful agreements for the decisive sections of industry.
To continue this pattern, acceptable (or at least tolerable) to the capitalist class, it is possible to modify the most extreme provisions of the Taft-Hartley Law. This temporary objective situation made the Truman turn not only a policy which could assure a Democratic victory in the elections but one which was within the limits of what was immediately acceptable, even if not most desirable, to industry. Possible and acceptable – but not for very long.
Truman represents not another New Deal but a temporary dabbling in liberal trivialities, especially in words. The irreducible need of the new administration is to prepare for war. It has therefore no intention of freeing the union movement from government controls. It intends to replace the hated T-H Law with a more “reasonable” measure of control which will insulate the economy from the electric shock or mass strikes. In this one instance, the whole new New Deal is exposed. The government does not have full confidence in the union movement and its leadership because it has no confidence in its own ability to pacify them with reforms.
There is a certain justification for this lack of confidence. The Democratic Party, the labor leadership, and the rank and file of the unions all approach the putative new New Deal in a different fashion. Capitalist politicians may modify their attitude toward reforms, offering or withdrawing them as suits the basic needs of the system and class whose wealth oils their political machines and personal careers. Election defeats are no tragedy. When the great liberal, New Deal Senator Brown of Michigan, was defeated by the Republican Ferguson, he soon found employment as head of the Detroit Edison Company. A brief synopsis of his biography is the biography of all liberal democrats: he was liberal – but not too liberal.
 
“Reasonable” Labor Control
For the labor officialdom, this is a life-and-death question: almost (if the word does not seem out of place in this connection) a matter of “principle.” Periods of reform mean stability for the leadership; periods of reaction undermine this stability. Fresh in the mind of every porkchopper is the nightmare experience of World War II. The conservative leadership summarized its loyalty to the war in the no-strike pledge just as today it hopes to pledge its loyalty to the Marshall Plan by accepting “reasonable” measures of labor control.
But while the war made it difficult to make gains for the workers it did not prevent the capitalist class from striking blows at the unions. Rank-and-file movements developed within the unions against the leadership under the slogan “Rescind the No-Strike Pledge.” In at least three important CIO unions, the leadership faced serious opposition: John Green in the Shipbuilders Union saw his regime threatened; Sherwin Dalrymple in the Rubber Workers Union saved his administration only by resigning in favor of L.S. Buckmaster, who in turn held on to the presidency at the last convention of his union by a few votes; R.J. Thomas and George Addes in the Auto Workers Union were utterly and finally defeated by Walter Reuther, who knew how to take advantage of the discontent that had accumulated during the war years.
The end of the war brought relief to the sorely pressed leadership, but it had hardly exhaled a collective sigh of relaxation following the celebration over the election of Roosevelt for a fourth term than the. rightward swing of the new Truman administration and the Republican victory of 1946 shocked them into new moods of anxiety. The 1948 elections permit them another short respite to chase rainbows. At last they can begin to usher in the brave new world which they have spoken of for so many years and prayed for so often in vain. Are the new hopes any more likely of fulfillment than the old?
*
During World War II, various maps and atlases were sold with the promises by the publishers that, upon conclusion of the war and the peace settlements that would follow, new and more up-to-date editions would be forthcoming gratis or at some nominal fee. As the trusting purchaser of one of these atlases, I still await redemption of this promise some years after the hostilities have ended. But one can bear no grudge: with the best will in the world the publishers cannot achieve the impossible. If the simple promise to deliver a new map of the world cannot be redeemed, how much faith can one put in the pledges of the statesmen and politicians to deliver not a map but the new world itself – a liberal, progressive world – at least for the American people?
The difficulty is that while the New Deal is to come as the promised fruit of victory in warfare, the preparations for war and, of course, the war itself yield only the fruits of reaction. That is why we can have no confidence in the Truman regime. The labor holder of the promissory note of the new administration will be faced not with a future of slow and steady payment but of more and increasingly insistent demands for more credit.
 



In his President’s report to the UAW membership, Walter Reuther announces that the UAW delegation at the recent CIO convention proposed the expulsion of Communists from the CIO. We turn to this question not because we want to defend the Stalinists in their efforts to retain influence in the labor movement but because we seek the most effective methods of eliminating their ideas and practices so harmful to every progressive movement.
The proposal of the UAW leaders is not only wrong in itself but harmful to the union movement in its argumentation. Furthermore, it reveals a state of mind among the leaders of the most advanced labor organization in the country, the United Automobile Workers Union, which, if continued, can lead not to a decrease in the influence of Stalinism but to an increase.
It is quite true, as Reuther has said, that the Communist Party acts as the colonial agent for the Soviet Union. But any sensible person must ask himself: “How is it possible for colonial agents of an anti-working class bureaucracy to gain supporters among the American workers?”
For it is not true at all that the majority of the members and sympathizers of the Communist Party are colonial agents. The basic cause for pro-Stalinist sentiment lies in the fact that millions of workers and poor people, in this country as in all others, are dissatisfied with the conditions of insecurity, threat of war and unemployment that are part of the present capitalist system. Where there is no alternative method of carrying on a fight against these conditions proposed by honest people, the Communist Party is able to turn this justified discontent into support for Russian policy. That is the basic cause but, of course, there are also additional factors; for example, in the course of the last war, the present labor leadership which is so concerned with its fight against the Stalinists, was helping them to fit on the mask of “liberalism.”
To deal a lasting blow at the Communist Party and not simply one which inconveniences them today only to push them forward tomorrow, two things are necessary: 1) an active program by the labor movement that is able to advance the interests .of all the common people, not only In words and promises but in actuality; and 2) the fullest possible democratic discussion in the ranks of the labor movement of all policies and programs so that the membership is able to judge on the basis of facts not fiction.
An example of the proper way to defeat Stalinism in the labor movement was the fight inside the UAW against the Thomas-Addes-CP administration and group in the period of 1945–7. But, since the fight of the anti-Stalinists was based upon a limited, not fully adequate, and often self-contradictory program, the defeat of the CP while severe was not final and crushing. The problem of Stalinism in the labor movement, including the UAW, remains; and in striving to eliminate it, we cannot rely upon memories of past victories.
 
Introducing Bureaucratic Convention
The proposal of the UAW leaders at the CIO convention marks a turn in the methods of the struggle against the CP. Instead of the fullest possible democratic debate, it proposes bureaucratic expulsions. Instead of a new fighting program for the union movement, it proposes a reliance upon the newly elected Truman administration. This criticism may appear somewhat extreme when we read in Reuther’s report:
“We welcome democratic debate within the councils of CIO. We grant anyone in those councils the right to express his point of view and the right to influence decisions in the determination of policy. But once those decisions have been democratically arrived at, the will of the majority must prevail and those in a position of leadership must adhere to the policy established. Officers of CIO affiliated International Unions who take advantage of all the privileges and protections of CIO affiliation must also assume the responsibilities that go with CIO affiliation. Those who have failed to assume these responsibilities in the past should make up their minds once and for all either to get all the way in the CIO or all the way out of the CIO.”
So that every International Union must carry out the line or get out of the CIO! We leave aside the question of how free and democratic are the sessions of the national CIO conventions whose delegates are not chosen directly by the membership but appointed by the Executive Boards of the respective unions and whose methods of representation give an over proportionate representation to small unions and affiliated bodies which are easily controlled by the Murray machine. We simply ask Reuther to tell us the terribly democratic manner in which the CIO convention repudiated all talk of a “new party” in opposition to a now almost forgotten resolution of the UAW International Board.
Although Reuther defends his proposed expulsions on the basis, of “trade union principles” he is actually not defending any long standing “principle,” but introducing a bureaucratic innovation into the CIO. The trade union “principle” of the American labor movement has been the traditional autonomy of the International Unions. This was long established in the American Federation of Labor and when the CIO split away it maintained the same principle. Reuther proposes to abandon the old principle and substitute a new one. There is nothing wrong with changing a principle provided, 1) it is done honestly, and 2) it is an improvement. Reuther’s proposal meets neither of these tests.
The autonomy of the International unions is at least a partial guarantee today that a certain minimum of democratic procedures will continue. In order for the top leadership of the CIO to put over a program and policy, it is compelled to rely upon convincing the International Unions of its validity. The abandonment of autonomy would facilitate the procedure of dictatorial command as a substitute for democratic discussion.
 
Poor Substitute for a Program
And by the way, when did Reuther discover this new principle? At this very second, the National CIO is on record against the payment of a cash veterans bonus. (It is liable to cause inflation! God knows, we want to keep away from that.) Under more militant leadership, the UAW has endorsed a proposal for a cash bonus. At the last AVC convention a representative of the UAW spoke publicly for the bonus and Bernstein a personal representative of Murray spoke against it. But that is not all. Murray’s representative told the delegates to the AVC convention that this disagreement between himself and the member of the UAW was an example of the prevailing democracy in the CIO. True. And Reuther’s new proposal is an example of a trend away from democracy.
In the GM strike of 1945–46, the UAW under Reuthers inspiration raised the slogans of “Wage Increases without Price Increases” and “Open the Company’s Books”. Phillip Murray frowned on these radical ideas and that was one reason why he supported the Addes-Thomas group against Reuther at the 1946 convention. Murray did not succeed in having his own stooges retain control of the UAW. One thing that hindered him was the fact that he was not armed with Reuther’s new principle of centralized control. In the steel workers strike of 1946, Murray did not adopt the principles of the GM strike. That is the one reason why he was able to get a settlement so quickly from the steel capitalists who knew that the steel union would not expose their attempts to get price increases. In the same year, Reuther criticized Murray’s leadership of the Steel Workers union because he did not “pick up the torch lit by the GM strikers.” Who violated union principles then?
This brings us to our last point. The Walter Reuther of those years was the man with a radical program which inspired the ranks of the UAW. He did not wait until his policies became “official” to bring them to the public because he wanted to win a strike and he wanted to become president of the UAW. With this program he rallied support, he exposed the Communist Party and shattered the Addes-Thomas-CP bloc. BUT TODAY THAT PROGRAM IS A MEMORY. Reuther has no program that can arouse the ranks today. He thinks only of remaining as a supporter of the Truman Democrats, trusting in their promises. But he knows as well as the next man how ill-founded are hopes in the administration of Truman. For this or that diplomatic reason he prefers to remain silent as do the more progressive elements in the UAW. And with no program of their own, with no confidence in the program which they endorse publicly, they fear the rise of Stalinist influence. Their way out of the dilemma is to propose the bureaucratic expulsion of the CP. That is not the way.
The new Reuther proposal therefore is not designed to assist in the struggle against Stalinism but to make easier a continuance of the old, worn out policies of supporting the Democratic Party. Not the expulsion of the CP but the formation of a Labor Party; that is the answer.
 



Here is the UAW, as it is and as it must become. The UAW and Walter Reuther, by Irving Howe and B.J. Widick [1], offers the only account of the battles which transformed it from a union of a few thousand into the mighty organization of nearly one million that it is today. If that were all, the work would command our attention, for the magnetism of the UAW, attracting the whole American working class and infiltrating the international labor movement, will yet force its way into world politics. But this book is far more than a history of the UAW; it is a penetrating analysis of the role of the labor movement in the United States illustrated by the UAW.
In his New Men of Power, C. Wright Mills measured the capacities of the contemporary labor officialdom against the need to stop the “drift” of society toward war and totalitarianism; he found it inadequate and faced a chasm in leadership which he tried to bridge with “labor intellectuals” ... unsuccessfully. Howe and Widick approach the same question from the vantage of a single union. A socialist understanding combined with an intimate knowledge of the real life of the UAW (Widick, a chief steward in one of the largest UAW locals, participated in the strikes of the ’30s in Flint and Akron) permits them to fill in the gaps left by Mills. For in the UAW we meet the men and women of the labor movement who are being molded and hardened to grapple with the very tasks which Mills found unsolvable by the labor leadership. Their book is one of the few works on the labor movement that can be read with the same absorbed interest which the living story of the UAW itself provokes.
Into open-shop Detroit, overpowered by the assembly line; torn by racial, national and sectional antagonisms of Negroes, whites, Italians, Boles, Southerners breaking out into bloody riots; cursed with all kinds of fascist crackpot grouplets; dominated by three giant auto corporations which played with city affairs like the owners of any company town ; poor in leisure, deprived of culture, lacking the most ordinary democratic and human rights ... into this city the UAW enters as the main civilizing, organizing force for its two million inhabitants.
“It alone,” the authors emphasize, “has brought a sense of human warmth into an area dominated by robots, pistons and dollars – and that more than anything else is the measure of its triumph.”
The UAW bears the birthmark of its origin. The authors trace its rise in the glorious days of the sit-in strikes when workers in the Flint Fisher Body plant, holding firm against injunctions and threats of eviction by state troops, wrote to Governor Murphy:
“We have decided to stay in the plant. We have no illusions about the sacrifices this decisions will entail. We fully expect that if a violent effort is made to oust us, many of us will be killed ... If this result follows from the attempt to eject us, you are the one who must be held responsible for our deaths.”
With a consciousness of power that came from victory in the fight against General Motors and Chrysler, the militants of the UAW fought off the first attempts to debase their union into a plaything for bureaucrats, ousting their first president, Homer Martin, and assigning him to oblivion.
The union went on to crack the most obdurate open shopper of all, Henry Ford, last of the Big Three to fall to the union. Then quickly into the war years with its debates on the “Equality of Sacrifice” program and bitter factional struggles over incentive, piecework pay. And finally, the momentary emergence of the “Rank and File Caucus,” a faction without the support of a single well-known official which won 40 per cent of the votes at the 1944 convention against the no-strike pledge in the teeth of the united opposition of the top officialdom.
It was the same UAW which led the first post-war strike wave in the famous General Motors strike of 1945–46, inspiring the union movement with its radical demands for a look at the company books and a say-so on prices. Strike leader Walter P. Reuther, then director of the General Motors department, was hoisted into the presidency and the more conservative R.J. Thomas deposed. Internal struggles and conflicts between political groupings taught the union activists more than raw militancy ... They became wise to the ways of the Communist Party, which once boasted a strong UAW following. Its feeble efforts at cold-war super-militancy met with jeers and scorn. In a two-year faction fight, the auto workers reduced the CP to a shadow and eliminated its influence from leading circles. It is this history of united battle against the class enemy and internal conflict over tactics and strategy that created the cadre of the UAW, the union militants, jealous of democratic rights and loyal to a fighting union platform. In the words of Reuther, the UAW is “the vanguard in America.”
 
The UAW as a Vanguard
The UAW can become the center of an authentic left wing of the American labor movement; in fact, in one way it is so already. In all unions, militants who are dissatisfied with rigid bureaucracy, who hope for a leadership more sensitive to the ranks, who are stirred by a vague disquietude with the policies of their own officials, look expectantly to it. If judged by socialist standards, it might appear conservative indeed; for its leadership and its membership are pro-capitalism in outlook. But we must measure by the standards of the United States where socialists make up a tiny section of the working class and socialism itself lives in tiny sects incapable of decisively affecting the course of the class struggle. The UAW is not distinguished by any special ideology nor by a formally worked-out program clearly different from the ordinary platform of the CIO. Nevertheless it plays a special role. At each stage of the development of the class struggle in this country, from the earliest days of the CIO, the UAW has been in the forefront of labor’s battles, initiating tactics and slogans to show the way. Life, not doctrine, makes the UAW the vanguard of labor and its vanguard role flashes out most vividly when the union movement reaches an impasse and must alter its policy to break out.
We face just such a turning point today. Our giant labor movement, at the peak of its power, enjoying the loyalty of a solidly union-conscious working class, limps along like a crippled dwarf. It demands far-reaching reforms only to file them away for future reference. It lives and thrives only in the soil of democracy and this democracy is dug away as all sections of the bourgeois from right-wing Republicans to Fair-Deal Democrats move toward state controls over labor, injunctions and loyalty oaths. It begs for crumbs at the back door of the Democratic Party, hoping against hope that the icy winds of Taft-Hartleyism will blow warmer.
The authors argue cogently for the formation of a new political party based upon the labor movement “neither tainted by the Moscow touch nor crippled by the usual double-talk of what passes for liberalism,” to fight for its independence from the government and avoid the dangers of the “corporate state,” to take its stand for “butter, not guns,” for social services, not armaments. Can the UAW provide the impulse? They reply: “The UAW is both the closest thing to the kind of union we have described as desirable and yet still far away from it; but in few other unions are there so many people who in one way or another would like to make it this kind of union.”
Will the UAW once again show the way? Hopes seemed near fulfillment in March 1948 when its International Executive Board voted for the formation of a “progressive political party” after the ’48 elections. In a solemn pledge, Reuther vowed to devote his energies toward such an end. He did not intend, he said, to fritter his life away pecking about for pennyweight gains soon lost. But the ’48 elections have come and gone. 1949 ... 1950 looms. The UAW appears momentarily in full accord with the old program of supporting the Democratic Party. It proposes nothing, it watches, it waits, it trails along.
 
The UAW in a Suspended Position
The UAW has not surrendered its position in the labor movement; it has suspended it. A weight of general conservatism presses it back into diffidence, a gingerly, hesitating caution. For a moment in early 1948, the whole labor movement seemed about to spring forward; Murray, Green and others shook menacing fingers at the Democratic Party which had “betrayed” them. But Truman’s elusive promise of a Fair Deal was enough to soothe their tempers. The curve of labor politics bends back toward the fair- weather “friends of labor,” chasing the 1950 rainbow of a liberal majority in Congress.
In 1945, Philip Murray, president of the CIO, blasted Truman’s fact-finding boards; in 1949 he greets them as heaven-sent. After more than six months of futile negotiations, the steel workers’ union adjured its demands one by one until the fact-finders cut them to the bone. But they left the bone and Murray is grateful for little things. Before taking a step he calculates the mood of the “liberal” Democrats. Voluntary submission to fact-finding boards is a convenient device for limiting the workers’ demands to what is acceptable to Truman. Murray is a typical representative of conservative CIO policy and it is he who sets the tone today.
How such conservative moods are transmitted to the UAW is best understood in the person of Walter P. Reuther, who has always been on Murray’s left and who rose to power in the UAW against Murray’s wishes. Reuther is solidly entrenched in his own union; no conceivable opponent could displace him. The fundamental cause of his standstill policies today cannot be attributed to the pressure of conservative forces within the UAW. It comes from without.
 
A Portrait of Reuther
In their chapter, Walter Reuther, a Portrait, Howe and Widick give us new insight into the personality of the man who is undoubtedly the outstanding figure in the American labor movement. We understand how his socialist past continues as a nagging vestigial remainder in his consciousness. We examine his new social outlook, pieced together in his experiences in the early days of the union and his evolution toward New Dealism. We follow his career to the top, see him walk a tight rope between the radical and conservative sections of the union during the war, watch him take undisputed leadership over the radical wing during the GM strike and then permit his far-reaching GM program to fade away on paper. We see how skillfully he synthesizes the most progressive sentiments of workers, the backward and the advanced, the passive and the active in a struggle to defeat Stalinism, a struggle which remains a model of the lines along which to combat the CP in the union movement. And, we might add, we see him shift over to the position of Murray and demand the bureaucratic expulsion of the CP-controlled unions from the CIO by authoritarian decree.
To union critics who ask why he does not speak out squarely for the formation of a Labor Party, Reuther is fond of replying: “We must not get too far ahead of the parade.” The reply would have merit if one demanded that the UAW itself form a new national political party. Still, the UAW could take the initiative in proposing its formation, in arguing and crusading for it, in educating the widest numbers of workers in the UAW and in other unions to its necessity. In this respect, Reuther is not “ahead of the parade” at all but sinks back into line with Philip Murray.
The authors explain the paradox of a man who is by turns bold and timid, radical and orthodox, describing him as an “unfinished personality” torn between “vision and power.” Nevertheless, we can detect a definite pattern in Reuther’s seesaw course. At each point in the class struggle when the old policies appear outworn and when the rank and file grow increasingly restive and push in new directions, it is Reuther, sensitive to every developing leftward mood, who seizes the initiative, articulates these moods in new slogans and new proposals. And in every period of lull, he sinks back again into normality. Reuther understands the vanguard role of the UAW; he reacts most quickly to it; at times he puts it in words; but he does not create it.
The authors tell us that “Reuther is convinced that he has succeeded in reconciling power and vision.” They are dubious. (The contrast between “vision” as something good and “power” as something evil is somewhat misleading. Any social program [vision] would remain only Utopian speculation without the power to put it into effect and every conception of “power” is linked to a corresponding “vision”). But if he has not reconciled the two, he has in a sense combined them into a common conception. Reuther is pushed back and forth between two “powers” – the explosive power of the rank and file, flaring up in leaping flashes then subsiding, and the power of the stolid citizen labor leaders which doggedly presses for short-term gains, oblivious of the future. His “vision” is a resultant of these two powers.
When Reuther abandoned the Socialist Party as an inconvenient obstacle to the full use of his talents in the labor movement and slowly groped his way toward the platform of liberalized New-Deal capitalism, Reuther moved away from the conception that the working class could reorganize society by taking power. In the years that followed, the socialist movement all over the world was beaten back while in the United States it remained more than ever isolated in small sects. Reuther remained tied to the working class. His union reminded him more than once of the latent powers of the rank and file but he now assigned it a more limited role in keeping with his new vision. The activity of the working class became a constant spur not to the transformation of society into socialism but a force for the preservation of a liberal free-enterprise economy and for the defense of democracy.
In the maneuverings among the various factions and caucuses in his own union, often carried on by tiny groups behind the backs of the membership, he saw how frequently even the active union veterans could be manipulated by small men for petty ends. If this was true in his own UAW, then how much more so in the rest of the labor movement? He learned to respect the power of labor officialdom in general. And if such power could be wielded for little things by shortsighted men, why not for noble purposes of social betterment? Only, curbing the role of the working class within the limits of capitalist politics gives rise to bureaucratic tendencies, even in the UAW, where they take on the most subtle forms.
 
Bureaucratism Seeps In
The UAW is unquestionably one of the most democratic unions in the United States. But there are disquieting signs of a slow seeping in of bureaucratism, the rise of a centralized officialdom which tends to raise itself above the rank and file and become independent of it. Its manifestations are analyzed by the writers and the counter-tendencies described, so that the reader sees the complexity of the action and interaction between forces giving rise to bureaucratism and counterforces making for democracy.
As it unites for the first time in its history under the leadership of a single man who enjoys the support of 95 per cent of the union, the UAW provides a unique example of the continuation of all the forms of democracy combined with the sprouting of a bureaucratic apparatus. To fight effectively, any working-class organization needs a certain consistency in its leadership; it cannot follow one policy on Monday, another on Tuesday and a third on Wednesday; it will not overturn its leadership every day in search for one in which it has confidence. The story of the rise and decline of the various groupings and factions in the UAW culminates in the victory of Reuther and the hundreds of secondary leaders who follow him. The union now has a fairly stable upper leadership. But how is this leadership to be held together and consolidated? Will it remain a force for the protection and extension of the processes of internal democracy or will it itself degenerate into a bureaucratic machine endangering democracy?
One of the sources of the trend toward bureaucracy in the UAW is the failure of its leadership to base itself upon a clear, progressive political line. A basic aim of the socialist movement, for example, is to forge a democratic leadership for the working class and its institutions by educating a class-conscious cadre of workers assembled on the basis of intellectual convictions, of a social philosophy checked and rechecked in the course of democratic discussions. The socialist program, voluntarily embraced by the working class, would make possible a democratic leadership for the working class. Our criticism of Reuther in this connection, however, is not that he does not build a socialist cadre. He is not a socialist and no one expects him to do so. But he does not unite his own followers on the basis of any consistent platform clearly and recognizably distinct from that of the ordinary conservative and bureaucratic labor officialdom. He leaves himself free to swing back and forth between opposing slogans and policies with the winds of the class struggle. Here lies his chief weakness and from it come the dangers of bureaucratism at this stage in the life of the UAW.
That is why the leadership of the union becomes increasingly based upon the paid officialdom, the top officers, the appointed international representatives (“porkchoppers”) who are required to speak to the membership with one united voice regardless of misgivings they may have with official policy. They tend to be a machine for jamming through the decisions of the higher officialdom and not a collectivity which itself participates in the give-and-take of democratic discussion. The Reuther group tends to become less and less a caucus of the active union members and more and more the meeting place of the officials.
Reuther synthesizes a leadership from two antagonistic elements. Its left wing comprehends the unique role of the UAW in the labor movement; it hopes for the formation of a new party; it understands, in a general way, that labor has a decisive part to play in shaping society; it includes many militants who sympathize with socialism. It is this wing of the Reuther group which spearheaded his rise to power. In the right wing are the bandwagon jumpers, the men who linked up with Reuther to get on the winning side, conservative in outlook, suspicious of new ventures, inclined toward a narrow “business unionism.” The influence of this group within the Reuther caucus is not evidence of strong conservative leanings within the UAW (although of course there are many conservative workers in it) but a reflection of the power of the right wing in the labor movement outside of the UAW, in particular the power of Philip Murray, whose social outlook they share. Reuther yields to his own right wing, makes concessions to it and insists that his own radical followers refrain from antagonizing it because he fears to come into conflict with Murray.
The future of the UAW, its internal democracy, its inspiring vanguard role, its militant traditions depend upon the evolution of the left wing of the Reuther caucus. The task of the day is the formation of an independent labor party. If it is willing to press for such a program despite the pressures of Murray conservatism, the UAW will quickly assume its rightful place as leader of American labor.
“If the UAW succeeds in coping with, or even tries to cope with, the complex problems facing it in the coming years,” write Howe and Widick, “if it succeeds in transforming union energies into drives toward political action and social change which alone can fulfill the larger purposes of an alert union – then it will arouse sufficient enthusiasm and interest among its members to preserve its admirable democratic tradition.”
*
Footnote
1. The Howe-Widick book is available to readers through Labor Action Book Service, 4 Court Square, Long Island City 1, N.Y.
 



By a margin of a mere two votes in the Senate, the administration lost the decisive battle on the Taft-Hartley law. A motion by Senator Lucas, majority leader, to strike out the injunction provisions of the new law was rejected, 46 to 44. Of the six senators who did not vote, four were evenly paired and so cancelled themselves out; the remaining two were administration supporters. Where were they?
One, Senator Ecton of Montana, was proudly watching his son get married. The other, Senator Wagner of New York, was ill. It was suggested, says Arthur Krock, that his physician decide if the sick senator could make one dramatic appearance on this momentous occasion. But in vain. With these two votes, the Senate would have been deadlocked; Vice President Barkley, as chairman, could have broken the tie in favor of the administration. Would have, could have; but an impatient groom and a cautious doctor decided otherwise.
 
Where and When Principles Prevail
In some places, little facts like these make big history. How narrowly the will of the people was thwarted. And so, hundreds of union employees sort out lists of registered voters and compile voting records of their elected representatives. Thousands of garment workers, auto workers, and steel workers are to climb stairways, ring doorbells to call millions of their brothers to the polls in 1950. Justice, The United Auto Worker, The Steelworker, appeal to their readers: Elect just a few more liberals and turn back the tide of reaction.
Matters of profound principle are decided by a few hands raised in Washington. Get out and vote. The lesson is simple. But is it? Fred A. Hartley, Jr. (of Taft-Hartley fame) has devised a simple formula for making one thing seem like something else; understand it and you have a handy guide for following the great “labor” debates in Congress. “If you have a particular measure you want approved in a particular fashion, it is sometimes a good practice to include among its provisions at least one that is obviously undesirable, unworkable, or unconstitutional. By doing so, you draw the opposition fire against the particular provision rather than against the measure as a whole.” We need only remember that the “particular measure” to be put over in this case is a general labor policy and the decoy is the “injunction” provision of the law.
Gavels pound: amendments and subamendments; substitutes and sub-substitutes; intricate procedural devices; committals and recommittals; threats of a veto; compromises and new compromises. One imagines something must be going on. Rules of order and parliamentary feinting fascinate our imagination until we snap back to reality. The honorable congressmen and the president are agitating themselves over one main question: shall the injunction provisions be enacted into law ? But law or no law, do you favor the use of injunctions against mass strikes? On this question, both sides are agreed. Yes! On this matter of principle, all tendencies unite.
“Although Senator Thomas’ bill, supported by the Administration, mentions neither injunctions nor seizure” reports the N.Y. Times, “Mr. Thomas told the Senate that it was ‘written in such a way’ as to permit the President to seize plants or ask for injunction in critical emergency disputes.” Senator Paul Douglas, another Fair Dealer, explained his own compromise bill to the Senate: “... there would be an implication, in ultimate emergencies of Presidential power to seek injunctions under this plan ...”, says the Times dispatch.
 
The Attorney General Casts His “Vote”
Truman goes them all one better; why all the fuss and bother about votes in Congress when all he needs is the one “vote” of his Attorney General who reinterprets the Constitution and legalizes the injunction without a law. A report of a Presidential news conference reads:
“When Mr. Truman was asked by a reporter whether he intended to reserve for the Administration the right to employ the injunction in labor disputes of a national character, he replied that he had been told the President’s powers were sufficient to meet such emergencies. A question was then raised as to why the power had not been inserted in the labor bill. This was not necessary, the Chief Executive said, since the Attorney General had advised him that the President had constitutional and implied powers” (Times, Feb. 4).
But the workings of the Hartley formula hypnotizes the labor leaders who close their eyes and dream of pleasant things. The League Reporter, published by Labor’s League for Political Education (AF of L), explains, “Anti-labor Senators want the injunction provisions of Taft-Hartley continued. But senators interested in the welfare of the nation and fair labor legislation oppose the injunction strenuously.” How “strenuously,” we have seen. And PAC-CIO tells us, “The showdown fight came on provisions to deal with so-called national emergency strikes. T-H backers striving to insert injunction provisions in the Administration measure, pro-labor Senators fighting a desperate battle to keep them out.” As “desperate” as it was “strenuous.”
 
As the New Deal Emerged
Unanimous agreement on the use of the injunction by the government summarizes a turn in the labor policy of the bourgeoisie; just what the turn means becomes clearer when we examine the old labor policy, the policy of the New Deal, and the conditions that gave rise to it.
In 1928, 268,000 people voted for Norman Thomas, the socialist. In 1932, his supporters numbered a million. Roosevelt was elected on the promise of driving the money changers from the temple. Down with the economic royalists; remember the forgotten man. The agony compressed into these four years stretched from the car in every garage to the furniture piled on prosperity’s corner. The moribund American Federation of Labor, living off the dues of its employed highly skilled craftsmen, hoped for better times and prayed to muddle through somehow. It offered no promise, no hope, no future to the workers. Things are bad enough, why risk the useless venture of organizing the unorganizable, employed and unemployed? Beyond the AFL was nothing but radicals. Leaderless, the workers began to take what leadership there was.
In May 1931, spontaneous strikes involving up to 40,000 miners blazed up in the bituminous fields around Western Pennsylvania. Grim miners – scrip money, company stores, little work and little wages – accepted the leadership of the Communist Party and its National Miners Union. In March 1930, 200,000 men, desperate with joblessness, knowing nothing of the Comintern and caring less, somehow heard of the call for an International Day Against Unemployment. They stamped through the streets in Detroit and New York under the strange banner of the Communist Party.
The CP was in the throes of its third period lunacy ; there were Communists and all others were fascists; the revolution was already under way; won or lost, the movements they led were victories, for cops’ clubs, injunctions, jailings and killings would automatically pound the revolution into the heads of the masses. Strike placards for the “Defense of Soviet China” were placed in the hands of puzzled miners. Its suicidal adventurism made it impossible for the CP and its dual unions to create any substantial and sustained organizations, but such were the times that despite themselves they were able, temporarily at least, to lead real mass movements.
Socialists and radicals of all kinds organized the Conference for Progressive Labor Action to work inside the American Federation of Labor and independently where necessary, to “work untiringly to organize the masses of unskilled and semi-skilled in the basic industries into industrial unions.” In 1929, it reported “Progressives almost single-handed carried on the glorious struggle by the side of the workers in Marion (North Carolina) which focussed the eyes of labor and of the nation on the Southern textile field.” In the next years it played a prominent role in strike struggles and in internal factional struggles in the unions, finally organizing itself as the Workers Party of America, which merged with the Trotskyists.
In May 1933, at the call of Norman Thomas, Sidney Hillman, David Dubinsky and others like them, 4,000 delegates from unions, farm organizations, socialist branches and cooperative leagues assembled in Washington for a “Continental Congress of Workers and Farmers,” where they adopted resolutions for a radical economic program to meet the crisis. They took no stand on political action but decided to set up united front committees in every city for mass action in pursuit of their demands. It was on the eve of the New Deal; the new President had already been sworn into office. Under his magic, the movement was liquidated in the next months.
 
Which Class Was Best Served?
This was only one of Roosevelt’s many services to the bourgeoisie. Within the next four years, Hillman and Dubinsky formed another outfit, the American Labor Party, to switch the traditional socialist vote away from their old friend Thomas to their new idol Roosevelt, by making it possible for socialist voters to cast their ballots “independently” for FDR.
Retired Marxists divert themselves with speculations on the non-class character of the state or at least its non-capitalist class character. Reminiscences of the labor policy of the New Deal, bitterly attacked by large sections of the bourgeoisie, even its majority, serve as a somewhat belated proof of their new view. They not only minimize the future of the working class, they must efface its past from their memories.
A thousand frightened businessmen, stupefied by concentration on their own red profit ledgers, couldn’t see as clearly as a few far-sighted bourgeois politicians. It was impossible to piece together an intelligent bourgeois platform from the separate, disconnected aims of individual employers. Each capitalist dealt only with his own workers; he saw simply the effects of unionization on his own enterprise, which in most cases would put him at a disadvantage in the competitive struggle; it seemed reasonable and simple to fight the drive to organize by direct and even brutal methods, methods which had always been successful. But if extended into a social policy applicable to all of industry, to the whole working class, what seemed so reasonable from the point of view of each employer could only have catastrophic effects on the stability of the whole capitalist system. Far from showing how the state acts against the interests of the bourgeoisie, the labor policy of the New Deal showed it in action as the executive committee of the ruling class. It was only the bourgeois state which could initiate and execute the necessary general labor policy.
 
The Alternatives Before Capitalism
The alternative in the early ’30s was not the simple choice between unions or no unions, between organization of the working class or no organization. Four years of pent-up misery made the drive toward some sort of organization irrepressible. But how were the workers to organize, under what leadership and under what social philosophy? This was the choice that the bourgeoisie had to make. Either the workers would organize under a “responsible” leadership or they would find an “irresponsible” one. Police measures and repression would club them to the left. Even in 1928, when peace and prosperity seemed the permanent normality, Senator Wagner saw it quite clearly when he told the New York State Federation of Labor:
In the long run, the injunction cannot stop the organization of labor. Organization springs from the most profound needs of human nature. You can’t destroy the desire to organize; you can only balk it for a time ... What is the effect of the injunction? I am still looking at it from the point of view of the employer. Its effect is just to postpone the formation of an adequate labor organization. It is keeping the labor movement in its fighting period; it is preventing the labor movement from coming to full maturity and assuming the tasks and responsibilities for which it is pre-eminently fitted.
Dr. A.H. Millis, a member of the National Labor Relations Board, said in 1935:
“If and when collective bargaining is freed from undue militancy, as it can be when wise management and good labor leadership are brought into cooperation, special problems connected with collective bargaining clear up and there are opportunities for gain to all parties.”
To avoid “undue militancy” and stifle the “fighting period” summarize the aims of the Wagner Act. The workers had to be led through the placid channels of class collaboration by compelling the employers to deal with the unions. The legalization of collective bargaining aimed at the liquidation of radical and socialist tendencies. Take the workers off the picket lines; settle all questions around the table; and a wiser, more responsible officialdom will naturally, without compulsion, rise to the fore.
“The inability of employees to unite in larger groups,” Senator Wagner argued against company unionism, “has hampered the efforts of labor to preserve order within its own ranks or to restrain the untimely and wayward acts of irresponsible groups ... Men versed in the tenets of freedom become restive when not allowed to be free ... Industrial strife is most violent when company unionism enters into the situation ... The company union is least likely to bring forth the restraint of irresponsible employees by others of their own group. The implications of what I have just said are clear. If the employer-dominated union is not checked, there are only two likely results. One is that the employer will have to maintain his dominance by force, and thus swing us directly into industrial fascism and the destruction of our most cherished American ideals; the other is that employees will revolt, with widespread violence and unpredictable conclusions.”
And so the complicated system of NLRB procedures and elections. It didn’t work perfectly, mass strikes couldn’t be avoided, but in the long run the objectives were realized. Labor leaders who once thought they were socialists, even extra-left-wing socialists, became idolizers of Roosevelt, then Democrats, and finally worshippers of a liberalized capitalism.
The New Deal sought industrial stability and class peace by extending the rights of the unions and limiting the rights of the employers to destroy them. The new labor policy turns the wheel in the opposite direction. It no longer relies primarily upon the voluntary, self-imposed discipline of the union and its leadership ; it seeks the limitation of the rights of the union and its leadership by state controls. The turn in policy was not originated under Truman; it was begun by Roosevelt.
 
Shift in Policy – Under FDR
The labor officialdom did well during the war. It handed over the equality of sacrifice and submitted to wage and job freeze. It made the no-strike pledge the official state religion of the labor movement. But a rash of wildcat strikes broke out, unofficial, unauthorized, “illegal” from the standpoint of the official leadership.
Threats and pleas, the stars and stripes of patriotism, the banner of union “loyalty”; rank and file soldiers with battle stars; officers and labor board officials with wounded pride all helped to send the undisciplined wildcatters back to their jobs. But the class peace was an uneasy one, interrupted by more wildcats, more trouble. Loyal and responsible as it was, no one could guarantee that the top officials could control the rank and file. Besides, who could guarantee that they would remain officials? If the leaders could not control the unions, the state had to intervene to control the unions and the leaders.
A series of anti-strike measures culminating in the Smith-Connally Act were introduced in Congress. The latter was vetoed by Roosevelt and passed over his
head. The labor leaders, who had fought the measure tooth and nail, were so grateful for the veto that they ignored Roosevelt’s publicly stated message: the law was inadequate because it gave legal sanction to strikes under certain conditions. Clearest evidence of all of the shift in policy was the President’s advocacy of a “work or fight” law.
 
Pieces in a Developing Pattern
But war is war. Perhaps, some may say, it was necessary to submit to state controls over labor in the interests of a war for democracy which would protect us from the state controls of fascism. The war, however, has been over for some time, but the trend toward a new labor policy has not been reversed. It has been speeded up. It is not a question of a temporary, accidental wartime device but of a changed platform of the bourgeoisie and all its main political representatives. Truman’s fines and injunctions against the miners, his threat to draft the railroad strikers are pieces of one pattern with the Tart-Hartley law. The old policy met labor “emergencies” in one way, new concessions. The new policy in another, new limitations.
Government injunctions against strikes are only a succinct summary of the modern labor philosophy of the capitalist state. These are injunctions not against violence, the destruction of property, “illegal coercion,” or anything of the sort, but injunctions against strikes as such, however legal, peaceful and orderly. “The so-called national emergency provision is typical of the whole tenor of the Taft-Hartley Act,” remarks co-author Hartley. And this is what is accepted by all. Government controls over the unions extends to control over the officials of unions. Anti-Communist affidavits clearly express this aim; for they are not simply directed against Stalinists. They are pointed at the existing leadership, responsible and pro-capitalist as it tries to be.
The Fair Deal Democrats, who are eminently fair and impartial, bemoan the “partiality” of the T-H affidavits. It casts a slur on the labor movement by singling its leaders out for loyalty oaths. In all fairness, they insist that employers also should be compelled to sign affidavits. Unbiased “liberalism” accepts the principle of government control over the labor leadership. This gives added significance to the remark of our well known Hartley:
“The Taft-Hartley law,” he tells us, “is designed to improve the lot of the good labor leader. It is also designed to drive from the trade union movement in America those labor leaders who are not sincere in their service to their unions, those who use the trade union movement to promote every conceivable idea under the sun, other than sound labor principles.”
Sound principles, it should be added, simply means the “business unionism” of the AFL. He gives a few hints to the employers.
Under the new labor law it is now the duty of the employer to determine for himself which type of union leader he has in his own unions. If he has a good union leader, he should work with him and thank his lucky stars his business will not be subjected to the pulling and tugging demands of an ambitious labor leader, anxious to make his way in the world at the expense of both management and the workers he represents. Such a leader can and will work to improve the lot of his members in making them happy and contented with their employment and in helping management improve its business for the ultimate good of the workers, the investors, and the public. If an employer has a bad labor leader, he how has access to the law to protect his business and his workers.
And just who are these bad labor leaders? Not merely the Communists, in fact not primarily the Communists. John L. Lewis is one, of course; another ...?
To me, Van Bittner typifies the bull-headed official running the American labor movement today. He showed ... that he respected only force in his dealings with others. If I happened to be an employer faced with Bittner or others like him representing my workers, I would close my business ... Presumably disrespect for government, unless it bows to your wishes, and contempt for Congress, unless it offers tribute, pay off in the labor movement today ... The labor movement in this nation has become sick when it produces as its top representatives men of this type.
And who is this monster frightening Mr. Hartley into print? The late Van A. Bittner was director of the CIO’s Operation Dixie, vice-president of the Steel Workers Union, member of the CIO Executive Board, assistant to Philip Murray, a member of the War Labor Board in 1942. A typical CIO official whose social philosophy was molded by the New Deal and whose road to power was smoothed by it.
 
Shaped to Meet Labor’s Power
The New Deal labor policy was adequate to handle the labor movement in the infant stages of the organization of the mass production industries; it gave it a pro-capitalist slant; it shaped its general ideology; it assimilated and transformed labor officials. Now that the basic industries of the nation are powerfully organized, enrolling the decisive sections of the working class into unions, the old line is no longer adequate for the bourgeoisie. The new policy of state controls over the unions and their leadership grapples with the working class in its present advanced stage of organization.
Hartley, for example, yearns for the good old days of 1929, when
“The cause of labor was being advanced by what I always regarded as the sound organizational principles of the American Federation of Labor. These principles, to refresh our memory, were based on the binding together of men engaged in closely allied activities requiring relatively similar skills. Some of these AFL craft unions are still typical off what are right and proper activities for labor.”
The AFL could conduct its business unionism without strain, negotiating its contracts, winning higher pay and shorter hours oblivious to the big social and political developments of the day. A printers’ strike, a carpenters’ strike, they caused inconveniences here and there, but life went on normally. An occasional mass industrial strike as in the mining industry was an exceptional disaster which, in the relatively weak condition of the labor movement, could be broken by ordinary police violence and the slow starvation of the strikers.
But when steel mills, mines or auto plants are shut down by strikes today the whole economy is swiftly thrown out of balance. The threat of such a calamity is no longer an exceptional possibility but an annual or bi-annual threat hanging over the country each time contracts come up for renewal. The labor leadership, moreover, has such vast powers in its hands that it is compelled to go beyond the simple questions of wages and hours; it must take up the general defense of democracy and “civil rights”; it is compelled to intervene in the political life of the country; it has to go down into the South to try to break the power of the Southern reactionaries. This leadership, embarrassed by its own power, may dream of peaceful collaboration between workers and employers, of the intervention of enlightened government on the side of justice and humanity which would make strife and turmoil a thing of the barbarian past. But what formed the labor officialdom by creating labor unions – the class struggle – upsets such Utopian calculations.
As the arsenal and warehouse of world capitalism, capitalist United States must be strong and united. In its delicate jockeying on the world social arena, its strength and its unity must be obvious as a warning to all rivals. The government cannot permit mass strikes to plunge it into “chaos” at unpredictable moments. Dependent upon the workers who elected them and who can throw them out, union officials are no longer suitable as the main controlling and restraining influence over a powerfully organized working class.
 
Compel New Policy for Labor
Such was the lesson of the first wave of post-war strikes. The capitalist class and all its political representatives effect a change in attitude toward the unions and the labor bureaucracy.
Under its present officialdom, the labor movement continues as of old as though nothing had changed, as though the New Deal, rebaptized as the Fair Deal, were still in effect, as though the cold war and preparations for a new war left everything in order. But as the bourgeoisie presses against the unions and squeezes the labor bureaucracy, the labor movement too will be compelled to change its policies to avoid regimentation. The first big step toward that change must be the formation of a new independent political party basing itself upon the unions.
 



By sheer coincidence, the labor leaders who met in convention at Atlantic City faced a drastically changed political climate just as they had to choose a new CIO president. Had Phil Murray lived and deigned to serve, they would have gratefully reelected him. And everything would have seemed unchanged. It would have been unthinkable for Reuther, at this juncture, to aspire to the presidency if Murray blocked his path. But Murray died on the very eve of the convention. To that extent, Reuther’s success was a fortuitous product of biological chance. But politics had its way in the end.
With the defeat of Stevenson, CIO officials discovered to their amazement and dismay that they were soon to live under a Republican administration. For two decades, labor’s politics were dominated by an alliance with a Democratic administration. The two largest CIO unions – auto and steel – were founded, reared and matured under Truman-Roosevelt and had experienced no other form of political existence. Whether it was willing to admit the fact or not, the CIO would be forced to become an opposition. Its leaders had not come to Atlantic City to alter their policies, or program. But the shock of November left its impression – a dull realization that tomorrow might imperiously demand new methods and tactics.
Because it was electing a new leader, the CIO gained an unanticipated opportunity to prepare itself for the new while clinging to the old. It could do both at once by elevating Reuther to the CIO presidency; and so his election became a relatively simple and painless process.
Murray died without an heir apparent and the field quickly narrowed down to two contenders: Walter P. Reuther and Allan S. Haywood. In the nature of their respective candidacies; the character of their support, and in the choice before the delegates lies the significance of the recent CIO convention.
A genuine struggle for succession erupted, no less serious because it was excluded from convention debate and confined to chats in conference chambers, private offices, and hotel rooms. Both sides contrived to mask the fight in a cloak of simulated total agreement. All resolutions were passed in virtual unanimity; the candidates and their respective spokesmen showered public praise upon one another. Yet neither would bow to his rival. Long after Reuther’s majority was guaranteed, Haywood insisted upon a convention roll call as a demonstration of continuing power and solid support sufficient to wrest concessions from his victorious opponent at the convention and after. Such stubborn insistence is an almost unprecedented violation of the labor officials’ code of ethics which prescribes that candidates in private may seek support from other officials but must bow out gracefully in public if their efforts are in vain. It is even laudatory, if not mandatory, for the disappointed candidate to nominate the rival whom he had been bitterly excoriating (in confidence) the day before. Haywood’s course pointed to the intensity of the fight – not critical enough to pose a split, but sharp enough to permit an open display of differences.
 
The official and public unanimity on every other question seemed to turn the elections into a personal contest based upon mutually exclusive private ambitions. What took place, however, was a conflict between two different tendencies in the CIO and the convention effected a shift of control from one to the other – by cold, uninspiring, bureaucratic methods but a significant shift nonetheless.
Like Murray, Allan S. Haywood came out of the miners union where he had been part of the arbitrary Lewis machine. But where Murray was able to carve out his own satrapy in the Steel Workers Union, Haywood always remained the hired hand of more powerful officials. When the break with Lewis came, he became a Murray lieutenant. He stood for office as the continuator of the regime, traditions, and policies of Murray and ran as the chosen candidate of the Steel Workers Union. He had been executive vice-president of the CIO, appointed to that post by his boss, Murray; in that capacity he directed and controlled the far-flung CIO organizational apparatus. He disposed of hundreds of appointed officials, regional directors, organizers and they in turn controlled scores of small local industrial unions, city and state councils, and even small dependent international unions. This staff supported Haywood, aggressively, anxiously, even desperately. They were for the status quo in the most ordinary sense; they wanted no change because they wanted to stay where they were.
Although they were most conspicuous at the convention, applauded loudest and gave an aura of mass support to his candidacy they were not his main base. Without the Steel Workers Union he could not have even announced his candidacy. The leadership of this union was nurtured by Murray and trained in his tradition. Conservative in ideology, distrustful of new things it was suspicious of Reuther for his socialist past, his unorthodox background, his unusual slogans and methods, and his radical, intellectual and socialistic admirers. While the conservative Association of Catholic Trade Unions, as far as is known, took no open public position it was undoubtedly on Haywood’s side. Just before he died, Murray had appeared as the invited guest at an ACTU convention – an unusual endorsement by a high labor official for a small faction inside the union movement. When leading labor officials conceal real differences and ignore genuine issues because of a mistaken sense of diplomacy, the frank expressions of groups like ACTU, give us an invaluable insight into what remains hidden. In Michigan, where many ACTU members are part of the Reuther faction, it has carried on a permanent campaign against the “socialists” in the UAW. In New York, ACTU warned Reuther, after his election, that he would have to get rid of the “secular liberals” that surround him or face a future of trials and tribulations. After his election to the CIO presidency, its spokesmen held out a diffident hand, offering to support him but warning him to cut loose from radicalism. The ACTU reaches its conclusion via its own private ideology, which does not necessarily correspond to the trend of thought among Reuther’s CIO opponents, but in their conclusion they express openly the misgivings which his critics inside the labor movement prefer to express in private.
The Communication Workers of America and the United Packinghouse Workers Union joined the Haywood camp. But although he could mobilize some smaller unions, steel, and the CIO paid staff, it was not enough. The vote stood at 2,613,103 for Haywood and 3,079,181 for Reuther.
The decisive mass production unions lined up in the Reuther column: Oil Workers, Rubber Workers, Textile Workers, Amalgamated Clothing Workers, Auto Workers, Electrical Workers. Jacob Potofsky of the Amalgamated memorialized Murray and James Carey of the International Union of Electrical Workers expressed his humblest gratitude toward him; Rieve, Reuther and other paid their respects to the memory of their late leader. But when the time came to choose his successor, they selected not the man who symbolized the continuation of his policies, but a new, younger, and different type of leader, Walter Reuther.
 
In contradistinction to the Haywood bloc, Reuther and the UAW constituted a left-wing; and the CIO convention witnessed its triumph over the more conservative right.” “Left-wing” is a relative term [we employ it in its authentic sense to signify a more radical tendency and not to imply any similarity with Stalinism]. It serves to pinpoint the geographical-political location of Reuther in relation to all its rivals. If Reutherism displays few of the inspiring characteristics which we might associate with an ideal left wing – the militant, pioneering, idealistic spirit, self-reliant and aggressive – then this is one sign of the backwardness of American unionism. Such is the left-wing of such a union movement. In the absence of any mass socialist wing or even of any more uncompromising tendency. Reutherism, with all its weaknesses and vacillations, stands on the extreme left of the American labor movement. The convention saw its push for power in the CIO and at the same time recorded its utter failure to maintain its own self-chosen perspectives.
In his rise to power in the UAW, Reuther assembled around him a group of rank and file union militants and secondary union leaders who viewed his struggle as a crusade for a new brand of unionism. They were inspired by the magnificent traditions of the sit-ins and were fresh out of their own war-time struggle against the no-strike pledge, a fight waged without his support. He rallied them and won their confidence with the slogans of the GM strike of 1945–6. He led a fight against Stalinism which appealed by reason and argument to the best class sentiments of the UAW membership – a model procedure in a labor movement whose first recourse in every dispute is bureaucratic suppression.
Many of his closest supporters had been socialists in their union youth, Emil Mazey, now UAW secretary-treasurer, most conspicuous of all. By this time, they had abandoned or forgotten their old socialist perspectives but they retained a belief that it was the destiny of their union to breathe fresh life into the labor movement. The ideals they had once sought through socialism were now to be realized in down-to-earth fashion in keeping with the facts of life in the United States. How and when, they were not sure; hut that this was their task, they knew. To the UAW came a group of professionals attracted to its staff by similar goals. Here they could build a union not as mere hired hands, but as full participants in creating “the vanguard in America, the architect of the future.”
It was this UAW, these men with their not quite defined aspirations that brought Reutherism to the fore as the left wing in the labor movement. It is the same tendency which came to the CIO convention. But in the interlude their dreams had faded, their ideals became somewhat shopworn. Reuther called in vain for a revival of the crusading spirit of the days of the sit-in strikes; he must first recapture the crusading spirit that once animated Reutherism as it rose to power and prominence.
His victory in the UAW was a successful revolt of active union militants against their old leadership and a rebellion even of the appointed staff. His program remained ill-defined – effective enough to undercut the rise of any serious opposition but not distinctive or adequate to create a conscious mass cadre of effective political supporters. At any rate, he felt compelled to consolidate his hold, and make it permanent, so to speak, by creating inside the UAW a replica of the machine which dominates virtually every union in the country. Former militants joined the paid staff and abandoned their once irrepressible rank and fileism to assume the demeanor of appointed officials, respectful and acquiescent to the top leader. He built a machine similar in type, although more progressive in its ideology, to that which Haywood had constructed within the CIO and which Reuther defeated at Atlantic City.
He rose in the UAW as leader of a democratic mass caucus. This alone sets him apart from most labor officials who inherited their office as a hand-me-down from other powerful labor leaders. A distinctive feature of UAW life has been a rich internal caucus life through which the active militants dominated the political existence of the union. In the dull bureaucratic calm that has settled over most unions, the UAW stands apart for its vigorous internal life. But it was not this that fascinated those who voted for Reuther at the CIO convention. Their confidence in him rose as they saw the old UAW caucus life tend to disintegrate. Perhaps his union is becoming more like ours, they seemed to say, and they felt secure against any outside stimulus that might make democracy pulse inside their own bailiwicks. Not that they oppose democracy; they are eminently for it but shun the uncertainties which it carries along. They look upon a free inner union caucus life as a bearer of disunity, a seed of disruption, a revelation of weakness and a potentiality for an overturn in leadership. In retrospect, the past shines differently even to Reuther, former faction leader now a successful labor leader.
R.J. Thomas, former president of the UAW defeated by Reuther, addressed the most recent auto convention as an invited guest; as is fitting, he urged them to forget the past and think only of the harmonious future. The now totally victorious Reuther, willing to forget his own past as a faction leader, utilized the occasion to admonish the delegates.
“... The past is dead, as far as the factional considerations are concerned; and I urge the fellows in those few remaining locals where they are still living in terms of the 1946 convention and 1947 convention and the Grand Rapids convention and the Chicago convention and the Buffalo convention – those conventions are behind us and the future, that bright future that beckons us all, where a better life awaits us and our families and our kinds ... You are going to have contests for offices, we are going to have an election tomorrow; anybody who wants to run for president who is eligible ought to run. That goes for every other office. But let’s have democratic contests without factionalism. Let’s have democracy but not factionalism. That is what we need.”
In this spirit, O.A. Knight, president of the Oil Workers Union, who nominated Reuther commended him for bringing unity to a divided and faction-torn union. Here, in one union, representatives of hundreds of thousands of workers, demonstrated in life that they could hammer out their differences, keep their union powerful and settle their acute problems without the heavy-handed arbitration of an all powerful bureaucratic machine. Out of UAW history, today’s crop of labor officials remembers only the inconveniences of the democratic struggles and not its inspiring quality.
UAW political policy is the most radical expression of labor’s line in the CIO; but it was never advanced in the councils of labor with vigor and forthrightness. In this respect it permits a concentrated summary of Reutherism: a left policy proclaimed in the UAW but never defended inside the labor movement.
In 1948, the UAW called for the formation of a new progressive party to bring about a “political realignment.” In a special message to his membership, Reuther solemnly vowed to press urgently and continuously for its achievement. With the passage of time and the election of Truman, the latter became a museum curiosity and the policy was relegated to the status of an ultimate objective without relevance to the tasks of the moment. Nevertheless, during the crisis of labor’s walkout from all war agencies, the 1951 UAW convention went on record for the summoning of an emergency political congress of labor to gird itself for the presidential campaign. Wherever the UAW dominated the labor movement, as in Michigan, Reutherites actively intervened in Democratic Party policies with the intention of dominating it in practice if not in theory.
 
The 1952 elections have come and gone; the CIO heard nothing of the UAW political plans; UAW delegates sat through CIO conventions, well-mannered enough not to allow their views to obtrude into the harmoniously unanimous sessions. Leaders of other CIO unions could relax; their equanimity would never be ruffled by any of the distinctive proposals of the UAW.
There is no question here of “insincerity.” The Reutherites are quite serious about their political views; they see organized labor acting as the driving force behind the Democratic-labor coalition without gaining the recognition and influence it deserves. A “new political realignment” aims to magnify the power of labor in general and of the UAW in particular. But Reuther has no intention of irritating other labor leaders. “We must not get too far ahead of the parade,” he is fond of cautioning his followers. What he means is now clear. The progress of the UAW and the success of its policy is so inseparably intertwined in his mind with his own personal advancement that the two are almost indistinguishable to him. To win the CIO presidency, he had to allay the suspicions of fellow union presidents and prove his own reasonableness. If this meant soft-pedalling, even abandoning, his own political line, was it too high a price to pay?
An open and public demand for a new political policy would not win out immediately in the CIO. In this, Reuther’s calculations are doubtless correct. But it would have wide repercussions in the labor movement. It would begin a reorientation; it would stimulate a reexamination in the conscious ranks of the unions and tend to create a sort of union-wide Reutherite tendency. But a Reuther responsible for such trends could hardly endear himself to his CIO colleagues.
He had to make a choice. Either (1) play the role of left critic as a minority, banking upon the impact of his line upon the ranks and leadership of the labor movement in the course of time; or (2) conciliate the existing CIO officialdom, serve as its instrument in advancing its policies today in return for the prestige of office and the hope of standing at the head of the parade when they themselves had finally decided to move forward. This chapter in his career got its title from the decision: “He would rather be president.”
Reuther came to Atlantic City with over one-third of the total votes in his pocket. This alone gave him a powerful bargaining position with the secondary International Unions. Clearly, he had the strength to lead the CIO. But he did not bludgeon his way into the CIO presidency by sheer force of numbers. Haywood matched his strength with the aid of the Steel Union.
Reuther’s strong and insistent bid for leadership was a sign that he and the UAW were at last ready to play first role in the CIO; that he was strong enough to replace Murray and Steel in aiding and directing the whole federation. This intention he had announced in effect many months before at the auto convention when he drove through proposals for increasing UAW dues to finance the struggles of other unions and for lengthening the period between UAW conventions to free himself for broader participation in the work of the CIO. All this could only encourage the leaders of other mass production unions who, under the special impact of the 1952 defeat were wrestling with the grim possibilities of tomorrow. In a way, their own left leanings were stimulated. Emil Rieve, president of the Textile Workers, more clearly than the others illustrates what was happening. In 1948, he had hinted darkly of the formation of a labor party while Reuther was calling for the new progressive party. In 1951, when the CIO rejoined the War Boards he ended up on the Wage Stabilization Board, but quickly expressed a restive dissatisfaction. We are still just captives, he said; and he tried to resign in protest. But the conservative counsels of Phil Murray induced him to remain. In 1952, he voted for Reuther. In the breast of every labor leader two instincts battle for supremacy. Reuther’s strong candidacy strengthened the instinct of self-preservation through struggle – if necessary.
Reuther had proved himself responsible by their standards; able to replace the domination of steel; progressive yet safe and sane. And thus he emerged as their leader. The election of Reuther does not signify a radical turn or the adoption of a new program. But it reveals that the decisive sections of the CIO, despite the efforts to cling to the past, are induced to revamp the control of the CIO and hold the door open for a future reorientation.
As Reuther expands his role to encompass a wider purview of activity in the labor movement, the significance of Reutherism is altered; it becomes less a source of power to stimulate and urge the labor movement forward and more a tool to be picked up by labor officials when they are ready. Reutherism remains suspended, a potential, a future possibility. It arises as a crusading force to raise a new clean banner of labor struggle. We see, however, how its inordinate preoccupation with the sensitivities of the labor officialdom has, at least for the time being, turned its eyes away from the ranks of labor and led it to evade the responsibilities which it had proclaimed; that of reorienting the labor movement.
The next step before the labor movement, one which is indicated by every consideration of logic and politics, is the reunification of CIO and AFL. For a moment, any union left-wing, would find the balance of power shifted toward the right as the more conservative crafts are thrown into the scales. But, by enhancing the social power of the working class, such unity would soon stimulate more demanding and less compromising policies. In a combined federation, a left wing tendency could present its policy with great persuasiveness and cogency; it would be addressing a united labor movement conscious of new power and not a section of it.
The story of the UAW is one chapter in the strivings of the working class toward a new policy. This left wing had to be able to maintain itself against the Stalinists, to keep intact its union strength against a powerful group of industrialists, withstand the pressures of the rest of the union movement and its bureaucracy – all without a clearly defined platform to bind its militants into a homogenous group. If this proved too difficult at the moment, it is not because the task is impossible but because this tendency is temporarily stifled in the general union conservatism. In electing Reuther, the CIO leaders were recognizing, in their own way, that the road ahead may lead through new political and strike battles. The evolution of the CIO saw the first beginning of a genuine, if amorphous, left wing in the union movement, most strikingly evident in the UAW but not confined to it. And in the days ahead, it will have many opportunities to demonstrate its viability.
 



An open letter from the WORKERS PARTY to:
UNITED AUTOMOBILE WORKERS, International Union
Michigan CIO Council
Wayne County Council of the CIO
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
Brothers:
You, the representatives of organized labor and of Negro and white champions of democratic rights, must call a mass demonstration in Lansing against racial discrimination. The whole labor movement recognizes in discrimination an enemy which undermines its unity, saps its strength, and helps the capitalist class to intensify the exploitation of all workers.
We all rejoice at the success of the recent campaign which gathered more than 175,000 signatures on a petition to force the State Legislature to take up the proposed Fair Employment Practices law (FEPC). Organized labor, the most militant and most powerful fighter for the democratic rights of all people, was above all responsible for this inspiring achievement.
The WORKERS PARTY, officially, and its members through their local unions, gathered several thousands of signatures. Now, we all face a cheap attempt by state officials to nullify the clearly expressed mandate of 175,000 people of the state by utilizing one pretext or another to arbitrarily invalidate the petitions. Every legal channel will doubtless be pursued to fight such an attempt; for we who hate Jim Crow as an enemy of the whole working class must employ every avenue open to us.
 
Mobilize for Mass Action
But the MAIN TASK today in the fight against discrimination is to mobilize thousands of workers and real fighters for democracy, Negro and white, in MASS ACTION against discrimination.
A state-wide conference in Lansing is planned for January with the announced purpose of supporting the FEPC legislation. It is called by various prominent individuals. THIS CONFERENCE CANNOT AND MUST NOT BE MADE A SUBSTITUTE FOR ACTION BY THE WORKERS THEMSELVES.
One of the sponsors of this conference is Mayor Jeffries. Do you believe that men like him will really fight against race discrimination? Has he not always stubbornly insisted on segregation in housing? Has he ever once applied the wide powers which he can exercise through the various city departments (building, zoning, police) to enforce the Diggs Civil Rights Act, a law Which would make discrimination in hotels, restaurants, etc., illegal, but which has been allowed to remain a dead letter? Have we forgotten how “impartially” his police shot and killed Negroes during the riots of 1943 and looked on passively while they were beaten by KKK type thugs? Is it not a fact that the fascist, Coughlinite, Smithite, KKK hoodlums rally to his side in his campaigns for office and implicitly acknowledge him as their banner bearer?
We cannot rely upon politicians like Jeffries. They do not become sponsors of these conferences because they are eager to add the weight of their office to the fight against Jim Crow. Not at all. They hope to utilize the campaign to patch up their own tattered reputations so that they may remain in office.
 
How to Fight Against Race Hatred
The conclusion is clear: you must call upon the masses of workers and real democrats, Negro and white, who sincerely detest race discrimination, to rally in Lansing to demonstrate their united will before the State Legislature.
Such a demonstration will serve two aims: (1) It will put pressure on the Legislature to carry out the will of the people. (2) It will show the workers how they must act to fight off race hatred and all reactionary attacks on the labor movement.



 


Ben Hall, Organizer
Workers Party, Detroit branch
6341 Gratiot, Room 10
Detroit 7, Mich.



 



DETROIT  –  The Detroit Branch of the Workers Party has appealed to the United Automobile Workers Union, the CIO and the NAACP in Michigan to organize a mass march on the State Capitol at Lansing to demand of the State Legislature that it enact the Fair Employment Practices Law submitted by 175,000 voters of the state on an initiative petition successfully circulated in December and November.
All that has happened since the publication of this appeal on December 24 in the form of an open letter has confirmed the validity of the proposal.
The State Attorney General has ruled that the petitions are invalid because they do not bear a clearly printed title indicating the contents of the proposed law. The petition itself, consisting of four long closely printed sheets, provides ample opportunity for any fastidious legal eagle to ferret out some misplaced comma or colon to “prove” that they are “irregular.” Experienced politicians have sleeves full of such technicalities.
 
Two Committees
As the state legislators prepare to come to the capital for their 1947 session, the campaign for the enactment of the FEPC law has bogged down in the mire of a conflict between rival “prominent” citizens, some of whom support and others of whom reject attempts by the followers of the Communist Party to make this campaign their private affair. The intricate details of the jealous maneuverings of the representatives of these two groups would make a delightful tale for lovers of involved mystery stories.
At this point two opposing statewide committees exist, one led by the Stalinist-controlled Civil Rights Congress and the other led by Bishop Haas, formerly of the national Fair Employment Practices Commission, and endorsed by many others, including Walter Reuther, George Addes, Mayor Edward Jeffries. Each committee has called its own conference in Lansing and each is jockeying for the support of the maximum number of priests, rabbis, ministers, lawyers – that is, the “respectable,” “prominent” community “leaders.” The anti-Stalinists gleefully attack the Communists, whom they accuse of responsibility for the technical defects of the above mentioned petition. The real culprit on this score is, of course, the Attorney General himself but the critics of the Stalinists no doubt hesitate to denounce him as he deserves because they are either soft-hearted liberals themselves or do not want to offend other soft-hearted liberals.
 
Time for Mass Action
Both sides in this pitiful squabble have one thing in common. Neither has any intention of organizing a really representative conference based upon the mass organizations of the people, which means, in the first place, based upon the CIO. The Stalinists cannot and will not make any such attempt because it would make their bureaucratic control impossible. The anti-Stalinists will not do it because they do not want to scare off the “liberals,” who would shy away from any conference “dominated” by labor.
The bickerings of these “prominent” people can play an important role only because the thousands and thousands of real fighters for democratic rights who made the petition campaign a success are not truly represented in the councils and are not drawn into the fight.
If the law is to be passed, and if it is to be enforced when it is passed, the workers who want to fight discrimination must be prepared to carry on organized MASS ACTION against the forces of Jim Crow. The time to begin is NOW. The Workers Party proposes to cut through the back door maneuverings of a handful of inflated politicians, lawyers and clergymen. Let the organized labor movement call a march on Lansing!
 



I
A time-capsule history of the American labor movement would record
that at one time any union member aspiring to a ready popularity
could enjoy the applause of his listeners by an impassioned appeal:
“Let’s keep our union out of politics.” This homely precept is
now abandoned. The modern labor movement on Election Day and every
day is preoccupied with political problems. Even the stronghold of
pure and simple “unionism,” the AFL, is yielding to the
inescapable compulsion toward political action. The theory that labor
must abstain from politics is a fossil remains of an outlived era.
The cry “Keep the union out of politics” has given way to a
new complaint: “There’s too much politics in the union.” The
speech of a Political Action Committee director who insists on more
attention to political action will conclude with an appeal for less
“politics” and more “unity” in the union. At the coming
convention of the United Automobile Workers Union, the delegate who
naively admits that he frowns upon the union’s political action
program will not be refuted or criticized. He will simply be ignored
or ridiculed. Let the same delegate, however, decry the supposed evil
effects of “politics in our union” and he will win the approval
of the claques.
Inside the union, “politics” refers to the factional caucuses
or groupings which are formed on the basis of definite platforms or
more often on the basis of loyalty to an individual who symbolizes a
certain platform or type of unionism and to the conflicts and debates
between these groups in their struggle for “power,” that is, for
a majority of the union. Politics-in-the-union is an inevitable and
desirable aspect of the union-in-politics. Once it has decided to
engage in political action, the labor movement must decide what kind
of political action it favors. It must (and does) choose between the
existing parties and sub-parties and platforms-or it must create new
political parties and work out new political platforms. These
decisions cannot be made without conflicts inside the union. In the
near future, an intensification of politics inside the union cannot
be avoided. The old policies of the labor movement are crumbling.
They must be replaced.
When the top union officialdom crusades against “factionalism”
and against “political groupings” in the union it means: “No
politics except our own.” The labor officialdom itself represents a
political tendency and a “faction” in the labor movement. It
represents the political tendency of bourgeois or pro-capitalist
politics. Its hatred of all other groupings signifies that it seeks a
monopoly for its own politics. Similarly, the Communist Party
tolerates no “factionalism” in the unions which it controls for
it seeks a monopoly for Stalinist politics.
The distaste of the rank and file for factionalism derives from
entirely different considerations. They want a solid, unified union
which can resist attacks from the employers. In their minds,
“factionalism” is frequently equated with the reprehensible
policies of the Communist Party, which aims tc convert the union into
a tool of Russian foreign policy. Or, it may appear exclusively or
primarily as a conflict between individuals without ideas or ideals,
for the sake of personal advancement. Such an appearance is often
deceptive. The conflict between individuals often hides a deep-going
fight between serious tendencies and opposing principles. Such is the
case in the United Automobile Workers Union. Politics inside the
union movement must not be abandoned but raised to a higher, more
principled level. The UAW is distinguished in this: the political
struggle inside the union has reached a stage more advanced than in
any other union. This struggle will erupt at the coming convention in
the conflict between the Walter Reuther caucus and the
Addes-Thomas-Leonard-Communist Party bloc.
 
II
In the two opposing factions, three distinct political tendencies
criss-cross. They are:

The conservative, pro-capitalist officialdom. This
tendency, which supports the “orthodox” CIa policies of Philip
Murray and tail-ends the so-called liberal wing of the Democratic
Party, is divided into two sections: (a) the pro-Stalinist wing,
taking in the bulk of this Murrayite” tendency, represented by
R.J. Thomas, Richard T. Leonard, and to a lesser extent by George
Addes, and which is the main strength of the anti-Reuther bloc; and
(b) the anti-Stalinist wing, which includes the small number of
supporters of the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists and the
followers of August Scholle, president of the Michigan CIO Council
and regional director of the CIO.
 
The Communist Party. The Stalinists are represented
by a whole group of secondary officials. Their chief task is, of
course, to adapt Stalinist politics to the concrete situation in the
UAW and if possible to manipulate the union in the interests of the
reactionary Russian ruling class. The main link between them and the
Murrayite pro-Stalinists is George Addes.
 
A strong militant wing which opposes the Stalinists
from the left and at the same time remains dissatisfied with the
official Murray CIO policies.

The fundamental dash in the UAW pits the radical militant section
of the union against the conservative officialdom, which is supported
in the fight by the Communist Party. By aligning himself with the
radical wing, Reuther, who is himself a left-wing bourgeois labor
official, was able to catapult himself into the presidency of the UAW.
The faction fight which arouses intense passion on all sides is
not the product of capricious temperaments or inflexible ambitions of
the top leaders but the expression of a deep-seated rumbling in the
ranks. The basis for the present fight was laid by the militants
during the war when they carried on a struggle against the whole
united upper officialdom, including Reuther, Addes, Thomas, the
Stalinists – all of them.
 
War Record of Labor Leaders
Unity of the top bureaucracy was cemented by its unanimous
approval of the program of “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice”
as the summation of its policies for the war years. The no-strike
pledge, speed-up of production, the surrender of premium pay for
Saturday and Sunday work, all these concessions and more, were to be
the unconditional contribution of the workers to the “war effort.”
In return, the labor leaders required only the right of pleading with
the capitalist class to make “equal sacrifices” and the privilege
of whining and grumbling when it did not. (Later, the officials urged
industrial workers to spend their off-days aiding in farm work in
their areas to overcome the agricultural labor shortage. The
capitalists, however, were denied this happy pastime.) To help win
the brave new world of peace, plenty, liberty, equality and security
(which we are now presumably enjoying) the leaders bowed before the
War Labor Board as the supreme arbiter of labor relations; they
accepted freezing of wages by the government; they swallowed every
bitter pill served up by Roosevelt and later by Truman, gagging only
at the most poisonous acts such as the proposals to militarize the
labor movement by drafting all strikers. In short, they abandoned the
class struggle.
These policies adopted by the labor leadership because its
fundamental loyalties linked up its interests with the victory of the
capitalists in the war, soon placed it in a very precarious position.
The role in society of the pro-capitalist labor leadership is that of
a middleman between the working class and the capitalist class. It
trades its support among the workers for the privileges and prestige
granted to it by the government and the bourgeoisie. But to retain
its position at the head of the working class it must be willing and
able to deliver concessions from the capitalist class to the working
class, or at least to help shield the working class movement from
attack. It is able to defend the existence of the capitalist system
only by fighting against the capitalist class to a limited extent and
by limited means.
The stability of the UAW leadership was undermined when it
abandoned the class struggle against the capitalist class while the
latter continued its class struggle against the workers. In April,
1942, in a flush of excessive zeal, it surrendered premium pay for
week-end and holiday work. Other unions, however, did not follow
suit. In August, the officialdom, still united, made the disgraceful
demand that all unions be compel1ed to make the same sacrifice; if
not, the UAW would reverse its decision. The concessions were not
conditioned by any sacrifices of the capitalist class, only by the
sacrifices of other unions. This measure, pushed through a
convention with great difficulty, has only one explanation: it was
calculated to protect the UAW officialdom from competing
bureaucracies of other unions who might offer more to the workers and
edge the auto union leaders out. This little example shows how rifts
can develop between different sections of the union bureaucracy and
how sensitive the leaders are to this fact.
Without leadership during the war, a militant rank and file and
secondary leadership carried on guerrilla warfare against the
employers. Hundreds of “wildcat” walkouts involved no less than
tens of thousands of UA W members. Because the top leadership
repudiated these strikes, denounced them, and with a wearisome
persistence invariably demanded an unconditional return to work,
these strikes inevitably became demonstrations against the leadership
itself. In 1944, the banners carried by the pickets at the Chrysler
Highland Park plant (Local 490) read: “Fight for the boys who fight
for you. The company fired part of your leadership. The International
UAW-CIO fired the rest.”
Unanimity in the ranks against the leadership prevailed when the
International Executive Board deposed leaders of local unions who
refused to order their men back to work. The ranks voted these men
back to office with huge majorities. The Board ruled that no local
could process the grievances of men penalized for unauthorized
strikes. W.G. Grant, president of Local 600 at the Ford Rouge plant,
followed suit by refusing to handle the grievances of more than a
hundred workers. The membership rewarded him properly by defeat in
the next local elections. The decision of the Board became a dead
letter. The ranks of the union revolted against proposals to restore
piecework in the name of “incentive pay” and sent it down to
defeat at the 1943 convention.
 
Rank and File Resistance
Increasing tension between the militant rank and file and the top
leadership reached its culmination at the 1944 convention with the
formation of “The Rank-and-File Caucus.” Without the support of a
single member of the International Executive Board, this caucus won
40 per cent of the delegates to its proposal for outright rescinding
of the no-strike pledge. Even after the whole top leadership had
united to drive through a motion to reaffirm the pledge, the caucus
successfully fought for a membership referendum on the question. It
elected its own national steering committee. It published its own
national paper, the Rank and Filer. It began to form the basis
for a new, substitute union leadership. A vigorous, self-confident
stratum which opposes the Stalinists and the conservative bourgeois
labor leadership and is sympathetic to radical policies was the
backbone of the Rank and File Caucus.
The Addes-Thomas-CP bloc opposed the radical rank-and-file
movement with irreconcilable hostility. Basing themselves on a more
conservative section of the membership, they fought grimly for a
consistently conservative program. The impact of the rank and file
movement on the top leadership was displayed in the actions of Walter Reuther.
1942: The UAW officials ignored their differences in a
festival of mutual admiration and support. Reuther, who of course had
endorsed the “sacrifice” program, seconds the nomination of Addes
for secretary-treasurer at the convention. Richard T. Leonard
nominates his “good friend, Reuther” for vice-president and Addes
rises to second the nomination. There are no opposing nominations.
The bureaucratic sky seems cloudless. But under the blows of the rank
and file, the solid front of the leadership breaks in two.
1943: The fight against incentive pay begins. The first
crack appears in the bureaucratic wall. Reuther steps out to lead the
forces opposed to piecework. He gains the support of the militants in
this fight.
1944: The rank-and-file militants, developing more swiftly
than Reuther, take up the fight against the no-strike pledge. But
Reuther, a “responsible” leader concerned with promoting the war,
cannot go along. To avoid losing control of the militant movement he
proposes a compromise: let us retain the pledge in war industries and
abandon it in the industries reconverted to peacetime production. The
rank and file spurns this compromise; Reuther gets only a handful of
votes for his proposal.
1945: The war is over. UAW President R.J. Thomas at a Board
meeting complains that the rank and file is out of hand; the
leadership has lost control; he does not know what to do. Reuther,
freed now of the wartime restraints, says that the leadership itself
must issue a call to battle and restore its dwindling prestige. Using
his post of General Motors director as a base, he wins the leadership
and calls the GM strike. The other members of the Board learn of the
strike from the newspaper headlines!
The General Motors strike was the most significant strike of the
immediate post-war period. Strikes were called by most of the big CIO
unions at the same time. In each case, the top officials solidified
their position by organizing a fight for a wage increase and in many
cases liquidated movements of internal revolt. In the UAW, the revolt
of the rank and file had gone too far for R.J. Thomas. By leading the
GM strike, Reuther was able to capture leadership of the militant
section of the union; and on the basis of this new position, he
deposed the old leader, Thomas. There has been much discussion of the
“timing” of the GM strike. Should it have been called before
Christmas or after? Should it have been called in 1945 or later in
1946? These questions are not to the point. The GM strike was
accurately timed to coincide with the sentiments of the ranks, who
were straining at the leash. They were waiting to express all the
grievances and resentments that had accumulated during the war and
this was the first opportunity to do so. The slogans and demands of
the GM strike exceeded all others in scope: “Open the books”;
“wage increases without price increases”; “increased wages out
of the swollen profits of the monopolists.” The workers were called
upon to fight not merely for an increase in pay but for a new social
program and to act as the guardians of the whole population against
price gouging.
 
Reuther as Weathervane
Reuther caught up again with that movement which he had headed in
1943 but which had by-passed him in 1944. The “Rank and File”
movement of 1944 dissolved into the Reuther caucus. Its elements,
however, are still fighting against both the conservative section of
the labor officialdom and the Stalinists. Now, they seek to achieve
their aims through the victory of the Reuther faction.
The anti-Reuther bloc, composed of the supporters of Murray and
the Stalinists, is made possible and inevitable because both sections
of this bloc are threatened by the more radical tendency. In other
CIO unions, supporters of Murray are in conflict with the Communist
Party but these conflicts do not duplicate the situation in the UAW.
The fight in the UAW is a continuation in a different form of a
struggle that began during the war when the friendship between Murray
and the Stalinists was unmarred by the contradictions of United
States and Russian imperialism. The difficulties that separate Murray
and the CP date from the end of the war and coincide with the
difficulties between the two rivals for world domination. Such a
conflict takes place in the UAW inside the anti-Reuther bloc itself.
The Wayne County Council of the CIO (Detroit), which the anti-Reuther
bloc controls, is the scene of protracted maneuvers between the
Stalinist and non-Stalinist elements of the bloc against one another.
The extreme demands of the Stalinist-controlled Farm Equipment
Workers Union for autonomy in its negotiations for unity with the UAW
must be understood not primarily as a move to support the
Addes bloc as a whole – for that it would have sufficed
simply to join the UAW on ordinary terms – but as a move by the CP
to strengthen its own forces and to secure guarantees from its own
allies. The CP must prepare for a possible fight against the
pro-Murray section of the anti-Reuther bloc. All these differences
are, however, subordinated to the main, common task of defeating the
pro-Reuther tendency.
A secondary division cuts across the main line. The anti-Stalinist
wing of the pro-Murray camp is found inside the pro-Reuther caucus.
This group (ACTU, Scholle) is basically in accord with the policies
advocated by the non-Stalinist wing of the anti-Reuther camp. They
diverge only in one respect: refusal to make a bloc with the
Stalinists. They therefore join the pro-Reuther camp not because of
its militant character but because of its anti-Stalinist character.
But since the real attractive power of the pro-Reuther camp lies in
its appeal to militant sentiments, the conservatism of this
group is a source of weakness to the militant movement and it serves
mainly to help deter the leftward evolution of the militants.
 
III
Reuther was elected president at the last convention of the UAW,
but a majority of the International Executive Board remained and
still remains in the hands of his opponents. How is the factional
dispute which takes the form of repeated collisions between the
highest officer of the union and its highest governing body to be
decided?
The plans of the anti-Reuther bloc are simple. They aim by hook or
by crook to overcome Reuther’s convention majority, to remove him
from office at the 1947 convention and by bureaucratic measures to
solidify their position. Their latest move was to utilize their Board
majority to force through a secretly concocted merger with the Farm
Equipment Workers Union, a small CIO union under the tight control of
the Stalinists, and in violation of the UAW constitution to give the
FE some 500 convention votes which would be added to the anti-Reuther
column. This maneuver was defeated by vote of a majority of the local
unions. Other possible moves include an increase in the terms of
office of the top leadership to two years and abolition or
restriction of caucus rights which would make it easier to hide the
inner workings of the union from the rank and file. A straw in the
wind was the defeat of a motion by Reuther to make verbatim minutes
of Board meetings available for the inspection of the rank and file.
From Reuther’s standpoint, there are two alternative ways of
“settling” the fight. He can attempt to “split” his
opposition, form an alliance with the non-Stalinist, pro-Murray wing
of his opposition and isolate the CPo The temptation to pursue this
course will be great if the Addes camp, smarting from its big defeat
in the FE referendum, makes overtures to Reuther for some kind of
“harmony” pact.
Or, Reuther might attempt to unify the decisive majority of the
union around a new, radical social program which consistently carries
out the implications of the GM strike program of 1945–46. This
would involve a clear-cut stand against both sectors of the
anti-Reuther camp. Faced with this choice, he finds it impossible to
take either course in a determined fashion.
On the one hand, the pro-Murray section of the anti-Reuther camp
has been irreconcilable against the man who “betrayed” them by
becoming a leader of radicals. Reuther could overcome this hostility
only by becoming more loyal than the most loyal Murrayites, by making
a series of organizational compromises and abjuring his radical
anti-Stalinist talk. By such actions, he would risk alienating the
very source of his real strength, the radical militants, and becoming
a mere adjutant for Philip Murray. Reuther, however, has charted a
far more ambitious course for himself than that. On the other hand,
Reuther cannot rise above his own political nature; despite all his
talents and imagination, he is not basically a class-conscious,
militant working-class leader, but rather a procapitalist,
opportunist labor official. He shifts his fight from one axis to
another to make immediate gains. He makes public declarations for
harmony while in private he advises his followers to continue the struggle.
 
Role of Walter Reuther
In recent speeches Reuther has been playing with a loud pedal on
this theme: the irresponsible factionalism of my opposition makes it
impossible to carry out a constructive program; and the union cannot
make progress until its stranglehold on the Board is broken and I get
a majority.
“Who gets a majority?” is not, however, the real question. The
problem that is posed is: “How can we best unite the decisive
majority of the membership around a progressive labor program?” If
the union cannot go forward until the faction fight is settled, then
the faction fight cannot be satisfactorily settled until the
militants consciously adopt and fight for a new labor program that
can inspire the whole membership. It is not the faction fight that
holds the UAW back and prevents progress. That would be standing the
matter on its head. The faction fight is one result of the inability
of the union to make progress on the basis of the current policies of
the CIO. No serious faction fight annoys the Steel Workers Union.
What prevents it from making great progress? Unions with big faction
fights, with little faction fights or with no faction fights are all
in about the same position. To understand why this is the case, we
have to examine the situation of the whole union movement and the
nature of its political and economic policies.
Half of the nation’s families have a direct stake in the union
movement. Their breadwinners are union men. Their income depends
immediately on the strength of the union and its policies. Fifteen
million organized workers can and do determine whether the factories,
mines and railroads shall or shall not operate. They are capable of
the most inspiring solidarity and tenacity on the picket lines, as
exemplified by the miners and auto workers. They fill the Cadillac
Squares and Madison Square Gardens in all the industrial centers by
the hundreds of thousands to demonstrate for their demands. They can
count upon the support of allies: Negroes, veterans, tenants,
foremen. This giant of a labor movement, strangely enough, is
concerned with the task of holding its own, of defending itself. In
many instances it is not successful. A railroad strike was broken by
President Truman when he threatened to draft all strikers. A mine
strike was broken by a Supreme Court and Administration-inspired
injunction. Postwar strikes in auto, steel and electrical equipment
were sabotaged by the intervention of government fact-finding
commissions. By overwhelming majorities in both houses, Congress
passed the Taft-Hartley bill and little congressmen in the state
legislatures copy the latest anti-labor fads.
 
Two Periods in Recent Labor History
In the early days of the CIO, the labor movement was far weaker,
less unified. It was harassed by police violence, company unionism
and vigilante attacks; but it was chalking up one inspiring gain
after another. Old age pensions, unemployment insurance, wages and
hours laws, anti-injunction acts, the right to organize – all these
were won by a labor movement far weaker than today’s. The more
powerful labor movement of 1947 cannot maintain the social rights and
the standard of living of its members.
In the 58-page pamphlet of economic analysis entitled: Wages;
Prices; Profits, the UAW proved in scrupulous detail, The
Automobile Worker’s Case for a 23½ Cent Wage Increase.
Scholarly graphs showed the rising line of prices and living costs.
Itemized charts displayed the shrunken bar of purchasing power.
Tables of copious statistics enumerated the heavy profits of the
manufacturers. Wages could be raised. Prices could be lowered.
Profits had to be slashed. The union, however, was armed only with
brilliant statistical devices. Realization of these demands fell far
short of what was necessary and possible. The paradoxical situation
of the auto workers can be summarized in the changes in the real
hourly wage rate after the necessary allowances for increases in
living costs and taxes in two periods.
From 1936 to 1941, the period of the founding of the union, when
it still had to prove its strength and conquer its main footholds,
the real hourly wage rate of auto workers rose from 76 cents
to about 96 cents an hour. From 1941 to 1946, after the power of the
UAW and the whole CIO multiplied and every major industry was
organized, real auto wages fell from 96 cents an hour to about
88 cents an hour.
A question arises: why does the graph of labor’s Tights and
standards dip downward in the period when the line of union power
curves upward? The facile answer that a faction fight is taking place
is totally false. The real cause lies in the crippling policies
doggedly defended by the top union officialdom, including Reuther.
These policies date back to the days of the early New Deal in 1933
but their catastrophic results are becoming obvious only now.
The labor program of the New Deal administration of Franklin
Delano Roosevelt was a frightened reaction to the powerful radical
surge in the American working class as a result of five years of
bitter economic crisis and the performance of the Hoover regime. This
radical wave is illustrated partially in the vote of the Socialist
Party in 1932 (nearly one million) and in the eruption of violent
strikes. The number of strikes rose from 651 in 1930, involving a
work loss of 3 million man-days, to 852 in 1932, with a loss of 10½
million man-days. Veterans marched to Washington for the bonus.
Farmers dumped milk on the highways during a National Farm Holiday.
Unemployed participated in “Hunger Marches” to the capital. All
this before the advent of the Roosevelt administration.
Roosevelt sought to prevent this discontent from getting out of
control. It was essential in his mind that pro-capitalist labor
officials take the helm lest radicals and socialists take over by
default. To make this possible the New Deal, through Section 7A of
the NRA, aimed to take the workers off the picket lines and send them
through the red tape mill of the NLRB. So successful was this policy,
for a time, that the NRA became known as the “National Run-Around.”
This was a period when the capitalist class appeased the working
class in order to ransom a tottering capitalist system. Part of the
ransom price was the whole series of reforms sponsored by Roosevelt.
The policy of the labor leadership, then as now, consisted in
supporting the so-called friends of labor in the Democratic Party.
The New Deal reforms were a necessary element in the perpetuation of
this type of bourgeois, pro-capitalist politics. In a period of
appeasement of labor, the union leaders traded off the support of the
labor movement to those capitalist politicians who paid the highest
price. This policy had a certain superficial plausibility. It seemed
to work; it seemed to bring more gains for the labor movement.
Actually, these gains were won not because labor supported liberal
capitalist politicians like Roosevelt, but because the capitalist
class feared that without them, the labor movement would withdraw its
support and fall into “irresponsible” radical hands.
 
War Brings About a Turn
But the beginning of the war in Europe corresponded to a turn in
the strategy of the capitalist class. The expense, first of war
preparations and then of war itself, had to be paid by the masses.
This turn occurred not under Truman but under Roosevelt. He himself
underlined this turn when he said: we must speak not of Dr. New Deal
but of Dr. Win-the-War. The policy of appeasing labor was gradually
abandoned but a dazzle of super-patriotism screened the turn in
policy. As the capitalist class shifted from defense to attack, a new
emphasis developed imperceptibly in the old policies of the labor
leadership. Formerly it was, “support the men who gave us
most.” Now it became, “support the capitalist politicians who
will take away least.” Despite Roosevelt’s attacks on
wartime labor rights and standards, the labor officialdom continued
to support him. This became New Dealism in reverse, going downward.
Support Roosevelt because he will take away least. We witnessed a
strange phenomenon. Each time labor would “win” a great victory
at the polls, cries of “betrayal” would resound from the offices
of the union leadership as the Congress, elected with their support,
continued to chop away at the working class.
The Republican Congress and the Truman Administration continue
this policy. The United States must finance the recovery of world
capitalism; it contests with Russia for domination of the whole
world. The costs of this conflict, like the costs of the war itself,
must be borne by the workers. The period of appeasing of labor has
not returned. The capitalist class is embarked on an anti-labor offensive.
The mechanics of an upside-down New Dealism compel the labor
leadership to appease the capitalist class. If Truman breaks a
railroad strike it does not matter; they support him lest an
administration which will break even more strikes come into office.
It is this policy of appeasement of the capitalist class which
generates the steady retreat of labor and the decline in its living
standards and political and social rights. The capitalist class
presses forward. The labor leadership seeks to avoid any sharp
collision. This is possible only by continued retreat.
Only a fine line distinguishes Truman from the Republican
majority. Truman hopes that the labor leadership itself will remain
at the head of the parade and organize the workers in a disciplined
march backward. He therefore prefers a “milder” policy. The
Congress majority places more reliance upon the clubs and whips of
governmental coercion to force the workers backward. They are for a
“sterner” policy. But this is only a minor distinction in
technique. The left-over New Dealers – the Wallaces and the Peppers
– served as pay-off men who delivered the goods at the door of
labor when the agenda called for the appeasement of labor. Today they
merely clutter up the scene and stand in the way of a complete break
by labor with capitalist politicians.
 
IV
Blow after blow will fall upon the labor movement with monotonous
regularity until it understands that its anns arc held by the
“liberals” while the strokes are administered by the
“reactionaries.” This division of labor will continue until the
working class ends its dependence upon the “liberals” and begins
to rely exclusively upon its own independent class action. It is not
a matter of inventing a somewhat better and more effective program
but of substituting a working-class program for the old
liberal capitalist one. Labor must issue its declaration of
independence. Such a declaration must be an all-sided program of
political, economic and social class struggle with the following
minimum essentials:
 
The Tasks Before Labor

The immediate formation of an Independent Labor Party based
upon the organized labor movement and all the mass organizations
which fight for the people. For an uncompromising opposition to all
the capitalist politicians and a complete break with the Republican
and Democratic Parties.
 
A plan of action against the Taft-Hartley Act which relies
upon the coordinated, independent mass action of the workers in the
form of strikes, demonstrations, mass rallies and picketing, etc. No
reliance upon any capitalist politicians in this fight. Every legal
and constitutional device to be employed without deluding the
workers into giving exaggerated importance to them. No reliance upon
judges and courts and lawyers.
 
Labor, and not the liberal capitalists, to become the true
champions of all sections of the population who suffer oppression
and discrimination in any form. The organization by the union
movement of a Labor Veterans Legion, mass tenants’ associations,
popular mass committees of Negro and white workers to fight against
every form of race discrimination.

The active rank and file of the UAW has repeatedly demonstrated
that it will greet such a program with enthusiasm. Wherever and
whenever the leadership has issued a call for action the ranks have
responded aggressively. During the war years, they carried on a
working class policy in their own way without, and against, their own
leadership. The militants in the UAW who have rallied to the Reuther
camp because they are looking for a new policy must begin to press
forward for such a program. The future of the UAW depends upon them.
The conservative Addes bloc aims to unseat Reuther at the
convention precisely because it views him as the leader of a radical
tendency. To support Reuther against this conservative-Stalinist
coalition is the indicated course at the convention. At the same
time, however, we must be under no illusions. Reuther, as in
the past, does not now measure up to the tasks ahead.
In 1945–46 a serious fight for the GM strike program meant a
one-hundred and eighty degree turn in CIO policy. If the slogan:
“Wage Increases Without Price Increases” was to be more than a
well-meaning prayer, a network of union price control committees had
to be established in the departments, in the shops, in the industry,
and in related and subsidiary plants and industries supplying parts
and raw materials. These committees, assuming the same importance as
grievance and bargaining committees would have to investigate, keep
account of and control the intricate thread of production. For this
it was necessary to “Open the Books,” get a glimpse into the top
secrets of big business and detect its financial and industrial
manipulations. But any such “invasion” of the sacred rights of
private property would meet with the determined resistance of the
capitalist class and its government.

Note by ETOL
In the December 1947 issue of The New International the following correction appeared:
Our readers may have noted that the article on The
Pre-Convention Struggle in the UAW, by Ben Hall, in the September
issue, ended quite abruptly. Through an unfortunate oversight at the
technical end, the last three pages of Comrade Hallâs manuscript
were not set up in type and were therefore left out of the magazine.
However, a large part of the omitted section is quoted in this issue
in the accompanying article on the UAW convention and all important aspects of the question covered. We apologize both to our contributor
and to our readers.
 



By the year’s end it is virtually certain that the American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations will have united. Top committees of both have endorsed a merger agreement. All that remains to consummate the unity is a joint convention scheduled for the fall. The Railway Brotherhoods, traditionally aloof and independent, are already talking of joining. For the first time, the prospect looms of a single trade union federation in the United States with the exception of the Stalinist-dominated unions and the possible exception, at least at the beginning, of the United Mine Workers Union.
The impulse toward unity arises not out of weakness but frustrated power. An organized labor movement, bigger and stronger than ever in its history, discovers that its strength is somehow vitiated and neutralized. Liberal Democrats, to whom it clings, endorses and whitewashes, are feeble and timid: since the early New Deal, only gargantuan promises and trivial deeds. Now, a Republican administration holds office; the Taft-Hartley Law stymies union advances, especially in the South, and offers employers a weapon, already successfully wielded in local instances, to wipe out unionism where it is weak. In the states, labor faces a widespread legislative campaign to abolish the union shop and limit the right to strike in the name of the “right to work.” The labor movement holds on to what it has achieved only through the sheer social weight of organized unionism and no further advance or even effectual self-defense, seems possible except through the most concentrated application of this power. George Meany and Walter Reuther, with the traditional labor leader’s instinct for the camouflage of respectability, explain their unity as a patriotic measure devised to promote national unity against Communism. If the truth were told, they are driven to unite because America is divided into classes and the working class feels compelled to unite against its capitalist exploiters. In a country where “capitalism” is dubbed “free enterprise” the class struggle is paraded under the guise of “national unity” but this euphemism changes nothing.
Unity is an historic step forward for U.S. labor but this will become evident in all its force only with time. Unlike the original AFL-CIO split, which meant an immediate dramatic shift in policy and a sweeping rise in the class struggle, the unity will leave all formal policies unaltered and everything, for the moment, will continue as before. A united labor movement will undoubtedly continue to string along with the Democratic Party and will persist in its loyalty to American foreign policy, complaining as always over its sordid details and pleading in vain for a somewhat more democratic spirit.
Unity is no reversion to the status quo ante; for the labor movement can never return to the days before the split. Merger becomes the starting point for a new advance. The CIO claims 5,000,000 members; the AFL, 10,000,000. But despite the numerical preponderance of the AFL, the fundamental character of the modern labor movement in the United States has been stamped by the CIO. The formation of the CIO was a gigantic leap forward of the American working class; the new movement sought not only a new form of organization, industrial unionism, but a new role for the unions. It transformed the union movement, until then a narrow stratum dominated by the skilled crafts, into a labor movement, the organized working class. It was the triumph of an American class consciousness in embryo: union consciousness.
When the case-hardened officials of the AFL expelled the CIO, they pitted the most trivial interests of union bureaucracy against the pressing needs of the working class. The organization of the unorganized, essential if labor was to emerge as an effective class force, was nothing but an incalculable danger to the permanence of their plushy office chairs. But in the period of rapid rise, their opposition was swept aside in a great mass outpouring of workers.
The CIO not only expanded the geographical scope of union organization, it broadened its social role. Unionism came forth as a leader in the fight against racial discrimination and a cadre of skilled and able Negro worker leaders were trained in union struggles. Racketeering and corruption were successfully fended off. In most of the new unions, the spirit of rank and file democracy prevailed. Labor came forward as an organized and potent political force.
Socialists of every brand and faction were in the very heart of the rising movement, occupying positions of leadership and influence. Hopes ran high that at last the isolation of American socialism would be overcome and it would grow to a mass force. At the very least, it seemed probable, even inevitable, that the labor movement under the impact of the CIO, would quickly move toward political independence and form its own party, raising the American working class out of its historical political backwardness.
But it was not to be. A cruel combination of international defeats for socialism in Spain and France; the rise of fascism and world Stalinism; a second world war and its aftermath of totalitarian Stalinist advance wiped out the socialist possibilities within the labor movement. It persisted in illusions over a warmed over, stale New Dealism. In the period of their friendship and sympathy for Stalinism, then in a pro-Roosevelt and pro-capitalist turn, labor militants were thwarted in their class development. And in the post-war period of Stalinist expansion when its anti-democratic, totalitarian features had become clear, the same strata of labor militants cast aside all sympathy for socialism in their justified revulsion against Stalinism. In the cold war with Russia, the unions remained tied to the old capitalist politicians.
By the hundreds, socialists in the labor movement ceased to be socialists, they emerged as the molders of a new American labor movement; anti-socialist but social-reformist; politically conscious but pro-Democratic.
In such a context of domestic and world politics, the CIO had exhausted its role as an independent movement; it was stalemated in bourgeois politics. Reuther’s elevation to the presidency of the CIO climaxed, symbolized, and concluded this whole period. The former socialist rose to the top post at the very moment when he had abandoned, for the time, the advocacy of a new party.
Meanwhile, the AFL could not remain rooted to the past. To stave off the CIO which threatened to supplant it, many of its craft unions were forced to adopt the practice, if not accept the principle, of industrial organization. As the labor movement grew from less than three to more than 15 million it discovered that its life was dominated by politics. In an era of war and war economy, the government confronted it everywhere. Wages became an affair of state. Increasingly, the AFL was forced to abandon its traditional non-partisanship and enter with the CIO into bourgeois politics as a left-wing. Its more responsible leaders gained a glimmering of the social role imposed upon unionism. The CIO formed its Political Action Committee; the AFL followed belatedly with its Labor’s League for Political Education; and both endorsed Stevenson in 1952.
Beneath these progressive externals, lay the undissolved, hard core of the old AFL. Racketeering continued to flourish, undermining the moral standing of unionism at the very moment when it had decided to crusade among the whole people. The AFL, still dominated by the old crafts, did nothing. The watchword “autonomy” became the pretext for sheltering plain corruption. On a local level politics had degenerated into wardheeling and narrow self-seeking labor officials simply integrated themselves into the corrupt machines of the old parties. Racial discrimination, open, official and legal continued in some Internationals without interference from the Federation.
With the death of William Green, all the elements that sought to weaken the power of shortsighted craftism and cleanse the Federation of ordinary crookedness gathered around the new president, George Meany. It was this group, from the AFL side, which made the success of unity negotiations possible. The terms of the merger agreement are unquestionably a total triumph of everything that the CIO has symbolized:

The two federations enter as equal partners in the new center.
 
Industrial unionism is recognized as equal in status to craft unionism.
 
The new constitution will make race discrimination illegal.
 
The new constitution will outlaw racketeering and thus legalize federation action against corrupt affiliates.
 
The CIO will retain its independent structure and treasury on a national and local scale as a separate department within the new federation. Former AFL unions will be free to join it.
 

The agreement, a moral victory for the CIO, came not at the peak of CIO strength but at a time when it was cut down in numbers and undermined from within. The expulsion of Communist Party-dominated unions decreased its size. At the same time, David J. MacDonald, conservative president of the Steel Workers Union, allied with the AFL right-wing led by David Beck (Teamsters president), initiated a running campaign of provocation, nagging and threatening against Reuther to force him into a unity of complete capitulation. Far from taking advantage of Reuther’s exposed position, Meany and his supporters deliberately strengthened the hand of the CIO president. And not without reason. Through the unity, Meany was able to bring the weight of the CIO to bear; with the CIO, he could bring the AFL to accept terms that might otherwise prove inacceptable.
Thus, the achievement of unity is already a victory for those labor leaders, who, however inadequate from the standpoint of independent class politics, represent the modem labor movement; and it is a defeat for the hidebound conservatives left over from yesterday.
A new alignment takes place within the labor movement. MacDonald is allied with Beck. Beck is allied with the Carpenters, Hodcarriers, and Operating Engineers in an artistically accurate pooling of union conservatism and toleration of corruption. And on the other hand, a working collaboration between the forces around Meany and Reuther is inevitable, an alliance with all kinds of weaknesses and shortcomings but incontestably superior to and more progressive than the other. Up to now, the ultra-conservative right-wing enjoyed enormous, often decisive, power within the AFL and weighted down the whole labor movement. But with unity its relative weight instantly decreases.
From every standpoint, unity is an achievement. Inside the labor movement it strengthens the most progressive sections. And simultaneously, it encourages the self-confidence of the working class, stimulating it to demand more from employers, government, and politicians. The stage is set for a forward march.
 



The Socialist Party of America
by David A. Shannon
Macmillan, 320 pp., $4.00, 1955.
A prominent bourgeois economist, Sumner H. Slichter recently pondering the state of the labor movement came forth with the following historical generalization:
“The ideas of radicals have always been so completely unacceptable to American workers that no radical group has ever had a significant effect upon the thinking of workers in this country.”
So finely attuned to the spirit of our times is this ignorant observation that it deserves to be true; if only the past could be patterned on the ideological needs of the present, we might enjoy an aesthetic symmetry whose highest culmination is an attorney general’s list. Socialism has been branded as something illicit: its followers are denied security clearance in government and industry and refused honorable discharges from the armed forces. It remains for historians, educators, commentators and plain thinkers to bar them from history. But, first history must be spruced up and scrubbed clear of all derogatory information. Thus, in the campaign against socialism today, it is fitting to wipe out the memory of yesterday. If it never was, it probably never will be.
But there was the old Socialist Party, founded at the turn of the century, a party which, for a time, made a deep impression on American political life and thought, which had an impressive following among the working class and widespread influence in the trade union movement. The Socialist Party of America is the first full length account of its history. Its author, David A. Shannon, Associate Professor of History at Teachers College, is not among those who rework history to pass muster before a loyalty review board. He handles his subject with genuine sympathy and with a noticeable regret at American socialism’s decline. What he offers is not so much an analytical history as a running chronological account fundamentally accurate except where his strong bias toward the right wing in any fight leads him away from objective reporting. In 1919, for example, the party Right Wing, a minority among the membership by Shannon’s own account, but still in control of the official machinery, suspended and expelled the Left, in an arrant disregard of elementary democracy and ignored a national membership referendum in which it had been deposed. The author strains hard to justify the high handed course of the Right Wing machine.
Nevertheless, if we remain on guard against such irritating intrusions, we can value Shannon’s work as a positive contribution to restating and preserving the record of American socialism and as a reminder of the impact it once made.
As the story of the Socialist Party, it begins at the beginning, ends at the end and tells what happened in between. The tale swings along nicely, like reading old newspapers or attending meetings of days past. A hundred little incidents give us the flavor of party life; activists and leaders spring to life in scores of biographical vignettes. From day to day, so to speak, we get a sense of how the party grew; how it settled its little squabbles and big faction struggles; how it enrolled farmers and middle class reformers; how its class composition became predominantly working class, and finally reverted to petty bourgeois; how it revived for a moment in the thirties and then disintegrated. In this, the book is as complete and comprehensive as a normal sized one volume record of almost fifty years could be.
Valuable as such a narrative proves to be, it is subject to many weaknesses. If a loyal and serious member started a diary of party life from the day it was formed in 1901 and kept a running account till now, has record would resemble Shannon’s history. Events are impressed upon us in their most obvious, outward guise. Party disputes often remain vague: divisions between groups and factions are only roughly indicated by text book rule of thumb: this was the Right; that was the Left. Party development is presented chronologically with little reference to the times or to the state of the whole labor movement; with virtually no connection to international events and trends within world socialism. And finally, because this is a history of the Socialist Party and not of the socialist movement, it loses connection with the main line of development.
When the Socialist Party split after World War I, the Left Wing took its proletarian and vigorous sections and founded two Communist parties, later fusing into one, which, like the world communist movement, finally degenerated into Stalinism, an anti-socialist, anti-working class political tendency. The rise of Stalinism and the growing realization by American workers that it represents anti-labor dictatorship; its confusion with socialism – all this stands among the decisive causes of the decline of socialism in the United States. Shannon hardly mentions the subject.
Shannon summarizes the faction fight between Left and Right in these words:
“Although the basic issues – evolution or revolution, political democracy or proletarian dictatorship, parliamentary action or ‘revolutionary mass action’ – were seldom debated on their merits, these differences were fundamental and important.”
And some pages later, describing a debate in the early ’20s between a Socialist and a Communist he comments:
“Democracy was the issue which split Oneal and Minor, democracy in the sense of universal political participation and civil liberty, the meaning of the term that has been generally understood in western Europe and America, not in the sense of the ‘peoples democracy’ of the Soviet Union.”
But these faction struggles, their significance as well as their ludicrous aspects, the real issues as well as the exaggerations can be understood only on the background of the times: the Russian Revolution and its enervating struggle against armed reaction and intervention; the German Revolution and the reconsolidation of right-wing militarism against an armed working class. At that moment in history, the working class had taken power in backward Russia. In advanced Germany, where the workers organizations held actual power in their hands, militarism and proto-fascism were allowed to re-consolidate. In both cases, the armies and political parties of reaction took refuge against socialist revolution behind the hypocritical watchword of “democracy.” And it was in the name of “democracy” that German right wing socialists raised militarists and bourgeois reactionaries to the seats of power. All this is lost on Shannon whose account centers around a few lifeless formulas.
 
THE THIRTIES BROUGHT ANOTHER CRISIS in Socialism, and a similar treatment is meted out to the contestants by the author. Years of deep depression had revived the desultory Socialist Party; a group of young “militants” demanded a more activist line. Meanwhile, in Germany the most powerful social democracy in history was powerless before Hitlerism and finally succumbed without stirring its lax muscles to avoid extermination. It is only by mustering the most incredible selfisolation from events that Shannon can describe the militant Old Guard dispute without one reference to the rise of the Nazis. And so, he misuses the militants as he misused the early communists.
“The Militants’ view toward democracy was in some respects similar to that of the Communists. Democracy was to them a bourgeois quality, a device adopted by the bourgeoisie to defeat the aristocracy that was now being abandoned by capitalists as their conflict with the proletariat became more intense. Wrote one Militant, ‘Capitalist democracy can be viewed as a game between capital and labor in which the capitalist is at liberty to make the rules, count the points, or suspend the rules entirely,’ Socialists, then should not make a ‘fetish’ of democracy.”
Shannon’s attention is riveted upon the oversimplified view of his chosen Militant writer. But he appears utterly unaware of the fact that the German social democrats were using their own oversimplified view of democracy to dodge responsibility for defending the labor movement against fascism. In 1933, misused slogans of democracy became a pretext for passivity before totalitarian dictatorship. The fight between Militant and Old Guard in the United States was only one facet of a world wide crisis of social democracy, a crisis created by the failure of its views on democracy to cope with the rise of fascism.
But all this is beyond the purview of Shannon’s chosen subject matter. Of 268 pages, only the last 14 examine the causes of the SP’s demise. A brief, sketchy analysis – little more than an appendix unrelated to the main body – concludes:
“But despite all the shortcomings of the Socialist Party, its failure was not primarily its own fault; the failure of the Socialists was due less to their errors than to the basic traditions and conditions in American society which the Socialists could do little or nothing to change.”
This reviewer is in full accord with that thesis. Others have reached a like conclusion but with other motives. Anti-socialism today is almost a prerequisite to an advanced career. For most writers, it is not enough to discover that the weakness of American socialism is the product of profound social causes. Simple, malicious or ignorant critics would merely censor socialism out of history in retrospect. Others who recall the glories of old ascribe the downfall of socialism to factors that are not merely profound but eternal, or at least permanent and unalterable in American capitalism. They are not content with rejecting socialism; they are not satisfied with the attempt to refute it; they would wipe it all out for all time by simple literary declaration.
Although not a socialist himself, Shannon refuses to fall victim to the passing ideological pressures of our times and in this respect remains free of the disease of acute conformity. He sums up socialism at its high point thus:
“In 1912, it was not altogether foolish to believe that within a generation or so the Socialist Party would be, if not the dominant political party of the country, at least a major political group as strong as the British and continental social-democrats.”
He is not hypnotized by the present strength of American capitalism, pointing out:
“As socialists predicted, capitalism has not provided the American nation with a confidently stable economy. What economic stability and health there has been in the nation’s economy since 1940 has been largely attributable to past, present, or possible future war.”
And finally, looking back upon the wreckage of the Socialist Party, he concludes his book with the following two sentences:
“The ideals of social democracy will remain part of the American tradition as long as American soil produces rebels, and there may develop some day, under the impact of fundamental social change, another social-democratic political movement of significance. But should there again be a vigorous political organization with democratic and socialist principles in the United States, it is most unlikely that the party of Debs, Hillquit, and Thomas will provide its impetus.”
The author is able to handle his subject matter, socialism in the United States, with a basic objectivity and with integrity. In these days, that is not a small achievement.
 



Unions and Capitalism
by Charles E. Lindblom
Yale University Press. 267 pp, $3.75
The profession of labor leader has become almost as respectable as that of insurance salesman. High ranking union officials who once spoke to scornful men in their socialist youth formulate weighty arguments in defense of “free enterprise,” adding to their stock of arguments as they rise in the labor hierarchy. Their testimony is heard by Congressional committees; their counsel sought on advisory boards of sub-investigating committees. Public officials listen with respect, solemnly nodding their heads. A fraternity of labor and capital seems solidly cemented in mutual tolerance and regard. Unions appear to have won a permanent place under capitalism; capitalism a loyal ally and advocate.
But a melancholy dissent comes from Yale Professor Charles E. Lindblom who insists, contrary to the apparent weight of evidence, that the maintenance of unions and the continued existence of capitalism are incompatible. Such is the sorrowful theme of his book, Unions and Capitalism; sorrowful, because he admires capitalism but can discover no practical scheme for avoiding its destruction at the hands of unionism.
The author would quickly deny harboring preconceived prejudices. In a cautionary preface he assures us that he passes no judgment on inexorable social processes, that he treats social trends and class forces with the unemotional detachment of a scientist. Such objectivity is indeed a rare quality. Our normal scepticism sounds warning when we learn that he intends to demonstrate, on the basis of pure social science, that the pending doom of capitalism is read in the rapidly rising curve of wages. Powerful unions, he tells us, are forcing wages up to impossible heights. “This is the great labor problem of our time: unionism is destroying the competitive price system.”
Does the disintegration of world capitalism (and its impact upon the American working class) cause the conservative American labor movement to lean toward an alternative philosophy and program. Or, does the rise of conservative mass unions in the United Stites cause the disintegration of capitalism? Lindblom advances the second, and tries, most painfully, to bolster it. He discovers the principal danger to capitalism in the rise of powerful unions which encourage the stubborn pursuit of narrow, self-seeking class aims by the workers, without regard for the interests of “society.” (He uses the terms “society" and capitalism almost interchangeably.)
The whole book is flavored with a quaint one-sided “objectivity” as in some of the following random thoughts.
Item: Unions disrupt and disorganize society. But, of course, capitalism does have defects. For example, labor is treated as a commodity. Yet it is more “propaganda” than fact to say that labor is a commodity under our present system. Our order is fundamentally and genuinely democratic because the consumer, “voting” in the market place with his dollar, dominates and rules production. Such is the essence of democracy. Still, it must be granted that some consumers have more dollars than others, even very many more. On the other hand, this is inevitable under any “incentive” economy. One might say that such inequalities are flaws in our dollar democracy. But, after all, society has declared by a majority vote to maintain such an incentive system with all its inequalities and that is truly democratic. Besides, if unions took over control of production, as a scientific analysis discloses they tend to do, we would have an undemocratic rule of producers over consumers. But let us not be too harsh on unionism, for such is their natural tendency under our present form of society.
Item: His analysis spirals around one central pivot: high, “monopoly” wages undermine capitalism. Lindblom fans out this thought into 200 pages. Since every strike and every new union contract inspire the critics of labor unions to ring the changes on this theme, let us follow the author’s special variation which goes somewhat as follows:
Item: Capitalism is a “competitive price” system. Consumers will pay only a limited price for goods. The cost of production of any commodity must be lower than its selling price; otherwise, no profits and no production. But wages enters as one of the elements in the cost of production; for wages is the cost of labor to the employer and he must buy it like any other commodity; the true level of wages is the “competitive” wage (1) permits profits to employers and reasonable prices to consumers, and (2) is established in the competitive market place, free from “monopoly” control by unions; once the competitive wage disappears, inflation and unemployment follow; capitalism begins to disintegrate. By insisting on a “human wage” and proclaiming “human rights before property rights,” labor leaders reject the “competitive wage” and establish a “monopoly wage”; wages break loose from all moorings; workers wolf down a larger and larger share of production justly belonging to other sections of society; prices skyrocket, higher, higher, higher. Unions take wages completely out of competition by industry-wide bargaining and in agreement with management establish joint “syndicalist” control over separate industries, an alliance against the interests of society. So powerful are the unions that neither government nor management will block their way. Capitalism appears doomed.
“Now one may be quick to endorse the sentiment that people deserve more considerate treatment than things ... But this does not deny that labor is bought and sold on the market, that unionism through its power in collective bargaining does establish what is technically called a monopoly and that union monopoly will disrupt the economy. To insist that labor is not a commodity is to bypass these issues and register simply a moral objection to the treatment of labor in a price system.”
The author would soar above simple moral considerations to the summits of pure science but his economics is hopelessly bound to earth. Viewed with Lindblom’s standpoint, every commodity has its production cost and selling price; cost must remain less than price to allow profit. The justification of the selling price of a given commodity can be sought only by comparing it with its own cost of production. If by such a comparison, its price is reasonable, then this price must enter as a necessary element in the cost of production of any other commodity to whose production it was essential, say, as raw material. For example, if the price of leather permitted repayment of its cost of production plus a reasonable profit, then this price would become a necessary and justifiable element in the cost of producing shoes. Obeying the rules of the game, we could hardly make “moral” demands upon the owner and producer of leather and insist that he sell his product at a price to guarantee profits to the shoe manufacturer. If leather sold at reasonable prices, according to these norms, only an emotional shoe manufacturer could attribute a decline of the shoe industry to an exorbitant price of leather. He is allowed to make such a complaint only if leather sells at a “monopoly” price far above its cost of production. But Lindblom requires labor to be far more generous, self-effacing, and obliging than a mere scrap of leather.
If we really abandoned all “normal” considerations in analyzing labor as a commodity, we would have to view it like all other commodities. If it is burdened with equal duties it should command equal rights. If it is obliged to sell at a certain “competitive price” it should be privileged to receive at least its cost of production. Lindblom, however, makes labor a second class commodity citizen: he discovers its selling price easily enough (wages) but no cost of production! An oversight which makes it possible to test wages not in terms of the cost of production of labor but exclusively in terms of the ability of employers to make a profit. Every other commodity which violates the etiquette of commodity behavior is tried by a jury of its peers; labor, by its masters.
What is the “cost of production” of commodity labor power? This question, so carefully skirted by the author, can be answered only by examining the standard of living of the working class, a level set in the course of the class struggle, in decades of organization and social conflict. By waving aside this modest factor, a series of logical apologetics for exploitation and privilege can be readily arranged.
How can the existence of “monopoly wages” be detected? By some statistical device? If wages are tearing loose from all moorings and workers are cutting deeper and deeper into the national income, such trends should be easily demonstrated. We might still debate whether labor was “entitled” to its more generous portion but at least the facts would be incontestable. But Lindblom’s deep confidence in his theory rescues him from any annoying preoccupation with facts. According to New York Times reports, Martin R. Gainsburgh, chief economist of the National Industrial Conference Board in an address before the New York Chamber of Commerce announced that labor’s total share of the income originating in private corporate enterprise, after allowing for indirect payments, has remained relatively unchanged over recent decades. It amounted to $73.80 out of every $100 of such income in 1929 and $73.40 in 1948.
Economist Seymour E. Harris compares “the rise of employee compensation of 180 per cent from 1929 to 1948 with that of business and professional incomes of 220 per cent.” The People’s Lobby Bulletin reports:
“In 1949, national income was 207 per cent larger than in 1939: compensation of employees was 197 per cent larger; proprietors’ and rental income was 210 per cent larger, corporate profits after taxes 244 per cent larger, dividend payments 121 per cent larger and undistributed profits 633 per cent larger. In 1949, total employee compensation was only 63.7 per cent of national income and 66 per cent in 1939.”
Hardly a picture of labor hogging the national income.
But perhaps the inexorable trend toward monopoly wages and its devastating effects on our otherwise sound economy can be detected by some more reliable, if less statistical, examination. Lindblom warns us away from the search.
“Monopoly rates will raise price and restrict output in an industry; but in any given case of price and output changes, no obvious evidence of union responsibility will be found. It will be known that both wage rate and price are high but whether the wage rate is a monopoly rate will not be known.”
Like God, monopoly wages seem to belong in the realm of the unknowable.
Chase as fast as he can, the workingman cannot overtake the upper classes. This simple thought is twisted into a supple apologetic for privilege; the great gulf between worker and non-worker, between opulence and mere humdrum existence becomes an inherent characteristic of any free, stable social system.
“The worker is in fact insisting on no fixed goal at all. He is in effect demanding that he be put within reach of standards set by the middle and upper income groups. And as he moves toward them, they move away, for the constant rise in the national income raises the accomplishments and standards of the middle and higher income groups themselves.”
At bottom, Lindblom’s quarrel with unionism stems from its assault not only on capitalist inequalities but against social inequality in general. And here lies the explanation of a queer ambivalence in his attitude toward labor leaders.
On gloomy first thought, he expects the worst. “The new leadership [Murray, Reuther] understands the complexities of the market place better than the old. It therefore realized how great the obstacles are to the achievement of union objectives without altering the market structure itself.” And elsewhere he predicts, “The latter [these leaders] may come ultimately to confess publicly their desire to lead the way to a new order.” But a faint ray of optimism flickers from an unexpected source, when Lindblom puzzles out a wistful program for preserving capitalism. On second thought, the union leadership alone seems able to exercise a moderating restraint upon the anti-social tendencies of unionism. If no one else can protect and preserve a privileged upper stratum against the rude pushing of the workers below, perhaps the labor leaders will. At least, such seems to be his hope.
The author documents the impinging of unionism on the rights of management and the sprouting of a laborite anti-capitalist ideology at the core of the union’s pro-capitalist philosophy. In this respect, his book is of great interest to socialists. But if we seek a scholarly explanation of social trends in the labor movement we do so in vain, discovering only a scholar’s reaction and his literary revenge upon them. The effects of two world wars and preparations for a third, the impact of economic crises, the threat of mass unemployment, the rise of giant monopolies in industry, the trends toward authoritarianism and dictatorship, the intervention of the state in industry ... all these tendencies, inherent in modern capitalism and inseparably associated with its threatened collapse and gradual disintegration are either lightly dismissed or completely ignored. Thus any examination of their effects in forming a new working class ideology is avoided. Such trivia may be ignored; for the author is convinced that the faithless desertion of capitalist principles by the unions is at the root of all difficulties. As her former courtiers abandon her in ugly senility, the doddering hag of capitalism is consoled by the thought that if her admirers had remained eternally loyal, her youth would have bloomed forever.
If we discount its pretensions to objectivity and its pseudo-scientific detachment and consider only its symptomatic significance, this book assumes real importance. Lindblom reveals a striking loss of faith in the ability of capitalism to reward its workers with an ever rising wage level and a rapidly improving standard of living. Once capitalism proudly boasted that it alone offered higher and higher pay; now comes the sad discovery that the struggle for fulfillment of yesterday’s promises undermines the system itself. The author is compelled to throw overboard the theories of Selig Perlman which maintained that the working class and its unions were inherently conservative; that its characteristic loyalty to the capitalist status quo doomed the hopes of socialists who saw the labor movement as a powerful vehicle for social transformation. Lindblom proclaims, on the contrary, that the labor movement is revolutionary by nature. Despite its professed aims, its loyal intentions, and its own conservative cast of mind, the labor leadership is impelled along paths that lead away from capitalism and trespass on the sacred rights of private property. He is no socialist. He foresees the coming demise of capitalism with regret. Fascinated by the perquisites it allows its upper classes, he hopes finally and wistfully that some modus vivendi with the labor officialdom will permit their perpetuation.
Nor are our American union leaders socialists. They hold tightly to the coattails of bourgeois politicians; they fear the formation of a labor party; they are bureaucratic; they jealously guard their own lofty position, exalted way above their rank and file. The tragedy of our times lies not in a tendency of the existing unions to undermine capitalism but in the failure, thus far, of the labor movement to replace it with socialism. Meanwhile the internal chemical processes of capitalist degeneration corrode the bases of modern civilization. Socialism demands the conscious participation of millions of workers to end capitalism and replace it with social ownership of industry, to eradicate bureaucratism and permit the flowering of democracy in all phases of social life; it requires the end of a system where leisure, luxury, and culture become the privilege of a few and rest upon the toil and degradation of the peoples. Our labor movement is far, far away from such a program. But in his own queer way, Lindblom reminds us of the enormous revolutionary potentialities of the working class movement.
 



A Philosophy of Labor
by Frank Tannenbaum
Alfred A. Knopf. 199 pp. $2.75
As tendencies toward bureaucratism in society deepen, the labor movement commands attention as a powerful counterforce. Through their unions, workers begin to control and direct their own labor. In this respect, unions become the very antithesis of totalitarian control from above and the whole structure of modern democracy depends upon them. Tannenbaum’s little book deserves to be read because it deals interestingly, if quaintly, with this theme and recognizes the labor movement as the chief defender of democracy in our times. But more than this cannot be said. The author sympathizes with unions and their aims, in a general sort of way, but his analysis of their significance ignores the weighty facts of their development.
This work, entitled A Philosophy of Labor, promises far more than it gives. The labor movement is not and never has been confined exclusively to the union movement. Yet, the author reaches conclusions solely from an examination of the latter. And not of the union movement as it has evolved in all the main industrial centers of the world but almost entirely of the unions in the United States. Even narrower becomes the focus of his analysis which concentrates upon only one phase of the history of the American union movement, a phase which it is already outgrowing, the period dominated by the old American Federation of Labor. His philosophy, therefore, is a strained attempt to universalize the limited experience of the working class in one country at one time into a general law.
“Trade unionism is the conservative movement of our times,” he begins, “it is the counter-revolution. Unwittingly, it has turned its back upon most of the political and economic ideas that have nourished western Europe and the United States during the last two centuries. In practice, though not in words, it denies the heritage that stems from the French Revolution and from English liberalism. It is also a complete repudiation of Marxism.”
To illuminate and clarify this thought, he argues that the trade union repudiates “individualism” and rests upon the “group.” “The values implicit in trade unionism are those of an older day, antedating the grating modern political slogans. It is an unwitting effort to return to values derived from the past: security, justice, freedom, and faith.” With this, he launches a chapter of pedantic divagations into the ancient and medieval history of the guild, presumably the embodiment of these older values, in the course of which we are fascinated by assorted tid-bids of encyclopedic information: there were guilds in China at least a thousand years ago; they were known as officium or ministerium in Latin, metier or jurande in French, arte in Italian, etc., for six languages. This tedious section concludes somewhat abruptly and startlingly, “The role of the new union which, it should be emphasized, is not derived from the guild, was to prove profoundly different because the economy itself had greatly changed.” His interest is so unwaveringly focused at the point where the union movement did not begin, its real origins and history is skimmed over in scattered fragments or lost in vague speculative generalities about the reaction against “individualism.” His analysis does not clarify the influence of the past upon the present nor illuminate the connection between them but simply superimposes the past helter-skelter upon the present. With the same capricious historical methodology one could just as easily “demonstrate” that the trade unions in revolt against “individualism” submerge the individual in the mass and thereby “unwittingly” subvert human liberty.
The modern labor movement begins as a reaction against the failure to achieve the great ideals of the French Revolution within capitalist society. Not only political democracy but social democracy, or economic democracy, or industrial democracy. Not only political equality but social equality. With such watchwords, the labor movement everywhere appeared not as a movement for a return to the past but as a crusade for effectuating what had been promised but not achieved. Even in the United States, the labor movement was inspired by the liberating ideals emanating from France and embodied in the Declaration of Independence which provided its rallying1 slogans in the early eighteenth century.
But it is probably futile to quarrel with the author’s insistence upon the “conservative” and “counterrevolutionary” character of union activity. He seems more concerned here with startling his readers than effecting a real judgment. We read 130 pages later, “The ends aimed at (by unions) are not revolutionary in intent but they are revolutionary in effect.” It is obvious that the words “revolutionary” and “counter-revolutionary” are being juggled to death.
“Trade unionism is a repudiation of Marxism,” says Tannenbaum, “because its ends are moral rather than economic.” This vulgarization of Marxism as dehumanized economics is no worse than his other references to Marxism, all the fruit of a harmless ignorance. Marxists have never understood the importance of unions ; they simply seek to manipulate them for their own devious purposes ... so goes the writer. Naturally, he confuses Marxism and socialism with Stalinism. But this misconception has gained such currency and is so blithely accepted by all who would slur together the socialist movement for human freedom with Stalinist totalitarianism that one hesitates to haggle over the point merely because it happens to be an impermissible distortion.
But an author who is so convinced that the union movement is the very antithesis of socialism might be expected to examine some of the most obvious facts of their reciprocal history. In the major countries of Europe, the labor movement begins not as a trade union movement but as a socialist movement. In kindness to Tannenbaum’s philosophy, this ought never to have happened, but it is true. The decisive sectors of the European trade union movement were initiated and led by socialists. In Russia, where the unions assumed significance after the revolution, Marxists viewed them as the very institutions of the working class which would ultimately take over control of all industry. In the Marxist view, the task of the labor movement is nothing less than the reorganization of society under the real control of the working class. The trade unions are called upon to mobilize the working class in the daily struggles against exploitation, to train the workers in the skills of controlling production, to participate in the great crusade for a new society, to participate in the actual management and control of industry under a workers’ government. One may reject these objectives. But it would be hard to prove that they signify an underestimation of the role of unions.
While Marxists speculated in unrealizable fantasies, says Tannenbaum, the unions’
“... very lack of ideas made it strong and enabled it to concentrate upon immediate ends without wasting its energies in a futile pursuit of Utopia. The trade- union movement could go on for generation after generation despite many failures, gradually accommodating itself to a changing industrial environment. It could do that without challenging the political or moral ideas current at the time, all the while slowly shaping new institutions, habits, and loyalties. It has gathered power within the community until it has suddenly dawned upon men that a new force – not an idea, but a new force – has come into being. This force is changing the structure of our economy and redistributing power in our society.”
The author thinks he has uncovered the innate tendencies of the union movement but he only describes the American labor movement as it completes the first quarter of the twentieth century and even that without regard to the rise and decline of its socialistic wing. One glance at continental Europe is enough to warn against generalizing. When its labor movement under the leadership of conservative social-democracy did in fact restrict itself to limited aims to the sacrifice of long term goals, when it remained a “power” without rallying the people to a new “idea,” it suffered shattering defeat and momentary obliteration at the hands of fascism. Tannenbaum simply ignores this whole experience. Applied to the United States, his thesis hardly stands up any better for it arrives about twenty-five years too late. With the advent of the CIO, the American labor movement discovers that its old-fashioned simple unionism, the bread-and- butter concentration upon immediate, tangible, non-political tasks is no longer adequate. It is compelled to enter politics and to try to wield the power of government in its own behalf. As it grows in power, precisely because it gains recognition as a decisive social force, it is impelled to develop an “ideology,” a general social program an “ideal.” Although this program still remains committed to capitalism, it has moved many steps away from pure and simple unionism.
Socialists propose that the union movement go further. Not because they deny any significance to unions except as instruments of socialism (that is what Tannenbaum contends) but because the pro-capitalist policies of the unions tend to check, restrain, devitalize the struggles of the working class, make it difficult to protect and strengthen the union movement itself, and render it incapable of a consistent and aggressive defense of the interests of all the common people.
If this seems like asking too much, we note that Tannenbaum himself assigns the union movement a heavy responsibility. “In the end, either the organic groups now in unions will destroy the authoritarian government state or the government will end by stifling the industries and ultimately disintegrating.” The alternatives he poses are: either the unions and democracy or the state and totalitarianism. But who is to control the state? If the labor movement can bring democracy into industry, why not into the state? Tannenbaum offers no reply to questions which he does not even raise.
Shall the labor movement take the lead in reorganizing modern society? The author cannot make up his mind. “Every activity of organized labor is a denial of both the philosophy and practice of a free market economy.” If the unions are in fact the only alternative to totalitarianism and if they tend to wipe out our present market economy then it would seem demonstrated that the labor movement is the bearer of a new form of society, a free, democratic, non-capitalist society. It is just this that Marxists believe and they suggest that the unions pursue this goal consciously and consistently instead of stumbling toward it. Tannenbaum succeeds in escaping from this conclusion only by escaping from his own “philosophy of labor.”
“In spite of its many shortcomings, it is not the industrial society of the Western World that is on trial. That has now been tried for over a hundred and fifty years and has given men a greater body of material goods than was ever enjoyed by the mass of men anywhere. What is on trial is the new system (Statism) that would replace it on grounds of higher efficiency and greater moral perfection.”
What then, becomes of the unwitting striving of unions toward something new?
For a man who accuses socialists of utopianism, Tannenbaum shows a remarkable ability to invent a novel solution to the problems of humanity. Or, if not so very novel, it remains pure invention. “What is presumed [by Tannenbaum] in this development is that the union will gradually take on the role of the modern corporation by buying into it and that ownership will cease to be fluid and impersonal.” And in the closing words of the book, “The corporation and the union will ultimately merge in common ownership and cease to be a house divided. It is only thus that a common identity may once again come to rule the lives of men and endow each one with rights and duties recognized by all.” And thus, as the classes blend in harmony each with its recognized and unchallenged role and rights, the state may be ignored and totalitarianism avoided.
However, instead of merging with the big corporations, unions are compelled to continue their struggles against them. Instead of by-passing the state, unions find they must intensify political action. Instead of ignoring the government, unions find their struggles and demands inextricably intertwined with it.
The interesting aspects of Tannenbaum’s book remain. Here is an anti-“statist,” an anti-socialist, who sees the fate of democracy resting with the labor movement. Regardless of how he circles into this conclusion, his testimony remains.
 



“Hall is looking at the world through one eye,” says Judd, “and this one eye sees ONLY American imperialism.”
It might be presumptuous for a one-eyed person to question the vision of a man who enjoys the use of two eyes. But I gain courage in the disconcerting discovery that the original diagnostician is himself cross-eyed. It is true that optometrist Judd has two eyes, but having simultaneously moved toward his nose, each sees a different image.
“How interesting,” says Judd, that Hall does not “mention the danger of Stalinism and least of all of a general strategy for overcoming this danger.” In an article in a forthcoming issue of the Bulletin of the Workers Party I say something about this question. Judd unsuccessfully blurs together his position on aid with a vague, shimmery hint of a promised “strategy” for fighting Stalinism under the proverbial formula: “Let not thy right eye know what thy left eye is seeing.”
 
Double Vision
As Judd squints out of his right eye, this is what he sees: the disorganized state of Europe leads to the growth of Stalinism and Stalinist influence. Unless Europe “recovers,” experiences a “revival,” the working class will be defeated by Stalinism. The socialist revolution is far off. Therefore the reconstruction of Europe, essential to the defeat of Stalinism, must come from the existing imperialist government of the United States. Therefore we are for “exacting” “aid,” that is, the capitalist reconstruction of Europe, from the American bourgeoisie. What he has here is NOT a strategy for defeating Stalinism. All he is saying is that without the revival of Europe it is impossible to defeat Stalinism; that is, that no strategy is possible under these conditions.
This policy makes the American capitalist class the decisive social force in combatting Stalinism and therefore tends to transform the proletariat in all countries into a critical democratic, although “oppositionist,” wing of American imperialism. If the proletariat alone can combat Stalinism, then the American capitalist class alone can strengthen the proletariat! Of course, the bourgeoisie must be prodded a bit!
But again, Judd has two eyes. As he blinks out of his left eye he sees a different world.
“Do we accept the alleged humanitarian declarations of the bill or its proud boasts that it will RECONSTRUCT EUROPE AND BRING PEACE AND ORDER? We know that this is cant and hypocrisy. Nor do we have the slightest confidence in the ability of this act to accomplish what it, claims it will accomplish. Thus we would wish to signify by our vote, no confidence in the government of the American capitalist class, no trust in its proposals, NO FAITH IN ITS ABILITY TO MAINTAIN PEACE OR RESURRECT THE EUROPE IT HELPED DESTROY.” (LA statement, May 17, my emphasis.)
But if Europe must be reconstructed by American imperialism lest Stalinism conquer AND if American imperialism CANNOT reconstruct Europe, what has happened to the grand “strategy” for defeating Stalinism? Judd’s left eye sees the victory of Stalinism as guaranteed and therefore the impossibility of any program for defeating it. Thus his boast “we say modestly (!) that perhaps no other publication has posed the threatening catastrophe as clearly as Labor Action.” Judd simply cannot decide once and for all whether the victory of Stalinism is inevitable or whether it can be stopped by the American capitalist class. He would vote for the Marshall Plan or ERP just like Goldman if his vote were decisive. But we might ask, “Didn’t you just say that the existing government cannot restore European economy?”
An inmate of a lunatic asylum was found in his cell stark naked except for a silk top hat. When asked why he had taken off all his clothes he replied: “Nobody ever visits me anyhow.” But, the questioner continued, why are you wearing the silk top hat? “You can always hope for the best,” he replied as he proceeded to vote for the Marshall Plan.
 



DETROIT – Some tightrope walker, juggling his pencil in the current issue of Ammunition (UAW educational magazine) attempts to“explain” the 1948 political policy of the United Automobile Workers Union.
In question and answer form we are told just why we should not support the Wallace movement. We receive an IOU handout on the promise that after the presidential elections this fall the UAW will help organize a genuine third “majority” party based largely on the union movement. But sad to say we are told this cannot be done now; for now is not the time. (The epitaph of the leaders of the American labor movement will read: “Now was not the time.”) No, there is too much “educational” work to be done and besides, the state election laws would make it impossible to get on the ballot in time for the ’48elections.
 
“Naturally, We Don’t Know ...”
After many questions and many explanations we finally reach the $64 item (quotes are from Ammunition):
“Question: But whom do I vote for for President?”
“Panel (Answer): If you don’t know, naturally we don’t know ...”
That’s clear enough. The UAW leaders just don’t know. For years, the CIO leaders, including those of the UAW, have commanded great prestige among millions of workers; they have pounded away at the necessity for political action; they have denounced all proposals to establish labor’s own party; they have stubbornly insisted that the only “practical” political policy was to support so-called liberals in the two capitalist parties. And now, after years of experience with this policy, at a time when the union movement is under attack from every department of government, they can only offer this advice: “naturally, we don’t know.”
Ammunition continues with its brilliant political advice:
“Actually, if we start working immediately on a political program that deals with housing, Taft-Hartley, prices, taxes, and monopolies we may yet find a candidate and a program we can support in November.”
How does this abracadabra make sense? Only in one way. If by some miracle or by some hypnosis whose workings is as yet unknown the CIO leadership could perform the impossible and arouse the enthusiasm of its membership for the current bankrupt political program ... and if as a result the CIO could put on huge political demonstrations in some form or other ... then it is doubtless true that some phony “liberal” in the Democratic party who now prefers to remain discreetly silent might utter a few ineffectual mutterings which could be interpreted by the desperate CIO officials as “progressive” and “New Dealism.” Then we could all jump on his bandwagon and try to postpone the whole annoying business for a few more years.
 
Time Is Now, Not Later
But if such pressure would accomplish such results, what could the immediate formation of a labor party bring? CIO members would respond by the millions as they did in the days of the formation of the CIO itself. That is guaranteed. And, seeing the determination and resoluteness of the workers, it is also certain that the politicians of all parties would try to woo the workers away from this movement by all sorts of concessions and compromises. And the more we spurned their crumbs the more they would try to offer in order to stave off the growth in influence of our party.
It is true that these concessions would not last forever, for when our party grew in strength, as it inevitably would, the capitalist politicians would fight us with the same reactionary methods that they use today against our unions.
But the immediate formation of a Labor Party, now ... today would mean a big step forward and an immediate improvement in the conditions of the whole working class, regardless of the outcome of the current elections. NOW is the time for the formation of a Labor Party.
 



The discussion on the Marshall Plan in the May 17 issue of Labor Action is of great interest not primarily because it airs the issues in dispute between the editorial board and Goldman but because it indicates that despite differences in emphasis both take fundamentally the same position. Where one puts an ambiguous “No” the other places a qualified“Yes.”
The common basis for the two points of view can be summarized as follows: the working class of Europe cannot defeat Stalinism unless European economy is stabilized. Only the U.S. can provide, immediately and effectively, the aid essential to recovery. Since a working-class government does not now rule the United States and since action must come immediately, we favor aid for this purpose by the existing capitalist government. But the government is imperialist and attaches imperialist strings to its aid; we therefore fight for aid from the imperialist government free of imperialist strings.
Such a position does not flow from the fundamental political slogan of the “Workers Party”: Neither Washington nor Moscow: It can only reassure and stimulate political trends toward critical support of American imperialism and its world strategy. Economic recovery of Europe, free of imperialist dictation, can be supported and financed in only one way: by a working-class government in the United States. The capitalist class can and will carry out only an imperialist policy on a world scale. By proposing to persuade or compel the present government to pursue a non-imperialist policy on this question, both Goldman and the editorial board foster the illusion already prevalent enough with our meager assistance that it is possible to purge world capitalist strategy of its imperialist character if only the workers fight hard enough. Such a conclusion does not refute but strengthens those who go further and believe it possible to purge war conducted by the capitalist class of its imperialist character.
 
Meaning of “No” Vote
The editorial board states that a socialist congressman would vote against the Marshall Plan on grounds of “principle” as a means of expressing a lack of confidence in the imperialist ruling class. Our enthusiasm for this laudable sentiment is restrained from boiling over by the fact that this principle is in contradiction with the general line of the editorial board on aid to Europe.
The “No” vote on the Marshall Plan can be compared with the traditional stand of Marxists in voting “No” on the budget of capitalist states. The “No” vote, on principle, is cast not because of oppositions to the “connotations” political or otherwise, nor because of opposition to any single aspect or group of aspects of a given “bad” budget but as an expression of lack of confidence in the ability or willingness of the ruling class to run the state or society in the interests of the working class.
A “No” vote against the Marshall Plan “on principle,” following this traditional policy, would have to express not an opposition to any special “connotations” of the plan but a lack of confidence in the ability of the present ruling class because of its very nature as an imperialist bourgeoisie to rebuild Europe in the interests of the masses, a lack of confidence in its ability to devise anything but an imperialist plan. From this lack of confidence flows, in principle, the necessity to install a working-class government to aid the non-imperialist reconstruction of Europe.
But the editorial board while expressing its lack of confidence by a “No” vote announces its policy of “exacting” aid from the imperialist state to rehabilitate Europe without imperialist strings. The real principle thus established is that we have no confidence in the bourgeoisie when it acts in an imperialist manner but that we are confident that it can be compelled to act otherwise. This is the same principle established in a somewhat different manner by Goldman.
 
Chief Task
Tactical questions dealt with in the statement of the board are not decisive to this point. Whether we present our views in a bill, as amendments, how we present our ideas in a union ... all this is important. But before deciding on the validity of a given tactic we have to decide what it is supposed to accomplish. Does it aim to teach that a non-imperialist plan can be exacted from an imperialist government or does it demonstrate the need to get rid of such a government in order to get such aid.
This matter is of vital importance today because the United States obscures its real plans with professions of humanitarianism and philanthropy. The chief task of American socialists in regard to the Marshall Plan is to expose these pretensions.
War, says Judd (Labor Action, May 10) will be the planned continuation of Marshall Plan politics. Let him explain then, how our policy on war will be the “planned continuation” of our policy on the Marshall Plan. If we can exact a non-imperialist reconstruction of Europe from an imperialist government, why is it not possible to exact a war which is essentially non-imperialist?
 






The accompanying article was written before the GM settlement. Though now outdated in some of its facts, the essential point of the article is still vital to the labor movement. – Ed.



*
DETROIT, May 22 – 225,000 workers may walk out of their plants when the UAW contract with the General Motors Company expires on Friday, May 28. After weeks of fruitless negotiations, no offer of any kind has been made to the union. General Motors which is making more profits than ever in its history, and which forced its workers into a three months long strike in 1945–46, is so far acting in line with a “pattern” being set by all sections of the capitalist class in all industries.
The task imposed upon the labor movement, it is becoming clear, is not simply to obtain a well-justified wage increase. In order to win our just demands, we must resist the “pattern” of united capitalist attack; and the “pattern” of government by injunction!
The Chrysler strike, now entering its third week, may be the opening episode heading toward a big national crisis.
Following a few relatively trivial incidents, Chrysler applied for an injunction against mass picketing at the Dodge truck plant and the state police were mobilized at the gates of the Highland Park plant. These measures in themselves have little effect on the course of the strike in face of the solidarity of the strikers. But they assume great significance in terms of a possible long range and unified strategy by ALL the big auto companies, and not them alone. Police measures and court injunctions are preparatory measures to soften up the workers for the possible intervention of the Federal government.
The Chrysler Corporation contemptuously offered and then withdrew a token and insulting 6 cent wage increase and has stubbornly refused to budge. Even this offer was accompanied by a letter to all employees in which the company stated that its real position was that NO WAGE INCREASE was justified, but that it offered the 6 cents as ransom money against a strike. Chrysler is not alone in this arrogant attitude.
Not long ago, the steel industry flatly refused even a 1 cent increase to the United Steel Workers Union. Westinghouse Electric followed suit with an identical move against the CIO electrical workers.
The Ford Motors Company, which succeeded in breaking the Foremen’s Association in its plants after last year’s foremen’s strike, is proposing NOT A WAGE INCREASE BUT IS DEMANDING A WAGE CUT from the union. A strike against Ford to defend the living standards of the workers is inevitable if the company does not retreat.
After battling it out for more than two months on the picket line where they met a campaign of terror and intimidation reminiscent of the open-shop days of 15 years ago, the CIO packinghouse workers were compelled by the sheer pressure of hungry families and empty larders to return to work on the basis of the employers’ proposed 9 cents per hour wage increase. In Kansas City, for example, the police broke up peaceful picket lines with clubs, invaded the local union hall, wrecked the equipment and property, and beat all in sight.
The 9 cent wage increase leaves the packinghouse workers far behind the cost of living.
 
Unified Policy
If the Big Three auto monopolists, Chrysler, Ford, and General Motors, follow an agreed-upon plan of attack against the UAW the course of events is clear. The union will be forced either to capitulate and suffer a demoralizing setback, or it will be compelled to carry on a combined strike against the Big Three. Knowing the UAW and its militant rank and file we are certain that they will not capitulate. We know that they will take on the auto monopolists.
But it is not enough to be prepared to stand up against the auto manufacturers. The shutdown of the big auto plants, involving in itself more than half a million workers, would quickly affect supplier and parts plants directly affecting possibly a million workers. Related industries would soon feel the effects ... rubber tires, glass etc. All the big monopolies are tied together. If the auto barons decide to effect what amounts, in fact, to a lock-out of the mass production workers, shops and industries which could really continue in operation might be closed under one pretext or another. Such a unified and coordinated policy is possible to the capitalist class because it is in control of all the levers of modern industry and has the dictatorial right to decide what plant shall and what plant shall not operate.
The crowning aim of such a policy would be a demand for Federal intervention, a demand for an anti-strike injunction under the infamous “national emergency” sections of the Taft law. The capitalist class has received encouragement to embark upon such a criminal road by two years of government by injunction. Twice in two years the miners have been beaten back to the mines by injunctions and fined astronomical sums by the courts. Twice in two years the railroad workers have been driven back to work by government decree. In each case, upon the advice of leaders who do not know how to defend the rights of the labor movement or who are not willing to do what is so necessary, the labor movement has capitulated. That is what leads the auto manufacturers to the conclusion that now may be the time for a show-down battle.
All this MAY NOT occur. The capitalist class, seeing the solidarity of the auto workers, may decide that the unions are too powerful, that it is best to be more cautious and to wait. But it is possible. It is very possible. And if the UAW-CIO. Should be forced to bow to government by injunction, this fact added to the capitulation of the miners and the railroad unions would give a green light to the whole capitalist class to begin a new era of union wrecking.
 
Social Struggle
The labor movement cannot permit itself to be forced backward one section at a time. The joint strategy of the capitalist class which has as its aim the final wrecking of the union movement must be met by a joint strategy of the labor movement for defense of its rights. What begins as a fight for a simple wage increase,for the right to improve or even merely to maintain the existing living standards of the workers is being transformed by the capitalist class into a big social struggle. And it must be met as such.
Against the “pattern” of government by injunction! A joint strategy committee representing all the mass unions and responsible to the democratically elected representatives of the workers must coordinate the fight. Shall one shop or more than one strike at a time? Shall one industry or more than one strike at a time? How can the workers be organized and mobilized to defend each sector of their struggle? These and similar matters can be settled by a joint strategy committee if it understands the need to prepare for co-ordinated mass action against the injunction pattern.
The UAW already has a Policy Committee for the whole auto industry. Two things are needed: 1) that this policy committee understand what is about to take place or what can very well take place; 2) that there be a “policy committee” for the whole working class.
 



The New Men of Power: America’s Labor Leaders
by C. Wright Mills
Harcourt, Brace, N.Y., 1948, 323 pages, $3.50.
The American labor officialdom is subjected to a pitiless
examination by C. Wright Mills. These several thousand men,
“generals” of the “most democratic societies of
their size in the world,” says Mills in his opening pages, “are
the strategic actors, they lead the only organizations capable of
stopping the main drift toward war and slump.” Weighing them
carefully against this task, Mills finds them wanting and concludes
his work with this sentence: “Never has so much depended upon
men who are so ill-prepared and so little inclined to assume the
responsibility.”
Having proved to the hilt that those who can and should stop the
“main drift” cannot and will not do so, the author loses
balance in an effort to find the way out. He becomes blinded to the
very guide marks which he himself carves out and loses control over
his own excellent material, ignoring conclusions which flow
inescapably from his investigation. This work divides into two
clearly defined aspects: Mills, posing the role of the labor
leadership within the framework of the problems of contemporary
society, is powerful, convincing, illuminating. But Mills outlining
his own program, and we must add, sketching the purported program of
the “far left” (Trotskyists), succeeds only in creating a
bizarre fog. This latter part of his work is of interest mainly as a
curiosity which can be overlooked without detracting from the
unquestionable importance of the book.
What is the American labor leader? Mills adds much to our
knowledge, documenting his investigation with facts and statistics
assembled in large part from a series of questionnaires addressed to
all leaders of AFL and CIO international unions and heads of city and
state federations. The labor leaders are “of lowly origin.”
Most of them began as wage workers, as did their fathers. However,
they come not from the lowest sections of the population, the
unskilled and semiskilled, but from, among the highly skilled
workers, foremen, farmers, or of small businessmen. Many were workers
whose ambitions were leading them out of the working class into the
professions, but who became derailed into labor leadership. Mills
informs us that “David Dubinsky, for instance, or Julius
Hochman went into the shop with the vaguely contradictory ambition of
leading the workers toward ‘emancipation’ while saving
enough money to study medicine or law.” Walter Reuther could be
cited as another example. He started out as a tool and die maker who
worked as a leader while he attended college with the aim of becoming
an engineer. He participated in the socialist student movement and
with the depression and later the rise of the UAW became diverted
from his engineering career back into the labor movement. The labor
leaders, says Mills, “are, in an unkindly phrase, ‘petty
bourgeois’ in origin.”
The union leader “organizes discontent, then he sits on it
exploiting it in order to maintain a continuous organization; the
labor leader is a manager of discontent.” To maintain his
position he builds a machine inside the union based upon patronage
(“porkchops”) but at all times he must “deliver the
goods” to the rank and file. His horizon is limited to securing
this or that immediate short-term gain. He supports the capitalist
system but seeks within it peaceable and cooperative relations with
the business class which will give him a junior partnership with the
owners of industry, security for the union, and higher wages for the
workers. He “stands between the company bureaucracy and the
rank and file of the workers, acting as a shock absorber for both.”
Security for the union he identifies with the security of his own
position which gives him power, a standard of life above that of the
ranks and freedom from the monotony of industrial labor. The
culmination of this stability he seeks by the regularization of the
whole economy to free it of shocks and crises. He therefore accepts
the “liberal rhetoric” of peaceful cohabitation of union
and industry under the benevolent auspices of the liberal capitalist
state. The New Deal embodied all his aspirations. Becoming its ardent
champion, he helped shunt aside the political development of the
labor movement.
He fears the power of industry in government and is alarmed at the
possibility of fascism but has no long-range policy beyond that of a
quick grasp for speedy small-time gains. He is opposed to the
formation of an independent party of labor and hopes to achieve his
aims within the framework of the Democratic-Republican party system.
His social philosophy gives him a sense of “sobering
responsibility” which pushes him further and further away from
the rank and file. It is the lowest ranking leaders with the closest
ties to the workers who “reflect more hope, expectation and
trust” in the long-term development of the union movement.
Modern society is drifting toward war, slump and totalitarianism.
Mills considers the aims, character and ideology of the labor
leadership in this context. The only group apart from the “far
left” which has a consistent long-term program is the so-called
“sophisticated right,” that is, the most far-sighted
thinkers of big business. (Stalinism in the labor movement is
analyzed separately and is not considered in this connection.)
Through the Marshall Plan they seek unchallenged domination of world
economy in the interests of the profit makers. They plan for the
militarization of society, the increasing merger of the state,
industry and the military. The cost of their plans, which can
culminate only in a new war which they fully expect, must be borne by
the poorest sections of the population. The labor union must be
either destroyed or completely integrated into the militarized state.
Their immediate strategy is to reach some kind of agreement with the
existing labor leadership to insure the system against a radical,
socialist development of the American working class. They want to
suck the labor leadership into their policy of control by the state
and guarantee a pro-capitalist, pro-imperialist labor movement.
The labor leader, far from standing in the way of this program,
helps to further it by his own ideology which views the state not as
it actually is, the instrument of the ruling capitalist class, but as
the impartial arbiter between classes. “The labor leader is
walking backward into the future envisioned by the sophisticated
conservatives. By his long-term pursuit of the short end, he is
helping move the society of the United States into a corporate form
of the garrison state.” The leaders of the CIO and AFL, despite
the many differences between them, are fundamentally alike in this
respect.
A powerful analysis and correct in all its essentials. But what to
do? For Mills properly tries to find some mode of action
corresponding to the facts. And here Mills is at his weakest.
The power of the union must be linked with the intellect: such is
the author’s formula for describing the task of developing a
union leadership freed of its narrow vision and capable of
undertaking the tasks ahead. The key is the “union-made”
intellectual, a master of every skill required by a labor organizer,
a research man, an organizer, a political thinker, whose role, says
Mills, “would be difficult to overestimate.” He will find
labor leaders, appreciative of his knowledge and abilities, who will
listen to him “if he does not frighten them.” But what
shall these intellectuals teach the labor leaders? Mills does not
really know ... somehow they must sound the alarm against the “main
drift.” Here Mills is no longer dealing with real men acting in
life with real ideas but with the straw men of his own imagination.
The specific proposal advanced by Mills, in fact his only such
proposal, is the formation of an independent labor party. He takes
consolation from some, of his statistics which reveal that a small
percentage of labor leaders favor the “eventual”
formation of such a party. Others who do not go so far are intensely
concerned over the political power of industry and the possible rise
of fascism. It is these men who, if they are not “frightened”
by the intellectuals, offer hope.
But the problem, as Mills should certainly realize, hardly begins
with the formation of a labor party. He has cogently demonstrated how
the labor leadership as a social grouping fears instability and seeks
peaceful class relations. A program which would propose the
abandonment of collaboration with the capitalist class and its state,
for the adoption of a program of class struggle aimed at the complete
transformation of society, cannot but “frighten” a
stratum steeped in pro-capitalist ideology. The formation of a labor
party would not change the character of the present labor
officialdom. Far from abandoning their social philosophy in forming a
labor party, the leadership will adjust the new party to it. They
will seek to restore “stability” for themselves with new
political methods, and to adopt a new and more effective (for
themselves) mode of collaboration with the capitalist class and its
State. Mass labor parties have existed in all the nations of Europe,
only to be led by men whose political philosophy was identical with
that of the present American labor leadership. They proved incapable
of stopping war and fascism.
The labor leadership of today, petty-bourgeois in nature, loyal to
capitalism, more and more divorcing itself from the ranks (to restate
Mills’ own description) cannot by its very nature
become, the necessary leadership of tomorrow. This or that individual
exception, however important, cannot change this fact. A new
leadership drawn from among the militants, close to the rank and
file, trained in class, socialist politics and unionism must replace
them. The formation of a labor party and the political battles which
will be thrust upon it will help raise these elements to the fore.
New times – new men. Mills again helps us to understand the
mechanism of making and unmaking labor leaders. “When something
goes wrong in the economy, then new leaders with other ideas are
likely to rise ... Democracy in the unions ... often proceeds by
upsurges and revolution rather than by smoothly operating democratic
machinery.” But he does not fully pose the task of changing the
existing leadership nor state clearly with whom arid how he would
replace it.
An early definition fixes the “far left” as the “two
Trotskyist groups” but the less said about Mills’
exposition of the purported “left” program the better.
Readers of The New International can judge the expert
character of his detailed description of the far-left program by the
following single sentence: “The American left focuses its
political attention more on domestic politics than on foreign
affairs.”
He does not in fact present and analyze the program of the genuine
American left with the same care and objectivity as the rest of his
material. We cannot and do not, of course, expect Mills to advocate
our program, but we can expect that before recounting it at length
and with apparent authority he acquaint himself with it and present
it objectively. This neglect is all the more irritating because of
the excellence of Mills’ work as a whole. It is, in spite of
its shortcomings, an indispensable asset for socialist unionists.
 



In their feeble vision, the members of the International Executive Board of the United Automobile Workers, now solidly in the hands of the pro-Reuther bloc, have conjured up a weird resolution on political action in preparation for the 1948 elections. The resolution unambiguously repudiates Wallace, among other things, because “all attempts to build a political party from the top around a particular individual are pre-doomed to dismal failure” and because the Wallace movement “exposes labor to the self-defeating course of supporting false friends in order to prevent the election of declared enemies.”
Therefore? The executive board declares itself firmly in favor of the “defeat of reactionaries” and the election of so-called progressives, or true friends. And to ensure the triumph of the Democratic Party which they support in the ’48 elections they have discovered that one man and one man alone can guarantee victory – General Dwight D. Eisenhower – and they are now pounding their heads to obtain his nomination at the Democratic national convention. This is known as the “boom” or “beating of drums” for Eisenhower.
Only one possibility exists to get them out of the strange dilemma which finds them supporting in Dwight what they reject in Henry. If by some quirk of symmetrical justices the Republican Party could be induced to nominate General Douglas A. MacArthur for president, the imaginative UAW leadership might be persuaded to abandon the election slogan which they apparently realize is worn out: “support the lesser of two evils.” The new one could be “vote for the greater of two generals.”
 
Digging and Clinging
Act II of the farce: August Scholle, president of the Michigan CIO, announces, with a straight face, that the Michigan CIO-PAC in view of the critical situation will absolutely abandon its previous, well-established “non-partisan” political policy.
A ringing call must be issued: we will join the Democratic Party. There, he continues, we will “dig in” and“cling.” Not because we want to dominate, he adds, but simply because, as the vast majority of the voting population, we are entitled to some recognition. Surely a modest request!The Democratic ward-heelers reply: we will not accept this CIO “dictatorship.” Ungrateful beasts that they are, they begrudge Scholle the very mud in which he grovels. But perhaps we do Scholle an injustice. After all, things will be tough enough. The PAC has been living long enough with the cigar-chewing Democratic punks; it will look nicer if the marriage ceremony is performed. Especially since there is now some new suitor in the field.
Scholle is a candidate for delegate to the Democratic national convention. In 1944, R.J. Thomas, then president of the UAW, went as a Democratic delegate. Reuther has been playing with the same idea recently for the ’48 convention; but, it is reported, he has finally abandoned it. At least one reason for this change in plans is a desire on his part to make a concession to the easily satisfied pro-labor party elements on his executive board.
The political action resolution of the UAW is a compromise between the right wing and the more militant wing of the Reuther coalition. In return for acceptance in action now of the old line of supporting phony “progressives” in the Democratic Party, the right wing has signed a promissory note, written no doubt in disappearing ink, that some time in the future it will support the formation of a new, mass party.
Emil Mazey, who is the leading silent spokesman of the pro-labor party forces in the top leadership and who is the secretary-treasurer of the union, obviously has been one of the participants in this rotten compromise which justifies the capitulation of today by the hypothetical promise of a better tomorrow. This was to be expected of Mazey, who himself endorsed the anti-labor Jeffries as the lesser evil candidate for Mayor of Detroit in the last elections. Mazey today spends his time boasting of stabilizing the financial status of the union while its political status is in a dizzy whirl.
 
Blindman’s Bluff
The pro-Stalinist grouping in the UAW is preparing for an attempted comeback although they have lost some ground in recent local elections. Wallace-for-president clubs are being formed in the locals. These clubs which will profit from the total, abysmal, and obvious repulsiveness of the old line political policies of the CIO, will inevitably gain sympathy and support for the almost discredited old anti-Reuther bloc. This“natural” course of events is helped along by the general blindness of the present officialdom.
A series of anti-democratic attacks on the pro-Wallace forces and provocative lynch-inviting speeches by the new Detroit chief of police, a “strong” man who intends to act ruthlessly against hoodlums, union “reds,” and delinquent teenagers met with no formal protest from the labor leadership. We have not even heard of a single resolution of simple solidarity with the mine strikers. No, the attention of the anti-Stalinist union brass hats is concentrated on trying to effect a bureaucratic removal of the present pro-Stalinist leadership of the Wayne County CIO Council.
All this in the name of supporting the Marshall Plan. These myopic creatures, wandering in the dark with blinders over their eyes, want to blaze a big path in world affairs. But they can’t even find their way along the neighborhood lanes.
 



In suicide, Jan Masaryk did not issue a heroic summons to the Czech people to begin the fight for their own liberty and independence. Quite the opposite. His death was a last futile appeal, obsequious as in life, to Stalin, and only Stalin, begging for his intervention to preserve capitalist Czechoslovakia from Czech Stalinism in the interests of Russian Stalinism. Masaryk died without a word to the Czech people, for in fact he had nothing to tell them except the advice to remain quiescent and passive subjects of Russian imperialism. He killed himself not to ensure but to forestall all possible mass resistance to the Stalinist regime.
Silent in public, he spoke in secret to the real master. Several hours before committing suicide he addressed a letter to Stalin explaining the political significance of his act. This letter, of first rate importance in clarifying the development of the Czech events, appears in the July 17 issue of the New Leader, which reprints it from the French paper Combat.
 
Basis of policy
Discovered on Masaryk’s desk after his suicide by Nosek, the Czech Stalinist Minister of Internal Affairs, and transmitted to Russia, it was seen by Captain Ivan Krylov, a Russian intelligence officer, who obtained a copy through a contact in the office of Marshal Bulganin, Russian Minister of War and a member of the Politburo. On April 24, Krylov, who had left Moscow on a special mission, decided to break with the Kremlin and take up residence in the West. Shortly thereafter, he turned the Masaryk letter over to the French press. Combat, before printing the letter, carefully investigated Krylov’s claims and background. The letter provides documentary evidence not simply of the incapacity of the bourgeoisie to fight for the independence of Czechoslovakia from Russian imperialism, but of its deliberate and conscious policy of undermining and preventing any such struggle.
1) In Masaryk’s view, the “independence” of Czechoslovakia was to he ensured by total and complete subservience to Russia. The Czech bourgeoisie was the best guardian of Russian interests and in return he expected Stalin to be the best guardian of its bourgeois regime. All of Masaryk’s political acts, including the suicide itself, was based upon this policy.
“Even in the days of my youth,” writes Masaryk in his secret letter to Stalin, “my father taught me that an independent Czechoslovakia could never exist without the direct and effective support of Russia against the waves of the German sea. This notion has been deeply rooted in me, as deeply as in the majority of Czech politicians. We, the Czechs, always thought that we could not rely on any country with the exception of Russia, to defend us against Germanism.”
And he goes on to record a long record of service by the Czech bourgeoisie to Russian imperialism even under the Czar.
“I speeded up as much as I could the cession of the Bohemian uranium mines from Czechoslovakia to your country in order to show you clearly that in any armed conflict we would side with the USSR.”
And on the Marshall Plan he continues:
“In refusing this aid I once more gave tangible proof that the foreign policy of my country aligned itself loyally with the interests of the USSR.”
 
Expected Stalin’s Aid
2) The February coup, pleads Masaryk, endangers the defense of ... Russia. For,
“there are thousands and thousands of intellectuals without whom you will never be able to erect your bastion of defense in Central Europe and render the Bohemian quadrilateral impregnable. Without this, all your precautionary measures will prove ineffectual, one day; for when the hour of mortal danger strikes for your country and all the Slavs, you will have here but a government hated by its country, despised by its ELITE, a government relying solely on the bayonets of its police and gendarmerie.”
3) Masaryk himself played a key role In legalizing the February Gottwald cabinet.
“You know well,” he reminds Stalin, “that my support played a decisive part and that after my intervention, President Benes gave his consent to the formation of the new Gottwald cabinet, thus forestalling civil war and a break between our country and the USSR.”
4) For services rendered, past, present and future, Masaryk expected Stalin’s aid in preventing a Stalinist coup.
“Right from the outset of the last government crisis, I wanted to know your personal opinion of the claims of the Czech Communist Party ... You explained to me that the USSR, as a measure of preventive security, needed in Prague a strong government, completely loyal both to the spirit and letter of the Russo-Czech alliance ... You had unlimited confidence in President Benes and above all in me ...”
Stalin maintained that the Czech National Assembly was “full of traitors and sworn enemies of the USSR” but Masaryk did not take this seriously.
“In any case,” continues Masaryk, “you clarified the question by indicating that the claims of the Communist Party by no means aimed at the sovietization of our country, but that the party simply wanted to fulfill its duties toward its native land and toward Slav solidarity ...
“He (Zorin, the Russian ambassador to Czechoslovakia) had given me a formal assurance in writing that the Communist Party would not take advantage of the situation by seizing the government and applying in our country political and economic principles completely foreign to our people and its entire history.”
But all these assurances were worthless paper, Masaryk saw no way out except through a last and dramatic appeal to Stalin. His letter concludes as follows:
“You still have time to stop the policy of sovietization of my country. Make haste, for soon it will perhaps be too late.”
 
To Die in Silence
5) Not for one second did Masaryk dream of organizing or inspiring a struggle against Russian domination.
“At my last conversation with President Benes, he reproached me with having had confidence in the promises made to me by Mr. Zorin in your name. I could have openly acknowledged my mistake, could have demonstratively resigned and started fighting against the Gottwald government and its policy. But that would have been a struggle against the legitimate government of Russia! Never will the son of Masaryk be able to fight against the government that rules Russia, never will he be able to give the slightest pretext to the enemies of Russia who watch for your faults and delusions in order to utilize them better against the cradle of Slav peoples ... I am not the only one who renounces the fight for his ideal of freedom if this fight compels him to combat Russia.”
And further:
“I cannot live without freedom, I cannot fight for it, because Jan Masaryk cannot fight even indirectly against Russia and her government”
6) Masaryk dedicated himself to avoiding and preventing any struggle by the Czech people. His actions, he repeats many times, were designed to avoid “civil war.”
“There is but one thing left for me to do – to die, to die in silence in order to prevent my deed from serving as a pretext for those who would provoke civil war in Czechoslovakia.”
*
Most significantly, the letter makes no reference of any kind to the role of the masses in the Czech events, except that the constant repudiation of civil war implies of course a policy of avoiding and preventing mass action. Masaryk does not threaten Stalin with the possibility of serious mass resistance, even in this secret letter. The people play no role at all in his thinking. He did not see them as active opponents of Stalinism; nor did he see them as active supporters of the Stalinist coup. They simply did not exist as a factor that fitted into his political program; either FOR or AGAINST the Stalinist regime. Ev- [text missing in our copy – ETOL]
 
Blocked Masses
The parliamentary regime and the democratic atmosphere for which Masaryk yearned served simply as a means whereby he could rally the people to VOTE fof the Masaryks and Beneses, who in turn could deliver the support received at the polls to Stalin, who in his turn would call off his Stalinist dogs. Masaryk under- [text missing in our copy – ETOL]
In the light of the Masaryk letter we can better understand the February coup. We see the Czech bourgeois democracy not as a force which desperately tried to organize a struggle for democratic rights and failed to gain mass support, but rather as a force which did everything possible to prevent mass resistance and succeeded ... only to succumb in the long run because Stalin’s aims did not correspond with their own.
From the end of the Hitler domination to the Stalinist coup in February, Czech political life was filled in by a unanimous drive to remove the masses from the social arena as an active political force. The Stalinists infiltrated into key state positions under the protection of Russian bayonets and built up their real apparatus, the military-police structure which serves as a substitute for active mass support. Masaryk-Benes substituted their deals with Stalin for mass action. Shielded by Russian military power, guaranteed against mass resistance by the policies of their enemies and provided a legal cover by Benes-Masaryk, the Stalinist apparatus resting upon a tiny minority completed its seizure of power and the establishment of its dictatorship. Not the entry of the masses into the struggle but their removal, consciously and deliberately planned by both the supporters and the opponents of Stalinism, is what explains the course of the Czech coup.
 



As an aftermath to the pogroms against the Negroes in Detroit, an
eight-point program supposedly designed to make impossible its
repetition has been proposed by R.J. Thomas, president of the UAW.
The following is Thomas’ program:

A special grand jury to investigate the cause of the riots
	and to return justifiable indictments. 
Construction of park and recreational facilities. 
Immediate and practical plans for the rehousing of Negro
	slum dwellers in federally financed housing projects. 
Recognition by management and workers of the rights of
	Negroes to jobs in accordance with their skill and seniority. 
A grand jury investigation of the conduct of the police
	during the riots. 
No discrimination by the courts between whites and Negroes
	arrested for the rioting. 
Creation of a fund by the city to make good losses
	suffered in personal injuries and property damage. 
Creation by the Mayor of a bi-racial committee of ten to
	make recommendations looking toward the elimination of racial
	friction.

It is the elementary duty of the leaders of the most powerful
union in Detroit to offer some solution designed to prevent the
terrorist attacks upon Negroes. The CIO derives its strength from the
complete unity of all workers regardless of race, creed, color, or
craft. The recent pogroms, in Detroit threaten to drive a wedge
between the Negro and white workers in the shops and to weaken the
unions thereby.
But in the face of the actual events, what can Thomas’
program accomplish?
The fighting, which began on Sunday, June 20, was the culmination
of a well-planned and organized offensive against the Negro people.
This is the FACT, regardless of who threw the first brick or which
side first attacked a person of the opposite color. The precise
incident or incidents which provided the initial impetus for the
fighting are shrouded in rumor and will never be satisfactorily
proved.
But the events which preceded the June 20 trouble and the very
course of the fighting itself prove that the real force behind it all
was the reviving fascist Ku Klux Klan! 
Klan Organizes Attacks
The Sojourner Truth housing fight, the attacks by gangs on Negro
neighborhoods in Ferndale, the West Side and elsewhere, the strike at
the Arsenal against Negro guards and finally the outageous “strike”
at Packard Motor Co., directly organized by the Klan against the
upgrading of Negroes, all prove that the affair of June 27 was no
spontaneous outbreak by “citizens” but a direct attempt
by the followers of the Klan to bring their past work to a bloody
conclusion.
In the course of the rioting, white gangs were organized on the
outskirts of Negro neighborhoods and attempted to break through to
beat and kill all Negroes in sight and reduce Negro homes to
shambles. Negro groups formed in their own neighborhoods to beat off
these attacks.
The police established barricades around the Negro areas to
prevent attacks by white gangs under the leadership of the Klan
elements. No such barricades were necessary around white
neighborhoods because the Negroes did not threaten them.
The June 20 event was an anti-Negro pogrom organized by the
Klan. The action of the Negroes in the fighting was primarily one of
self-defense. And this FACT is in no way negated by the fact that
Negroes under the direction of intensely nationalistic elements
retaliated against the Klan offensive by beating all whites caught in
Negro neighborhoods and looting white-owned stores.
By placing the issue on the basis of all whites against all
Negroes, these elements among the Negro people play directly into the
hands of the Klan and facilitate its work of playing on the
reactionary prejudices of backward white workingmen. The very cause
of the Negro people, and of white workers as well, depending as it
does upon the unity of whites and Negroes in the labor movement,
received a blow by these reactionary and nationalistic
manifestations. Come what may, the Negroes will fight in
self-defense. Only if the UNIONS organize and assist this defense
will it be possible to cheek the development of a trend harmful to
labor.
The whole labor movement has the elementary duty of preventing
the reorganization of the Klan by smashing its anti-Negro attacks.
This is a task which is of immediate importance, not only for the
Negroes, but for white workers as well. The very existence of the
union movement is at stake!
It is in the light of these facts – the reorganization of
the fascist movement in Detroit, which is beginning by attacks on the
Negroes – that we must consider Thomas’ program. 
Thomas Omits Most Important Point
Thomas’ proposals fall under two main headings:

Proposals which are supposed designed to get to the roots of
	race antagonisms by providing greater facilities (housing, jobs,
	recreation) for Negroes and whites; and 
Proposals designed to get fair treatment by the police and
	courts by rioters of both races.

We are one hundred per cent in favor of housing, recreational and
job facilities for Negroes. But, on the one hand, Thomas’
program is completely inadequate for cutting off race antagonisms at
the roots. For that a sweeping reorganization of society is
necessary, a reorganization which will abolish the fear of post-war
unemployment and end the fight of one worker against the other for
jobs. Thomas merely scratches the surface.
On the other hand, Thomas overlooks the fact that the need NOW
is for a program to smash the fascist Ku Klux Klan bands which will
be stronger than ever after their recent victory and which will greet
every new advance toward Negro-white amity with intensified activity.
It will plan further violent anti-Negro outbreaks. Thomas’
general program hides the need for planning action now to combat the
Klan.
Point two in Thomas’ program relating to the police and the
courts serves to throw the workers off guard. How much can labor rely
upon “good” police, “good” courts and jury
investigations when the task of the moment is independent action
by the workers themselves?
The role of the police during the affair should be clear enough to
all.
They turned their backs while white gangs beat Negroes to death;
yet in Negro neighborhoods they acted with an iron hand, shooting to
kill on the slightest or no provocation. They permitted Klan gangs to
carry weapons openly on the streets while they systematically invaded
the Negro neighborhoods for the purpose of disarming the inhabitants.
Thomas wants no discrimination by the courts against Negroes
arrested in the course of the fighting. Whites and Negroes should be
treated alike, he says. But the discrimination exists in the fact
that eighty-five per cent of those arrested by the police were
Negroes. This is how the courts interpret “equal justice.”
The police and courts are proved to be stacked against the
Negro people, just as they are stacked against the labor movement in
any decisive contest. To advise labor to put all its faith in
investigations which presumably are to lead to some modification in
the attitude of the police and the courts is to advise working men to
let themselves be trampled on by fascist Klan bands armed with clubs,
Knives and guns.
The whole labor movement of Detroit must take warning. What is
needed is defense against the developing and growing Klan.
If the police stand by silently while Negro workers are attacked
by thugs, the Negroes have the right to defend their lives. The whole
labor movement must be prepared to help its Negro brothers defend
themselves, for the existence of the trade unions is based upon the
unbroken solidarity of Negro and white workers.
The Jim Crow terrorists are scabs. Every worker must understand
this and must put an end to scabbery.
 



To the Editor:
It seems to me that Labor Action and your writer, Walter Weiss, have not been able to make up your minds whether the miners actually won anything or not in the Ickes-Lewis agreement. I refer to the issues of November 8 and 15. In two articles Weiss proves, or tries to prove, that the miners got practically nothing. At the same time, the headline in the November 15 Labor Action reads Miners’ Victory Shows the Way and in the course of his article Weiss writes: “But they won part of their fight and they smashed the Little Steel formula.” What are the actual facts:
Under the Ickes-Lewis agreement the miners get $57.37½ for a 52½-hour week. But of this only 48 is actual working time and 4½ is travel time.
Compare what the miners would have gotten for the SAME work week under the OLD agreement, which provided pay only for actual working time and not for travel time. For a 48-hour week at the rate of $1.00 per hour (time and one-half after 35 hours) the miners would have received $54.50.
Under the new agreement, $57.37½. Under the old, $54.50. Simple arithmetic shows that for the same WORK the miners receive $2.87½ more.
Under the old agreement, by working 48 hours the miners would have received pay for 54½ hours. Divide the $2.87 by the 54½ and you discover that the miners won a REAL increase of four cents an hour, calculated on the basis of the old contract. It is this real increase in wages that proves that the miners broke the Little Steel formula, despite the fact that they fell far short of their original demands for a $2.00-a-day increase.
And the miners will still win more out of the same agreement. A reporter asked Davis: “Do you think you’ll get eight hours at the face?” “I’m not operating the mines,” Davis answered, “and I’ll ask you one; do you think Mr. Ickes will get eight hours?” The reporter answered: “No.”
The miners broke the steal formula by striking. Let’s not give any assistance to the WLB or the Administration by glossing over this fact.



 


B.H.,
Detroit



 



DETROIT – The complete bankruptcy of the CIO policy of supporting so-called “friends of labor” and the urgent necessity for the immediate formation of an independent Labor Party, with a fighting program were demonstrated by the recent mayoralty campaign in Detroit and by the whole course: of the election campaign itself from the primaries on October 5 to the final balloting on November 2.
Mayor Jeffries, running for re-election, was backed by all three local daily papers, by the Detroit Board of Commerce and by an undercover campaign of the Ku Klux Klan. His election bid was marked by vicious attacks against the Negro population of the city and slanderous charges against the CIO.
Frank FitzGerald, supported by the Democratic Party, the CIO and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and proclaimed as a “scholar, athlete, soldier, lawyer, professor and judge,” went down to defeat.
The final returns show that Jeffries nosed out his opponent by a vote of 207,799 [1] to 175,817, a majority of some 32,000 votes.
From the viewpoint of the labor movement on a national scale, these elections are of great significance. The startling feature of the election campaign was the ability of Jeffries to turn almost certain defeat into victory.
 
Victory of FitzGerald in Primaries
In the primaries, on October 5, Fitzgerald received 98,583 votes to 60,360 for Jeffries. This impressive victory came as a surprise to all the local newspapers and political commentators. It proved conclusively that labor was in a fighting mood and -desired “a voice in politics, and that the Negro people, thousands of them members of the CIO, were weary of the toleration and whitewash of Klanist activities by the police department. They were convinced of the need to back a candidate supported by the CIO. This does not: mean that FitzGerald was a REAL labor candidate. But support by the CIO made this Democrat appear to be a spokesman tor labor. As a result, the entire campaign was a farce.
Betting odds after the primaries were overwhelmingly for FitzGerald. It seemed as though he would win a decisive victory.
But between October 5 and November 2, Jeffries, the daily press and the Klanists were able to take the offensive, to raise those issues which they wished to discuss, to mobilize thousands of voters who stayed away from the primaries, and to put Jeffries back in office.
In the final returns, FitzGerald received forty-five per cent of the votes cast. In the primaries he had received sixty-two per cent of the total vote cast for himself and Jeffries.
The facts therefore demonstrate that even if FitzGerald had finally nosed out Jeffries by a small margin, the whole course of the election campaign was a tremendous increase in the influence of the enemies of labor in contradistinction to their poor showing in the primaries. It is this fact, not the simple matter of FitzGerald’s defeat, that demands the attention of the labor movement.
 
Labor Movement versus Capitalists
The real contenders for power were the organized labor movement on the one hand and the big capitalists, ably represented by the daily press and the Klanists, on the other. But neither side came out openly under its own banner and program.
While labor appointed as its spokesman the Democratic politician, FitzGerald, who remained silent on all the main issues confronting labor and who conducted a vacillating, defensive and empty campaign, big business had an able and vocal champion for its interests in Jeffries, the self-styled liberal and “non-partisan” respectable Mayor. It soon became clear that FitzGerald’s victory in the primaries would be nullified. Two issues dominated the campaign, both aggressively raised by Jeffries and both sidetracked by FitzGerald – the CIO and the June riots against the Negroes, together with associated problems of race relations.
One of a series of provocative and anonymous little cards which bear the unmistakable stamp of the Ku Klux Klan and which were distributed secretly by the thousands in the streets and in the shops stated:
“Your ballot is secret. Will you let a few power-hungry labor leaders order YOU how to vote? Use your God-given American right to vote as you choose. It’s all up to you.”
 
FitzGerald and the CIO
What was FitzGerald’s reply? Nowhere did he state openly or even by implication that we need a labor government, that labor, not big business, constitutes the majority of the population and is entitled to rule; that it was labor which produces the goods of life for all and deserves to run a government really in the interests of the people.
His platform stated that he was in favor of “a helpful and cooperative attitude toward labor.” He could not even take an unambiguous stand on the right to strike. When asked a point-blank question by the Detroit News: “’Do you believe a city employee has the right to strike?” he refused to give a clear reply. “This is a legal question,” he said, “... the question is of little bearing upon the immediate future, as practically all responsible unions are pledged not to strike during the period of the war emergency.”
But FitzGerald cannot dodge the fact that responsible unions have gone on strike and even now are in the midst of strike votes. Fitzgerald could not take a stand openly for the workingman and the unions because he is a supporter of the capitalistic Democratic Party.
 
The Negro Problem
The Negro issue and the June 21 riots played a prominent role in the campaign. Jeffries adopted a disgraceful, irreconcilable, anti-Negro line.
Money was spent like water to rush through the trial of two Negroes, Leo Tipton and Charles Lyons, who were accused of making inflammatory statements on the eve of the June riots..Every attempt was made to inflame the public by this stage-trial – reported in lurid headlines in the pro-Jeffries daily press. The trial was pushed through to conclusion, before the elections.
This trick was exposed by the Michigan CIO News for what it was, “... a well planned and executed maneuver by the Hidden Government that has this community in its grip and is seeking to perpetuate itself, to-re-elect. Jeffries as Mayor.”
Jeffries, speaking of the. riots, said: “Negro hoodlums started it; the conduct of the police department was magnificent.” The Klan thrived in the Jim Crow atmosphere established by Jeffries. Its tiny cards proclaimed “FitzGerald says the Negroes need protection. Protection against whom? What do you think?” and “26,245 Negroes voted for FjtzGerald. Only a few voted for Jeffries. How are you going to vote?”
FitzGerald’s reply? Asked by the News how he would prevent a recurrence of race riots, he replied: “A hoodlum is a hoodlum, whatever his color may be, and the moment he is caught violating the law he should be clamped into jail.”
FitzGerald thinks that hoodlums, Negro and white, were responsible for the riots. This is an absolute falsehood. The Klanist element bears the real responsibility for big anti-Negro strikes and street demonstrations and its activities on a nationwide scale are the real immediate cause of the riots in Detroit and elsewhere.
 
Housing in Detroit Elections
Mayor Jeffries came out squarely against the policy of allowing Negro and white occupancy of the same public housing projects. He denounced the idea that Negroes should be permitted to move into housing projects in hitherto white neighborhoods.
Labor has given up the right to strike, he said. No group should fight for social gains during wartime, he maintained. To the Negro this means that because we are supposed to be fighting a war for democracy he should surrender the fight for democracy right here at home and permit Klanists to run riot. A peculiar war for democracy! Jeffries was silent, on the social gains of big business, which is the only real gainer out of the war.
Where did FitzGerald stand? Not a single forthright statement in favor of the democratic rights of Negroes. At the beginning of the campaign he said that the demands of Negroes for mixed occupancy of public housing “must be considered.” Later in the campaign he issued a denial that he had ever taken a stand in favor of mixed housing. Some of his supporters tried to counteract Jeffries’s campaign by trying to prove that it was he who “forced a Negro housing project into a white neighborhood.”
This argumentation conceded everything to the Jim Crow campaign of the Klanists and put everything on the basis of who was REALLY more anti-Negro, Jeffries or FitzGerald. This criminal propaganda in his behalf was never repudiated by FitzGerald.
By his-anti-Negro campaign, Jeffries sought two objectives. In the first place, he wanted to divert labor from what should have been the main issue of the campaign, rule by big business versus, rule by labor, and in the second place, he sought to cover up the vicious part played by his own police department, headed by his own appointed police commissioner Witherspoon.
Because the labor movement supported FitzGerald, a supporter of a capitalist party, Jeffries was able to succeed completely in his strategy. The fact that the police shot Negroes on sight, at the slightest provocation, disarmed Negroes and threw them to the Klan-led mobs and at the same time adopted a kid-glove attitude toward the Klan gangs in the June riots ... all this was covered up and forgotten.

Note by ETOL
1. The printed version says “297,799” – but this is contradicted by figure for the majority given later in the same sentence.
 



A Summary of the Detroit Elections

On the Detroit Elections
 




(Concluded from last issue)

What were the real issues in the Detroit campaign?
Here, where the CIO has its most powerful stronghold, the home of the UAW with its more than a million members, was the opportunity to strike against the nation-wide assault against labor, its rights and its standard of living. The union membership was fully aware of this fact. That is why FitzGerald won a remarkable victory in the primaries.
FitzGerald dissipated his support because he could not, would not, and did not face any of the real questions. That is because he is NOT a labor candidate, but a capitalist candidate endorsed by labor. W. Kelsey, writing in the Detroit News, hinted at the real nature of FitzGerald’s campaign:
“... As a lawyer, Mr. FitzGerald knew that any promise he might make, either to labor or to the Negroes, must be conditional ... He had to avoid those issues in which, as the primary had demonstrated, lay his strength.”
That is the stupidity of the Detroit elections. Labor supported a man who had to avoid all issues affecting labor!
 
For a Labor Party
There was only one possible force which could have driven Jeffries, the Klan and the daily press into retreat. That was a fighting, independent Labor Party with its own independent candidates, with no ties to either of the two old capitalistic parties.
A fighting Labor Party could have pointed out dramatically and effectively how the big monopolies are profiteering during wartime. It could have denounced the infamous Little Steel formula, which, together with the skyrocketing prices uncontrolled by the present Administration, mean terrific wage cuts for labor. It could have demanded a shifting of the costs of the war from the back of the workingman who earns his money by his own labor and onto the shoulders of the rich monopolists, the “Sixty Families” who rule this country and who receive their money through OUR labor.
Issues like these, raised so loudly that no one could avoid them, would have revealed to all exactly where Jeffries and his backers stood. That they were the tools of the big capitalists and open enemies of the people would have been made clear.
Even assuming that in this case the candidate backed by the Labor Party had been defeated, as was FitzGerald, the tremendous vote that it polled would be a victory in itself, for it would warn all sections of Congress and the national administration that labor had ceased to rely on the discredited “friends of labor” and intended to go into battle for itself. That alone would win many concessions, even from the most reactionary sections of Congress, which fear the rise of a fighting Labor Party a thousand times more than they do the victory of “friends of labor.”
A fighting Labor Party could have exposed the true character of the anti-Negro campaign run by Jeffries. It could have made clear that this was an attempt to throw a smokescreen over the genuine campaign issues outlined above, and to hide the fact that Jeffries was the banner-bearer for the monopolists.
Jim Crow would stand exposed as a weapon of the capitalists for splitting the labor movement and diverting it from its real goals.
And as a complete reply to the race hatred of the capitalist candidate a fighting Labor Party would declare and explain the absolute necessity of complete social, political and economic equality for Negroes in the fight against labor’s enemies.
 
Why No Labor Party in Michigan?
The leadership of the CIO is against the formation of an independent Labor Party. The last convention of the Michigan State CIO a few months ago decided to explore the possibilities for the formation of an independent Labor Party. Nothing has been heard of it since. Instead we have seen the organization of the Labor Political Action Committee, whose aim is to continue to support capitalist “friends” and to stymie any attempt to form a real Labor Party.
At the last CIO convention, Philip Murray declared against a Labor Party and for a continuance of the old policy oh the ground of preserving unity with all “progressives.” FitzGerald is one of these.
What have been the fruits of this old policy?
In Detroit in the previous mayoralty campaign in 1941, the CIO supported Jeffries as a friend of labor. This “progressive” friend turns out to be a reactionary enemy.
The leaders of the CIO, in an attempt to discourage the formation of a Labor Party, will doubtless argue that the recent election returns prove that the labor vote is weak and that we must cling ever more closely to the apron strings of our “friends.”
 
Break with Discredited Friends
This idea is one hundred per cent false and equally suicidal. It is not LABOR that is weak but the so-called friends of labor who are weak, in disrepute and discredited.
The New York Times reports that the elections demonstrate “a reaction against the Administration’s handling of home affairs” and a “disillusionment among Negroes as to the purpose or ability of the New Deal Administration to guarantee them the place which they seek in the nation’s economic life and particularly the war effort:”
Walter Reuther spilled the beans in his resolution at the last UAW convention.
“It will be impossible to mobilize the same degree of continued enthusiasm and support for the candidacy of Franklin D. Roosevelt and for his election for a fourth term if the present Democratic Party policy of appeasement of the foes of progress continues.”
Put in plain, everyday language this means: the people are getting sick and tired of this rule by the so-called friends of labor, who really knife labor. Not even support by the unions guarantees their victory!
Only one course of action can bar the way of the reactionaries. Away with support to the so-called friends of labor! Form an indeperident, fighting Labor Party which breaks all ties to the Democratic Party, the Republican Party arid the Roosevelt Administration!
 



In an article entitled Our Differences with the Three Theses (Fourth International, December 1942), Felix Morrow discusses the movement for national liberation in occupied Europe. Who the “our” refers to is not clear, but since this is the same Morrow who was the official defender of the line of the SWP on China we may assume it to be more or less an official defense or elaboration of the SWP on this question.
At first glance the Morrow who confronts us here appears to be a new man. For China, he insisted that despite the fact that the war on its part is conducted in alliance with the imperialist war of the “democratic” camp by the bourgeois Chiang government, that war is a genuinely progressive war for national freedom. But how different is his approach to the European scene. No hint of his former “flexibility” is discernible. In reply to a group of European comrades who maintain that national liberation in Europe is a democratic demand deserving our support, Morrow, not without numerous distortions of their views, accuses them of working for the revival of the Third Republic in France, the Weimar Republic in Germany, of counterposing the “national movement to the workers’ movement,” and of committing a “nationalist deviation.”
It might appear that Morrow, who developed the opportunist line on China, has had a change of heart and is now the champion of a revolutionary policy for Europe as against nationalist deviators. Nothing could be more mistaken.
The opportunism of the Cannonite position on China consists in clinging to support of a war which in the past was a genuine war for independence but which is now part of the general imperialist war carried on by the United Nations camp. This is a social-patriotism concealed only by the fact that China formerly fought a real war for independence against Japan.
Morrow established a principle for himself in China: support to the war of a bourgeois regime in alliance with imperialism. He applies this principle because China is a semi-colonial country. But if he concedes that in Europe a genuine fight for national liberation exists, not under the leadership of revolutionary socialist elements he would be compelled to apply his principle to Europe as well.
Should the Norwegians, for example, succeed in overthrowing the domination of Hitler and permit the reestablishment of a bourgeois regime which would continue a war in alliance with England and the United States, Morrow would be faced with an impossible difficulty. How could Morrow, who grants support to Chiang’s war in alliance with imperialism, deny support to its counterpart in Europe?
But such a policy for Europe would be clear and open social-patriotism and Morrow’s entire article is permeated with the fear of facing the ultimate consequences, in Europe, of his line in China.
Morrow can extricate himself from this dilemma in one of two ways: 1) he can develop his China line for Europe and fall into a hopelessly pro-imperialist war line, or 2) since the development in real life of a progressive national struggle in Europe deals irreparable blows at his China position he can find refuge from life itself by falling back on principles eternally applicable “in this epoch.”
He chooses the latter as the lesser of the two evils. The opportunist Morrow finds refuge from his own opportunism in the starry realms of sectarianism. Far from mitigating or nullifying the errors of his China line, Morrow’s sectarian line for Europe reinforces them from another angle.
This article will concern itself not with Morrow’s repeated and deliberate distortions of the Three Theses which he attacks but with outlining the essentially sectarian content of his whole treatment of the movement for national liberation in Europe.
 
“National Freedom in This Epoch”
Says Morrow: “The workers under the Nazi boot want national freedom. Good. The task is to explain to them that national freedom in this epoch is the task of the working class under the leadership of the Fourth International.”
This idea is unimpeachable as a general principle. But it also applies to China and for that matter everywhere else, and not only to the problem of national liberation but to all the important social problems “in this epoch.” But in China, where this principle is equally valid, Morrow recognizes in addition the need to support what he considers a progressive, democratic, anti-imperialist struggle now not under the leadership of the Fourth International but of the Chinese bourgeoisie. In Europe, Morrow confines himself to glittering universalities.
One might with equal validity proclaim to the Negro masses of the United States: “Full social, political and economic equality for the Negroes in this epoch is the task of the working class under the leadership of the Fourth International.” But this hardly begins to define our relations to the Negro masses who fight today for equal rights under quite a different leadership.
What is at stake is the recognition of the progressive character of struggles which do not take place under your own socialist banner but which nevertheless in reality further the development of the socialist revolution itself. This is precisely what is occurring in occupied Europe today and exactly what Morrow contrives to dodge and to confuse throughout his whole article. Nowhere does he indicate the possibility of support to a not-yet-socialist struggle for national liberation in occupied Europe.
It is this attempt to substitute general principles applicable to “this epoch” for relations with a living mass movement that constitutes the hallmark of sectarianism.
 
“What Is Really New”
Given a correct estimation of the fight for national liberation it becomes possible for revolutionists to lead it into a fight against not only the foreign oppressor but the native bourgeoisie as well. Morrow is forced to give a twist to this idea which transforms it into something entirely different and in fact altogether false.
What is really new in the occupied countries is that the national sentiment of the workers and peasants is sharpening their class bitterness against the collaborating bourgeoisie. National oppression has given a new edge to the class struggle. National sentiment hitherto serving only the bourgeoisie, today can be used against the bourgeoisie of the occupied countries. That is what is new. (Emphasis in original.)
Morrow translates “bitterness” against the collaborating bourgeoisie into class-conscious opposition to the bourgeoisie as a whole. The class struggle has become more intense against the entire bourgeoisie as a class because a section of it collaborates with the Nazis. What this neglects is the fact that national oppression makes the masses, including the workers, prey to bourgeois elements of the de Gaulle variety and above all especially vulnerable to the bourgeois democracy of the labor reformists.
In pre-war France, the socialist proletariat was led into the People’s Front of collaboration with the bourgeoisie by its socialist and communist leadership. The working class tolerated this policy only because unity with the bourgeois politicians appeared necessary to defend the workers and their organizations from fascism inside France and from Hitler on its borders. This enemy, fear of whom facilitated class unity, is now the master of all of France, both as a fascist ruler and a foreign oppressor. Morrow contends that this national oppression itself intensifies the class struggle. What is this but a pale reflection of the Stalinist pre-Hitler idea of “After Hitler come we.” By a similar process of reasoning, the class struggle in Germany received a “new edge” after Hitler’s rise to power, when it became clear that the bourgeoisie preferred fascism and that the socialists and communists could not fight it.
But if the class struggle has become more intense, and if the main content of our slogan is “under the leadership of the Fourth International,” then there is really nothing new. There is no new element which in any way modifies the road taken by revolutionists in their approach to the masses. Morrow, uncomfortable in the Europe of 1943, seeks a formula which would miraculously return him to the pre-war days when his China line had no application outside of Asia.
But there is something manifestly new. Before the war, the present struggle of the peoples of the occupied countries for national freedom did not exist. Now it does. Before the war the fight in all these countries was directly and first of all against the native bourgeoisie. Now, in order to carry on an organized, centralized and systematic struggle on a nationwide basis against the native bourgeoisie, the peoples of the occupied countries must get rid of the foreign oppressor. In this respect, the advanced peoples of occupied Europe are in the same position as the colonial peoples of Asia and their movement, like the latter, deserves our support.
Morrow has devised the theory of the “new edge to the class struggle” to escape the application of his China line to the European stage. In China, national oppression has led to a war for the democratic principle of self-determination which continues today, he maintains. Once he admits that this is the case in occupied Europe, the necessity of supporting bourgeois regimes in alliance with the imperialists inexorably follows.
 
The “Workers’ Movement”
The Three Theses have this merit: they emphasize the democratic nature of the fight for national independence in Europe. Morrow refuses to understand them, accusing their proponents of favoring the re-establishment of the Weimar Republic in Germany and the Third Republic in France; similarly a confirmed sectarian might accuse us of favoring the establishment of a capitalist regime in Spain because we supported the war against Franco. This is not because the Theses are unclear on this point or because Morrow read them hastily. Morrow cannot permit himself to understand this point and cannot honestly reply to it because his own line on the democratic struggle for freedom as developed for China leads to social-patriotism.
Does Morrow contend that the movement among the people of occupied Europe for national liberation is a conscious and direct struggle for socialism? We seek in vain for an answer to this question. Unwilling to characterize the movement as socialist and unable to characterize it as democratic, he seeks a new, ambiguous formula. It is a “workers’ movement.”
But this cannot save Morrow. The vague phrase, “workers’ movement,” clearly indicates the class composition of the chief organizations and groups and individuals participating in the fight for national liberation but it says nothing about the immediate and direct aims of the struggle, nothing about its political character. A “workers’ movement,” which is based first of all on the struggle for national independence, is a movement for democratic rights – and the proletarian struggle is going through a democratic phase.
 
Socialist United Stares of Europe
Says Morrow: “In discussions, the authors of the Three Theses have indicated that they consider national liberation as an immediate agitation slogan and the Socialist United States of Europe as a propaganda slogan, i.e., not suitable for immediate agitation. Their separation of the two slogans must be characterized as a nationalist deviation.”
Here again Morrow refuses to recognize any distinction between a democratic slogan – national freedom, and a socialist slogan – Socialist United States of Europe.
Presumably Morrow equates these two slogans because just as “national freedom in this epoch is the task of the working class under the leadership of the Fourth International,” so national liberation is impossible without a Socialist United States of Europe.
This is a principle absolutely valid “in this epoch.” In the long run, unless the revolutionary masses go over from the fight for national independence to a Socialist United States of Europe, it will be impossible for them to solve their pressing economic, social, and political problems. Imperialism persisting, the further intensification of national oppression is guaranteed.
But despite this general principle, the peoples of Europe fight now for national liberation. This is a just demand and moreover its realization is a prerequisite to the voluntary federation of the peoples as against the forcible unification by Hitler. This fight for national independence is the ideal of hundreds of thousands and millions. In that sense the demand for national independence is an immediate agitational slogan. The demand for a Socialist United States of Europe is the program of an infinitesimally tiny minority and a propaganda slogan.
Morrow cannot separate these two slogans. Just as he finds it impossible to distinguish between a socialist and a democratic demand, he finds it impossible to recognize the possibility of a struggle by masses striving for national liberation,
not yet raising a socialist banner. Like all such movements it runs the danger of becoming a disciplined tool of the Allied war machine. But Morrow’s China line prevents him from recognizing a genuine movement for liberation from one which has been subordinated to the imperialist war. Fearing to support the latter, he refuses to conceive of support for the former.
“We insist,” he says, “that these two slogans must go together , otherwise the slogan of national liberation degenerates into mere bourgeois nationalism in the service of one of the imperialist camps.”
If we translate this idea into the truth it would read as follows and demonstrate the crux of Morrow’s difficulty:
“My China position supports a non-socialist, non-proletarian war for national liberation in alliance with imperialism. In Europe such a position would openly degenerate into mere bourgeois nationalism in the service of imperialism. To save myself, I ‘insist’ upon the possibility of and recognize only a socialist war for national freedom in Europe.”
Morrow argues: “Only the working class can free the country by proletarian revolution.”
Had Morrow deliberately set out to confound and confuse he could never have discovered more suitable formulations on every point. The above is a typical example.
Ordinarily the phrase “proletarian revolution” is quite clear and simple. We mean the socialist revolution. But the phrase may contain serious ambiguities.
There have been many proletarian revolutions in the last quarter of a century which did not solve the problems of national freedom, democracy, or any of the other major social problems of “this epoch.” They were revolutions led by and dominated by the proletarian class and parties of the working class. But these proletarian revolutions stopped short of the socialist revolution, confined themselves within the framework of bourgeois democracy and consequently suffered ultimate defeat. Deespite their failure to go to the end, great victories were achieved which made possible a speedy transition to the socialist revolution. Only in Russia did there prove to be a tested revolutionary party which could take advantage of such a proletarian revolution and lead it to the socialist revolution,
The only kind of proletarian revolution which can really achieve lasting national liberation, which can free a nation economically and politically from imperialism, which can establish a genuine democratic regime and prevent the restoration of capitalist rule is a socialist proletarian revolution which spreads internationally to the powerful, advanced, industrialized nations. The socialist revolution aims at the complete destruction of the power and influence of the bourgeoisie and the expropriation of the industries under their control.
But between now and the time when such a proletarian, socialist revolution succeeds, many struggles and revolutions can and will take place which are not under the leadership of revolutionary socialist parties and revolutionary socialist slogans. One such struggle is the movement for liberation in occupied Europe which leads in the direction of a revolution which will facilitate the socialist revolution.
The phrase “proletarian revolution” is thus able to slur together two different, though closely related, aspects of the working class struggle. It is this ambiguity which makes the phrase ideally suited to Morrow, who is concerned above all with glossing over the democratic nature of the liberation struggle.
 
Imperialism and Democratic “Restraint”
The difference between the socialist movement and the movement for national liberation which can also be carried on by revolutionary proletarian methods is that the former is directed toward the seizure of power by the proletariat for the purpose of expropriating the native bourgeoisie, while the latter sets as its first goal the ousting of the foreign oppressor as the precondition for organizing the socialist struggle of the masses on a systematic and centralized basis. Possible within the limits of still existing bourgeois property relations, the fight for national freedom is a democratic movement.
In order to achieve the ousting of Hitler the masses must be ready to struggle directly against their own collaborating bourgeoisie and the forces of Hitler occupation. In order to make the socialist revolution, the masses must be prepared to break with their own “democratic” bourgeoisie and its labor agents, to fight against the counter-revolutionary Stalinist regime which stands ready as the executioner of the Eastern European socialist revolution, and above all with the international bourgeoisie which as always stands ready with its tremendous economic and military resources to intervene in any one of the national sectors of its battlefront.
When Henry Wallace warns that if the Soviet Union agitates again for world communism there will be another war, he is really threatening war against all socialist revolutions; and when he promises food to those nations which string along with the Anglo-American camp, he promises blockade to its socialist enemies.
It is the power of the bourgeoisie on an international scale which makes it possible that the movement for national liberation will stop short of its logical and ultimate goal, the socialist revolution.
The real alternative presented by international imperialism to the revolutionary people of Europe will be: “Restrain yourselves to a ‘normal,’ ordinary bourgeois government and we offer you economic assistance, food and temporary, benevolent neutrality. But go forward to a socialist revolution and we promise you economic blockade and military intervention.”
All kinds of concessions and compromises with capitalism and imperialism are possible provided the peoples “restrain” themselves and are “realistic.” And it is to this realism and restraint that all the bourgeois democrats, reformists and Stalinists are dedicating themselves. These compromises are designed to withdraw the fruits of victory from the masses piecemeal until a firm basis for the bourgeois status quo is restored.
The thwarting of these “realistic” plans and the possibility of transforming the rising of the people for national liberation into an international socialist revolution on an all-European scale depends directly upon how rapidly the revolutionary, socialist proletarian party is organized and extended and obtains support from the masses. But this in turn is just as directly dependent upon the recognition by revolutionists of partial, progressive struggles which lead in their direction.
But all this is lost on Morrow. In his world, all is clearly black and white. All the reactionaries and imperialists line up dearly on one side and the revolutionary proletarians under the banner of the Fourth International line up on the other – and thus national liberation will be won. He must fear that if he recognized life with all its possible cruel compromises and betrayals, he would turn as opportunistic in Europe as he is already in China.
 



Dear Editor:
In the August 2 issue of Labor Action you printed a letter
signed by Jerry F. Foch, executive secretary-treasurer of the
Ferndale Labor Club.
Referring to an article I wrote in the July 25 issue entitled UAW
Should Organise Against Klan, the Ferndale Labor Club resents the
fact that I mentioned an attack by a white gang in the Negro
neighborhood of Ferndale and denies that this took place.
The reference in that and other articles was NOT to the events of
June 21 but to an incident which occurred in March. This incident and
others like it in Detroit were important factors which led to the
June 21 outbreaks. The event was reported in both the Michigan
Chronicle and the Detroit Tribune, both papers dated April
3. The Michigan Chronicle writes:
“Seizing on a fight between colored and white
students at Lincoln High School on Nine Mile Road in Ferndale as the
provocation, a group of White hoodlums led by members of the Ku Klux
Klan instituted a reign of terror among the colored residents of the
Eight Mile Road community last Wednesday which did not subside until
Friday night as state troopers, city and county officers blanketed
the area.
“During the three-day reign of terror the
Klan-inspired hoodlums rode through the district in automobiles,
firing shots that endangered business establishments along Eight Mile
Road. Windows were smashed in four business establishments on the
highway.”



 


Ben Hall (Detroit)



 



America’s Strategy in World Politics
by Nicholas J. Spykman
New York, N.Y.
According to Messrs. Roosevelt and Churchill, we are engaged in a war of liberty, equality, justice, etc., plus the Atlantic Charter. But Professor Nicholas J. Spykman, author of America’s Strategy in World Politics, knows differently and says so:
Because man loves peace, it is always the opponent who is the aggressor and, because he prefers decency it is always the enemy who fights unfairly and with cruel and dastardly means. National struggles inevitably become conflicts between good and evil, crusades against sin and the devil. Modern wars can be fought successfully only in an atmosphere of unreality and make-believe.
It is not Spykman’s aim to dispense with the jargon of jingoism, for the make-believe world is necessary for the common herd. Nor does he support the war any the less. Quite the contrary; he insists that the Axis must be defeated. He is concerned primarily with clearing away the ideological rubbish that clutters up our thinking so that the makers of imperialist policy may not stumble over their own refuse.
The merit of this book consists in a forthright and cynically truthful statement of the real political aspirations of U.S. imperialism in war and in peace. It is precisely this that is objectionable to our super-patriots in whose dream world democracy fights for justice and fascism for evil.
“... by taking for granted that our moral standards are no better than Hitler’s, we are also surrendering our ability to win the war,” writes Malcolm Cowley in the New Republic in criticism of Spykman. However true this may be, it offers no reply to the author: this and similar difficulties are not weaknesses in Spykman’s logic but are the insurmountable contradictions of democratic imperialism.
We are in this war for two related reasons, says Spykman. In the first place we must defeat the Axis in order to avoid encirclement of the Western Hemisphere and in the second place we must guarantee that in the peace that follows, the U.S. will emerge indisputably as the dominant power in the world.
The main portion of the book, obviously written before the entry of the United States into the war, is concerned with the first half of this aim and consists of a devastating reply to that isolationist mode of thought which believes that the Western Hemisphere can remain intact regardless of the outcome of wars in Europe and Asia. The conclusion that he reaches is that although the United States might be able militarily to defend the quarter sphere up to the bulge of Brazil in the event of an Axis victory, economically it would be so shut off from foreign markets and sources of raw materials that it would suffer a sharp decline in economic and military power. But it is Spykman’s line of reasoning that is of more interest to us than his conclusions.
Spykman effectively explodes the theory that events are naturally leading toward a free, democratic union of all the American states in opposition to all possible totalitarian aggressors. There are as many internal divisions among the American states as there are among the nations of Europe; dictatorship is at least as welcome as democracy; the economy of the Southern countries, especially Argentina, meshes in more closely with that of Europe; and above all the chief Latin American states hate and fear the United States as much as any of the totalitarian powers and can be expected to try to play one side off against the other.
Spykman makes clear exactly what is involved in Pan-Americanism:
Nothing short of a single hemisphere economy with centralized control of international trade could provide the possibility of defense against the economic power of a victorious Germany. No American state would, however, be willing voluntarily to make the changes necessary to create such a regional economy. It could be achieved only by the same process which is now being used to transform the national economies of Europe into a Greater Germany co-prosperity sphere. Only the conquest of the hemisphere by the United States and the ruthless destruction of existing regional economies could bring the necessary integration.
Or, “faced by the planned economies of two national socialist regimes in the continents across the ocean, there can be a chance of economic survival in the Western Hemisphere only if we surrender individual freedom of action within the state and national freedom as between the states.” Has there been a clearer statement of the rôle which a fascist United States would play on the American continents?
If Spykman discards this as a desirable line of development it is not out of any moralistic considerations but because he believes that even such a fascist Pan Americanism would be unable to cope with a victorious Germany. He implies that this tack would be unnecessary for a victorious U.S. But Spykman admits that the period of peace that follows this war will only be a temporary armistice and in any event will be the stage for warfare carried on by economic and political means. The Federation of British Industries, for example, has announced that it intends to follow the pre-war emergency trade policies, part of which was the struggle against the U.S. for the South American market through bi-lateral trade agreements. Totalitarian control by the U.S. over South America may not in itself compensate for an Axis victory but it would be a handy instrument in a post-war world of intense economic warfare.
The United States must avoid the errors of the period that followed the last war. This time is must aggressively step into foreign politics and insure a “balance of powers.” What Spykman means by a balance of powers becomes clear enough ... that no power other than the United States shall be free to exercise its strength on a world scale, thus making the United States super-arbiter of the world.
He rejects the idea of a joint British-American hegemony in the world.
It is undoubtedly true that immediately after the armistice, the United States and Great Britain could exercise great power through control of the seas, particularly if they had previously destroyed Japanese sea power. But it is highly problematical whether American-British hegemony could be translated into a permanent form of world organization and it would be a mistake to assume that this program would appeal to any but a limited number of Anglo-Saxons as an ideal substitute for German-Japanese hegemony.
Such a set-up would only throw Germany, Russia and China together, he maintains, and tend to upset the balance. Moreover, Spykman makes abundantly dear that all is not so well between the U.S. and Britain. We will take over then-possessions in the Western Hemisphere. Britain is in conflict with us in South America. Its agreement with Japan following the last war was one of the serious threats to our power in the world. Above all, the United States must oppose any form of unity in Europe.
If the peace objective of the United States is the creation of a united Europe. She is fighting on the wrong side. All out aid to Hitler would be the quickest way to achieve an integrated transatlantic zone.
The policy that Britain pursued on the continent must become the policy of the United States in the world. It must seek such a balance of power that will prevent any one or two powers from dominating either Europe or Asia. We must not err in taking the principle of self-determination too seriously, implies Spykman, and his manipulation and remanipulation of the states of Europe is a sight to behold.
In carrying out this policy his main proposals are:

Protect Japan. “Twice in one generation we have come to the aid of Great Britain in order that the small off-shore island might not have to face a single gigantic military state in control of the opposite coast of the mainland. If the balance of power in the Far East is to be preserved in the future as well as in the present, the United States will have to adopt a similar protective policy toward Japan. The present inconsistency in American policy will have to be removed.”
 
To restore Germany. The big problem on the continent of Europe will be to ward off the power that Russia will represent if the Axis is defeated. A strong Germany, plus a large buffer state between the two is the answer, says Spykman. “Strange as it may seem at this moment, it is quite conceivable that the British government would not relish the idea of a Germany so completely defeated that it could not defend itself against the invasion of victorious Russian armies. It is even conceivable that Washington might become convinced of the cogency of the British argument that asks for the continued existence of a powerful Germany. A Russian state from the Urals to the North Sea can be no great improvement over a German state from the North Sea to the Urals.”

Is this clear? Here we are at war with Japan and Germany. A Sterling professor of international relations at Yale University informs us that when the war is over we must revivify and protect our former enemies against our former friends! But, the anxious patriot may inquire, is not this more or less the policy that was followed after the last war and didn’t it lead to a bigger and better World War? Spykman, unlike Roosevelt and Churchill, who promise a period of peace and justice, replies:
Basically the new order will not differ from the old and international society will continue to operate with the same fundamental power patterns.
This program does not promise the end of international strife. It accepts the fact that there will always be conflict and that war will remain a necessary instrument in the preservation of a balance of power.
Professor Spykman has been widely commended for his “realism.” This realism foresees a drive for totalitarianism on the Western Hemisphere in the event of an Axis victory. In the event of an Axis defeat, the reconstitution of Japan and Germany and the domination of the world by the United States; continuous economic, political and finally, military warfare to maintain this “balance of power.”
What seems to be realism consists at bottom of a profound ignorance of the rôle played by the masses in the post-war period and to be played in the course of and after this war.
The United Nations have already learned to their sorrow how impotent they are in the Far East without the support of the oppressed millions. Edgar Snow, Lin Yutang and others appeal to the democratic imperialist governments to demonsrtate that they really are fighting for democracy by giving real freedom to India, Africa and China. This is to advise slave-holders to free their slaves the better to fight to keep them.
Divorced as they are from reality, however, these sentimentalists show more insight than the would-be Machiavellian adviser to imperialism. They, at least, recognize the decisive rôle of the masses today.
Not so with Spykman. In all of his book of more than 400 pages he refers not once to the possibilities of a revolution of the masses anywhere in the world and its possible effects on the balance of powers. At a time when the volcano that is India is about to explode beneath Great Britain he develops a line of thought predicated on the most abject submission on the part of the masses. Discussing the many “errors” of the democratic imperialist powers he writes:
“Equally serious had been the failure to save the Spanish Republic. Fascist Spain, which owed her victory to Germany and Italy, controls the most strategic zones on the coast line of the continental triangle.” In this simple statement one discovers the bankruptcy of his whole line of thought.
It was no more an error for the democratic camp to allow a fascist victory in Spain than it was (and will be from Spykman’s point of view) to allow post-war Germany to rise again. What was at stake for England and France was no mere strategic outpost but nothing less than the European revolution. A crushing defeat for Franco by the Spanish masses could have no other result than the completion of the Spanish Revolution – the seizure of power by the proletariat. The French working class, still marching forward, would have followed and the European revolution would have forged ahead.
Since the last war there have been no end of revolutionary movements: The Russian Revolution, the Finnish, Hungarian, Chinese and German revolutions, the mutiny in the French fleet, British shop stewards movement, etc. But our realist has literally nothing to say about these movements and those to come and how they will affect his policies, thus demonstrating that our historian does not know his history.
 



Several groups in the labor movement have recently declared themselves in favor of the formation, in the unspecified future, of what some of them call a “third party” and others a new “people’s party.” The Workers Party has been consistently campaigning for the formation of a new party by the organized labor movement; but the Workers Party calls not for a third party but for a LABOR PARTY. This difference in terms expresses not a slight variation in language but a serious conflict over opposing social and political principles.
It is necessary to stress this fact because top CIO officials like Sidney Hillman have repeated their long-standing opposition to setting up of ANY new party. Offhand, it might seem that the advocates of a “third” party propose a drastic change in the current political line of the CIO. But that is not true; for they remain faithful to the philosophy which underlies the old line.
In his statement of policy to the executive board of the United Auto Workers Union, Walter Reuther said:
“Labor should join hands with farmers, professionals, small business and other functional groups to work toward the eventual formation of a broad new progressive party’ which will truly represent the needs of our nation and its people.”
The Addes (Stalinist) faction, despite its bitter fight against Reuther for control of the union, agrees with him on this point. Its platform states:
“That we work toward the eventual formation of a broad Third Party based on the thinking and interests of millions of the labor, farmer, professional and other progressive people of our nation.”
The National Educational Committee for the Formation of a New Party set up on April 6–7 at a national conference in Chicago attended by a group of liberals and labor leaders, announced that it is organized “for the purpose of carrying on an educational campaign for a people’s party and for the principles on which such a party should be based.” At a meeting of its national committee in Detroit on May 4, a representative of Walter Reuther was present as an observer. Others who attended were August Scholle, head of the Michigan CIO Council and director of the PAC in Michigan, and Matthew Hammond, head of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation.
 
Continue Support of Boss Candidates
While these moves were being made public last month, the Political Action Committee of the CIO, represented by its national chairman, Sidney Hillman, was meeting in conference with two organizations composed of professional and middle class elements – the National Citizens PAC and the Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions. This conference was presided over by former Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes. Ickes stressed two facts: (1) The union of the three groups did not aim at the formation of a third party and (2) its purpose was to oppose the “coalition of reactionary Democrats and Republicans” by supporting so-called friends of the people among the Democrats and Republicans. This is a clear endorsement of the standard CIO policy of supporting “liberals” from the two old parties in the primaries and in the regular elections.
Thus, one group favors a new party and the other opposes it. However, these contrary ideas are really separated by a very thin line of demarcation; for both sides are in complete agreement on what should be done NOW. The advocates of the new party are against the formation of any such party NOW. Their plans relate to some unspecified date in the future; they do not explain when and under what conditions they hope to form their party.
The differences between the two groups in question can be summarized as follows: (1) Both agree on the same political principle; (2) Both agree on what to do now; (3) But the new-partyites are dabbling with the idea of supporting the same old capitalist politicians outside of the framework of the two old parties. They are not for a political divorce between labor and capital; they merely want the married couple to move into a new home if the old one gets too dirty.
 
Why the Talk About a New Party?
Why is there so much talk about a new party? Because it is becoming increasingly clear that the two old parties are owned by the big monopolists and bankers. Labor needs its own party, a party based upon the organized labor movement, a party which fights for a. program which will fulfill the needs of the working people. But capitalist politicians, whether or not they remain inside the Democratic and Republican Parties, cannot and will not fight for such a program.
Against the capitalist politicians, for independent labor political action! That is the slogan of today and it means: “For a LABOR Party.” The 1944 elections proved how misleading any other policy is.
In 1944, the top leaders of the CIO rejoiced at the re-election of the Democratic administration and celebrated labor’s great “victory” at the polls, a victory which put the control of Congress into the hands of iso-called friends of labor. A few months passed and – what disappointment reigned! The big question asked in the CIO was: “Who really won the elections?”
The answer was simple: THE CAPITALIST CLASS. Its victory was demonstrated by the decisions of Congress and the actions of the Truman administration. In the midst of the big strike wave, for example, the administration proposal for “fact- finding boards” was denounced by Philip Murray as an anti-labor, pro-capitalist scheme. The capitalist “liberals” have fooled labor many times but it is time for the workers to begin to learn. Yet the proponents of the “third” party idea continue to retain faith in these liberals. The formation of a third party with the same old capitalist politicians would only be a new means of deceiving the people who are becoming aware of the true nature of the old parties.
 
What Does Reuther Want to Wait For?
Walter Reuther, who is probably destined to become a leading spokesman for the “third party” idea, says: “Such a movement (the new party) cannot succeed if it is launched prematurely and on a narrow basis.” Addes and his followers repeat the same idea in almost the same words. They all agree: a new party is “premature.”
But, we ask, what makes a new party “premature”? Whom must we wait for? Must we wait upon the exploited working class, the poverty-stricken sharecroppers and farm laborers, the disinherited one-third of a nation, the oppressed and Jim-Crowed Negroes – in sum: must we wait upon that section of the American people which toils and sweats to earn its living? Such an idea is preposterous.
If, ten minutes from now, the organized labor movement proclaimed that it was about to form a Labor Party, millions upon millions of workers and their families would rally behind the new party with the same hope and enthusiasm that greeted the formation of the crusading CIO some ten years ago. No, the leadership is not waiting for the membership; the membership is waiting for the leadership.
These warnings – “not prematurely” and “not narrow” – give us the clues that we need to understand the nature of the “new third party.” It is to be a party in which the workers wait upon the capitalist liberals. Just as we are asked to be patient and forebearing while the liberals decide when, how, why and where to form a new party; so, in the new party, labor would be expected to follow at the coat-tails of these politicians, to alter its demands and to delay its actions in accordance with their desires. Such a party would not be a Labor Party but its opposite, a party in which capitalist liberals hold the reins while labor strains in the harness. Such a party would be a third CAPITALIST party.
The formation of a “third” or “people’s” party would mean a policy of compromise and collaboration with representatives of the capitalist class. The third capitalist party would therefore be not an instrument for advancing the cause of the worker but a machine to further depress and minimize his demands.
Either labor sacrifices its own program and continues to collaborate with the capitalist liberals in a new “third” party, or labor brushes these politicians aside, fights militantly for a program that will satisfy the needs of the people, and forms an independent LABOR PARTY, based upon the organized labor movement.
 



The Michigan State Convention of the CIO which met in Detroit on June 10–12 was dominated by the personality of Walter P. Reuther, president of the United Auto Workers Union. The strength of the convention lay in the strength of the program which is identified with Reuther, and its weakness lay in the weakness of that program. There was no other program. The delegates divided into two camps, those who supported Reuther’s program and those who opposed it. Reuther intervened personally in the convention, addressing the delegates and organizing a caucus of his followers to win control of the State CIO.
The pro-Reuther forces put forward as candidate for president August Scholle and for secretary-treasurer, Barney Hopkins. The anti-Reuther group ran Glen Sigman and W.G. Grant. In a fairly close election the Reuther forces triumphed by about 400 votes – 2,200 to 1,800.
As at the last UAW convention, the real convention issues were not clearly presented to the delegates. The written declarations of both sides appeared similar. It was necessary to read between the lines of the written material and above all to attend the caucuses of the two factions which are as much part of the convention as the formal sessions themselves, for it is here that the delegates and the leaders speak freely.
 
The Anti-Reuther Bloc
The convention line-up was: Reuther against the field. The anti-Reuther bloc was a coalition between the conservative right-wingers who follow Thomas and Philip Murray and the Communist Party led by Nat Ganley and John Anderson of Local 155. They combined to “get Reuther.” The Murray-Thomas supporters were motivated by a conservative distaste for Reuther’s new radical approach, the Communists by their desire for a pro-Stalin policy.
The aims of the CP stick out in the program of the Sigman-Grant slate. For example: “We repudiate all efforts calculated to weaken or destroy the friendship and close collaboration of Great Britain, the Soviet Union, and the United States within the United Nations” and further “We favor independence for all colonies ...” These phrases are the key to all Stalinist policy in the present period. On the one hand, the first formula outlaws any criticism of the Russian occupation of Europe as an attempt to “weaken or destroy” the United Nations. But on the other hand, the formula for colonial independence legalizes all attacks on the imperialist rivals of Russia. How sensitive the CP is on this key question was demonstrated at the convention sessions.
The pro-Philip Murray character of the anti-Reuther bloc was equally clear. Sigman himself is a paid official on the staff of the Steel Workers Union. It is unlikely that he would move without at least tacit support from Murray. The slogans of this group were: “Support Murray supporters” and “For a unified strategy under the leadership of Philip Murray.”
The anti-Reuther bloc, was totally incapable of presenting any ideas or program to the convention. Any constructive ideas were already incorporated in the Reuther program and so they confined themselves to a miserable campaign of sniping. They killed one and one half days of the convention in a fight over technicalities involved in the seating of delegates.
They held their caucus meetings under the slogan of “efficiency” and “good government” in the State CIO. Arguing on the lowest level of slander they hinted, without even an attempt at proof, that somewhere and somehow there was misuse of funds in the state CIO office. That was the whole content of their program. One asked oneself if these misdeeds were true, why did you keep quiet about them for a whole year and speak out only at election time, when you found yourself without a program?
A totally different atmosphere prevailed in the Reuther camp. Here the delegates were bound together primarily by their attachment to the new militant program advanced by Reuther. In his opening address to the delegates, Reuther spoke as follows: We must fight for higher wages and lower prices to be gained by dipping into the profits of big business. If prices continue to rise we will not feel ourselves bound by contracts because Washington has broken its contract with the American people. We can pass all the resolutions we want but that is not enough. We must mobilize the membership behind our resolutions. He called for a national conference of the AFL, CIO, and Railway Brotherhoods to map out a united campaign against the flood of reactionary legislation pending in Congress.
At the caucus meeting he went further: Attacking Murray’s leadership of the Steel Union by implication he said: “The torch we lit during the GM strike was not picked up by the steel workers.” He threatened that if the CP-Thomas bloc continued its “obstructionist” policies he would carry the fight to the rank and file of the union and demand a special convention of the UAW.
This radical program is drawing to Reuther the best elements in the labor movement who look to him for leadership in a crusade not only to raise wages one or two notches higher but to grapple with the vast social problems confronting the people in all spheres of life. The “Reuther caucus” shows the possibility of becoming not merely another union faction but a serious movement within organized labor of profoundly progressive significance. Reuther is rising as the spokesman for this tendency, as the man who articulates and formulates its demands and policies.
He and his closest aides, however, show themselves unable to give farsighted and consistent leadership. The serious shortcomings of the Reutherite leadership was demonstrated in the field of international politics during the debate on Indian Independence and in the field of national politics in the discussions on political action.
 
Indian Independence
Following an address by M. Fazel Elahi Qurban, vice-president of the All-India Railwaymen’s Federation who appealed to the convention for moral support to the forthcoming railway strike in India and who requested the passing of a resolution favoring immediate, independence for India, a Stalinist delegate proposed a resolution denouncing the British Labor Party.
Roy Reuther, brother of the UAW president, darted to the microphone and in reply eulogized the British Labor Party for its noble “gesture” in offering independence to the Indians. He concluded with a vigorous
attack against the military occupation of Eastern Europe and its domination by Russia. The convention was thrown into an uproar as the Reuther supporters rocked the hall with applause and the Stalinists, touched in their most vulnerable spot, booed and hissed.
This little incident tells us a lot about the spokesmen for the two opposing factions. The CP attacks the colonial policy of England only in order to make the rotten policies of the Stalin regime seem more palatable. Roy Reuther turned this policy upside down. He denounced Russian imperialism only to cover up for the imperialist policies of the British Labor Party. Don’t rattle the skeletons in my closet and I won’t rattle yours. Had there been no attack on the British Labor Party, there would have been no counterattack on Stalin’s oppressive role in Europe.
 
Political Action
The convention heard talk from all sides about the crucial need for “vigorous political action.” The attacks on the “reactionaries” in Congress were duly applauded. The “reactionaries” were duly booed.
But that has been going on for years. The labor movement has been supporting so-called “friends-of-labor” against the “reactionaries” in one election after another. Each election is supposed to record a new victory for the forces of “progress.” Now we see more clearly than before that these gentlemen who so readily accept the support of labor on election day just as readily play the role of pro-capitalist strikebreakers when a real crisis arises. The old political path has led us up a blind alley. Where is the new road?
No answer either from Reuther, or the convention, or any of the caucuses. Ernest Mazey of Local 212 who called for an end to the policy of supporting Democrats and Republicans and for the immediate formation of a Labor Party was a lone voice; but he alone pointed to the correct policy.
Walter Reuther sawed the same old wood. He excoriated the “reactionary Republicans and the southern Democrats.” But what happened to all the great “progressives” whom labor “elected”? What happened to all our election “victories”? Reuther repeated all the old formulas as though nothing had happened in the past year.
The convention adopted an absurd resolution full of ambiguities. It was a pitiful attempt to compromise all existing points of view. It declared that the “long-run” program of the State CIO was for the “eventual formation” of a new “peoples’ party.” Meanwhile? We continue to “endorse and support liberal and progressive candidates of the existing parties.”
Mat Hammond, chairman of the resolutions committee who is one of the leaders of the new National Educational Committee for the Formation of a New Party, interpreted this resolution as a move in the direction of his new “peoples” party (not a labor party).
Emil Mazey endorsed the resolution as a welcome step toward the formation of a Labor Party. Meanwhile he has to swallow the continued endorsement of Democrats and Republicans.
Gus Scholle, on the other hand, understood the resolution to be a restatement of his own printed platform which reads: “Against a third party now or in the immediate future; but continue also to lay the groundwork for labor-liberal unity in a possible third party if and when conditions are ripe.” (Can any one invent a more weasel worded statement than that?)
In summary: All agreed to vote for the resolution on political action. Few agreed on what it meant. But it hardly matters for all differences are laid aside in a common pledge to continue the suicidal policy of supporting candidates from the old capitalist parties. That was the great defect of the Michigan State Convention of the CIO.
 



DETROIT, July 15 – At the call of the United Automobile Workers Union, thousands of workers supported by members of Negro, veterans, consumers, and labor organizations will demonstrate in Cadillac Square on the afternoon of July 16 to protest the end of price control.
This demonstration is the direct outcome of a mass meeting attended by over 1,000 CIO shop stewards and local union officers two weeks ago where Walter Reuther, outlining the program of the policy committee of the UAW, called upon Phillip Murray to convene a United Labor Conference of all American labor to discuss action to repulse the anti-labor offensive of Congress and to restore price controls. At this meeting resolutions were passed asking the CIO through Murray to call a one-day national labor holiday and failing that, insisting upon a one-day work stoppage in the Detroit area.
But Murray has been totally silent throughout the price crisis. He has outlined no program of his own and is reported to have vetoed the idea of a one-day national holiday and to have frowned upon even a stoppage of work in the Detroit section. The Tuesday demonstration is therefore a compromise with the views of Murray. It is not called as a general 24-hour work stoppage. Instructions to local unions are to shut down the plants for part of a shift in agreement with their respective employers and if this agreement is not forthcoming to close the factories “for not more than two hours on any one shift on the day of the demonstration.”
To repeat: it is the UAW which is calling this demonstration. Similar actions will be called on the same day, where possible, wherever the UAW has strength. The International Executive Board of the CIO has yet to be heard from.
The program outlined by the UAW embraces three main points: 1) The calling of protest demonstrations in every community on July 16; 2) A buyers’ strike; 3) United resistance to rent increases. The general objective of these three points is summarized in the slogan: “Congress must be forced to act.” The main point of emphasis for all UAW policy has become to achieve the restoration of price controls by Congress.
Even the idea of a buyers’ strike is linked up with a fight to force Congress to act; for it is obvious that the people cannot refuse to buy the necessities of life forever. There must be some point at which the strikes can come to an end. The UAW program proposes:
“We must urge all our members and every consumer to buy only the minimum of food, milk, and absolute necessities until Congress enacts a price control law with teeth in it and the administration staffs the OPA with men with guts enough to resist big business pressure.”
The terrible weakness of the UAW program is this: It makes everything depend upon action by CONGRESS after it has been proved to the hilt that this Congress is the sworn enemy of price control. Suppose Congress does NOT enact and enforce a real price control bill? And that is the unfortunate likelihood. What shall labor do then? There is no reply in the UAW program.
The program adopted by the UAW for the General Motors strike insisted that wage increases could be achieved without price increases by the simple device of taking them out of the profits of the parasitic capitalist class. It is necessary to go at least one step further now. We must have a program of ACTION by labor to carry out the ideas of the GM Program and that involves a program to stop price increases.
The workers themselves must control prices! We cannot and must not rely upon Congress ... that is the road to defeat. FOR PRICE CONTROL BY LABOR!
The UAW proposes to control the price of housing (rent) by mass flying squadrons which will compel the landlords to keep down the rents. The same idea must be applied to ALL commodities (for housing is itself a commodity and its price is the rent).
The workers in the mines produce the raw materials. The workers on the railroads transport the raw materials to the factories. The workers in the shops fabricate the parts. Other workers finish and assemble the products. More workers transport the product to where it can be sold to the consumer. BUT THE CAPITALIST CONTROLS THE PRICE!
Let the workers form union committees for the purpose of regulating and setting the price of the products that they themselves produce. These committees can control the price of the product at every stage of production. That is the only practical program for price control. It is a thousand times more realistic than reliance upon a Congress which represents the landlords, capitalists and bankers.
Price Control by Union Committees!
 






This is the second of a series of educational articles by Comrade Ben Hall on the Kaiser-Frazer and Chrysler plans. In the first article, which appeared several weeks ago, Comrade Hall discussed the incentive pay scheme. In this article he discusses certain aspects of the company security plan. Other aspects of this plan have already been discussed in Labor Action, as in the article by Comrade David Coolidge in last week’s issue. We propose to continue hammering away against this scheme – Ed.)



*
The workers who man the picket lines in defense of their union rights and working conditions see the fruits of their inspiring solidarity slipping out of their hands as union officials concede one form or another of so- called “company security” plans. Contracts with Ford, Chrysler and Kaiser-Frazer already incorporate provisions for punishing participants in “unauthorized” stoppages. The penalties range from discharges to fines to the loss of wage bonuses. Other companies, encouraged by the capitulation of the union leaders to the demands of the auto monopolists, are demanding the same concessions. General Electric and Westinghouse, for example, are insisting upon some form of company security as a condition to signing new contracts with the United Electrical Radio & Machinists Union.
 
A “No-Strike” Pledge
The Chrysler contract reads as follows: “The union will not oppose the discharge or discipline of anyone who instructs, leads or induces another employee to take part in any unauthorized strike.”
All through the war the labor movement was shackled with a no-strike pledge. To the aggressive union militants who fought to free their organizations from these chains, the official labor leadership replied: “Don’t you know there’s a war on? You can’t strike now.”
But now the war is over and ... the same labor leaders propose another no-strike pledge under a new name – COMPANY SECURITY.
“But,” one might answer, “the no-strike pledge renounced strikes under ALL conditions. The unions agreed not to authorize ANY strike, no matter how justified. Now, however, the leaders simply agree to punish unauthorized strikes but do not promise that they will not authorize strikes themselves when they are justified.”
True, there is a certain difference between the pledge made during the war and that made now, but we must understand that despite this incidental difference both pledges are based upon the same fundamentally false idea that the workers and the capitalists have common interests and must cooperate amicably for their mutual benefit. During the war, the labor leaders preached the myth of national unity between the workers and their employers. The capitalists of this country – so went the hypnotic dream – after capturing the markets of the world would establish a life of plenty and prosperity for all. The no-strike pledge was part of the “higher strategy of labor” to achieve our “brave new world.”
The new no-strike pledge has more modest but similarly illusory aims. The latest fantasy which has captured the imagination of the labor leaders goes as follows: If the company has security, production will rise. The capitalists will get richer. If the capitalists get richer some of this increased wealth will dribble down into the hands of the working men in the form of increased wages.
This is no wild guess. Read, for example, the joint statement by Norman Matthews, UAW Chrysler director, and Robert Conder, labor relations director of the Chrysler. Co. Here is what they say:
“In reaching the new agreement, which will run until January 26, 1947, the union recognizes the importance of company security against unauthorized strikes and the need for productivity on the part of the employees.”
 
Wages and Productivity
All the big companies have argued, and still do; that they cannot and will not grant substantial wage increases until they are guaranteed increased productivity. What does this talk signify?
The productivity of this country is already the greatest on earth. The experience of the war has demonstrated that with its present productive capacity, the United States could raise the entire population to a higher and genuinely decent standard of living – to PLENTY FOR ALL.
What stands in the way? The capitalist class wolfs the greatest share of the fruits of this productive capacity.
The working class, the men and women who actually produce the goods of life, has been fighting on the picket lines to raise its own share of the national income at the expense of the share ALREADY received by the idle capitalist parasitic class. The capitalists, on the other hand, fight like the wolves they are to guard every ounce of their unearned share. If the workers were defenseless and without unions and democratic rights, the capitalist class would rejoice in the ability to buy labor as cheaply as possible. Then they could pay the workers only enough on which to live and to raise new families of workers.
But the working people are NOT defenseless. They have formed powerful and aggressive unions. The capitalists must therefore be a little more modest and choose the second best method of dealing with their workers. “We refuse to reduce our share of the national wealth and income,” they say, “but if you will work harder for us, If you are loyal enough, if you pledge yourself to strain even harder to enrich us, then out of our immodestly swollen profits we will consider giving you a modest increase in pay.” Thus they propose incentive pay, production bonuses, piece work, and company security.
While the workers battle to increase their share of what they already produce, their labor officials, adopting the outlook of the capitalists, agree to increased productivity through company security as the means to gain wage increases.
Now you can understand why the anti-labor Detroit Free Press praises Richard T. Leonard, Ford director of the UAW, and Norman Matthews, Chrysler director, for their “statesmanship in industrial labor conflicts.” You see, they had just agreed to scale down their wage demands below that of the GM strikers and to accept company security.
A “labor statesman” is a labor official who accepts the point of view of the big capitalists. When the workers are able to win big gains, the labor statesman is always able to “win” half as much. Then he goes to his members and says: “See what I won for you. Of course you will now have to work harder and more loyally than before.”
But company security plans as a means of buying wage increases with the workers’ own sweat are a dangerous trap for the union movement. We will discuss this again in a coming issue of Labor Action.
 



DETROIT, Jan. 26 – In secret sessions and without the presence or knowledge of the elected National Ford Negotiating Committee, Dick Leonard, director of the Ford Department of the UAW, today signed an agreement with the Ford Motor Co. providing for a wage increase of eighteen cents an hour, or fifteen per cent.
The full text of the contract which still must be ratified by the top UAW officers, has not been made public and the fate of the notorious “company security” provisions, which would fine so-called wild-cat strikers, is in doubt. According to one member of the National Ford Negotiating Committee, the union representatives dropped the original idea of fining strikers after a wave of protests had greeted this proposal. In its place they substituted a bonus plan for non-strikers similar to the plan incorporated into the Kaiser- Frazer contract. But since the members of this Negotiating Committee have been left out of the final negotiations one can only guess at what dish the secret sessions cooked up.
This agreement, negotiated by a three-man committee consisting of Leonard, Joseph McCusker, president of Ford Local 600, and Nelson Samp, secretary of the National Negotiating Committee, is a new blow at the fighting General Motors strikers. What the latter have been fighting for during two months on the picket lines is being stolen from them in the conference halls.
Theft No. One: While the GM workers were fighting for their increase, Leonard tried to buy an increase from Ford at their expense. He proposed his “company security” plan, which would put the most militant elements in the shops at the mercy of the employers. This plan was endorsed by all top UAW officials.
Theft No. Two: The union officials have agreed to a new Little Steel formula and withdrew their demand for a thirty per cent wage increase under the pressure of the Truman auto fact-finding board, which recommended an increase of 19½ cents per hour. This was accepted by the union as a final “compromise” settlement.
Theft No. Three: The top UAW officials agreed to the reinstatement of a form of incentive pay in the industry in their contract with the Kaiser-Frazer Co. Of this plan, Kaiser himself said: “It is an incentive plan that makes every worker feel that his earnings are dependent on himself.”
Theft No. Four: While the GM strikers announce their plans to intensify their battle by stopping all GM tool and die work, the Chrysler and Ford negotiators, who have not led their men in a single day of real fighting, have now cut their demands BELOW THE PROPOSALS OF THE TRUMAN BOARD.
At the very moment when Leonard and his two assistants were signing the new contract, a meeting of Ford Local 400, at Highland Park, was taking place. The session was interrupted by one local member, who excitedly waved a copy of ah early edition of the Detroit News with the headline: “Ford, UAW Sign 18 Cents an Hour Increase.”
Carl Bolton, the local’s representative of the National Ford Negotiating Committee, took the floor and heatedly denied that the headline was true. “There were no negotiations scheduled for today,” said he, “therefore no agreement could have been signed. The headline is false. It is a feeler put out by the company to see if it can get us to settle for that low figure. It is an attempt to undermine our morale.”
But Bolton was mistaken. Details of the secret sessions appeared later in the day. They had been called at Leonard’s request in an attempt by him to gain “prestige” as the first UAW representative to win a signed contract with one of the Big Three. And he won the race by only a few hours. However, it cost the Ford workers an additional ½ cent per hour. Shortly after the Ford contract was signed for 18 cents an hour increase, the Chrysler Co. signed up for an 18½ cent increase.
 






The articles that appear below are DISCUSSION ARTICLES published as part of the pre-convention discussion in the Workers Party. Because our space is limited, it will be impossible to devote more than two columns per issue to this material. Contributions will therefore have to be brief, not exceeding 750 words. Pre-convention discussion articles are also appearing in The New International and in the Workers Party Bulletin. Copies of the latter may be gotten by sending fifteen cents to the Workers Party, 114 West 14th Street, New York 11, N.Y. Readers will understand that these articles represent neither the views of the party nor of Labor Action, but are written with a view toward establishing policy at the coming convention of the WP.



*
Labor Action and the Workers Party during the war showed how to translate the ideas of revolutionary socialism into terms of the real class struggle. A superlative example of our method was the insistent and continuous propaganda and agitation for simple slogans like: “Rescind the No-Strike Pledge” and “For a Progressive Caucus in the UAW.”
Thousands of active unionists were against the no-strike pledge. The highly placed bureaucrats of the CIO and AFL, however, believing that American capitalism is the best and only possible social system and rallying to its defense in the crucial struggle for domination of the world, gave up the fight against the capitalist class in the name of “national unity” and struck out instead against those very militants who insisted upon class struggle action to defend the conditions of American labor.
Opposition to the pledge was our point of agreement with these militants and by using this agreement as our springboard we were able to clarify the irreconcilable nature of the class struggle in modern society, the need for the working class to carry on its struggle despite the war. We were able more easily to expose the imperialist nature of the war and the pro-capitalist character of the present labor leadership.
Coupled with our propaganda on the pledge was the call for the formation of a rank and file group in the UAW to combat the top leadership and to replace it with a new militant leadership. We were the first to popularize this slogan and it was in part through our efforts in this connection that a rank and file group was actually organized and a tiny handful of socialists was able to play a decisive role at the UAW convention in 1944. The UAW militants began to see the need for rank and file organization against the old leaders.
As the war continued and the labor officialdom exhausted the possibilities of winning concessions within the rules decreed by the WLB and the national administration, a deeper and deeper rift developed between the ranks and leadership ...
Labor Action appealed for “a conference of shop stewards and committeemen.” If the union leaders have no program, we said, then let the direct representatives of the rank and file take over.
The end of the war released the union leaders from their dilemma and gave them elbow room for maneuvering. With their slogan of a 30 per cent wage increase, they shifted back into the good graces of the ranks. But the fact remains that Labor Action and the Workers Party by agitation on the no-strike pledge and for the progressive caucus brought revolutionary ideas to the workers which will under proper conditions again surge forth into class action.
 
Transitional Program
Comrade Johnson refuses to recognize this. In his typically confusing and contradictory fashion, he writes: “Agitation for the revocation of a no-strike pledge or for withdrawal of labor members from a government labor board are necessary and useful at all times, particularly in wartime. But concentration on this as a means of developing into a party the propaganda group which has turned to the masses IS IN DIRECT CONTRADICTION WITH THE WHOLE AIM AND METHOD OF THE TRANSITIONAL PROGRAM.
“It is on the basis of propaganda for revolutionary action that the propaganda group builds itself into the mass revolutionary party.”
By rejecting the emphasis of the party during the war, Johnson reveals that all his talk about “revolutionary action” and “self-mobilization of the masses” is mere phrasemongering.
In 1943 Johnson wrote: “What is decisive in all political agitation is the stage of consciousness of the masses and the particular organizational form and direction in which their minds are concretely moving.” That is exactly what we considered when we spoke of “Rank and file caucus” instead of “revolutionary self-mobilization.”
One glaring omission is evident in Johnson’s resolution on the American question. Johnson is highly critical of our party and insists that we have abandoned a revolutionary perspective on all important questions. But this false contention is refuted by our program and activities during the war, when we alone in this country upheld consistently the banner of the “Third Camp” against both imperialist war camps.
That is why Johnson is unable and unwilling to deal with our record during the war. For example, he groups four pages of his resolution on America under the heading The American Proletariat During the War but one reads with amazement not ONE word about the working class during the war or our party’s connection with it. Instead we learn that Johnson predicted a great crisis AFTER the war. Strange oversight? Not when you realize that a balance sheet of the party’s role during the war would annihilate Johnson’s thesis.
 
War Profits Issue
Johnson errs not only in omission. His resolution on America is a rambling and discursive distortion and falsification of our activities during the war. I cite one illustration not because it is most important but because it is typical, tricky legerdemain. He says:
“Unable to appeal to the revolutionary instincts of the workers, it (Labor Action) dissipates its revolutionary energy in attempts to stimulate the combativity of the workers by wearisome repetition of the large profits and the criminal conduct and deceptions of the bourgeoisie.”
But the party exposed war profits not as a means of “stimulating” but as one means of exposing the imperialist character of the war. Was that right or wrong?
 



If you find it difficult to convince a man, mystify him! And how better to mystify than with the obscure or the unknown? What members of the Socialist Workers Party were ever intimately informed of their party’s policies in the Michigan Commonwealth Federation in its active period more than two years ago? And, of these, how many were aware of the points at issue between the Workers Party and the SWP inside the MCF? Hardly a full half dozen!
Thus the author of the August, 1946, Internal Bulletin of the SWP, which draws up a balance sheet between the “revolutionary Marxism” of the SWP and the “petty bourgeois revisionism” of the WP, writes the following: “Ostensibly both we and the Workers Party have the same or very similar positions on the question of a Labor Party ... But even where we agree abstractly, as in this cage, our approach is so different from theirs that we have never yet been able to agree on supporting the same candidate in any election! We advise the workers to vote one way; the Workers Party advises them to vote a different way. In 1944, both we and the Workers Party were active in the Michigan Commonwealth Federation, an embryonic Labor Party. It must be recorded as a fact that in every important debate that took place in this organization, our comrades were on the opposite side of the fence from the Workers Party.”
In the MCF, therefore, we are afforded an opportunity to study the SWP’s “revolutionary Marxism” as distinct from our “revisionism” – not merely in theory but in practice. Good. But having called our attention to this important fact, the author leaves us staring at a blank wall. This is all he has to say about the MCF. Caution dictates the omission of all details, of all real facts.
This is not the first such vague and misleading reference to the MCF. I intend here to fill in the relevant material which does in fact show a difference between revolutionary Marxism and opportunism. Let the reader judge which fits whom.
The New International and Labor Action devoted many pages to an evaluation of the MCF and of the various trends within it. However, the actual events were taking place at that very moment and we did not want to be accused of “exposing” the members of the SWP or of making impossible its policy of “caution”; we were consequently unable publicly to give the SWP what was its due. Not only has the situation changed but the SWP itself has seen fit to raise the question.
 
Issues in Dispute
What were the main issues in dispute between the SWP and the WP inside the MCF?
I – Bloc Affiliation: At the first MCF conference in March, 1944, provisions were made for bloc affiliation by unions. This rule militated against its becoming merely a reformist or liberal sect. The problem was to retain that provision, for the MCF leaders did not want the new party to be “dominated” by labor. Such “domination” would scare off the farmers and professionals, you see. At the founding convention of the MCF at Lansing in July 1944, this rule was abandoned; bloc affiliation disestablished; and emphasis placed upon neighborhood clubs.
A host of reasons were cited by the leaders of the new party for this departure. But the real reason for the change was the fact that the MCF leaders, themselves second-ranking and third-rate officials in the CIO, feared that a fight in the locals for bloc affiliation to the MCF would bring them into conflict with the higher officials of the CIO and with Reuther and Thomas. (At present when the factional scene has changed, the MCF after two years of stagnation is once again considering bloc affiliations.)
At the Lansing convention, the spokesmen for the WP defended the policy of bloc affiliation, stressed its importance, and proposed that it be inserted into the new Constitution. The leading speaker for the SWP on the other hand endorsed the proposal of the leaders to abandon the policy of bloc affiliation, giving their proposal a twist of his own. Bloc affiliation is unwise, he said, because it could be construed as a violation of the Smith-Connolly Act. (This “lawyer” forgot that the PAC was based upon bloc affiliation.)
This was one of the “important debates” in the MCF. The SWP and the leaders of the MCF won out against us.
II – Statement of Objectives of the MCF: “We both advocated the adoption by such a party of a program of transitional demands,” says the SWP Bulletin. Where and when and how did the SWP fight for any ONE such demand or any variation thereof?
The convention Constitutional Committee proposed to state the “Object” of the MCF in typical liberal jargon: “To bring to our public life a new type of public servant”; “economic plenty and justice,” etc., etc. The WP proposed a simple statement declaring for a “government of the working people.” Where did the SWP stand? Arthur Burch, Detroit organizer of the party was present AS A DELEGATE. They did not speak or VOTE for our proposal.
 
On Negro Question
III – The Negro Question: The Declaration of Principles proposed to the convention made no reference to the Negro question. The WP proposed to incorporate a brief statement demanding complete, social, political and economic equality for Negroes and all other minorities. One need not be a revolutionary Marxist but simply a consistent democrat to endorse this idea. (The PAC platform for 1944 was far superior to the MCF declaration on this point for it called for full political, economic and civic equality for Negroes.)
I need not nauseate the reader by repeating the arguments used at the convention against our proposal. The leading SWP delegates were silent. They did not vote for our proposal. Burch remained quiet.
The proposed election platform included a section on “Civil rights.” We advocated an amendment which would demand that discrimination be made a criminal offense. As a result of our fight on the Declaration of Principles, a concession was made to us on the platform. The committee revised its report to include our amendment.
But we were “punished” for this victory. John Saunders, who reported the convention in The Militant (August 12, 1944) was aware that the WP alone had successfully raised the Negro question and therefore concluded that it was best for a “revolutionary Marxist” to overlook the whole thing. As far as he was concerned, it had no significance. His story did not so much as mention it.
But Charles Jackson, in his column in The Militant, The Negro Struggle, thought otherwise. He said: “The flat-footed demand for laws making segregation of races by any public institution, private business, organization or individual a criminal offense is the fulcrum of the entire race question. A program must include this demand if it is to really pull up racial oppression by its vicious roots. Halfway platforms which take a few noisy steps but do not reach this balance point will not tip the board to the other side.” (His emphasis.)
Who was correct in this “important debate”? Was it The Militant’s reporter and the SWP delegates or The Militant’s columnist and the WP delegates?
 
On Supporting Candidates
IV – Against Veiled Support to Democrats: The MCF was officially on record in opposition to supporting candidates of any other party. In the given situation, this meant the Democratic and Republican Parties. The leaders of the MCF, however, were torn between two contradictory lines. They “personally” announced that they were supporting Roosevelt for a fourth term and that they endorsed the policy of the PAC which was for the endorsement of “progressive” candidates of the two old parties. Thus, they had two policies. In the MCF they gave lip service to the idea of independent politics. Outside the MCF they accepted the contrary policies of the PAC. To extricate themselves from this embarrassing position, they resorted to a series of crude maneuvers, which the representatives of the SWP supported and endorsed. As a result, the MCF could never adhere to a firm policy.
a) The founding MCF conference took place in March 1944. In April, a convention of the Wayne County PAC was held. Ben Garrison, who was a member of the MCF State Committee and later one of its candidates in the 1944 elections, was chairman of the PAC Resolutions Committee and in that capacity reported out favorably resolutions endorsing “progressive” Democrats. All the MCF leaders were present as delegates. Not one spoke out against this policy. R.J. Thomas publicly revealed that “leading members” of the MCF at a meeting in New York with Sidney Hillman had promised to support the candidates endorsed by the PAC. “If that is their policy,” said Thomas, “I can go along with them.”
It is obvious that the MCF leaders had to find some formula whereby they could support independent candidates and at the same time not oppose Democrats and Republicans endorsed by the PAC. They worked out their formula with the help of the representatives of the SWP.
Note: Two members of the SWP were delegates to the PAC convention. One of them, X, spoke out against the endorsement of Roosevelt and called for the formation of a Labor Party. He discharged his duties as a revolutionary with honor. The other, however, was C., who went along with the Roosevelt stream. When we declare our support of Roosevelt’s program, he said, we must make clear that we do not endorse those of his policies which are anti-labor. This same C, in a panel discussion at the March MCF conference, in reply to a clear-cut WP motion that the conference go on record “opposing the endorsement of any candidate running on the tickets of the Republican or Democratic Parties for any office,” said that while he himself had no intention of voting Democratic or Republican, he would oppose any motion which meant opposing Roosevelt. (See Labor Action, March 20, 1944)
 
Making the Lines Clear
b) A few days after the performance at the PAC convention, a small meeting of Detroit MCF members took place. The two leading spokesmen for the SWP, C and E, were not present. In this absence, L, a rank and file member of the SWP who had been active in the MCF up to then, sharply criticized the actions of the two leaders of the MCF at the PAC convention. As a result of his speech, it was decided upon the motion of a WPer to call another meeting of Detroit members and invite these leaders to explain their point of view. The WPer reached an agreement with SWPer L to present a common point of view at the coming meeting and arrangements were made for an informal consultation in advance. But that was the last the WP or the MCF saw or heard from. L. He was obviously withdrawn from activity in the MCF by the local SWP leader.
c) L’s “error” was speedily corrected by C and E, who both attended the next membership meeting. L, as has been explained, was absent.
In the presence of the two leaders of the MCF, a speaker of the WP criticized their course at the PAC convention and insisted that to vote for the policy of supporting “progressive” Democrats was in obvious contradiction to the policy of independent labor political action in general and to the stated policy of the MCF in particular. In reply, the MCF leaders drew a very fine, hair-splitting distinction between their actions as leaders of the MCF on the one hand and their actions as leaders of the PAC on the other. Paul Silver, one of the MCF leaders, praised the PAC policy which had succeeded in driving Martin Dies off the Democratic list.
The two SWPers felt compelled to defend the MCF heads. Fawning on Silver, C said that he resented such criticism of a man (Silver) who had gone far out on a limb in organizing the MCF and this was a great service to the workers. Silver, said C, is gaining nothing for himself, in fact he could probably get farther if he stayed out of the MCF.
[Two notes: (1) Paul Silver now occupies a reasonably warm post in the appointed officialdom of the UAW and has been part of the “no-third-party-now” caucus of Thomas, Addes, CP. (2) C resigned from the SWP not long ago. Probably concluded that outside of the SWP he himself could go farther.]
E denounced the “impractical” views of the WP speaker. In his opinion, said E, the MCF leaders had followed an absolutely correct policy at the PAC convention and in NO WAY contradicted the principle of independent political action. E split a few hairs of his own. The PAC, he said, is NOT a tail to the Democratic kite but it is the political arm of labor. (As though it could not be both!)
 
Where to Run Candidates
d) Where to Run Candidates: For what posts shall the MCF run candidates in the 1944 elections? Involved here was the same problem raised by the PAC convention. Shall we follow a genuinely independent course in the state elections, or shall we give veiled support to “progressive” Democrats? This question was discussed publicly on two occasions at MCF gatherings. First, at a state-MCF conference in June 1944. Second, at the MCF state convention at Lansing in July.
At the state conference the discussion beat merrily around the bush. Shall we run a candidate for Governor? Shall we run in this or in that district? Somehow, no definite decision could be reached by the leaders at this small conference. Finally it was decided to postpone the whole matter and to appoint a special committee which would “consider” the whole question and report a month later to the state convention.
The diffidence with which this subject was handled becomes quite understandable when we remember that the PAC had not YET announced its endorsements in the coming elections. The representatives of the Workers Party pointed out to the conference that the discussion on where to run candidates involved not some minor technical question requiring “investigation” but the whole principle of independent politics itself. We must not only oppose “reactionary” Democrats and Republicans but also the “progressive” ones, even though they might have been rewarded for their “progressivism” by PAC support.
It was a terribly hot and humid summer afternoon. SWPer C, as always, felt compelled to defend the policy of the officials. “I came here,” he said, “to discuss practical questions, but if I had thought that we would end up by discussing principles (pr-r-r-rinciples, with a rolling sneer), I could have spent my time more enjoyably at the beach.” (Probably C resigned from the SWP to take that enjoyable swim.) But was. the problem a “practical” one or a “principled” one? The state MCF convention gave the final proof, for by this time it was quite clear that the PAC would endorse the Democratic candidate for Governor and “progressive” Democrats for other posts.
After a lengthy discussion, the convention accepted the proposals of the MCF leaders and decided to run candidates in those place where they would oppose “reactionaries” but not PAC endorsed “progressives.” Thus, the reconciliation between the policy of the PAC and that of the MCF which was so important to the MCF heads was finally effected.
The Workers Party proposed that the MCF run its own candidate for Governor, seeing in this proposal one means of blocking the policy of veiled support to the PAC-endorsed Democrat. Although our delegates received resounding applause for their efforts, we were badly defeated in the vote. The SWP adopted a policy of “diplomatic silence.” Its delegates voted against us. The Militant was also silent. Saunders, reporting the convention in the issue of August 12, “forgot” the whole thing.
*
Other issues were debated in the MCF. However, on some of these such as the fight to change the name to “Labor Party,” the SWP and the WP were in agreement. In what is written above, I confine myself to the main issues in dispute, where the SWP and WP members of the MCF found themselves on opposite sides. Yes, it is true: “in every important debate” the WP and the SWP “were on opposite sides of the fence.” For one good reason: we refused to follow the SWP representatives in their groveling, sycophantic, lick-spittle policy. These were the issues. If that is contested. I ask: “What else was debated in the MCF?”
 
Revolutionary “Models”
One thing remains. How is it possible that the local leaders of the SWP could follow so opportunist a course? Here we see that they are not only NOT rebuked, but are praised by the author of the Internal Bulletin. More: their conduct is mentioned as an obvious model of “revolutionary Marxism.”
The answer, I believe, is two-fold: (1) In the bureaucratic atmosphere which dominates the SWP in general and the Detroit branch in particular, the rank and file finds it difficult if not impossible to correct and check its local leadership, which tends to opportunism. (2) On the other hand, the local leaders are the staunch defenders of the Cannon regime in their party. Therefore they must be protected by the national leadership. The policy is less important. And when the membership of the SWP is ignorant of the facts, the granting of protection becomes so much easier.
Let us hope that after comparing the pronunciamento of the SWP leadership in regard to the MCF with the actual facts, the membership will be encouraged to seek the truth behind their fanfare and boasting.
 



Where is all the steel?
The big auto manufacturers are laying off thousands of workers for an “indefinite” period. Why? Because they cannot get enough steel ... they say.
Why can’t they get enough steel? Because there are too many strikes ... they say. One such strike ... they say ... is the power strike in Pittsburgh, the steel center of America, where ... they say ... production has been hit by the strike, thus cutting off steel production and causing the acute shortage which has led to the layoffs in auto. THEY SAY!
This is all a ladle full of lies. The facts were explained in detail by Meyer Bernstein, representative of the Steel Workers Union and head of the CIO Veterans Department, in his report to the Detroit conference of UAW veterans on October 12.
The steel industry in Pittsburgh is operating AT 107 PER CENT OF CAPACITY, said Bernstein. True, he continued, there is and has been a power strike, but while the strike has affected the transportation system, the hotels and the amusement centers, it has not touched steel production in the slightest. All the workers manage to get to work and are working full shifts. Steel production in Pittsburgh and in all the other steel producing centers of the nation are producing more steel now than in any previous peacetime year and in fact current production has been exceeded only in two of the war years. Steel is producing at a national average of 90 per cent of capacity.
“We know that the steel is coming out of the steel plants,” said Bernstein, “but why it doesn’t get to the auto plants, IF IT DOESN’T, we do not know.”
This raises two questions: (1) Is the steel getting to the auto plants? (2) If it is not, where is it going?
It is not difficult to find out! The steel companies cannot conceal their production because the workers themselves produce the steel and can easily find out how much is produced and where.
But other workers ship the steel. Truck drivers and railroad workers transport it. Other workers receive it at the point of delivery. Where is the steel? Let the workers find out where it goes and AT WHAT PRICE?
How is that possible? Carry out the program of action proposed by the Workers Party! Form committees of consumers and workers in each industry to control production, to investigate the origin and destination of all shipments, and to probe into the prices of production and the prices of sales.
 



DETROIT, April 1 – The city-owned public transportation system was completely shut down at 4 a.m. this morning when 5,200 street car and bus drivers, members of District 26 of the Amalgamated Association of Street Railway and Motor Coach Operators (AFL) rolled their busses and cars into the car barns for the beginning of a city-wide strike.
The strike was voted by a large majority of the union membership at a mass meeting yesterday afternoon which followed six weeks of futile negotiations with the city administration of Mayor Edward Jeffries. These negotiations continued up to midnight yesterday when the contract between the union and the city expired.
The workers are demanding an increase in wages of 18 cents per hour. Jeffries has made a phony offer of 15 cents which is tied up with various concessions by the union. The real extent of his offer amounts to no more than 10 cents per hour. This offer has been categorically rejected by the union.
At the union mass meeting the rank and file voted for the strike despite the pleading of its local and international officials who urged going slow and continued negotiations and despite the threats of city officials that the strike was illegal and would be broken. Philip Weis, chairman of the State Mediation Board, had demanded that the strikers wait for thirty days as allegedly provided for in a state law relative to municipal services. Jeffries demanded that the issues be sent to arbitration.
But these appeals, threats, and demands went unheeded. One bus driver, a young veteran named Paul Michalewski, replied to these arguments in heated terms.
“I am a returned GI,” he said, “and I am telling you we want to strike and end this damned business once and for all. The people of Detroit all want us to strike. They know what Jeffries and his rotten commission are doing to us.”
Mayor Jeffries, who is a candidate for the Republican nomination for Governor of Michigan, hopes to become the darling of every reactionary force in the state by his actions in this strike. He intends, if possible, to break the strike and wreck the union by violence if necessary.
“I anticipate ... that if a strike is called it will be a long one,” said Jeffries yesterday. “If they call a strike the city will be without transportation only until public opinion is sufficiently aroused to justify the turmoil that accompanies the breaking of a strike.”
One rank and filer took up Jeffries’ challenge.
“He told you in the papers that he will break your strike,” said he. “He has 250 of his commandos over there that he wants to use for breaking our strike. Well, I for one, am ready to meet his commandos right out at the Shoemaker garage tomorrow morning. We’ll find out whether he can break our union or not. If he wants a strike, let’s give it to him.”
The DRS office workers and 100 electrical workers who are members of another AFL union have already announced that they will back up the strike of the drivers and will not cross their picket line.
Richard A. Sullivan, DSR General Manager, announced that 1,700 maintenance men employed by the system would work through the strike. These men are members of the State, County and Municipal Workers Union (CIO), a union which is controlled here by the supporters of the Communist Party. It remains to be seen, however, whether these workers will carry out the reactionary policies of the CP or whether they will respect the picket lines.
The workers of the entire Detroit labor movement must get ready for a protracted and bitter struggle, for if Jeffries has his way, a sharp fight is inevitable. All unions, CIO and AFL, must be ready to give moral and practical support to this fight.
Detroit workers! On guard against anti-union strike breaking and violence!
 



DETROIT, April 7 – The strike of bus and street car operators on the city-owned transportation system (DSR) ended today when the leaders of the union, the Amalgamated Association of Street Railway and Motor Coach Employees (AFL), accepted a 15 cents an hour increase in wages and submitted all other issues in dispute to arbitration. The public transportation services had been shut down completely during the seven days of the strike.
The strikers had originally demanded an increase of 18 cents. Edward Jeffries, mayor, had offered 15 cents but had qualified this offer with a number of demands for concessions and retreats by the union from its old contract which expired on March 31. It is these demands of the Mayor which will go to arbitration.
 
Ranks Against Return
Three days ago, on Thursday, a mass meeting of more than 3,000 strikers had almost unanimously turned down arbitration and had voted to remain on strike until their demands were granted. Only one speaker at that mass meeting, Robert Armstrong, International Vice-President, had dared to propose openly a return to work and he was hooted down by the ranks. All other local and International officials dodged the issue of arbitration and return to work. Frank R. Martel, who heads the Wayne County Federation of Labor (AFL), told the men that he felt that the strike was a mistake but that the AFL would unitedly fight against any attempt to operate the transportation system with scabs. An announcement was made by the Teamsters’ Union that it too would resist any strike breaking efforts by the city, hinting that it would back up this declaration by a general strike if necessary.
The determined spirit of the men at this mass meeting compelled their leaders to go easy on return to work talk. Most militant and vociferous in their demands for uncompromising continuation of the strike were the returned servicemen, one of whom was reported to have said: “I carried an M-1 rifle in the war and I can shoot better than any of those cops if they try to break this strike.”
When the strike began, Jeffries was convinced that this was his opportunity to break the union by violence if necessary. He said: “... the City will be without transportation only until public opinion is sufficiently aroused to justify the turmoil that accompanies the breaking of a strike.” He proposed to the City Council that as a strike-breaking measure it license private jitneys for $1.00 a car and that these jitneys provide service until the men were defeated and returned to work. But the council rejected this proposal. Councilman George Edwards, elected with the support of the CIO and falsely regarded as a real fighter for the rights of labor, explained why the Council had rejected the jitney proposal.
“The 5,000 operators might regard approval of jitneys as a strikebreaking move and accept it as an invitation to chaos,” said Edwards, “I know we have the police, but BEFORE WE START UP THAT ROAD I WANT TO BE SURE THAT THERE IS NO PEACEFUL SOLUTION.”
It is clear by now that all the declarations of support by the top officials of the AFL were concessions dragged out of them by the militant spirit of the strikers. These leaders in the first days of the strike, merely rode the wave of strike sentiment in order the better to end the strike without a real fight.
At the mass meeting today, all the leaders rose to “sell” the idea of arbitration and a work return that had been rejected only three days before. Martel, Jack Storey, president of Amalgamated Division 26, and Andrew Sayed, business agent, pressed for an end to the strike.
One speaker, Stephen Singler, former business agent, denounced the proposed settlement and spoke against going back to work.
 
Bureaucrats Win
Before any real discussion could take place, Storey, who was chairing the meeting, suddenly declared the debate closed. He called for a surprise standing vote of all who favored a work return. He did not ask for a vote of those opposed. He declared that a vote had been passed to return to work and announced that the meeting was adjourned.
Hundreds of strikers broke into a roar of denunciation of this undemocratic procedure. Many of those objecting and shouting for continuation of the strike were men wearing military service buttons. But these disorganized protests were powerless to fight off the tricks of the leadership and the men returned to work that night.
The strikers may get a lesson in arbitration. The board of arbitration consists of a representative of the union, one from the DSR, and a third, holding the decisive voice, Police Commissioner John F. Ballenger.
 



“Incentive pay” and “company security” are the demands of the capitalist class in general and of the auto monopolists in particular. The leaders of the Auto Workers Union have yielded to these demands in the contract they have just signed with the Kaiser-Frazer Co., which has taken over operation of the former Willow Run bomber plant abandoned by the Ford Motor Co. This agreement is therefore NOT a victory for the workers but a victory for the employers and a new retreat by the top officials of the union.
The International Executive Board of the UAW has not yet assigned jurisdiction over the plant to any local union and has had complete freedom to conduct negotiations from the top without direct representation from the rank and file. The contract, it must be noted, has the unanimous approval of ALL the top leaders, including Thomas, Reuther, Addes, and Frankensteen. With his usual bombast, Thomas declares, “It is the best contract ever drawn in the automobile industry. We feel that Mr. Frazer and Mr. Kaiser will not be disappointed.”
There is no doubt ... THEY will be satisfied but the question is: Shall the WORKERS in the auto industry rejoice over this alleged victory? Unless the UAW militants speak up against this contract with the same vigor with which they denounced the Leonard-Ford company security scheme, the brass hats of the union will have quietly slipped over a plan that will have its oppressive effects on the workers of the whole industry.
 
Wages
The company has agreed to pay the same wage rates as the Ford Motor Co. Any increase in pay won by the General Motors strikers will be matched by equivalent retroactive increases for the K-F workers. The company has recognized thereby the power and solidarity of the union but this “victory” is a very conditional one. The fight for the 30% increase in wage rates must still be fought and won by the auto workers while the Kaiser-Frazer workers mark time as the battle is being fought out.
The agreement provisions for production bonuses and for a company security plan, however, are not only vicious in themselves but also make the fight for wages rate increases more difficult.
 
The Plan
The plan devised by the UAW leaders and accepted by the company is roughly as follows:
For every car sold at wholesale prices, the company will set aside $5.00 in a special fund. At the end of the year, this fund will be distributed among the workers as a bonus. Exactly how the division will take place has not been made public. BUT ANY AND ALL WORKERS WHO PARTICIPATE IN SO-CALLED UNAUTHORIZED STRIKES WILL LOSE ALL THEIR CREDITS ACCUMULATED IN THAT FUND UP TO THE TIME THEY STOPPED WORK.
The evils of this plan fall into three categories:

It is an incentive pay plan.
 
It is a “company security” plan.
 
The combination of the two above plans is even worse than either of the two.
 

Incentive Pay
In the past, the advocates of incentive pay argued: “There is a war on. We must not strike. Wages are fixed. Only incentive pay can bring added wages.” The union militants who built the UAW and who fought bitterly to eliminate all forms of incentive pay refused to be baited into that trap and at the 1943 convention of the UAW voted down all piece work proposals.
Now that the war is over and all these arguments prove bankrupt, the union officials, in violation of the convention decision, agree to an incentive pay plan. Walter Reuther, who in 1943 gained himself a reputation as the spokesman for the opponents of incentive pay, also agrees! Regardless of what fancy argumentation the union brass hats may invent in order to prove that they have not violated the convention decision, they will be unable to avoid one simple fact ... the representatives of the employers KNOW and SAY that this is an incentive plan.
The Detroit News writes in one of its editorials:
“The scheme is as ingenious as it is novel and is noteworthy particularly for its ABANDONMENT ON THE UAW’S PART OF THE LONG-STANDING UNION OPPOSITION TO INCENTIVE PAY.”
George B. Hassett, financial editor of the same paper says:
“Whatever the participants to the contract may choose to call it, IN EFFECT THIS AMOUNTS TO INCENTIVE PAY.”
The general objections to all forms of incentive pay ... piece-work, production bonuses, etc. ... are well known to all experienced union men and we will not repeat them here.
But this new pill is heavily coated with sugar and dusted with the sugary phrases of the union leaders who will try to make it as palatable as possible for the members who are to swallow it. It may seem to some that the K-F workers have won an advantage over the rest of the industry. They will get the Ford rates plus the bonus. But this is a strange, temporary, illusion. The contract in question will really exert a downward pressure on the wages rates of all auto workers.
The UAW has been fighting for increases in total take home pay by raising the HOURLY WAGE RATE. It has fought against lengthening of hours, speed-up, piece work which may bring temporary, minor increases in take-home pay as the result of intensified exploitation of the workers and accompanied by tremendous rises in profits. Any plan which ties the amount of wages received by the workers to their individual or group productivity is a piecework plan and an abandonment of the fight for higher wage rates. The Kaiser-Frazer contract makes a dangerous concession to the restoration of the piecework system in the auto industry.
 
Greater Exploitation
Workers are not opposed to increased productivity – that goes without saying – but they want to work at a normal, human pace. Increased productivity must come out of technical improvements, better machinery, and scientific development. BUT THAT IS NOT WHERE KAISER EXPECTS TO GET HIS ADDED PRODUCTION. He says, “It is an incentive plan that makes every worker feel that his earnings are dependent upon himself.” The workers are expected to strain their muscles and energies for the added bonus.
By increases in their wage RATES, the workers obtain a larger share of what they already produce and cut down the share that is received by the parasitic capitalist class. Under the production bonus system, the workers voluntarily agree to superexploitation and speed-up which raise the capitalist’s share to the skies at the cost of a small bonus-bribe.
If such a principle is accepted in this case, the employers will fight to have it recognized throughout the industry. Instead of wage increases coming out of increased wage rates, the capitalist class will insist that they come out of increased individual productivity through speed-up. If that becomes the recognized norm, the agreed-upon standard, the illusory advantage of the K-F workers will have disappeared and the working conditions of all auto workers undermined.
(To be concluded)
 



DETROIT – UAW locals have been electing delegates for the annual convention of the union which meets on March 23 at Atlantic City. At the same time many locals are electing their local union officers or have already done so.
The elections this year are taking place in an entirely different atmosphere from the campaign that preceded the elections to the 1944 convention. dominated as it was by a furious campaign around the issue of the no-strike pledge. In the last elections, the issues were clear. In this election the problems that face the union and the platform of the various groupings in. the International are blurred over and unclear to the rank and file.
 
Change in Situation
The last convention witnessed the emergence of a powerful Rank and File caucus, organized against both the Addes and the Reuther factions which dominate the UAW. It gained the votes of over one-third of the delegates on its main slogan: “Rescind the No-strike Pledge.” The Rank and File group had made its appearance long before the sessions of the convention when at the Michigan State convention of the CIO, the delegates from the auto locals led by the Briggs Local 212 and the Willow Run Local 50 delegations announced that they were organizing independently of the 1944 UAW convention.
In the referendum on the no-strike about 40% of the votes were cast for the proposal of the Rank and File caucus to withdraw the no-strike pledge. In local after local, candidates for office and for conventions ran on clear platforms: some for the repeal of the pledge and others, of course, for its retention. But at any rate, the issues were there for anyone to see.
Now however, the Rank and File caucus has disappeared. The Willow Run Local 50 for all practical purposes went out of existence when the plant shut down. The progressive group that controlled the Briggs local at the time of the last convention has been defeated by a more conservative tendency. Reports are that even in Local 15 at Fleetwood, where some of the most aggressive militants in the UAW were in control for at least three years, the local elections registered defeats for these excellent progressives.
In Local 600, Larry Yost who headed the former Rank and File group is running for local president backed by a caucus of militants who oppose both the Addes and the Reuther groups in the local on a clear platform including the following planks:

for an independent labor party;
 
against company security, and
 
opposition to the present top leadership of the International.

However, this group and this platform are unfortunately outstanding exceptions in the elections in this area.
Support is temporarily flowing back into the channels of the two big and powerful Reuther and Addes factions.
 
Why the Change?
This tendency is not surprising. At the last convention, the leadership of both these groups was firmly behind the no-strike pledge; they deserted the membership which had to fight the employers in so-called “wildcat” or unauthorized stoppages; they functioned openly as strike breakers; they removed the officials of locals which insisted upon fighting the employers.
With the end of the war, however, the leadership got more elbow room for itself. Their past crimes were temporarily put aside as they bowed to the pressure of the rank and file and, at least in the case of General Motors, put the stamp of approval upon a nation-wide walkout. The Stalinist supporters of Addes, reacting to the needs of the rulers of Russia in its conflict with the United States and Great Britain, became critics of the tactics of the International Executive Board and appeared to become “radical” once again.
At the same time, the long and bitter strike against General Motors has shown the workers how powerful the big monopolies are, how great is their power of resistance, and how mighty the struggle of the working class must be to defeat them. Small isolated strikes were the rule yesterday. Now, however, after a three months’ shutdown of ALL the GM plants, the limits of these partial stoppages is clearer. The first elementary, even if erroneous, conclusion of the active unionists seems to be to shy away from the smaller “opposition” groups in order to return to the groups with apparent power and influence. Doubtless, many workers translate the wholely justified desire for unity and solidarity against the big corporations into a willingness for “unity” with and for the top leadership of the union. This becomes an even greater tendency because of the shifting positions of the leadership in reaction to the post-war problems.
However, the old problems of the unions still remain although temporarily concealed from the eyes of the membership. The leadership has accepted company security and speedup provisions in the new contracts. It has no platform to meet the political offensive of big business against labor. As the months go by, the rank and file will feel these shortcomings of its leaderships. The hum of the rapidly moving assembly lines will sing new tunes.
 



Granting the capitalist class contracts to guarantee their “company security” makes as much sense as prescribing strength-building vitamin pills to Superman. Their “company security” is guaranteed in advance by their monopoly over vast resources and wealth, and by their ownership of the machinery of production in the basic industries. How explain, then, that the union leaders appear so ready to concede to “company security” clauses in the recently signed contracts?
At a recent meeting of Chrysler Local 7, where the new contract was finally ratified after a bitter debate in which the shop stewards were unanimous in their opposition, R.J. Thomas tried to explain away the decision to yield to the “security” demand. He argued that the strike wave revealed a conspiracy on the part of the capitalist glass to destroy the union movement, to wipe it out completely and to return to open shop conditions. “Under these circumstances,” said R.J., “we did the best we could.” Company security, according to this line of argumentation, is a concession to the employers to buy them off, a ransom or blackmail payment to hold off the thugs of capitalism.
 
The Fruits of Granting Concessions
This, however, is a familiar theory. Do you remember the arguments in favor of the no-strike pledge? Remember how we were told that we had to surrender the strike weapon lest Congress pass anti-labor legislation and abolish the right to strike? That was an appeal to the labor movement to pay blackmail. Its fruits? We won ... anti-labor legislation and anti-strike legislation.
Yes, the employers want to destroy the unions. But blackmail payments cannot stop them. Every concession of this kind is a sign of weakness and only leads to greater boldness on the part of the capitalist class.
The anti-union conspiracy continues. But the big business elements have been compelled to retreat from outright union busting BY THE POWER AND SOLIDITY OF THE STRIKE WAVE, BY THE SUPPORT GIVEN TO THE STRIKERS FROM NEARLY ALL SECTIONS OF SOCIETY.
The company security provisions now give the employers a tool with which they hope to whittle down the solidarity and strength of the unions IN PREPARATION FOR THE BATTLES OF TOMORROW.
 
Aimed at Shop Steward System
Against whom is the. “company security” system aimed? Answer: AGAINST THE SHOP STEWARDS AND COMMITTEEMEN.
In Chrysler, the “company security” plan is accompanied by another provision, the notorious section 2 which reads as follows: “The Union recognizes that the Corporation has the exclusive right to manage its plants and direct its affairs and working forces.” Every shop steward knows what this means. Instead of being free to handle grievances and leave his job when necessary. he can expect to be chained to his job.
During the Ford negotiations, the company demanded and still demands dozens of new restrictions on the stewards. It wants to cut down their number, to reduce their pay for lost time, to tighten up on their rights, and to eliminate many of their prerogatives.
Who will be penalized, under the company security plans? Answer: THE STEWARDS AND COMMITTEEMEN. When a walkout occurs, On whom does the company pin the blame? The steward. If anything at all goes wrong in a department, who are always picked out as the “leaders,” as the “instigators”? Always the stewards.
No one knows these facts better than the committee- men and stewards themselves and that is why they are so bitter against company security. THEY KNOW IT MEANS INSECURITY FOR THE UNION.
 
Stewards Are Vital to CIO
Why do the employers aim their arrows against the shop stewards? Because they know that the shop steward system is the very heart, of the CIO. If they can pierce that heart they can proceed to destroy the rest of the body at their leisure.
Who defended and preserved the unions during the war? The shop stewards and committeemen. The official leadership, the R.J. Thomas’, the Phillip Murrays and their kind, voluntarily gave up the class struggle. They renounced the right to strike and fought down their own membership when it tried to defend itself.
But the capitalist class did NOT give up its struggle against the working class. It tried to demoralize and destroy the unions and their rights. It was the shop stewards who led and carried on the defensive struggles of the working class, deserted by its top leadership. Thousands of so-called “unauthorized” strikes took place. It was this “unauthorized” class struggle, led by the stewards, which held the unions together and preserved the solidarity of the working class which is now being displayed in the picket lines.
In fighting against the company security plans we are fighting to defend the shop steward system.
 



The effectiveness of buyers’ strikes as a means to control prices can be judged by comparing them to the boycott as a means in organizing unions. Like the buyers’ strikes, the boycott is an attempt to mobilize the power of the “consumers” not against high priced goods but against non-union goods manufactured by scabs.
Where a strike is not 100 per cent effective and production can still be carried on by the employers, the union may declare a boycott of that company’s products. Both the AFL and CIO maintain active “union label” departments which publish lists of non-union companies and which urge all unionists to purchase only those products which bear a union label.
Nevertheless, all experience has proved that the MAIN weapon in the fight to organize is the STRIKE, However important the boycott and the use of the union label may be, they are only supplementary to this most important weapon, the strike. The Ford Motor Company, for example, the last of the big automobile manufacturers to be organized by the DAW, was brought to its knees, not by a boycott, but by a united strike. Let us see why the strike is so much more effective than the boycott.
The main strength of the union in its struggle with the employer lies in its ability to halt production. The workers, because they are that class in society which produces, have the power to shut off at the very source of supply the stream of commodities which the capitalist must receive if he is to be able to sell in the market and get his profits. Stop production and you stop profits. There are no two ways about it. The capitalist must break the strike or give in.
 
Power of Organization
But strike-breaking is not so simple a matter; for it meets with the determined resistance of the strikers themselves. And today the strikers in a single plant or industry may count upon the assistance of millions of other unionized workers. To restore production by breaking a strike, the employer is compelled to carry on a struggle not just against a few thousand “people,” who are no different from any other “people.” The, capitalist is confronted with certain kinds of “people,” namely ORGANIZED WORKERS. As WORKERS, they represent the most militant the whole population – that which is best able to fight because of the strategic place it occupies in the productive life of the nation. And as ORGANIZED workers, they represent, the most advanced, class-conscious, confident and experienced section of the working class.
But matters are quite different when, despite all its efforts, the union is unable to stop production by means of a strike and is compelled to rely upon the boycott. The success of a STRIKE depends upon the response and actions of THE MOST ADVANCED SECTION OF THE WORKING CLASS. The success of a boycott depends upon the “consumers.” But while all workers are consumers, not all consumers are workers. The whole population of the country – the “people” – consists of consumers; but this population, these consumers, are divided into CLASSES. A few are big capitalists. Some are small business men, merchants and professionals. Many are farmers. Many are workers.
Not all workers are in the same category. Some know how important the union movement is to them but others are ignorant and duped by capitalist propaganda; they think that the boss is their friend and the union their enemy. Some workers have been strong enough to organize their industry. Others have been defeated in their attempts or may be indifferent to another attempt.
For all these reasons, the “consumers” differ widely in the degree of their sympathy or hostility to the union. Because of class interest or ignorance, many are already anti-union and may become even more so when they find themselves “inconvenienced” by a boycott appeal.
The capitalist can deal with the boycott far more easily than he can deal with the strike because he can fight or delude the consumers far more easily than the workers. As long as the flow of goods from the factory to the capitalist continues, he has the possibility of making profits. He takes advantage of the fact that there is a great difference between one consumer and another.
Strikes have therefore been the major weapon of the union in its fight against the capitalist. More effective than the boycott, which relies upon the buying power of the consumers, the strike relies upon the fighting power of the organized working class, which can control or stop production.
Buyers’ strikes, which also rely principally upon the consumer, display the same weaknesses as the boycott.
(This is the second of a series of three articles on buyers’ strikes.)
 



Last week we pointed out that the success of a “buyers’ strike,” like a “boycott” campaign, depends to a large degree on the reaction of the “consumers” and that the category of “consumer” includes all classes and sections of the population. Active union militants man the picket lines in front of the stores. The small business man, the professional, and even the apathetic or uneducated workers watch the line and then go in to buy or not, as they see fit.
During a period when there is a shortage of commodities, the fate of a buyers’ strike is even more directly affected by middle class elements. A greater proportion of the available goods can be shifted by the capitalist into non-working class areas and neighborhoods in order to minimize the possible effects of the “buyers’ strike.”
“But,” it might be objected, “isn’t it true that the working class must get the support of the millions of middle class people if it is to have real success?” Yes, that is true. But all experience of the working class movement in every country has proved that the labor movement can win the sympathy and aid of the middle classes only when the workers themselves show that they are united behind a fighting program that can really provide the answers to the problems that all the people face.
 
Buyers’ Strike Alone Is Not Enough
Buyers’ strikes will NOT provide such a program! How unified and determined does the labor movement show itself in the buyers’ strikes? CIO and AFL union men and women picket on the outside, appealing to all to refuse to buy. But on the inside, CIO or AFL union men are at work selling to whoever crosses the line. And as one looks out of the store window he sees other union men delivering the products to be sold. This absurdity reached its height in Detroit recently when a CIO retail union objected to the picketing of union shops during a buyers’ strike demonstration.
Such a policy is not good enough. If mass groups of consumers could enter a store and with the cooperation of the committee of the retail workers buy goods at low prices ... THAT would be quite appealing to the middle classes and we may be sure that they would rally to SUCH an idea. If union and consumers’ committees did actually COMPEL the sale of goods at low prices, all people, except a small group of plutocrats, would hail these committees as a great blessing.
But for a retail clerk to sell a shirt at a low price, a truck driver would have to deliver it at a low price and committees of union drivers would have to act as inspectors. And the price of the shirt as it leaves the factory and goes to the truck driver would have to be controlled by committees in the factories. Likewise with the raw materials, the cloth that goes into the shirts, and the coal that is used to turn the machines that produce the cloth, and the steel that goes into the machines and the iron ore that goes to make the steel.
 
Workers Need to Control Production and Prices
A solid strike can quickly defeat an employer when the supply of his goods is shut off. A strike is one means of controlling production ... that is, a means of cutting it off completely. But there are other methods of controlling production-already employed by the union movement. When workers on the assembly line agree to cut down on the speed of the line, they are controlling production to that extent. When the workers in the Wisconsin plant of Nash-Kelvinator refuse to work on cars with a a right-hand drive because they know that these are for export, they are controlling production. The control of production has many features and aspects. One of them is price control. If the worker organized into a union can control his own wages and hours, if he can seek to control his working conditions and his speed of work, why not control the price of the products which he himself works on?
That is the crux of the Workers Party program for price control. Committees of housewives and union workers can set the price of goods at each stage of production, distribution or sale. And these committees can be coordinated on a local and national scale just as the union movement itself.
 



DETROIT – How effective are “buyers’ strikes” in the fight to control prices? This question is of importance because the leaders of the CIO, including Walter Reuther of the UAW, have come to rely more and more upon this tactic until it has become the MAIN if not the only means proposed by them to keep prices down.
Reuther, like most of the other leaders of the labor movement, has spoken militantly and often brilliantly for a program of fighting for wage increases without price increases. This is fully possible, he pointed out, provided that we are willing to dip into the profits of the big manufacturers and bankers who have accumulated billions in the course of the war and who will accumulate more billions in the postwar period. In this way, the millions of people who have to work for a living will be able not only to hold their own and to defend their existing wage standards but they will be able to INCREASE their real wages and secure an ever rising standard of living.
The chief defect in all Reuther’s proclamations, however, has been this: he has never outlined an effective program of action to indicate HOW and BY WHOM prices can be controlled. Without such a program of action all talk of price control becomes ineffectual wishful thinking.
The leaders of the UAW, under the pressure of the rank and file, particularly at Ford and Chrysler, have slowly come to the conclusion that it is necessary to reopen contract negotiations in order to secure new wage increases to meet the rising costs of living. Of course, we must fight for such wage increases. In fact, the Workers Party proposes an even more effective demand. We propose that the labor movement fight for contractual provisions that would provide for a RISING SCALE OF WAGES. Let wages automatically rise every time that prices go up!
We must remember, however, that such proposals are mainly defensive. They are designed to MAINTAIN the purchasing power of wages in the face of rising prices. But as long as prices continue to go up, the workers are, in the words of Reuther, caught on an “economic treadmill.” The faster prices rise, the faster the workers must run in order to stand in the same place.
But Reuther began with a program to RAISES the standard of living of the workers; and such a program must have as one of its main pillars an effective program for price control.
How to control prices ... that is the problem we must solve.
On June 16, shortly after Congress had killed the OPA and Truman had vetoed the bill which he said “legalized inflation” hundreds of thousands of workers demonstrated at the call of the UAW demanding the restoration of price controls. It was at that time that Reuther put forward the idea of buyers’ strikes. We must, he said, refuse to buy all but the most essential needs of life, until Congress passes an OPA bill “with teeth in it.” Notice: these buyers strikes were intended at that time as mass demonstrations of protest that were to compel CONGRESS TO CONTROL PRICES. That is, their value was measured not so much in terms of how much these strikes themselves could control prices but in terms of the pressure that they would exert on a reluctant Congress which in the words of the labor leaders had “surrendered to the demands of the profiteers.”
But Congress acted. And Truman signed a new OPA bill. But instead of a price control bill “with teeth in it” we got an emasculated version of the OPA which in its best days never grew any “teeth.” A “decontrol board” was set up with the power to lift the ceilings off various commodities.
 
Must Go Beyond Buyers Strikes
“Continue the buyers’ strikes” said the CIO leaders. But now there was a new emphasis ... the buyers' strikes were to demonstrate the continued insistence of the people for price control and to put pressure on the decontrol-board to maintain price controls. Again ... the main objective of the buyers' strikes was to get action from the government, this time through the decontrol board.
But the decontrol board has begun its activities. More and more controls are lifted. Where controls remain, price ceilings are lifted. Prices continue to rise. No hope is in sight that existing agencies will ever bring prices back to where they were before OPA was originally scuttled ... aside from all considerations of bringing prices down to where they really belong.
Where do the buyers strikes fit in now? What we must weigh now is not so much what they can achieve by putting pressure upon the government but this: How effective are buyers strikes themselves in controlling prices?
When we examine this question we find that a real program of action for price control must go far beyond that tactic of “buyers-strikes.”
(To be continued)
 



DETROIT, Sept. 27 – The Detroit Retail Meat Merchants Association is circulating a petition among its customers calling for the abolition of OPA control of meat. Unfortunately, many gullible housewives are being taken in by the meat dealers’ propaganda and are signing their own names to take money out of their own pocketbooks.
The association’s propaganda is quite clever. Its petition reads: “OPA vs. Meat on Your Table! We accuse the OPA of bungling the nation’s meat supply and would like to have your opinion.”
What is the OPA guilty of? One main thing: it does not and cannot control prices effectively. It does not and cannot cope with the determined resistance of the meat profiteers!
In effect, the profiteers themselves are saying: “You see, the OPA cannot control us. It cannot force US to sell meat at low prices. Therefore, if you want meat, you had better get rid of price control.”
That is a fine answer ... for the profiteers. But the working class must not and will not accept the ABOLITION of all price control merely because the OPA represents ineffectual price control. No! What we want is effective and aggressive price control instead of timid and vacillating price control.
Prices CAN be controlled and supplies of the goods of life provided. To do it, however, we have to carry out such a program for price control as is advocated by the Workers Party:
Form popular price control committees! Committees must be formed among the packinghouse workers, among the teamsters and railroad workers, among the retail clerks, among consumers and housewives.
These committees can and must control the production of the goods needed by all the people, and they can ensure their distribution at low prices.
 



A minimum of 2,000 workers witnessed the anti-war parade and series of mass meetings organized by the Workers Party in the East Bronx section of New York City on Friday night, June 14. This action, climaxed by a meeting of close to 1,000 people on the corner of Tremont and Prospect Avenues initiated a one month campaign of intensive anti-war propaganda.
The parade began at the headquarters of the Bronx branch at 1334 Wilkins Avenue and wound its way through the East Bronx; stopping at interva1s of ten blocks for brief open air meetings lasting 20 minutes each.
At each of these open air meetings there were from 200–400 workers present attracted by the slogans of the marchers: “Fight Against the Draft”, “This is Wall Street’s War, Let the Bankers Fight,” “Stop Persecution of Foreign-Born Workers”.
At none of the meetings was there any trouble from the listeners. Where small groups of hecklers interfered, they were effectively squelched by others in the crowd. After each meeting, knots of people formed to discuss the Workers Party program for stopping Hitler.
At one point, three squad cars of police drew up and emphasized the need for fighting for democracy by tearing down the platform and banners and threatening to arrest all those who protested.
Defying a police order, the lines re-formed and the parade continued for another block where the police staged another raid. Again the lines re-formed, and the police made a last, and unsuccessful, attempt to keep the marchers from joining the wind-up open air rally which had been going on all evening at Prospect and Tremont Avenues. This rally was as large as the tremendous meetings held in the days of the anti-Coughlin agitation in the same area.
The campaign will continue with a large mass meeting in the Brownesville area on Friday, June 21: Twenty five thousand copies of a special anti-war leaflet have been issued. Indoor and outdoor meetings are being held all over the City by the branches of the Workers Party.
 

