 Dean Harber: 1933: “History of the  Russian Revolution”, Review in  Clare Market Review



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Denzil Dean Harber
“History of the  Russian Revolution”, Review in Clare Market Review
TROTSKY, LEON, History of the Russian Revolution.  Three vols. 18s. per vol.
This is certainty the most valuable contribution to the history of the Russian Revolution that has so far appeared in the English language—perhaps in any language. The reviewer of volumes 2 and 3 is hampered in the choice of appropriate expressions of appreciation by the fact that the publishers have printed on the dust covers extracts from the published reviews of volume I (which appeared last summer). It is easy to agree with the author of these reviews, but by no means so easy to avoid repeating their comments. One can only say that those who have read the first volume will find that the two completing volumes are in every way equal to it and in some respects even surpass it, while those who are still unacquainted with the work have a great pleasure in reserve. The appalling price will prevent most people from buying the three volumes themselves, but they should be available at most progressive libraries.
Trotsky’s book should be of great value not only to the student of Russia, but also to the student of history in general. It would be difficult to find a more brilliant example of the superiority of the Marxian historical method even in the works of Marx himself. After all Marx had never personally headed a successful revolution. One has only to turn to non-Marxist authors on the same subject to see at once all the superiority of the Marxian analysis. There can be no better answer to the accusations of the dominant Soviet clique that Trotsky has sold himself to the bourgeoisie than this book which he has written in exile and while in dire need of money—perhaps actually for the sake of money, and in which he nevertheless has not deviated one wit from the principles which he has always maintained. It is regrettable that the same thing cannot be said of his accusers.
Since the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and hence of necessity, also the Communist International, have been under Stalinist guidance the world has frequently witnessed a curious phenomenon which must have caused considerable anxiety to all Communists not completely blinded by official party propaganda. A prominent Communist suddenly comes into opposition with the Party leadership. He is expelled and his “errors” denounced. It might be thought that this would be enough, but the Party bureaucracy is still not satisfied. The whole past of the Communist in question is raked up and his former revolutionary services are at first disparaged and finally, when the campaign against him has reached a certain stage, absolutely denied and his whole political career depicted are merely a series of errors culminating in his expulsion. This process naturally finds its best expression in the calm atmosphere of the Soviet Union where all opposition is automatically suppressed and where the reading public can only wonder when the official Press one day praises a leader to the skies and the next finds nothing too bad to be said about him. Abroad, in the sections of the Communist International, it is not so easy but that the same holds good here also can be clearly seen from the campaign in the Daily Worker  following the expulsion of Murphy from the British Communist Party last year.
In the case of Trotsky, the campaign of lies and suppression has been carried to its logical conclusion. In a recently produced Soviet historical film dealing with the October Revolution, all the other Bolshevist leaders are shown but Trotsky, the actual organiser of the insurrection is completely omitted. We even see meetings of the Petrograd Soviet with no Trotsky present, although he was at that time its president and its central figure.
In the face of facts like this one cannot be surprised that Trotsky devotes much space to rehabilitating himself by making clear the real part which he played in the seizure of power. If any confirmation of his statements is required it can be found in the speeches and writings of Lenin, or, indeed, in those of any other Soviet leader (including Stalin himself) prior to 1924. Thus in November 1918. Stalin wrote in Pravda  “all the work of practical organisation of the insurrection was conducted under the immediate leadership of… Trotsky.” This, of course, did not prevent him from saying, in 1924, that “Trotsky played no special rôle in the October Revolution and could not have done so.”
This weapon of attack in the past is a two-edged one, as Stalin himself may find some day, if Voroshilov or some other rival ever succeeds from ousting him from his present position, all the more so, since, in his case, there really seems to be some ground for attack. It is not for nothing that publication of Stalin’s war-time speeches and writings have been forbidden in the Soviet Union. Nor do official historians of the October Revolution mention the fact that on the very eve of the struggle for power, Stalin, then editor of the Party organ, Pravda,  allowed the publication of a letter from Zinoviev against any immediate revolutionary attempt, for which he, Stalin, was severely reprimanded by the Central Committee of the Party. It is a remarkable fact, when one takes into account the present position of Stalin, that despite all efforts made by official historians, no single fact has come to light indicating that he played any part whatever in the actual seizure of power by the Bolsheviks. The enemies of Stalin within the party have certainly plenty of material on which to base their attacks, should they ever get the opportunity.
In concluding, we may mention that the book has been translated by Max Eastman. Despite Trotsky’s praise in the introduction to vol. 2 the translation is by no means a good one. Russian expressions have frequently been translated too literally, and this is sometimes liable to mislead the English reader.
D.D. HARBER

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 18 February 2009


 Dean Harber: 1933: Seeing Soviet Russia



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Denzil Dean Harber
Seeing Soviet Russia
 Clare Market Review, Lent Term 1933, pages 16-18, (1,483 words)

By  D.D. HARBER (who was in Russia three months last summer and autumn as interpreter to a journalist ).
Every year the number of foreign tourists visiting the Soviet Union increases steadily. A few years ago a trip to Russia was considered a somewhat venture-some undertaking, and the returning tourist was greeted by his friends as one who had ventured to explore an unknown and semi-civilised country. At the present time with the advent of cheap tours and the example of the famous, the habit of touring Russia has become almost universal amongst the British intelligentsia. The tourist of to-day differs in many ways from the pioneers of a few years back. One thing, however, he retains in common with his predecessors—in almost every case he carries back with him the belief that he has learnt something about which the rest of the world remains in an ignorance which it should be his task to dispel. The result is a perfect flood of books, articles and speeches about the Soviet Union—almost all of a precisely similar character, and almost all, unfortunately, equally valueless. A tourist spending ten days or a fortnight in France or Germany, ignorant of the language, and having no previous knowledge of the country, does not come home thinking himself in possession of expert information about the country in question. Precisely the same amount of time is spent in the Soviet Union, however, apparently gives one the right to become an acknowledged expert on Soviet conditions. Yet it would appear from an examination of the facts that precisely the contrary would be expected. The tourist can visit France or Germany as he likes, and for as long as he likes, but for the average foreigner there is only one way of visiting Russia and only a definitely fixed time which he can spend there. Without very considerable in-fluence behind the scenes it is impossible to visit Russia except through the official Soviet organisation known as “Intourist.” The only people for whom exception is  made are foreign communists and journalists recognised by the Soviet Government. Indeed, owing to currency difficulties, no other way is possible to the foreign traveller, unless he is a millionaire, or prepared to take the risk of smuggling in roubles from abroad. As things are, once the tourist arrives in the Soviet Union he finds everything done for him by the quite efficient organisa-tion mentioned above. Travel facilities, accommodation, food, guides and interpreters are all provided, and all for the most reasonable exclusive charge. An extensive programme of sight-seeing awaits the visitor, so exten-sive, indeed, as to occupy literally the whole of his available time. It is true that one is not obliged to go with the rest of the tourists—the individual can, if he wishes, go about by himself quite without restriction, but as he has paid for the sight-seeing, anyway, and as it is difficult to find one’s way about in a foreign city, it is but seldom that he does not fall in with the majority. As the average tourist does not know the Russian language it follows that what he hears and most of what he sees depends entirely upon the Intourist guides, who are, without dispute, servants, and markedly privileged servants of the Soviet State. A state of affairs which is hardly conducive to the acquisition of unbiassed in-formation. One does not expect any government openly to admit its failures.
Fortunately for the Soviet Government conditions in Russia are, at the moment, especially favourable for hiding the true state of affairs from the foreign visitor. As a result of the Five Year Plan immense progress has been made in many directions, most especially in the sphere of industry. This progress has, naturally enough, had to be paid for by the Russian people, and the price they have paid has been under-nourishment over a period of years, culminating in the last year in semi and even actual starvation, and the ruin of agriculture. Hence, as the result of enforced sacrifices which are apparently never ending, the workers and peasants of Soviet Russia are, in their mass, definitely hostile to the present Government, and are only kept down by “administrative measures.” But while it is easy for the foreign visitor to see evidences of industrial progress, it is extremely difficult for him, travelling with an official guide-inter-preter, to get reliable evidence of semi-starvation and general discontent. Yet such evidence abounds in every Russian town and village. Even the porters at the Intourist hotel could tell the tourists things almost incredible when contrasted with the official version if only he could understand their language. The peasant driven by starvation from his village to go to buy bread, or to find work in the town, and sleeping outside the railway station at which the foreign tourist arrives could tell him, were a few minutes private conversation if a common language were possible, exactly what he, and the vast majority of peasants, think about collective farms. The factory worker, against whom the foreign visitor jostles in a crowded tram could give him damning evidence about factory conditions and food rations.
Yet all these things must necessarily escape the foreign tourist even when they are almost thrown in his face. Throughout the spring and summer of last year the tourist while in Leningrad could see at night around the October Station (which is almost opposite his hotel) long queues of peasants, men and women sleeping on the bare ground, using a sack or bag for a pillow. If the said tourist had been sufficiently interested in this phenomenon to question his Intourist guide about it she would doubtless have given some quite satisfactory answer, probably to the effect that these were peasants coming from the villages to help in Socialist construction by working in the factories. Questions put to the peasants through her would, doubtless, have brought pleasant confirmation of this statement. But if the tourist had by some chance not been satisfied with this, and if he could have gone up to these people alone, and spoken to them in their native tongue, he would have heard strange things. He would have learnt that they had come from Ukrainian villages hundreds of miles away, and had come to Leningrad not to work in Socialist factories, but to buy bread to take back to their starving families. “But I had not heard that there had been a crop failure in the Ukraine,” the surprised visitor would have exclaimed. He would have been answered quite unemotionally, and without seeming bitterness, that in actual fact no such failure had occurred, but that the State had taken so much of their crop from them that there had not been enough left to feed themselves and their families. Hence they had come to town to buy back at a huge price their own grain which had been taken from them for almost nothing. All which might have given the foreign visitor new light on the “Socialist Reconstruction of Agriculture,”—especially if he had also learnt from these peasants that they had paid for the bread they had bought by taking to town and selling any industrial goods that they happened to have left, such as clothes, utensils, &c. This exchange between town and country of a nature so contrary to that which takes place in the unenlightened capitalist world, would doubtless have given the foreign tourist food for much reflection over “Socialist Industrialisation.”
Instances of this kind could be multiplied endlessly at almost every step the foreign tourist takes in Russia. Everywhere just beneath the surface are there to be found evidence of appalling human suffering and govern-ment inefficiency, and with but few exceptions the tourist passes them by, either without having noticed them, or having been satisfied by some ingenious official explanation, apparently confirmed by the people them-selves—even starvation does not do away with all concern for one’s personal security, and in any case, who can verify the interpreter’s rendering? And so the tourist misses it all and goes back home either quite satisfied or maybe vaguely doubtful, according to his political and mental make-up, but in any case without any knowledge of the real life of the Russian people, which, of course does not stop him, as we see above, from becoming an acknowledged authority on all things Russian and from contributing to the illusions of that very considerable group of people, represented by the “Friends of the Soviet Union” and “Russia To-day,” who, in most cases without even having been to Russia, damn every unfavourable criticism of Soviet conditions as a Capitalist Lie. 
All of which is, of course, very regrettable, though how it can be prevented seems by no means obvious. The instruction of prospective visitors to Russia in the Russian language would appear the best remedy. 

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 18 February 2009


 Dean Harber: 1933: Trotskyism, Review in  Clare Market Review



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Denzil Dean Harber
Trotskyism
 Clare Market Review , Michaelmas Term 1933, pp.14-15, (2,366 words)

Up to about a year ago this was not a word that one met in the British working-class movement. Trotsky himself was, of course, well known—everyone had heard of the second greatest leader of the Russian Revolution, the man who had helped to build up the Workers’ State side by side with Lenin, and who was disgraced after Lenin’s death. Many left socialists (mostly those outside the Communist Party) had even read Trotsky’s own version of events in his Life  and had been left with an uneasy conviction that all was not well; but all felt certain that finis  had been written to a great career.
Yet, from about the middle of 1932, it gradually became known that people calling themselves “Trotskyists” actually existed in England. The first to observe this were the members of certain Communist locals (mostly in South London). The matter was brought to their notice by propaganda, purporting to come from members of their own party and advocating a policy for the Communist Party of Germany which seemed, at first sight, not only reasonable, but in accordance with every principle of Leninism; but which took on a most sinister and counter-revolutionary appearance once it was learned that it emanated from “Trotskyist” sources. Next, the matter was brought to the attention of the whole membership of the Communist Party by a series of expulsions from that party for “Trotskyism” of old and trusted members of the party, workers who had rendered it great services.
Today, it has become clear to all concerned in the working-class movement of this country that “Trotskyism” whatever it may be, has come to stay. As is natural in the case of a relatively young movement, its forces are as yet small, but its vigour cannot be denied. In the Communist Party, expulsions for “Trotskyism” still continue. In the other left party, the Independent Labour Party, the effect of “Trotskyist” ideas has been such that Comrade Campbell of the C.P., recently declared that, “The differences (between the I.L.P. and the C.P.) are not in the historical objections, nor in the last few months’ differences, but in a series of new objections not rooted in the rank and file experiences of the I.L.P., but in the Trotskyist sewer.” Which, put in simpler if less picturesque language, means that the “Trotskyists” are preventing the C.P. from absorbing the I.L.P.
What then is this “Trotskyism”? A “Trotskyist” will reply that “Trotskyism” differs from Stalinism (i.e.. the basis of the present policies of the Communist International), only by the fact that it is Marxism and Leninism cleared of all the rubbish that has been heaped upon them in recent years. This answer is hardly likely to bring conviction to one who has been brought up on the material issued by the Communist International under its present leadership. It can, nevertheless, be proved by comparison between the works of Marx, Lenin, Trotsky and Stalin. As this is a somewhat burdensome task, and one which seems at first sight to be even more burdensome than it really is, few convinced Stalinists undertake it: especially as the whole essence of Stalinism is calculated to discourage any critical activity whatsoever. The object of this article is to convince all those interested in revolutionary working-class politics that this is a task which stands before every conscious revolutionary at the present time, and one which is vitally bound up with the whole future of the proletarian movement.
It is of course impossible, in the space available here, to expose even a small fraction of the distortions of communist theory and of historical truth which have been perpetrated by Stalin and his school during the last ten years. What can be done is to give some idea as to how these distortions arose, why they received official sanction, and how they have affected and are affecting the workers’ movement in every country in the world.
Marxist theory has long known the term “centrism.” In the working-class movement Marxism serves as the theory and the guide to action of the fully class-conscious section of the proletariat. Under capitalism, however, not all the proletariat is fully class-conscious. Imperialism, and the consequent intensified exploitation of the proletariat in other lands, enables the ruling class to “bribe” large sections of the working class at home. These “bribed” sections of the working class constitute the social basis of reformism. With the intensification of the contradictions inherent in the capitalist system during the last period of imperialism it becomes less and less easy for the capitalists to maintain this system of “bribing.” As a consequence, the condition of these “bribed” workers gradually worsens, and they tend more and more to abandon the reformist for the Marxist position. During the period when they have left the one but not yet fully arrived at the other, they are said to occupy a “centrist” position. This position expresses itself politically by a series of zigzags, now to the right towards reformism now to the left towards Marxism. At certain periods of crisis centrism has played an important part in the working-class movement. But under capitalism, centrism can only be a passing phenomenon, since its social base is not a stable one.
In the U.S.S.R., however, the situation is different. After the end of the civil war and the “heroic” period of the Russian Revolution, a spirit of tiredness, verging upon political apathy, spread over the Russian working class. Years of exhausting effort had passed and yet they were still far from the promised goal. It was but natural that the mass movement should die down after such an upheaval. If the internal situation was thus discouraging, the external situation was still more so. The revolution in other leading countries, expected by all communists, had not come, and after 1923 the temporary stabilisation of capitalism became even more obvious. But during the very period when the watchfulness of the working class of the Soviet Union was relaxed, new dangers were growing up even within its own State. A huge bureaucracy had existed in Russia before the Revolution, and much of it had had to be kept, in order to maintain the machinery of government, trade and industry. In theory this bureaucracy was controlled by the workers through the Communist Party, but the upper layers of the Communist Party itself, became increasingly bureaucratic and tended to merge more and more with the old bureaucrats, and with the new capitalists who sprang from the New Economic Policy—the Nepman and the Kulak. Thus the tiredness and disillusionment of the Russian working class were mirrored in its leadership. The loss of faith in the world revolution was reflected in the un-Leninist theory of “socialism in one country”; the passivity before internal difficulties, in the retreat before the rich peasant and the small trader. In other words, the leadership of the C.P.S.U. abandoned its Marxist position and became submerged in a bureaucracy whose interests were naturally not those of the workers. Under capitalism, a move of this nature would have terminated in the wholehearted support of capitalism (reformism). In the Soviet Union, however, the conditions are different. True, the Soviet bureaucracy has interests of its own quite distinct from and opposed to those of the working class. But, on the other hand, its own existence is inextricably bound up with the maintenance of the Soviet State. A return to capitalism would mean its own destruction. Hence, its position must be described as centrist. But, whereas in the capitalist world, centrism cannot be a permanent phenomenon owing to the absence of a stable social base, in the Soviet Union such a base exists in the bureaucracy. In other words, bureaucratic  centrism, which can only arise in a workers’ state, may remain stable over a long period of years. In its policy of zigzags it resembles the centrism of the capitalist world. Thus, in its internal policy, bureaucratic centrism encouraged for a time the growth of capitalist elements in industry and agriculture. When, in 1928, it suddenly realised how the growth of these elements had imperilled its own position, it performed an abrupt about turn and, going from the right to the extreme left, began extirpating all capitalist elements. Exactly the same can be observed internationally in the policy of the Communist International. Centred in Moscow, and with all its national sections dependent upon Soviet subsidies, the Comintern has remained in the hands of the leaders of the bureaucratised Communist Party of the Soviet Union, whose revolutionary theory has degenerated hand in hand with the decay of their revolutionary practice. This has had disastrous effects upon the international communist movement. Two examples will be sufficient to illustrate this.
In China, the period 1925-7 was marked by a revolutionary upsurge. The Communist Pare of China had the opportunity of attaining the leadership of this movement, and directing it towards the setting up of the workers’ state. In actual fact, however, the Communist Part of China, acting under instructions from the Communist International, pursued a policy which, allowing for the different circumstances, was identical with that carried out by the Mensheviks before and during the Russian Revolution. The Communist Party of China remained within the bourgeois nationalist party—the Kuomintang. It did not try to head the mass movement against the landlords and the capitalists by coming forward with its own independent programme, and its own press, but, on the contrary, was so afraid of its bourgeois allies being frightened away by this mass movement that, in true Menshevik tradition, it did all it could to prevent the spread of strikes and agrarian “disorders.” When the right wing of the Chinese liberal bourgeoisie under Chang Kai Shek betrayed the revolution and shot down the workers and peasants, the Comintern merely transferred its trust to the “left” Wuhan Government. When this fell, and the revolutionary wave subsided throughout China, the Comintern declared that the revolutionary movement had reached a “higher plane” and armed insurrection was declared to be the order of the day. The usual centrist zigzagging policy followed. Menshevism was replaced by ultra-leftism, and the Canton Uprising, led by a “Soviet” bureaucratically appointed for the occasion, caused a still further weakening of the forces of the Chinese workers and peasants. Putschism having failed, and the proletarian mass movement having subsided, the Comintern has since 1928 concentrated all its energy on the peasantry. “Partisan” bands of revolutionary peasantry have been labelled “Chinese Soviets,” and much is made of “Soviet areas” in the interior of China. But so far as the towns and industrial workers are concerned (and without these there can be no Soviet power in China) the Communist movement in China can hardly be said to exist to-day.
A more recent and a nearer example of the consequences of the present policies of the Comintern may be seen in Germany. Over a period of years we had there the spectacle of a strong Communist Party faced by a much stronger Social Democratic Party and a rapidly growing Fascist party. It was quite obvious to everyone (except the leaders of the C.P.G. and the Comintern) that the Communist Party could not repel Fascism unaided. For this some form of alliance with Social Democracy was needed. During the Russian Revolution a somewhat similar situation arose. In September 1917, the reactionary general Kornilov, supported by the capitalist and the landlords, threatened to seize power and to crush the workers’ movement. He was defeated by the Bolsheviks (who were then in a minority) uniting with the Mensheviks and the Social Revolutionaries, both of which parties had already betrayed and were still betraying the Revolution in other directions, upon the specific issue of maintaining the status quo.  Thus, the October revolution was insured.
Why was it not possible to apply similar tactics in Germany? Because some years before Comrade Stalin, “the leader of the international working class,” had made a speech in which he had said, in his muddled way, that Fascism and Social Democracy both being supports of capitalism. Social Democracy could only be regarded as the moderate wing of Fascism, and should hence be called “Social-Fascism.” Other, even greater, nonsense followed. Comrade Stalin discovered that “Fascism and Social-Fascism are not opposites, but twins,” and that “Fascism cannot rule without the support of Social-Fascism and vice versa.” As a result the unfortunate Communist Party of Germany was forced to fight Fascism all on its own. Moreover, it was considered by its leaders that the fight against Fascism was really less important than the fight against Social Fascism, since Fascism proper was declining, owing to the correct policy of the Communist Party. Hence, arose actual alliances with Fascism, e.g. the “Red” (actually Fascist) Referendum of 1931 and the Berlin transport workers’ strike.
The results of this policy are now sufficiently well known. Nor were the typically centrist zigzags wanting. After the coming to power of Hitler (i.e.,  when it was already too late), the Comintern not only offered the “Social-Fascists” a United Front, but agreed to abstain from criticism for the duration of this agreement. As in China, it is of course denied by the Comintern that the working-class movement has suffered any setback in Germany. It has merely risen to a higher plane, and is rapidly progressing towards the dictatorship of the proletariat. The proof? One can say “the C.P. of Germany is carrying out such and such activities, and its press has a circulation of such and such; but, of course, it is all illegal, and that’s why it does not appear on the surface.” And communists outside Germany actually believe that the C.P.G. has been strengthened, not weakened, by the coming to power of Hitler.
It remains to be added that in both these cases, as in all others, the mistakes of its leadership were exposed at the time by the “Trotskyists” who put forward the correct Leninist policy, which, if applied when offered, would have saved the situation in each case. We would urge those of our readers who are interested to verify this for themselves; on such an examination the Trotskyist case rests.
D.D. HARBER.

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 18 February 2009


xon (Denzil Harber): 1933: Three Short Letters to Leon Trotsky



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Denzil Harber
Three Short Letters to Leon Trotsky
1933
Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Ted Crawford and Paul Flewers.

(1829) T.L.s.; London, 20 Dec 1933. 1s.(1p.). E 165, (typewritten note)
10 Collingham Place
London
SW8
Dear Comrade Trotsky,
			 We enclose copies of the minutes of the Members’ Meeting of the British Section Communist League which took place on Dec. 17th and of our covering letter to the I.S. From these you will see the critical situation which has arisen in the British Section.
Yours fraternally
D.D. Harber
(for the Committee of the Minority)
Dec 20th 1933
* * * * *
(1830) A.L.s.; [same], 27 Dec 1933. 1s.(1p.). (handwritten note)
Dear comrade Trotsky
			I enclose a copy of the letter which the comrades of the Minority of the British Section Communist League have sent the I.S.
Yours fraternally
D.D. Harber
Dec 29 1933
* * * * *
(1831) T.L.s.; Paris, 3 Aug 1936. 1s.(1p.) (typewritten note)
Paris, 3.8.36
Dear Comrade,
		I enclose herewith a copy of a statement prepared by the B/L group in the British Labour Party and the Labour League of Youth. Unfortunately, time did not permit of its being translated for circulation to the delegates of the Geneva Conference, but at the request of Cde Braun, I am sending you a copy of the statement.
With revolutionary greetings
D.D. Harber
Delegate to Conference
ILP & LLY group of B/L

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 March 2009


 Dean Harber: 1933: Reporting Soviet Russia



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Denzil Dean Harber
Reporting Soviet Russia
 Clare Market Review , Summer Term 1933, pp21-22, (2,251 words)

In an article called “Seeing Soviet Russia” contributed to the last number of the Clare Market Review,  Mr. Harber relates his unfortunate experiences in acquiring the facts about Soviet affairs. In the true manner of the bearer of revelation, Mr. Harber suggests that here at last is Truth. All previous accounts of conditions in Russia are to be rejected as the products of ignorance of the Russian language played upon by the Soviet government through its apparatus for hoodwinking innocent visitors—Intourist. With becoming modesty Mr. Harber distinguishes himself from the common rut of tourist who is so deluded by the minions of Soviet power, the Russian interpreters, that he cannot see starvation when confronted with it and mistakes a miserable peasant for a factory shock worker.
Mr. Harber claims to have scratched the bright exterior of Russian affairs and to have revealed the horror beneath. Everywhere, he rather rhetorically exclaims, everywhere, just below the surface is to be found evidence of a grinding misery. This is merely a single example of that leaning for hyperbole which Mr. Harber learned from his journalistic association. He claims that unless one is a millionaire or a smuggler of roubles travel in the Soviet Union outside the Intourist organisation is impossible. One cannot believe that Mr. Harber adopted the second alternative. The company of a millionaire journalist for three months must no doubt be a pleasant recreation—albeit rather dangerous in a starving and desperate land. It is hardly conducive to that dispassionate outlook, charmingly claimed by Mr. Harber for himself, and necessary in appraising the achievements and difficulties of a Modern Russia; a community which is consciously attempting to raise its social and economic level from amongst the lowest in the world to one comparable with and even higher than that achieved by Western nations which have enjoyed the blessings of capitalist civilisation for over a century and a half. That Mr. Harber (who even before he visited the Soviet Union had been known to express his extreme distaste for life therein with its absence of bourgeois comforts) has allowed the millionaire psychology to jaundice his impartial journalistic outlook, is the only explanation one can provide for the mass of distortions, the contradictory statements, and false sweeping generalisations with which his article abounds.
He claims that visitors to Russia with but a few exceptions may only stay for a fixed time. If the time is fixed at three months, Mr. Harber, at least, would agree that some appraisal is possible. He surely must know however that visitors may stay beyond the period of their official tour. His assertion that tourists are so bound to their Intourist guides that they cannot go off and see things for themselves—“it is difficult to find one’s way about in a foreign city”—is too childish to be swallowed even by the most credulous. Says Mr. G.R. Mitchison, in his article (p.102) on the Russian Worker in “Twelve Studies in Soviet Russia” (none of the writers in which are particularly noted for their communistic leanings), “It is easy at a distance  to exaggerate difficulties of language. One can always keep ones eyes open; there are many Russians who speak English, French, or German, and I, like others, knew various foreigners living in Russia.” Mr. Harber’s fiction of the simple deluded tourist is no doubt as much a solace to him as his slanderous accusation that Russian guides deliberately distort the answers given by miserable Soviet citizens questioned about their conditions. His modest implication that only he had access to sources of real information can hardly be accepted on the strength of Mr. Harber’s assertion alone.
Much as this gives the stamp to the sort of information provided in Mr. Harber’s writings, his main contentions are more serious. He grudgingly admits that “immense progress has been made in many directions—especially in the sphere of industry.” How little one hears of this “immense progress” in Mr. Harber’s article! It occupies exactly two and a half lines out of a total of over one hundred and fifty. Surely a little more should have been written by our expert in Soviet conditions of this phenomenon of “immense progress in many directions” at a time when other parts of the world can boast of immense progress in nothing but the volume of their armaments and the figures of their unemployed. Mr. Harber says nothing of the enormous social advances, admitted by all but the most contemptible of anti-Soviet hacks, in the field of education, in the eradication of illiteracy, in the public health services which have reduced the infant mortality rate from 285 per thousand in 1910 to 137 in Leningrad and 128 in Moscow in 1928, and still further since. There is not a word about the most elaborate system of social insurance for the working class in the world, of the emancipation and protection of the liberties of national minorities, of the encouragement to scientific and cultural advance which are the foundations of Soviet policy. All these Mr. Harber cares nothing for, and to judge from him nor do the Russian workers and peasants. For again Mr. Harber claims to speak for the mass of the population.
“In the mass,” he declares “the population is hostile to the present government.” Mr. Harber would be generous enough to admit that the testimony of a journalist of the standing of Mr. A.J. Cummings who recently went to Russia to report on the Moscow trial, is at least as trustworthy as that of Mr. Harber himself. The former writes in an article published in the News Chronicle  of May 17th. “One is utterly sceptical of all the whisperings among foreigners  here that the Soviet regime is cracking ... I simply don’t believe it.” He speaks of the overwhelming faith of these people in their destiny, and states. “Even members of the unhappy dispossessed classes with whom I have had contact are not cynical about the future of Soviet Russia.” Again, Mr. Mitchison in the article previously quoted, says (p.102), “I do not believe that the general impression of enthusiasm for the Plan and of determination to overcome its difficulties is one that can be produced merely by a Government, however efficient. Still less do I think that such an impression could be conveyed to visitors in the country if no such feelings in fact existed.” Would Mr. Harber suggest that Mr. Cummings and Mr. Mitchison were also seduced by Intourist guides or hypnotised by OGPU guards?
Mr. Harber then directs his attention to agrarian matters. At one point he declares that the sacrifice of the workers in the achievement of the objects of the Five-Year Plan has culminated in starvation due to the ruin of Russian agriculture. At another he claims that starvation has been brought about by the rapacious extortions of Soviet officials. Mr. Harber’s zeal for public enlightenment on Russian affairs should not permit him the luxury of flagrant contradictions of this sort. If yields have not been sub-normal for what have the “extortions” been used? In fact exports of wheat during the period of the Five-Year Plan have allowed from one and a half times to nearly twice as much per head for home consumption as compared with the pre-revolutionary period 1906-11. Mr. Harber’s harrowing tales of ruin are the more unfortunate in that information from the Soviet Union concerning the progress of spring sowing this year suggests that the enormous difficulties of transition from the old system of petty peasant proprietorship to the system of mass agricultural production in collective farms are at last being overcome, that the sowing campaign has in many regions been in excess of plans and in all vastly in excess of results for the corresponding periods of 1932 and 1931. It requires no great lexicographical erudition to appreciate that ruin usually implies complete breakdown of normal processes, nor great economic insight even from our graduate in Russian affairs to understand that the ruin of agriculture can hardly be so quickly remedied that in a few months after the reported dissolution results of sowing are greater than the bumper year of 1930. No one, least of all the Soviets, in spite of Mr. Harber’s diplomatic assurance that no government openly admits its failures, has denied that the transition to collectivised farming involving one of the greatest and speediest revolutions in productive technique in the history of mankind, has met with great difficulties, much opposition from interested parties, and what can only be termed sheer bad luck in respect of climatic conditions in many regions. But to suggest that these difficulties are undermining the foundations of support for the Soviet regime, to magnify the transitional problems into a vague and venomous attack on the Soviet Union in general, without the least attempt to appraise the movement for collectivisation in its historical context or to estimate its potential advantages now becoming evident, is an exposure of the trustworthiness of the testimony of an individual who claims to be presenting the truth at last. All this, combined with the deliberate suppression of anything but the briefest mention of the “immense progress” that has actually been made, indicates that Mr. Harber might well consider himself the pre-ordained successor to “Our Riga Correspondent.”
After all his tale of woe, Mr. Harber’s conclusion is singularly tame. The only advice he can proffer is that prospective visitors should escape from the net of official misrepresentation by learning the language and equipping themselves with the instrument already possessed and already put to such fruitful use by Mr. Harber himself. For one who has exposed a hotbed of oppression and exploitation such as the Soviet regime in Mr. Harber’s article, this is surprisingly mild. One might have imagined that Mr. Harber would have associated himself with that vast company of disinterested students of Russian affairs which includes Lady Houston. Herr Rosenberg, and Sir Henri Deterding, whose zeal in the cause of the downtrodden Russian masses leads them to agitate for the Holy War of liberation. But perhaps we are only at the beginning of Mr. Harber’s political re-orientation.
S. GOLDMAN.
Mr. Harber replies:
When I wrote the article which has so annoyed Com. Goldman, I anticipated that it would evoke a rejoinder from a member of the Marxist Society, and further, that since most members of that Society are not only ignorant of the Russian language but have never even been to Russia, the reply could only take the form of a personal attack on myself.
Com. Goldman has informed me, in the presence of witnesses, that the only explanation he can conceive of my attitude towards the Soviet Union is that I have been “bought by the bourgeoisie.” His article is a restatement of that remarkable assertion in a less trenchant form. I refrain from the obvious retaliation that Com. Goldman is receiving Moscow Gold to attack my article. On the contrary, I attribute his effort to that natural annoyance that we all feel when a cherished illusion has been rudely assailed. It is unfortunate that I have not space to deal with Com. Goldman point by point. I should, however, indicate certain errors into which he has fallen in consequence of his small acquaintance with myself, of his not having troubled to read my article with reasonable care, and of his ignorance of the information bearing on Soviet conditions available even in this country. I do not say that all previous accounts of Russia are worthless. Com. Goldman appears to be familiar only with those accounts which do not offend his susceptibilities. If he thinks he can stand the shock. I can show him many “non-bourgeois” accounts confirming everything that I have said.
I did not go to Russia with a millionaire: quite the contrary. I never expressed my extreme distaste for life in the Soviet Union before going there. Com. Goldman’s natural desire to explain away unpleasant facts by stressing the personal factor has led him to state a definite untruth. I did not say in my article that I consider the Soviet Union to be on the verge of a collapse nor did I use various expressions which Com. Goldman attributes to me. I did not deal in my article with the many other aspects of Soviet economics which he mentions as I wished to depict Soviet conditions as they affect the Russian workers and peasants and not as they strike the foreign tourist.
Lacking space in which to instruct Com. Goldman in some of the elementary facts about Russian agriculture I will merely quote from an authority which he can hardly challenge, figures showing the decline in the standard of life of the peasant as compared with the pre-war period. In the early years of the present century the average consumption of grain per capita  among the middle peasants was 18 poods (Lenin, Development of Capitalism in Russia ). To-day the official standard for all peasants is 12 poods per capita  per annum. In none of the many cases which I personally investigated was even this sum reached.
In conclusion I feel that Com. Goldman is to be congratulated on his very able attempt to make bricks without straw. I would resent his attitude towards myself more, did I not remember having had reactions precisely similar to his on reading articles calculated to destroy that pleasant state of illusion in which I was and in which Com. Goldman still appears to be.

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 18 February 2009


 Dean Harber: 1945: Religion in the Soviet Union: I



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Denzil Dean Harber
Religion in the Soviet Union
Part I
 Workers International News “Religion in the Soviet Union Part I”, by Paul Dixon (Denzil Harber), October 1945, p.29-31, (1,501 words). Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Ted Crawford and Paul Flewers.

 In a recent issue of Workers International News  we dealt with the degeneration of the Stalinist bureaucracy as illustrated by the monstrous growth of nationalism which it has engendered in the Soviet Union. The course of this Stalinist degeneration can, however, be followed by studying almost any aspect of Soviet life. Especially clearly is it revealed in the relations of the bureaucracy with the Russian Orthodox Church.
The attitude of the Bolsheviks towards the Orthodox Church was conditioned not only by the materialist basis upon which Marxism stands but also by the special role played by this Church in Tsarist Russia. It had been not only one of the greatest landowners—it owned 7.5 million acres and had an annual income of 150,000,000 rubles. It was also a tool, and a willing tool, of Tsarism. With the growth of the revolutionary movement towards the end of the nineteenth century the Russian clergy asked to be allowed to cooperate with the Tsarist Secret Service in tracking down revolutionaries and many played no small role in this respect.
After the massacre of the St Petersburg workers by the Tsar’s troops on Bloody Sunday (January 1905) the Holy Synod (the governing body of the Church) issued a proclamation denouncing certain ‘evil-minded persons’ who ‘lead others into useless death without repentance, with bitterness in their hearts and curses on their lips’. ‘Our enemies’, stated the Synod, ‘wish to shake the foundations of our orthodox faith and the autocratic power of the Tsars… Fear God, honour the Tsar… submit to every power ordained of God… Toil according to God’s ordinance in the sweat of the brow.’
After the October Revolution, in January 1918, the Patriarch of the Orthodox Church, Tikhon, issued a message to the faithful, in which he denounced the Bolsheviks as ‘monsters of the human race’ and excommunicated all who should support the Revolution.
Lenin wrote:
Marx said, ‘Religion is the opium of the people’—and this postulate is the cornerstone of the whole philosophy of Marxism with regard to religion. Marxism always regarded all modern religions and churches, and every kind of religious organisation as instruments of that bourgeois reaction whose aim is to defend exploitation, stupefying the working class. (The Attitude of the Workers’ Party Towards Religion , May 1909)
But in this same article Lenin made it clear that the Bolsheviks did not expect religion immediately to disappear, even after the seizure of power. Engels, to whom Lenin refers, had established this some forty years previously in Anti-Dühring  where he wrote:
And when this act [the proletarian revolution] has been accomplished, when society, by taking possession of all means of production and using them on a planned basis, has freed itself and all its members from the bondage in which they are at present held by these means of production which they themselves have produced but which now confront them as an irresistible extraneous force; when then man no longer merely proposes, but also disposes—only then will the last extraneous force which is still reflected in religion vanish; and with it will also vanish the religious reflection itself, for the simple reason that then there will be nothing left to reflect.
Only in a fully socialist society can religion be expected to disappear completely for only then will the social basis of religion—the fear  of the masses caused by their helplessness before the blind forces of production—cease to exist. Meanwhile, the CPSU, as its 1919 Programme put it, endeavoured:
… to secure the complete break-up of the union between the exploiting classes and the organisations for religious propaganda, thus cooperating in the actual deliverance of the working masses from religious prejudices, and organising the most extensive propaganda of scientific enlightenment and anti-religious conceptions. While doing this we must carefully avoid anything that can wound the feelings of believers, for such a method can only lead to the strengthening of religious fanaticism.
With this objective in view the Soviet State decreed the separation of the Church from the state and freed the educational system from all Church influence. All citizens were given the right to carry on both religious and anti-religious propaganda. The property of the Church was confiscated but the church buildings were returned for the use of the clergy. The Church retained freedom of worship, association, meeting and propaganda. On the other hand vigorous anti-religious propaganda was carried on by the CPSU which set up the ‘Society of Militant Atheists’ with its journal, The Atheist .
During the years of the Civil War the bulk of the Russian clergy supported the Whites but their resistance to the Soviet regime was broken by the early 1920s. In 1921, in order to get funds for buying foodstuffs abroad to relieve the famine, the Soviet government decreed the confiscation of gold, silver and precious stones belonging to the Church. The Patriarch ordered the clergy to resist and a bitter struggle resulted in the course of which 45 clergy were executed and 250 sentenced to long terms of imprisonment. By this time it was obvious that the Soviet government had come to stay and a section of the clergy hastened to make their peace with it upon the best terms they could. In 1922 this section set up the so-called ‘Living Church’ which declared capitalism to be a ‘deadly sin’. A split in the Orthodox Church was the consequence. But henceforth even the majority of the clergy who were opposed to the ‘Living Church’ paid lip-service to the Soviet State.
Such was the situation before the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy and its victory over the Bolshevik-Leninist Left Opposition. The Church continued to function in the Soviet Union, but the masses had turned from it, especially in the towns. Its support amongst the youth was very small, and its main basis lay amongst the more backward masses, especially the older generation of peasants. The clergy lived upon donations from their supporters and were entirely cut off from Soviet life. Priests had no right to vote in Soviet elections or to be elected to Soviet organisations. For the class-conscious Soviet worker the Church was a relic of the past which was destined gradually to wither away under the influence of the rising material and cultural standards of the masses.
Such would without doubt have been the course of development had the isolation of the Soviet State been broken by the World Revolution and the growth of Stalinist bureaucracy been thus prevented. We would have witnessed the fulfilment of the confident prophesy of the ABC of Communism —the textbook issued by the CPSU in the days of Lenin and Trotsky:
… the transition from the society which makes an end of capitalism to the society which is completely freed from all traces of class division and class struggle, will bring about the natural death of all religion and all superstition.
The actual course of events under Stalinist rule has been almost diametrically opposite—a conclusive proof of the nature of the Stalinist regime and of the extent to which it has ‘finally and irrevocably’ established socialism!
The attitude of the bureaucracy towards the Church has passed through the usual zigzags of Stalinist policy. During the ultra-left period of forcible collectivisation and the Five-Year Plan in Four an attempt was made to liquidate the Church and its influence by government decree. Starting in 1929 churches were forcibly closed and priests arrested and exiled all over the Soviet Union. The celebrated Shrine of the Iberian Virgin in Moscow—esteemed by believers to be the ‘holiest’ in all Russia—was demolished Stalin and his government were not afraid of strengthening religious fanaticism by wounding the feelings of believers as Lenin and Trotsky had been! Religion, they believed, could be liquidated, like the kulak, by a stroke of the pen. The Society of Militant Atheists, under Stalin’s orders, issued on 15 May 1932 the ‘Five-Year Plan of Atheism’—‘by 1 May 1937’, such was the ‘Plan’, ‘not a single house of prayer shall remain in the territory of the USSR, and the very concept of God must be banished from the Soviet Union as a survival of the Middle Ages and an instrument for the oppression of the working masses’!
Unfortunately for the Stalinist ‘Plan’, during the very period when it was proclaimed the bureaucracy was actually strengthening the social basis of religion in the Soviet Union—by the ever increasing miseries which its disastrous economic policy was imposing upon the masses. The Great Famine of 1932-33 in which millions died in the Soviet Union did more for the strengthening of the hold of the Church over the masses than could have been done by any amount of religions propaganda. Like so many other Stalinist ‘Plans’ of this period, the ‘Five-Year Plan of Atheism’ was officially forgotten long before the time for its fulfilment was due. 
On to Part II

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 March 2009


ixon (Denzil Harber): 1945: The Nationalist Degeneration of Stalinism



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Paul Dixon (Denzil Harber)
The Nationalist Degeneration of Stalinism
From Workers International News, April 1945, pp 5-11. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Ted Crawford and Paul Flewers.

FROM the 1930s onwards the continually increasing degeneration of the Thermidorian Stalinist bureaucracy has manifested itself in every sphere of Soviet life. Some fourteen years ago the Communist Party of the Soviet Union had already been transformed from a revolutionary party into a bureaucratised appendage of the ruling caste; proletarian democracy had ceased to exist and the OGPU, from an instrument of working-class ‘terror’ against the bourgeoisie, had become the Stalinised weapon for the terrorisation of the workers and peasants. Many of the fundamental teachings of Marx and Lenin had already been revised and distorted and the history of the Bolshevik movement falsified.
But it has been characteristic of the degeneration of Stalinism—as it was of the degeneration of the parties of the Second International—that for  as long as possible a faÃ§ade of Marxist phrases has been preserved as a covering for the abandonment of Marxism in practice. Thus, it is hoped by the Stalinists that the advanced workers will remain unaware of the changes taking place.
However, as the degeneration of Stalinism progresses, so we witness the ever more open abandonment of Bolshevism in every  field. The pace of this degeneration became more rapid from 1935-36 and has been greatly speeded up during the present war. More and more it has become apparent that, in its frantic attempts to maintain its rule over the Soviet masses, the Stalinist bureaucracy is seeking inspiration in the traditions and institutions of Tsarism. In one after another of the spheres which have been left relatively untouched in the early period of Stalinist rule, we find today not only a flagrant abandonment of Bolshevism but a conscious remoulding on pre-revolutionary lines .
Thus, family life is being remodelled on ‘traditional’ lines; higher education is reserved for the children of the privileged strata; the army is reconstructed upon a hierarchical basis with the deliberate creation of a privileged officer caste divorced from the mass of the population; anti-religious propaganda is replaced by an alliance between the Stalinist bureaucracy and the Russian Orthodox Church.
This whole reactionary movement has been accompanied by, and, as it were, knit together by, a monstrous growth of nationalism, which now—so far as official Stalinist propaganda is concerned—equals that of any of the Imperialist states engaged in the present war.
The Internationalist Position of Bolshevism—The Nationalist Degeneration of Stalinism
In no other field has the Stalinist abandonment of Bolshevism been more flagrant than in the international one. Nowhere in the writings of Lenin or his associates can there be found the slightest trace of nationalism or of national pride. On the contrary, we find there an internationalist position stated with the utmost clearness and unambiguity.
In his Farewell Letter to the Swiss Workers  (8 April 1917) Lenin wrote:
The great honour of beginning the series of revolutions caused with objective inevitability by the war has fallen to the Russian proletariat. But the idea that the Russian proletariat is the chosen revolutionary proletariat among the workers of the world is absolutely alien to us. We know full well that the proletariat of Russia is less organised, less prepared and less class-conscious than the proletariat of other countries. It is not its special qualities but rather the special coincidence of historical circumstances that has made the proletariat of Russia for a certain, perhaps very short time, the vanguard of the revolutionary proletariat of the whole world.
Russia is a peasant country, it is one of the most backward of European countries. Socialism cannot triumph there immediately.
It should hardly be necessary to bring quotations to show that the attitude of Lenin during the First Imperialist War was one of proletarian internationalism, of revolutionary defeatism. But what was his position after the seizure of power, during the period of intervention and Civil War? On 11 March 1918 when the young Soviet State was reeling under the blows of German Imperialism and the armies of the Kaiser were advancing into Soviet territory, crushing the revolution as they came, Lenin wrote:
We are defencists from 7 November 1917. We are for the ‘defence of the fatherland’, but that war for the fatherland towards which we are going is a war for the socialist fatherland, for socialism as the fatherland, for the Soviet Republic as a section of the world army of socialism.
‘Hate the German, kill the German’—such was and remains the slogan of ordinary, that is, bourgeois, patriotism. But we will say ‘Hatred for the Imperialist bandits, hatred for capitalism, death to capitalism’, and at the same time, ‘Learn from the German! Remain true to the fraternal union with the German workers. They are late in coming to our aid. We will gain time, we will wait for them, they will come to our aid.’
What was the attitude of Lenin towards the achievements of ‘national culture’? In his Theses on the National Question  (1913) he gave the answer:
From the point of view of social-democracy it is impermissible to use either directly or indirectly the slogan of national  culture. This slogan is false, for all the economic, political and mental life of mankind is becoming more and more internationalised even under capitalism. Socialism will completely internationalise it. International culture, which is already being systematically created by the proletariat of all countries, takes to itself not ‘national culture’ (from whatever national collective it may come) as a whole, but takes from every national culture exclusively its thoroughly democratic and socialist elements.
The first step in the Stalinist abandonment of the internationalist position was made by Stalin in 1924 when he first formulated the theory of socialism in one country. Henceforth it became an article of faith for the bureaucracy that a completely socialist society could be built in a single isolated country—especially in Russia. This ‘theory’—besides being an economic and political absurdity—undermined the whole basis of proletarian internationalism and signified its abandonment by the Stalinist bureaucracy. If socialism could be built in Russia by relying upon Russia’s internal resources alone without the assistance of the workers of other countries, what was the need for the Russian workers to assist the revolutionary movements of the workers abroad? Thus the Comintern became, under Stalinist leadership, an instrument of the foreign policy of the bureaucracy and betrayed the workers’ struggles throughout the world.
But for a number of years after the adoption of the theory of socialism in a single country, the nationalist degeneration of Stalinism remained incomplete. So far as the traditional attitude of Bolshevism towards pre-revolutionary Russia was concerned, no immediate change took place. For the masses of Russia this past had been one of oppression and suffering and to them and the Bolsheviks it and its still persisting relics were things to be outlived and overcome.
As late as 1930 we find Demyan Biedny, a loyal Stalinist, publicly proclaimed as ‘the poet of the millions and tens of millions of the toiling masses’, writing as follows of Russia’s past:
A country tremendously large,
Ruined, slavishly idle, savage,
Dragging itself along behind cultured America and Europe.
A grave!
Servile labour—and a predatory parasitism.
Idleness was the people’s means of defence.
Idleness and poverty, poverty and squandering.
Squandering and boastfulness,
Are all inevitable, eternal neighbours.
The lash of the master corrupted the labour of the serf.
This then is the inheritance,
Which we have to overcome.
In 1934 this same Demyan Biedny was unwise enough to write a comic opera ridiculing the introduction of Christianity into Russia. However the opera was withdrawn: the unfortunate author was severely rebuked—he had dared to ridicule one of the national heroes of Russia—Saint Vladimir—who had not only introduced Christianity but successfully defended and enlarged the frontiers of the Russian state! Not only Demyan Biedny but the whole Soviet population learned to their astonishment that they were the heirs to a great national tradition—that of the old Tsarist Empire which had bequeathed to them the greatest achievements of a military and cultural character, which they were henceforth to cherish with pride and to defend with their lives!
The Revision of History Textbooks
The most prominent Russian historian of the post-revolutionary period had been NM Pokrovsky. His application of the Marxist method of Historical Materialism to Russian history had been sharply criticised by Trotsky in 1922 for his exaggeration of the role of trading capital in mediaeval Russia. In the inner-party struggles culminating in the defeat of Trotsky and the Left Opposition, Pokrovsky appeared as an ardent supporter of Stalin. He died in April 1932 and his death was commented upon by the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party as follows:
The Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) announces with deep regret the death of that most prominent representative of the Old Guard, of Bolshevism, NM Pokrovsky. He was an active participant in the Revolution of 1905 and in the Proletarian Revolution of October, an irreconcilable fighter for the General Line of the Party, a world-famous communist scientist, a most prominent organiser and leader of our theoretical front, and a tireless propagandist of the ideas of Marxism-Leninism.
A pamphlet of praise from every quarter for Pokrovsky’s work and learning was published immediately after his death. It included a quotation from Lenin, who, in 1921, had described Pokrovsky as ‘an essential adviser (and guide) in questions of science and of Marxism in general’. All his main works were reissued—some in mass editions.
But not even death could save Pokrovsky. Within four years there appeared a decree of that same Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party on the subject of existing history textbooks which, it suddenly discovered, contained ‘attempts to inculcate an anti-Marxist, anti-Leninist, in essence liquidationist, view of historical science’. One M Kammari writing in the April 1936 number of Under the Banner of Marxism  stresses the necessity of:
… overcoming these obviously false and anti-Leninist conceptions in historical science which have already been repeatedly exposed by the Party and which have as their basis the well-known [!] mistakes of Pokrovsky.
Pokrovsky, states M Kammari, had undoubtedly certain merits, but, unfortunately, he had never understood either Dialectical or Historical Materialism! This is shown, among other things, by the fact that he grossly overestimated the role of trading capital in mediaeval Russia!
Pokrovsky’s works were withdrawn. But the bureaucracy found it easier to outlaw the existing history textbooks than to produce new ones. In the schools of the Soviet Union the children were provided with a new edition of the History of Russia  by Klyuchevsky, who died in 1911 and who, with the school of historians he helped to create, had been thus characterised by Pokrovsky:
Valuing the autocracy, these historians value in no less degree the united realm. The formation of the Russian empire is for them too the basic fact of Russian history, and they see only its bright sides. (Preface to English edition of History of Russia )
Thus the historian of Tsarism became the historian of Stalinism, and this fact revealed the real reason for the posthumous disgrace of Pokrovsky—his internationalism. Henceforth the whole past of Russia was to be searched for examples of ‘patriotism ’ and for Russian ‘heroes ’. The patriotism of Stalinism is not patriotism to the Soviet Union, the vanguard of the World Revolution. It is not even patriotism to the Soviet Union, a national workers’ state; it is patriotism to Russia —the fatherland. Let us listen to V Smirnova in her preface to The Bard in the Camp of the Russian Warriors  (a patriotic poem by Zhukovsky, written over a hundred years ago and reprinted by the State Publishers of Children’s Literature in 1943 for the inspiration of Soviet Youth):
In every man there lives the feeling of the fatherland. The fatherland—this is the house, the family, the place where you were born, the factory in which you work, the field which you cultivate, the town in which you live; this is the ordinary sky over the adjacent land; this is the people to which you belong, the language which you speak and think, the culture, the history, the whole past, present and future of your native country.
Love for the fatherland is one of the strongest and noblest feelings. It makes a man capable of exploits, makes him a hero. In the history of our country there are not a few moments when the fatherland was, for the Russian man, dearer than everything in life, dearer than life itself. These were moments of the greatest national enthusiasm and of the exertion of all the popular forces, days when the whole people arose, as one man, when every man felt, thought and acted at one with the people.
Thus it was when other states attacked the freedom and independence of Russia, when they tried to subdue her by armed force and foreign troops invaded the Russian land.
Thus it was during the Great Fatherland War of 1812. The memory of this time fills with pride the heart of the Russian man.
Pokrovsky on the War of 1812
During the present war the Soviet masses have had held up to them for their inspiration, not the heroic struggles of the Civil War of 1918-20, but this alleged mass resistance to the invasion of Napoleon in 1812. On this latter subject Pokrovsky had written in 1912 the following lines which were accepted without question for over twenty years by the Russian Communist Party:
More detailed accounts of the war, even those emanating from the Decembrists themselves, completely destroy the romantic picture of the people, as one man, rising to the defence of their fatherland… even from such an arch-chauvinist source as the proclamations of Rostopchin one learns that the peasants of the districts occupied by the enemy frequently settled their accounts not with the French but with their own masters, taking advantage of the fact that neither police nor troops for ‘pacification’ were available to these latter. That Moscow was burnt not by its inhabitants acting in a fit of patriotic zeal but by the police carrying out the orders of this same Rostopchin, that the French army fell a victim not to a popular rising but to the defects of its own organisation—that, in so much as it remained without disorganisation (such was precisely the case with the Imperial Guard), right up to the end not only partisans, but even the regular Russian troops did not dare to approach it—all these facts are too elementary and too well known for it to be worth going into them here. (History of Russia )
Even the illiterate Russian serfs of the eighteenth century who were unfortunate enough to be forced into the armies of that ‘Great National Hero’ Peter the Great (who, in a Soviet film of the same name is made to say, ‘I have come through tears and blood but all for Holy Mother Russia ’), even these serfs are described today as filled with ‘national enthusiasm’ and ‘giving their strength, their talents, their very lives for the creation of great monuments of Russian culture ’ (L Timofeev in his preface to the reprint of the eighteenth century Journey from Petersburg to Moscow  by Radishchev, 1944).
Stalinism and the Crimean War
Every reactionary war in which Russia has ever engaged provides the Stalinists with similar examples of ‘popular heroism’.
Writes NV Andreevskaya of the Crimean War of 1854-55:
This war was one of aggression and was carried on by Russia as an unjust war. The victory of Russia in this war would have led to a temporary strengthening of the system of serfdom within the country… The revolutionary democrats of Russia wished for the defeat of Russia, in the hope that the military downfall of Tsarism would hasten the coming of the revolution…
For the Russian warriors defending Sebastopol it was a question of the defence of a town of the Fatherland against an enemy who had invaded the Fatherland. The defence of Sebastopol is one of the heroic moments of the military past of the Russian people…
The figures of the defenders of Sebastopol move our hearts even today, evoking in us the feeling of deep respect, pride and love. (From the Heroic Past of the Fatherland , Volume 1, published by the Peoples’ Commissariat for Education, 1943)
Some six years before the Crimean War, the Communist Manifesto  had proclaimed to the whole world: ‘The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they have not got. ’ There is considerable excuse for the conscripted Russian serfs who fought at Sebastopol being ignorant of this fundamental teaching of Marx and Engels; but what can one say of NV Andreevskaya who writes nearly a hundred years later and twenty-six years after the October Revolution! Not to speak of the People’s Commissariat for Education which passes and publishes this reactionary nationalistic propaganda.
The Stalinist Canonisation of Suvorov
The soldiers of the Red Army have today held up to them as symbols and models, not the heroes of the Civil War, but Tsars and Tsarist Generals back through the centuries. Actually backward Russia produced very few generals who succeeded in defeating the armies of the more advanced West. But those for whom such distinction can be claimed enjoy all the greater honour. One of such is Field-Marshal Suvorov, who, during the wars following the Great French Revolution, led his armies even as far as the Alps.
Even the Stalinists are forced to admit that:
The army commanded by Suvorov stood on the side of the interests of the Russian Landlords’ Empire of the eighteenth century. And Suvorov himself was an active agent of the will of the Tsarist autocracy.
But—‘in all his activities he was guided by a burning love of his fatherland and the urge to increase the fighting strength of the Russian army, to lead his “miracle warriors” from victory to victory.’ (From the Heroic Past of Our Fatherland , Volume 1, 1943)
There were, of course, other sides to Suvorov’s activities, which are little stressed by the Stalinist hacks of today. For instance, in granting him the title of Field Marshal in 1794, the Empress Catherine assured him, that ‘you yourself have promoted yourself to field-marshal for you have subdued Poland ’. Also his reaction to the French Revolution was such that he petitioned Catherine thus: ‘O Little Mother! Order me to go against the French! ’ Thwarted in this wish, he had to content himself with writing to the leader of the royalist counter-revolutionaries in the VendÃ©e, addressing him as ‘Great Hero of the VendÃ©e! Defender of thy fathers and of the throne of thy kings ’ and expressing the wish that ‘may the evil ones ’, the French revolutionaries, ‘perish and their race disappear! ’.
Today Suvorov is the greatest hero of the Red Army and the Order of Suvorov is the highest honour it can bestow.
Examples such as the above could be continued ad infinitum  and ad nauseam .
The Campaign of Racial Hatred Against Germans
Needless to say, the Stalinist attitude of extreme nationalism (which would have shamed a pre-revolutionary Kadet) is not combined with a fraternal approach to the German workers. All  Germans, workers and capitalists, anti-fascists and fascists, are lumped together to be hated racially, as Germans , in a manner which leaves even Lord Vansittart far behind. Let us listen to Alexei Tolstoy, the most honoured writer in the Soviet Union today:
We, the Russians, were always modest from the consciousness of our own greatness and strength, from affliction at our faults… In our spiritual carelessness we even pitied the poor Germans. Prince Alexander Yaroslavich beat this race, Ivan the Terrible beat them; when Peter the Great was in Berlin, King Frederick humbly begged him for some wretched little towns which had been conquered by Field-Marshal Menshikov; under Elizabeth we once again beat this race most severely; under Alexander I the Germans bowed down to him and asked for wretched little towns; Nicholas I out of bravado made a gift of Hungary to the Austrian Hapsburgs… How could not the Russian heart but pity the poor Germans…
During two and a half centuries the Germans were persistently and planfully crawling into Russian life; Germans commanded Russian armies, managed the estates of the landlords; taught the Russian youth in the schools and universities; Germans settled as colonists on Russian lands; but Russia to their annoyance continued to remain Russia—they had not got enough brains and talent for them to be able to compete with the Russians in literature, in the arts, in politics; even in science… it was the Russians who dared and invented, the Germans filched from them and sold the products of Russian genius as their own; from the second half of the nineteenth century German capital led a great attack on Russia; the German Tsaritsa during the War was in the centre of an espionage organisation… And suddenly, when Russia, as a colony, was almost in the German pocket—the October Revolution decisively and for ever threw off the German parasites who had fixed their claws in her.
There is no sense in arguing with them [the Germans]—in our epoch it is only possible to make a German understand by means of a bayonet.
Alexei Tolstoy will not even grant the Germans any racial affinity to the Russians. True, linguistic study long ago proved that Russian and German, like most of the languages of Europe, have a common source. But Alexei Tolstoy, since he ceased to be a White Guard and returned to the Soviet Union, has studied Marxism (!) and thus armed, easily disposes of the science of comparative philology:
Many roots [of Sanskrit] are common for the languages of certain tribes of India, of Persia, for the Celts, the Germans and the Slavs. But this important circumstance merely proves that on the huge territory from India to the Atlantic Ocean there once lived tribes with similar forms of social development and by that very fact  [!—our emphasis] similar forms of language. (All three quotations from Whence Came the Russia Land , State Political Publishers, 1942)
Let us take another example of the present Stalinist attitude towards Germany and the Germans—and, incidentally, of the new appraisal of the First Imperialist War now put forward by Stalinism:
Wilhelm II in making his campaign of plunder against Russia had his ‘Fifth Column’ at the Tsar’s Court. The residence of the German Tsaritsa was as full of spies as a sticky leaf is of dead flies. The Tsarist General Staff was under the continual observation of the German General Staff. The rotten regime of Tsardom by its whole existence objectively helped the German imperialists in their aggressive plans. But our multi-nationed people did not reconcile itself with it in the way the German fascist milk-sops reconcile themselves with their arch-reactionary regime, for our people was a people of heroes and not a people of slaves. It overthrew the Tsarist throne and that social order which hindered it from straightening its powerful shoulders, and thus preserved its fatherland. (The Hero-People; the Warrior-People , State Political Publishers, 1944)
Who is this speaking? None other than D Manuilsky—the ‘leader’ and the ‘theoretician’ of the Third International in its period of Stalinist degeneration—the man who was the instrument for forcing upon the Communist Party of Germany the notorious theory of ‘Social-Fascism’ which made it impossible for the Communists to win the masses from Social Democracy and thus ensured the defeat of the German workers and the triumph of Hitler!
Less than two years before Hitler came to power Manuilsky was telling the German workers that:
Fascism in Germany, in the Hitler form, is maybe on the downgrade and, in fact, is already on the downgrade as a result of the activity of our Party, [and] that in Germany the chief enemy today is the BrÃ¼ning government supported by Social Democracy, a government for the carrying through of Fascist dictatorship. (The Communist Parties and the Crisis of Capitalism , March-April 1931) 
And, on the eve of Hitler’s victory, that ‘the united front of struggle cannot be replaced by the Comintern “from above”. It can only be formed from below.’ (Social-Democracy—Stepping Stone to Fascism , December 1932)
Now as a direct result of his own disastrous policy, the German workers have endured eleven years of Nazi rule, Manuilsky has the audacity to brand them as ‘a people of slaves’!
Stalin Revives Pan-Slavism
The ideologists of the old Tsarist Empire did more than propagate the type of nationalism now so faithfully copied by Stalinism; they were also the advocates of a ‘wider’ form of nationalism—Pan-Slavism. In its attempt to get under its rule the various Slavic races, then mostly under Austrian or Turkish rule, Tsarism in the nineteenth century spoke loudly in praise of the Slavs as a racial unit. In particular it advocated the unity of the Slavs against the Germans.
Marx characterised Pan-Slavism as follows:
Bohemia and Croatia (another disjected member of Slavonic family, acted upon by the Hungarian, as Bohemia by the German) were the homes of what is called on the European continent ‘Pan-Slavism’. Neither Bohemia nor Croatia was strong enough to exist as a nation by herself. Their respective nationalities, gradually undermined by the action of historical causes that inevitably absorb into a more energetic stock, could only hope to be restored to anything like independence by an alliance with other Slavonic nations. There were twenty-two millions of Poles; forty-five millions of Russians, eight millions of Serbians and Bulgarians; why not form a mighty confederation of the whole eighty million of Slavonians and drive back or exterminate the intruder upon the holy Slavonic soil, the Turk, the Hungarian and above all the hated but indispensable Niemetz, the German? Thus in the studies of a few Slavonian dilettanti of historical science was this ludicrous, this anti-historical movement got up, a movement which intended nothing less than to subjugate the civilised West under the barbarian East, the town under the country, trade, manufactures, intelligence, under the primitive agriculture of Slavonic serfs. But behind this ludicrous theory stood the terrible reality of the Russian Empire. (Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany )
Today Stalinism has extended its nationalism to embrace Pan-Slavism.
During over a thousand years, beginning with the seventh century [writes Nikolai Derzhavin, The Eternal Struggle of the Slavs Against German Aggressors , published by the All-Slav Committee, Moscow 1943], the freedom-loving Slav peoples stood as an insurmountable obstacle in the path of the rapacious expansion of the German conquerors, who were pushing towards the East from the rivers Elbe, Oder and Vistula, and always offered the aggressors the most obstinate and stubborn resistance as they still continue to do.
The greatest of the Slav peoples, which in the course of many centuries in the struggle for its just cause, for its freedom and independence, gave the most annihilating resistance to the plundering propensities of the German barbarians in the Middle Ages and the German Imperialists in modern times, was and remains the Russian people, the eldest brother, the defender and friend of all the Slav peoples.
Since the German invasion of the Soviet Union an ‘All-Slav Committee ’ has been set up in Moscow, needless to say, completely under Stalinist control. On 23 and 24 February 1944 it called in Moscow a ‘Meeting of Warrior-Slavs’. This latter issued a manifesto addressed to its ‘Brother Slavs’ and which ends with the following slogans:
Long live the fighting unity of the Slav peoples!
Long live the manly, the brave Warrior-Slavs! 
Long live the great Russian people, which has inspired all the Slav peoples in the self-sacrificing struggle for honour, freedom and the independence of their fatherland!
Long live the heroic Red Army, the liberator of the Slav people!
Long live the genius-leader, the true friend and defender of the Slav peoples, Marshal Stalin!
Thus the slogan ‘Workers of the world unite!’ has today been replaced by the Stalinists by that of ‘Slavs of the world unite!’.
Russian Nationalism and the National Minorities of the USSR
It will have been observed from quotations that have been given that the USSR—despite occasional references to ‘our multi-nationed people’—is regarded by the Stalinist propagandists as a creation of the ‘great Russian people’. Now in the USSR of 1941—after the inclusion of the western parts of Poland and the Baltic States—as in the old Russian Empire, the Russians proper are in a minority. True it is possible for the Stalinists to perform the same jugglery as the statisticians of Tsarism and to include as Russians, the Ukrainians and White Russians. By this doubtful expedient it is possible to claim that the ‘great Russian people’ have a numerical preponderance in the USSR. But even so there are many millions of other entirely non-Russian races also present—Turkomen, Kazakhs, Tadzhiks, Georgians, Mordvinians, Armenians, Esthonians, Latvians, etc, etc. What part have they in the ‘heroic past’ of the ‘warrior people’?
In his preface to the English edition of his History of Russia  (Martin Lawrence, 1931) NM Pokrovsky wrote:
We [the Bolsheviks] alone, finally have abandoned the idyllic picture of the unification of a mass of ‘backward’ peoples under the ‘enlightened’ guidance of the Russian Tsars—because it has become possible for these peoples to tell how the ‘propagators of enlightenment’ tortured, oppressed and exploited them.
Today the non-Russian peoples of the USSR are expected to regard as ‘national heroes ’ those very Russian Tsars and their generals who ‘tortured, oppressed and exploited them ’.
Nor is this all. Up to the middle of the 1930s, the rights gained by the national minorities as a result of the October Revolution had not been seriously infringed upon. One of the achievements of the Revolution consisted in the fact that in the case of the Asiatic nationalities the traditional practice of writing their languages in Arabic characters had been abandoned in favour of new alphabets based upon Roman characters, which were much more easily learned. But with the new Stalinist turn towards Russian nationalism these new Roman characters were ousted in one Asiatic language after another, to be replaced by Russian characters, which are quite unsuited to any non-Slavonic language. This change was officially explained as making it easier for the non-Russian peoples to learn ‘the great Russian language’—the fact that at the same time it was made more difficult for them to learn to read and write their own languages was not considered worth mentioning.
During this same period, numerous arrests of prominent local leaders took place in the non-Russian republics and autonomous areas on charges of ‘local nationalism’. 
But the most striking example of the new attitude towards the non-Russian national minorities is furnished by the treatment of the Volga Germans. The ancestors of these Germans came to Russia in the year 1762. Together with the other nationalities of the Soviet Union, the Volga Germans passed through the October Revolution, the Civil War in which they furnished not a few brave fighters for the Red Army and the whole subsequent period, during which their loyalty remained unquestioned. Nevertheless, in August 1941 the whole of the population of the German Volga Republic—some 1,400,000 Soviet people —were forcibly removed from the land which they had occupied for nearly two centuries and deported to Siberia. The Stalinists had ceased to regard the Volga Germans as workers and peasants; now they were considered as ‘Germans’—and as such potential agents of the then advancing armies of Hitler!
The Inevitability of the Nationalist Degeneration of Stalinism
The development of the worst manifestations of Stalinist nationalism dates from the middle 1930s—from the time when it had become obvious, even to the bureaucracy, that the German bourgeoisie had called Hitler to power not merely to crush the German working-class movement but also to attempt to solve the problems of German capitalism by external expansion—and expansion primarily at the expense of the Soviet Union.
The Stalinist bureaucracy saw itself faced with the task of ideologically mobilising the Soviet population for the coming war. But it could not do this upon the old, Bolshevik lines. In the Civil War from 1918 till 1920 the Bolshevik Party under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky had rallied the workers and peasants behind it under slogans concretising the defence of the conquests of the October Revolution, and the preparation of the World Revolution. At the same time it had broken the morale of the armies of intervention by appealing to the workers in those armies upon the basis of international class solidarity. Thus they appealed to the British soldiers sent to Northern Russia:
You are working men too. What interests have you in fighting for the gang of Russian counter-revolutionaries and international capitalists? As working men your business should be to support your fellow workers in those places where they succeed in taking power, for the victory of the workers in one country is a step toward the emancipation of the workers in all countries.
Such could not be the approach of Stalin. The bureaucracy cannot call upon the masses of the USSR to defend the conquests of the October Revolution lest it should arouse memories of the pre-Stalinist period when these conquests were still fully enjoyed by the masses. Nor can it risk arousing the internationalist sentiments of the Soviet workers since the bureaucracy rightly sees in these a threat to its own domination. Therefore, the official Stalinist propaganda has almost completely avoided all reference to the heroic memories of the Civil War though these must be still fresh in the minds of the masses. It has preferred to concentrate rather upon such events as the defeat of the Teutonic Knights of the Sword by Prince Alexander Nevsky in the year 1242!
Likewise it has been impossible for the Stalinists to call upon the German workers to overthrow Hitler and establish a workers’ state. For it fears, and once again rightly, that the setting up of a workers’ state in Germany, or anywhere else, would lead to the destruction of its own rule in the Soviet Union which is based precisely upon the isolation of the first workers’ state. For years now Stalin has therefore consistently sabotaged the workers’ movement throughout the world.
Living parasitically upon the Soviet masses, the Stalinist bureaucracy has naturally come to regard itself as the heir to the old ruling classes of Russia and their traditions. The heroes of these former ruling classes have become the heroes of the bureaucracy. In their leaders—in Alexander Nevsky, Dmitry Donskoy, Peter the Great, etc, etc—the present rulers of the Soviet Union see but earlier and less perfect prototypes of the present Leader—Stalin. Though itself not a class but merely a parasitic caste, the Stalinist bureaucracy attempts to ape the methods of the old Tsarist Empire, and in so doing hopes to consolidate its own rule. Faced with the threat of war it could only appeal to the masses in the same way as its Tsarist predecessors did—upon the lines of Russian nationalism.
This ideology of the Stalinist bureaucracy does not, of course, fall from the skies. It flows inevitably from its position as a parasitic caste in an isolated workers’ state in a backward country. While the basis of the workers’ state—the social ownership of the means of production—still survives in the Soviet Union, political rule has passed into the hands of the bureaucracy, which absorbs an increasing proportion of the wealth produced by the socialised economy. It has thus certain features in common with the old ruling class of Tsarist Russia which it attempts to ape.
But this contradiction between the political rule of a parasitic bureaucracy and socialised industry cannot be of indefinite duration in the postwar world. Either the Stalinist bureaucracy will succumb to the pressure of World Imperialism—headed by USA—and socialised industry will be destroyed in the USSR; or the Soviet workers with the assistance of the workers of the rest of Europe and the USA will overthrow the Stalinist bureaucracy and re-establish Soviet democracy once more.

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 March 2009


 Dean Harber: 1945: Religion in the Soviet Union: II



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Denzil Dean Harber
Religion in the Soviet Union
Part II
 Workers International News “Religion in the Soviet Union II”, by Paul Dixon (Denzil Harber), November 1945, p.44-48, (2,779 words). Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Ted Crawford and Paul Flewers.

 This is the concluding section of an article the first instalment of which appeared in our previous issue.
It is of interest to note that even during this period—the first since the Revolution—of undoubted religious persecution, the servile head of the Orthodox Church, the Acting-Patriarch Sergius, found it possible to declare, at a stage-managed interview with foreign correspondents, that: ‘There never has been, nor is there any persecution of religion in the USSR.’ The Orthodox Church was even then quite willing to put its services at the disposal of the Stalinist bureaucracy in the same way as it had given  them to Tsarism, only the Stalinist bureaucracy did not want them!
But it had not long to wait. The Left zigzag of the bureaucracy was inevitably followed by a turn to the Right. The anti-religious processions which had been organised during the Church festivals of Christmas and Easter were abolished; the sale of Christmas trees was allowed once more; exiled priests were allowed to return to their parishes. But Stalin hastened to go even further than relaxing the pressure against the Church—he gave it rights that it had never previously enjoyed since the Revolution. In the New Constitution of the USSR of 1936 priests were given the right to vote and to be elected in Soviet elections.
Nevertheless the alliance between Stalin and the Orthodox Church was not yet finally cemented. In the period of mass purges of 1937 the attack upon the Church was for a short time resumed. Once again priests were arrested and banished and in January 1938 the ‘Society of Militant Atheists’ accused the Clergy of being in the service of the military staffs of Fascist states, of disorganising the Army, of trying to wreck railways, etc, etc.
But this renewed attack was very speedily followed by an even more drastic swing to the Right, a swing which reached truly remarkable proportions after the German invasion of the USSR. Not only did all government pressure upon the Church cease but all anti-religious propaganda also . The ‘Society of Militant Atheists’ had built up a huge publishing concern which in ten years had published 1700 books and issued magazines with a circulation of some 43 million copies. The whole undertaking was closed down upon the grounds of ‘paper shortage’. At the same time school textbooks were revised and anti-religious passages removed. Anti-religious tests for the Army and Civil Service were abolished.
In return the Church entered enthusiastically into the service of the Stalinist bureaucracy. The following message sent by Sergius, the Acting Patriarch, to Stalin, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the October Revolution (November 1942), gives eloquent proof of this:
On this twenty-fifth anniversary of the Republic of the Soviets, in the name of our Clergy and of all the believers of the Russian Orthodox Church, faithful children of our Fatherland, I salute with cordiality and piety, in your person, the leader chosen by God, the leader of our military and cultural forces, who is guiding us to triumph over the barbarous invasion, to the prosperity of our country in peace, towards a radiant future for its peoples. May God bless by success and glory your valorous exploits for our Fatherland.
Similar messages were sent on this and all other suitable occasions by all the main dignitaries of the Orthodox Church. The War in fact brought with it nothing more nor less than the incorporation of the Russian Orthodox Church into the Stalinist bureaucracy, with all the privileges that this entails . Some idea of these latter can be gleaned from the contribution made by ecclesiastical dignitaries to the Soviet war effort, as published in the Soviet Press. For instance, on 27 December 1942, Alexander Alexandrovich Troitski, priest of the parish of Chubino, writes to Stalin announcing that he has already subscribed 30,000 rubles, ‘taken from my own savings’ towards national defence. Now, he states, ‘I have decided to buy, with my savings, an aeroplane for the Red Army, and I am remitting for this great work the sum of a hundred thousand rubles. I have already paid in fifty thousand of them to the State Bank and I will remit the fifty thousand remaining on 15 January 1943.’ It must be noted that Alexander Alexandrovich Troitski is no highly placed ecclesiastic, but merely a parish priest. It must also be remembered that the average monthly wage of a Soviet worker, upon the eve of the present war, was 300 rubles . In other words this parish priest has been able to amass savings so vast that he is able to give from them to the state a sum equal to the total earnings of a worker for more than eight years . What must the income of the parish priest be like?
Nor is this merely an isolated instance. Many others exist of similar huge sums being given by the relatively lower ranks of the hierarchy of the Russian Orthodox Church. The priest of the Church of the Assumption, for instance, announces to Stalin on 4 January 1943 that he has already paid into the State Bank: ‘All my personal savings, amounting to 273,000 rubles. I beg of you, Joseph Vissarionovich’, he continues, ‘to have built with this money two war planes, giving them the names of our heroic ancestors Alexander Nevsky and Dmitri Donskoy.’
The higher up one goes in the Church hierarchy the greater become the sums subscribed. For instance, on 5 January 1943, Alexis, Metropolitan of Leningrad, informs Stalin that his Bishopric has already subscribed 3,182,143 rubles; he is now adding to this a further 500,000 rubles! He finished up with the statement that ‘We pray to God that He may aid you in your great historic mission; to defend the honour, the liberty and the glory of our fatherland.’
In each case a polite, if somewhat brief, reply is sent by Stalin and published in the press. For instance, the above mentioned priest of the Church of the Assumption received the following answer:
I thank you, Vladimir Alexandrovich, for your solicitude for the Red Army Air Force. Your desire shall be granted.
Receive my greetings
J Stalin
Nor was it long before Stalin gave his loyal supporters of the Russian Orthodox Church an appropriate recompense. In the official Soviet daily, Izvestia , on 5 September 1943, there appeared the announcement that Stalin had received leading Church dignitaries in the course of which: 
… the Metropolitan Sergius informed the President of the Council of Peoples Commissars that the leading circles of the Orthodox Church had the intention of calling together in the near future a council of bishops with the object of electing the Patriarch of Moscow and of all the Russias, and of forming a Holy Synod alongside the Patriarch.
The head of the government, J Stalin, showed himself sympathetic to this possibility and declared that there would be ‘no objections on the part of the government’.
On 8 September 1943, the Church had its wish—it elected a Patriarch, for the first time since the Kerensky period. Nor was that all—an official link was established between the Russian Orthodox Church and the Soviet State. There exists today a ‘Council for the affairs of the Russian Orthodox Church attached to the Council of Peoples Commissars of the USSR’. When in January of this year a Church Assembly met in order to elect a new Patriarch to replace Sergius who had recently died, it was greeted by a speech by GG Karpov, the President of this Council for the affairs of the Russian Orthodox Church. He informed the assembled ecclesiastics that:
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has authorised me to convey to the present High Assembly greetings in the name of the government and best wishes for successful and fruitful work for the construction of the Highest Church Administration.
I am deeply convinced that the decisions of the Assembly will serve towards strengthening the Church and will be an important starting point in the future development of the activities of the Church, which are directed towards assisting the Soviet people in the attainment of the great historical tasks before it.
But Karpov does not stop here; he goes on to give a new appreciation of the past of the Church. Lenin, writing in 1901 (Socialism and Religion ) referred to ‘that shameful and accursed past when the Church was in feudal dependence on the state, and Russian citizens were in  feudal dependence on the Established Church’. Not so Karpov to-day: 
The Russian Orthodox Church [he announced], in the days of hard trial, which our Fatherland repeatedly underwent in the past, did not break its link with the people, it lived with their needs, their hopes, their wishes and contributed its mite to the common struggle… many leading members of the Church sacrificed their lives for the good of the Fatherland.
It is hardly surprising under these circumstances that the Assembly was able to state in the message which it sent to the Soviet government:
Our Church, thanks to God, lives with a full life, according to our laws and to the customs of the Church. In all its activities our Church meets with full cooperation in its needs from the government and in first place from the Council for the affairs of the Russian Orthodox Church attached to the Sovnarkom of the USSR.
At every step now, the Orthodox Church hastens publicly to announce its support for Stalin and his policy. For instance, in Izvestia  of 17 February of this year one meets the heading ‘The Most Holy Patriarch of Moscow and of all Russia on the decisions of the Crimea Conference’. In it we read ‘The Church blesses these bright Christian wishes and hopes’; and redoubles its prayers to ‘the Lord of Hosts’ and the ‘Prince of Peace’ (Isaiah, IX,  6)’ etc, etc.
The priests of the other Churches existing in the USSR do not lag behind their Orthodox brothers in their expressions of loyalty to Stalin and his government. Thus Abdurakhman Rassolev, Mufti of the Central Spiritual Direction of the Mussulmans, sends his congratulations to Stalin on the occasion of the twenty-sixth anniversary of the October Revolution and ends with these words: ‘May Allah aid you to bring to a successful conclusion your glorious efforts for the liberation of the oppressed peoples. So may it be.’
Similar greetings are sent on the appropriate occasions by the Jewish Clergy. Thus Stalin has secured the backing not only of Christ, but of Allah and Jehovah also!
All accounts from the Soviet Union during the past few years agree that never since the Revolution has religion had such a hold over the mass of the population. We read of church services being attended by thousands, including young workers and soldiers of the Red Army. According to Soviet War News  of 22 August 1941, there existed at that time 30,000 religious associations of all kinds in the Soviet Union. An English clergyman, Canon Widdrington, has estimated the number of supporters of the Orthodox Church alone to be some 60,000,000 persons.
The conclusions to be drawn from all this are sufficiently obvious. In the first place there is no question of religion dying out in the Soviet Union as would be the case in a society which was advancing towards socialism. Thus is the lie given, by this fact alone, to the Stalinist claims to have ‘finally and irrevocably’ established socialism in the Soviet Union. On the contrary, religion is maintaining and increasing its hold over broad sections of the Soviet masses. This is undoubtedly due to the increasingly capitalist nature  of income distribution within the Soviet Union. Without the bureaucracy having become a class, and with the basic economic conquest of the October Revolution as yet still in existence, the bureaucracy has taken for itself an ever-mounting proportion of the national income of the Soviet State. The inequalities between the position of the bureaucrats, with their incomes of tens and hundreds of thousands of rubles and that of the workers with their few hundreds, have assumed a capitalist  character. At the same time, despite all the empty boasting about ‘social security’, the masses still live miserably and at the mercy of economic forces which neither they nor the bureaucracy can control. True these uncontrolled economic forces no longer, as in the capitalist world, threaten the masses with unemployment, but they affect them in equally significant ways—through periods of famine or semi-famine, through the chronic shortage of goods of all kinds, a shortage which is continually assuming acute forms in  one sphere or another, or through drastic forced movements of population. Moreover the very nature of the rule of the bureaucracy itself means that the lives and the liberty of the masses are constantly threatened by a force over which they have no control and the actions of which they cannot foresee.
The social roots of religion, the fear of the uncontrolled social forces which dominate the masses in their daily lives, ‘the impotence of the exploited classes in struggle with the exploiters’ (Lenin), not only still exist in the Soviet Union, they are being strengthened as the degeneration of the bureaucracy proceeds and the burdens which it heaps upon the masses increase.
In the second place there has ceased to exist any reason for a schism between the bureaucracy and the Church. The bitter hatred of the clergy for the Bolshevik Party of Lenin and Trotsky which represented the toiling masses and was working for the establishment of a classless society is not extended to their degenerate Stalinist successors who represent a usurping caste anxious only for the maintenance and extension of its own position and privileges. With such a caste it is possible for the clergy to come to terms in the same way as they have been able to come to terms with ruling and exploiting classes throughout history. True, in the present case the terms that the clergy have received have not as yet been particularly good, though they steadily improve with time. But that is because even Stalin’s Russia is still not yet capitalist Russia and the effects of the terrific blow that the October Revolution dealt at religion have not yet disappeared; broad sections of the masses still contemptuously turn their backs upon religion.
Stalin, therefore, does not, at least as yet, need the services of the Church so urgently as the Tsar did. But need them he does nevertheless. Inevitably, under the conditions of the rule of the bureaucracy, the Church must command the support of broad sections of the population; Stalin cannot destroy this support by administrative means—he has tried and failed. He must therefore secure an agreement with this Church which he cannot crush in order to secure the hold of the bureaucracy over the Soviet masses, for the nature of his regime does not permit the existence of an independent and potentially hostile force within the Soviet State.
As we have indicated, such an agreement was not difficult to arrange. And today Stalin who in his interview with the First American Trade Union Delegation (September 1927) once stated ‘The Party cannot be neutral with regard to religion, and it conducts anti-religious propaganda against any and all religious prejudices because it stands for science, while religious prejudices go against science, since every religion is something contrary to science.’—that same Stalin today is not neutral towards religion but gives it active, if as yet limited, support, for which he receives public thanks from the clergy.
The Church then is today an integral, though subordinate, part of the Stalinist state machine and the clergy enjoy the privileges accorded to the members of the bureaucracy. With the continuation of Stalinist rule and of Stalinist degeneration we may expect the alliance not only to continue but, by and large, to be strengthened with increasing privileges granted to the clergy. This does not, of course, signify that there may not take place in the future conflicts, and sharp ones at that, between the bureaucracy and the Church. Such conflicts will take place between sections of the bureaucracy itself and have taken place in the past between ruling classes and their Churches. But the general tendency will be one of increasing integration. 
Only the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy and the restoration of direct proletarian rule in the Soviet Union can, in alliance with the World Revolution, destroy the new privileges which religion is gaining and pave the way for the destruction of religion itself.

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 March 2009


ixon (Denzil Harber): 1950: A Deserter To Reformism



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Paul Dixon (Denzil Harber)
A Deserter To Reformism

“A Deserter to Reformism”, by Paul Dixon, (Denzil Dean Harber) Marxist Review, July-August, 1950, Vol.1. No.1., pp.5-19, duplicated. (6,492 words). F.W is, I take it, Frank Ward while the J.H. also mentioned must be Jock Haston. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Ted Crawford and Paul Flewers.
We have recently received a copy of a document entitled “The Left and the Labour Government”. Written by one F.W., a man who was once in the Trotskyist movement, this document, despite a few “Marxist” phrases, represents a complete capitulation to reformism on the part of its author. Since the views of F.W., appear to be in all essentials identical with those of a small group of ex-Trotskyists who have recently deserted to reformism in Britain, they demand our critical examination. This is all the more the case since F.W.— unlike fellow deserters—has at least had the courage to attempt a written justification of his capitulation.[1]
The writer begins with what we may term the material basis for his abandonment of a revolutionary position. Over the past five years things have not worked out as he expected they would. There has been no mass leftward swing against the Labour Government. So far as left-wingers are concerned, on one hand they see “the extent of parliamentary nationalisation, the maintenance of full employment and the lack of (at rate blatant) McDonaldism”. On the other hand, they feel confusion and resentment raised by the lack of any dramatic change in the day-to-day running of industry after nationalisation, international policy, the lack of any real improvement in living standards and the phlegmatic attitude of the population. As a result left wingers feel the paralysis which, in F.W.’s remarkable formulation “is experienced by a dog in its back legs if pricked simultaneously on each haunch”(!)
Stalinism has been able to secure no serious foothold in the Labour Party, but “the most remarkable feature has been failure of the non-Stalinist Left to make headway in presenting themselves as an alternative grouping”. Their lack of growth lies in “the failure of an over-mechanistic Marxism which in Britain has bedevilled the Left”. In the past predictions have been made regarding “left swings” and “revolutionary upheavals” but “current reality” confutes these. Therefore “a theoretical accounting is an imperative necessity” and “a firm Marxist basis must be substituted for the present confusion”.
To F.W. “four main ideas present themselves for reexamination” These are:
1. “That Parliament could never be the instrument of major social change”
2. “That substantial nationalisation would lead to civil war.”
3. That the old state had to be smashed. If it was not then it would grow constantly as a vicious anti-working class force.
4. That no such system as a “mixed economy” could maintain itself.
F.W. develops his ideas on these four points separately and we shall follow him in this.
Reformism and Social Change .
“It was considered central to revolutionary theory” writes F.W. “that Parliament could never transform society. Only the mass elemental action of the working people could do so. Such action would express itself through workers’ councils or soviets”. But “the conclusions regarding parliament were, nevertheless only generalisations based on the factual, experiences of the past. No more and no less!!” “It had been demonstrated beyond doubt that in periods when society was collapsing the legalistic and democratic principles of social democracy which are substituted as eternal verities in place of Marxism) prevented the taking of the drastic revolutionary steps necessary to sustain the life of the people. It hardly needs to be added that open and sordid place-seeking also played a not unimportant although secondary part”. But today in Britain none of this applies; “what has been new for the past five years and what renders the old generalisation inadequate or at very least marked as due for reconsideration , is that a strong reformist party took power in Britain in a period of relative social stability .” F.W changes everything: “there is nothing in Marxism which excludes the transformation of society by a reformist government while stable conditions remain . The approach of a serious Marxist therefore consists not in a negative ‘showing up’ of the undoubted blunders and omissions of the Government or a placid ‘waiting for our turn’ but in serious and sustained effort to enter into planning the transformation of society primarily through parliamentary action . It is along these lines that the Left should have been orientating itself over the last five years.” 
We quote F.W. at some length since many of our readers may not be familiar with his document and we would wish them to get its full flavour. According to F.W. social democracy in the past, in Russia, Germany and elsewhere, failed to transform society merely because of its “legalistic and democratic principles” (“open and sordid place-seeking” also playing a secondary role) which were not applicable in the situations in which it found itself. The social democratic leaders had, by and large the very best intentions, they really wanted to establish socialism, but misled by these unfortunately inapplicable principles, they instead shot down the revolutionary workers and saved capitalism. This, F.W. admits, was “treachery and betrayal” but only from a “historical viewpoint” (!) i.e. it was not deliberate and conscious—purely an unfortunate historical accident! Today, however, as the result this time of a fortunate accident, social democracy has become the Government of Britain “in a period of relative social stability” in which, most fortunately, its legalistic and democratic principles render it capable of carrying out the necessary socialist transformation of society. “There is nothing in Marxism” we quote F.W. again, “which excludes the transformation of society by a reformist government while stable conditions remain.”

Had this been written by someone with a background of Reformism and no knowledge of Marxism one could accept it at its face value and attribute it to mere ignorance. With F.W. however it is otherwise—he has known for years the real Marxist attitude towards Reformism and therefore we know that he lies and lies deliberately in the vain attempt to provide a Marxist cover for his own capitulation to this very Reformism.
It is of course the easiest thing in the world to prove this. Since the First World War hardly a Marxist book or document has appeared which has not contained a characterisation of the real role which Reformism plays in capitalist society.
In 1919 there was held the First Congress of the Comintern. It was of course inevitable that this Congress should give its characterisation of the role of Reformism since the very formation of the Comintern was due to the realisation by revolutionary Marxists of the complete bankruptcy and degeneration of the reformist Second International. Its analysis of social democracy was as follows:
“As a result of the general economic development, the bourgeoisie of the richest countries, by means of small donations from its enormous profits, had the possibility of corrupting and seducing the upper strata of the working class, the aristocracy of labour. The petty-bourgeois ‘companions of struggle’ of Socialism made their way into the ranks of the official Social Democratic parties and gradually orientated these parties towards the bourgeoisie. The leaders of the pacific parliamentary movement, the trade union leaders, the secretaries, editors and employees of Social Democracy together came to form a caste of a working-class bureaucracy, with its own egotistic group interests, in reality hostile to Socialism.
 
“Thanks’ to all these circumstances official Social Democracy degenerated into an anti-socialist and chauvinist party.”
No mention here of “legalistic and democratic principles” but a Marxist analysis of the social basis of Social Democracy and of the inevitable anti-socialist  role which flows from this:
How did Lenin regard reformists? Did he perhaps regard them as people who, under favourable conditions, might perhaps “transform society”? Innumerable quotations rise to one’s mind here. One will be sufficient.
In “Left-wing Communism” Lenin describes the Social Democratic leaders as: “nothing more nor less than the ‘agents of the bourgeoisie in the labour movement’ (as we always express it), or ‘labour lieutenants of the capitalist class’, according to the excellent and highly expressive summary of the followers of Daniel De Leon in America.”
One more quotation, this time from Trotsky, will suffice here. In “The Only Road for Germany” Trotsky wrote as follows of the German reformists—who were no better and no worse than their brothers in other lands:
“The social democracy supports the bourgeois regime, not for the gains of the coal, the steel and the other magnates, but for the sake of those gains which it itself can obtain as a party, in the person of its numerically great and powerful apparatus. To be sure, Fascism in no way threatens the bourgeois regime, for the defence of which the social-democracy exists . (Our emphasis.) But Fascism endangers that role which the social democracy fulfils in the bourgeois regime and the income which the social democracy derives from this role it plays.
 
It is then these people whom all Marxists have agreed in characterising as “the labour lieutenants of the capital class”, and as existing “for the defence of the bourgeois regime”, it is these people, the social democrats who, according to F.W. are capable in Britain today of “bringing about, the transformation to Socialism!” And, so he claims, “there is nothing in Marxism which excludes” this!!
Let us point out once again that these characterisations of Reformism by all Marxists are not just mere abuse resulting from the treacherous role played by Reformism in the past. They are the result of the Marxist analysis of the social basis of Reformism from which flows the treacherous role which Reformism has not only played in the past but must always play . F.W. would be entitled to attempt to prove that today this social basis and therefore this role have changed but he is well aware that it would be quite impossible to do this and he therefore makes no such attempt. Instead, as we have said above, he is reduced to writing deliberate falsehoods regarding the Marxist attitude towards Reformism.
Nationalisation and Civil War 
How is it asks F.W., that the nationalisations which the Labour Government, has carried out have not led to civil war? Was it not anticipated that such be the case? And he goes on to explain to us that, so far as the Tory Party is concerned, “the balance of class forces renders it impotent to attempt a civil war.” He might, at same time have explained to us why it is that this same Tory Party has declared that should it return to office it does not intend to repeal any of the nationalisation measures passed by the Labour Government—steel nationalisation (not yet in operation anyway) excepted. But such an explanation would have led him inexorably towards a position which he rejects out of hand—that, after al1, the Labour Government has made no serious inroads into capitalist society.
 
It is true that in “Where is Britain Going?” Trotsky stated that “if a real Labour Government, came to power in Britain even in the most ultra-democratic manner, a civil war would be revealed as inevitable.” The emphasis here is of course on the word “real” and Trotsky goes on to define such a government as one “utterly devoted to the interests of the proletariat”. F.W. may think that we in fact have such a government in Britain today but we question whether even he would have the audacity to claim that Trotsky would have agreed with him.
The Tory Party and the British bourgeoisie which it represents have shown not the least desire for civil strife since the advent of the Labour Government,—this is true. In fact their attitude towards this Government has fundamentally been no different from their attitude towards Liberal Governments towards which they have been in opposition in the past. British Capitalism has, in fact, not the least need. at this stage, for organising, or for wishing to organise civil war, since the Government in office is composed of its own labour lieutenants who are not only carrying out a policy in its interests but are even, in some respects, carrying it out better than the Tory Party could have done in the present circumstances. 
The facts are these. British Imperialism, as the result of two world wars and the loss of its former world position, has, as F.W. rightly points out, declined. Some of the great industries which in the past were the most prosperous and profitable have become not only unprofitable to run but need huge investments, with no prospect of return to the capitalist investor, in order to be modernised. But such industries, e.g. Coal and Railways, have to be brought up to date if British capitalist economy as a whole is to have any chance of competing on the world market—that is to say of continuing to exist. Only the State—the Capitalist State let is be emphasised—can attempt to solve the problem by nationalising these industries, paying generous compensation to their former owners at the expense of the working class, and then modernising them out of taxation—i.e. in the last analysis also at the expense of the workers. That is why it has been repeatedly stated in the more outspoken sections of the capitalist press, such as the “Observer” that very few Tories were really opposed to the nationalisation of Coal and Railways. But the capitalist class itself is not unanimous on the subject of the extent to which such nationalisations should go. The only other significant nationalisation which the Labour Government has put through (though not yet effectively) is that of steel. Considerable sections of capitalist opinion (though by no means all) are opposed to this and it is of interest to note that this opposition was reflected inside the Labour Government itself. But even here one sees not the least sign of such opposition assuming the form of even a wish for civil war!
In carrying out its nationalisation measures the Labour Government has not only thus performed an essential service for British capitalism but at the same time has been able to hold in check temporarily the rising class aspirations of the British workers by representing such measure as the beginnings of Socialism. It is ironical that at the very time when the advanced workers are increasingly realising that they have been deceived in this connection F.W. should go over to the camp of those who have been deceiving them.
One mistake that the revolutionary left must be admitted. It did not believe that the Labour Government would fulfil its promises of nationalisations because it failed to realise that under the given circumstances such nationalisations actually coincided with the interests of British capitalism, and that therefore the Reformists were fully capable of carrying them out.
A final point may be made here. F.W. states that the British capitalists do not effectively oppose the nationalisations since they are suffering from “disintegration and demoralisation”. Does he perhaps claim that the capitalists of the U.S.A. are similarly suffering? How comes it that American capitalism has given such immense material aid to the British labour Government if it is in fact “transforming society” here? The very “period of relative social stability” in Britain of which F.W. writes is in fact, primarily due to this American assistance.
The Necessity for Smashing the Capitalist State Machine
 
“What” asks F.W., “of the old State, the armed bodies of men which experience has emphasised as the consistent enemy of the working class?” A remarkable thing has happened here it appears: “Today” announces F.W. “the state is no longer the completely reliable ally of the ruling class.” one must note here before going further that F.W. apparently still considers the British bourgeoisie to be the ruling class in Britain. What does it rule through, F.W. if not the Labour Government, the government which according to you is bringing about the transformation to Socialism? 
Why is the state no longer a completely reliable ally of the ruling class? F.W. gives us three reasons. In the first place “the change of ideas” in the country has drawn into its orbit considerable sections of the lower and upper middle class from which the state machine is recruited, Secondly, and this is really remarkable, “Nationalisation also has created a fresh layer of officials and middle class careerists  whose self-interest is tied increasingly to the extension of state ownership. This minor but growing grouping is thus torn from its traditional allegiance to the bourgeoisie” (our emphasis!). Thirdly: “Such social elements who comprise much of the state personnel have not since 1945 been drawn into any sharp social conflict with the working class and thereby retrained in the necessary vicious anti-working class sentiments”.
One can hardly say today, after the result of the 1950 General Election, that considerable sections of the lower and upper middle class still support the Labour Party. In any case a real  Labour Government could hardly rely upon the support of any section of the upper middle class. But even if the British Civil Service, Police Force, Army and Law Courts were permeated with Labour supporters, it would be impossible for a real  Labour Government, “utterly devoted to the interests of the proletariat” to use these bodies for its purposes. No doubt many individuals employed in the British capitalist state machine could be used in a workers’ state machine. But the capitalist state machine itself, with all its key positions in the hands of trained capitalist supporters and with its whole structure designed solely for the support and maintenance of capitalism, would have first to be smashed and a workers’ state machine constructed. Few capitalist state institutions could ever contain within themselves more supporters of the new, workers’ regime than the Russian Army did in 1917. Units of that Army took part in the struggle for power on the side of the Bolsheviks. Yet, once power had been won, that Army had to be completely destroyed and a new, Red Army built in its place. The capitalist state apparatus is a machine designed for a particular object—the maintenance of capitalist rule and the suppression of the working class. The workers need a state machine with precisely the opposite objectives—the maintenance of its rule and the suppression of the capitalist class. The same machine cannot be used for both purposes.

The argument that, “official and middle class careerists” (!) ) employed in the nationalised industries can or ever could represent an anti-capitalist force would be comical did it not come from a former supporter of our movement. On this basis the Post Office must for years have been a nest of anti-capitalist elements ! And the ex-coal-owner who gets a lucrative job on the Coal Board at once becomes a confirmed anti-capitalist. (Perhaps this accounts for his disinclination to wage civil war against the nationalisation of the Coal Industry!”
F.W. claims that, since 1945, the state personnel has not “been drawn into any sharp conflict with the working class”. We seem to recall the use of troops to replace the labour of striking dockers and that of police against workers’ anti-fascist meetings and demonstrations; nor did it seem that these instruments of state oppression functioned any less readily than formerly on these occasions.
According to F.W. “To argue that the repressive anti-working class nature of the state has been magnified during the last period is only an example of old ideas dying hard.” F.W. of course, is an expert on old ideas and the hardness of their dying. That is evident from the way he trots out, one after the other, all the old Fabian reformist ideas. It must be pointed out that a growth in the repressive powers of the capitalist state machine does not necessarily coincide with their immediate utilisation against the workers in the form of direct conflict. Since the recent war, for instance, there has been no conflict in Britain in any way comparable with that of the 1926 General Strike. But that is not to say that the capitalist state machine is not stronger than it was in 1926. In fact since 1945 such a tendency towards strengthening the capitalist state machine in Britain has continued to exist and it has continued to operate against the workers, with the support of the workers’ own “leaders” who have become increasingly bound up in this same capitalist state machine. We need only refer here to the wage-freeze and the growth of compulsory arbitration. Why otherwise is it that nearly every strike today is “illegal?” The full effects of this strengthening of the repressive powers of the capitalist state will only become apparent in the period of direct working-class struggle which lies ahead.
In his conclusion on this subject F.W. states “there is nothing in Marxism which states that disintegration of the ‘bureaucratic military machine’ must take the same spectacular form as Russia in 1917”. Once again he consciously and deliberately lies here. The precise forms of the smashing of the capitalist state machine will, of course, vary from country to country. But for years all Marxists have agreed that the essence of what happened in Russia, the smashing of the capitalist state machine , constitutes an inevitable and essential part of the victory of the working class in every country.
As long ago as April 1871, at the time of the Paris Commune, Marx wrote to Kugelman: If you look in the last chapter of my “Eighteenth Brumaire” you will see that I state that the next attempt of the French Revolution will be not to take over the bureaucratic military machine as had been the case up to then but to break  it and precisely this is the first condition for every real popular movement on the Continent. Precisely in this consists the attempt of our heroic Parisian comrades.” In commenting on this passage, Lenin, before the Russian Revolution of November 1917, pointed out that Marx limited this process of breaking the state machine to the Continent since at that time in Britain and the U.S.A. this machine had not yet assumed the same character as in the European countries. He adds, however, that since then similar bureaucratic military machines had arisen in. Britain and the U.S.A. also and that these also could only be dealt with in the same way. (“State and Revolution”) Since 1917, the British state machine has, of course, grown even more bureaucratic and more military in character.

A “Mixed Economy”
 
According to F.W. we have in Britain today “a mixed economy”. Apparently by this he means an economy composed of a mixture of capitalism and Socialism. It was believed, he writes “that no such system as a mixed economy could maintain itself”. Actually, of course, Marxists know that under the appropriate conditions such an economy can exist for a time. When the workers have attained state power it is possible and often necessary for them to allow considerable elements of capitalism to exist for a time in the economy" The prerequisites for such a state of affairs are state power in the hands of the workers and the use of this power to build up the state sector of industry for the eventual elimination of the privately owned sector. This is in fact what happened in the Soviet Union during the New Economic Policy.
But in Britain today not only does state power remain in the hands of the capitalists (as F.W. himself has to admit when he writes of them as “the ruling class”) but the state sector of industry, as the Labour leaders themselves proclaim, is being used precisely for the benefit of the privately owned sector: an exactly opposite state of affairs.
For F.W. however, the Labour Government has already gone a long way towards establishing Socialism in Britain. “The Labour Government” he writes “are â¦ close to the transformation of the economic laws of society”. Capital accumulation is increasingly, so he claims, under the control of the state, the “private sector” is under state control also; in fact the contradictions of capitalism are ceasing to exist before our eyes. We, of course, are unaware of it, “hampered” as we are “by the dead weight of an anti-marxist dogma.”
We have already dealt above with the reasons why in contemporary Britain the nationalisation of certain industries by the capitalist state has been necessary in the interests of the capitalists themselves. This is in fact no new thing. In Germany immediately after the First World War the capitalist state took over the Aluminium Industry since the development of this industry was essential for the whole German capitalist economy and since private capitalist investors would not risk investing in it. Likewise in pre-war Poland the greater part of industry and almost the whole of heavy industry was in the hands of the capitalist state since private capitalist investors could not find the funds necessary for their development. Going back further still, in a number of capitalist states the railways had to be built and run by the state.
The same thing applies to other measures which the Labour Government has taken regarding import and export control, control of investment etc. They have been in existence in many capitalist states and in fact are bound to exist to an even greater extent in the future, pending the proletarian revolution. The whole tendency of modern capitalism as has been repeatedly pointed out by Marxists, lies in this direction. Capitalism is in fact forced to make attempts to overcome its own anarchy of production if it is to continue to survive under modern conditions. The first attempts in this direction are represented by the organisation of cartels and trusts; later the direct intervention of the state become increasingly necessary, it is particularly the case in time of war but though the return to peacetime conditions usually brings a certain relaxation of state control it does not halt the general tendency. The most complete attempts of state control were made in Hitler’s Germany which went further in this direction that the Labour government had done.
Even so far as surmounting the anarchy of capitalist production at home is concerned, such state control can only have a limited effect. And on the decisive world market this anarchy is inevitably intensified since state control is needed by the capitalist, precisely in order to render the national industries better able to compete on this world market. Naturally the whole process of state control over industry remains in the hands of the capitalist class and its representatives, e.g. in Britain the management of the nationalised industries remains in the hands of much the same people who ran them previously—plus a number of labour lieutenants of capitalism who have thus been rewarded for services rendered with jobs at several thousands a year. In such a state-controlled economy the profit motive—the fundamental cause of capitalist crises—naturally remains untouched. In fact the control itself exists solely for the maintenance and the increase of profits.
Thus when F.W. gives us his ideas as to how an isolated planned socialist economy would function and implies that much of this already applies to Britain today he is “merely” mistaking capitalism for socialism!  He sees things as the exact opposite of what they really are. Thus he is much impressed by the fact that a big percentage of capital investment in Britain is taking place “within the confines of state industry”. To him this is a step towards the socialist planned economy whereas it is merely the natural consequence of the modernisation of the out-of-date nationalised industries by the capitalist state in order to render British capitalist industry as a whole more able to compete on the world market. Amazingly enough, to him the fundamental feature in the “transformation of the economic laws of society” which the Labour Government is allegedly approaching lies in the fact that foreign goods cannot today effectively interfere with British production by “undercutting on the home market”(!) In this he appears to discern some profound socialist measure, a step towards the monopoly of foreign trade of a workers’ state! Since the very inception of capitalism, capitalist states have endeavoured to protect their home markets from “interference” by foreign goods in one way or another. In the past the means used has been mainly protective tariffs; today the tendency is to employ the yet more effective means of direct state control of imports and exports. Nazi Germany perforce led the way here also. Far from averting or softening world crises or their effects on the national economy such measures must of course, in the last analysis, only serve to intensify them.
The Reasons for F.W.’s capitulation to Reformism
 
We have now followed F.W. through the arguments by means of which he attempts to justify his capitulation to Reformism. None of them are in any way new and he must have answered all of them himself many times during the period when he was a Marxist. It remains to say something further about the reasons for this capitulation. As we have said earlier the basic reason appears to be the fact that events have moved more slowly than he (and we) had anticipated. But if this is a reason for pessimism and for desertion to Reformism then F.W. and those like him should never have joined the revolutionary movement in the first place. Were they not aware that over a hundred years ago , Marx and Engels, the founders of our movement, had regarded the proletarian revolution in Europe as imminent? They proved incorrect as we and others have proved incorrect, not because the basic analysis was wrong but because, while the science of Marxism enables us to understand the necessary course of development of capitalist society, it cannot, determine the precise tempo of this development. Such exactitude is not at the disposal of the social sciences.
As Lenin wrote in “Left--wing Communism” “parliamentarism is historically worn-out,” in a world-historical sense; that is to say, the epoch of bourgeois parliaments has come to an end , the epoch of Proletarian Revolution has begun . This is incontestably true. But the scale of the world’s history is not reckoned by decades. Ten or twenty years sooner or later—this from the point of view of world-historic scale—makes no difference; from the point of view of world history, it is a trifle, which cannot be even approximately reckoned.” 
This is not of course to say that Marxists cannot make prognoses as to the tempo of developments. They have to make such prognoses and to act on them. But, as Trotsky repeatedly pointed out, every such prognosis contains an element of uncertainty and events may in fact take a course difference from that which we expected. It is then necessary to analyse the situation anew and construct fresh prognoses. Many times in the past, this has happened. Again and again the tempo of development  has proved to be other than was expected, but, and this is the decisive point, the development itself  has continued to justify the Marxist analysis of the growing crisis of capitalism which can only be solved by the world proletarian revolution. All attempts, such as that made by F.W. to find some other way out, e.g. by reliance upon Reformism, have not only failed utterly but have and must result only in helping to prolong the crisis of capitalism and of humanity and to retard its revolutionary solution.
The road towards the proletarian revolution is a long and difficult one. Only a thorough grasp of Marxist theory can enable revolutionaries to overcome all the difficulties and endure all the reverses which inevitably arise. It is obvious that F.W. did not really have this thorough understanding of Marxism even when he was still with us. Mere lip-service to Marxism is of little avail in time of difficulty, as his evaluation abundantly shows.

F.W. and the Left Wing

It is a fortunate, though inevitable, feature of the desertion of our movement by renegades that the very alternatives which they offer must of necessity be such as to help to attach yet more firmly to the movement both newcomers and those who remain.
Let us examine, for instance, the policy which F.W. is offering to left wingers in the Labour Party. He starts by stating, quite falsely, that the non-Stalinist left have failed “to make headway in presenting themselves as an alternative grouping”. We would claim, on the contrary, that the revolutionary Marxist left in the Labour Party is today better organised and making more headway than it has ever done. Nor are the prospects immediately facing them such as F.W. has described. F.W. himself has chosen to desert the movement for Reformism just at the time when thinking labour workers are beg inning to realise, however unclearly at first, its real character. It is now obvious for instance that even had the Labour Leaders been returned with a substantial majority at the last election the days of significant nationalisations by them would still have been over. As it is, it seems from their recent speeches that the very prospect of further nationalisations is now openly abandoned by them. (So much, incidentally, for F.W.’s “transformation of society!”) 
Let us, however, for the sake of argument, grant him his premises; let us suppose with him that there is no centre in the Labour Party for left-wingers to gravitate towards. What is he offering them? In point of fact nothing not already offered them by various reformist groupings of intellectuals, such as “Keep Left”, plus a little Marxist phraseology. Very little, actually, which would not be acceptable to Transport House itself. Indeed, the lack of criticism of the Labour Government in his document is really remarkable. He mentions, in passing, that it has committed “unadoubted blunders and omissions” once even goes so far as to admit that it has a “tendency” and even a strong one, to “yield to the demands of the capitalist class”—though why it should have this “tendency” he fails to explain. However, it does not appear that this, admittedly rather deplorable “tendency” is of any real importance since, we are told, it has already “been more than held in check by the massed weight of the working class”.
It would seem then that there is very 1ittle that left-wingers can do, according to F .W., that is not already being done quite effectively by the Labour Government. Why, in point of fact, a left wing at all, if the Labour Government is doing the job? However, there are a few prospects of activity which F.W. holds out to them. They must, it seems, make “a serious and sustained effort to enter into planning the transformation of society primarily through parliamentary action” (Emphasis F.W.’s). Once again, in view of his general attitude this seems a little superfluous, though perhaps he is merely indirectly advising left-wingers to hasten to make careers for themselves as M.P.s! But it appears that there are still some things for the Left to discuss: questions concerning “the speed and priorities to be established, particularly over the forms of administration and semi-technical questions”. But not on any account must the Left concern itself with any “general mouthings” about the nationalisation of all the basic means of production and distribution and their operation under workers’ control. Why, exclaims F.W. such things as that are not even “in a form capable to taking parliamentary shape!”
It almost seems as though F.W. himself half realises that he has nothing to offer the left wing. For towards the end of his document he returns to the subject and assures his readers that he really offers them “ample scope for a real rallying of the forces of the Left” through support of “consolidation, democratisation and internationalism”. These broad conceptions are dealt with in a few vague phrases and that is all. In point of fact by the end of his document it is obvious not only that F.W. has nothing to offer the left wing but that he is not even a left winger in any sense himself. His conversion to Reformism has been so complete that he is not even a “left” reformist. The few “leftish” phrases in his statement are a very thin smoke-screen. Having had a left political past he apparently feels the need to attempt to justify his capitulation to former associates, and perhaps even to himself. But this is the extent of his connection with any real left movement.
One final point remains to be touched upon. F.W. appears to wish us to believe that, had the left wing in Britain pursued over the past five years the policy he now claims to offer them, they might have had “the opportunity of transforming not only the British but the world political scene”. Why and how this could have happened we are not told. However what is particularly interesting is that F.W. apparently foresees two possible and mutually exclusive perspectives for the future. On the one hand Labour may remain in office. In this case he stands for the reformist policy of his document. But, on the other hand, “a return of the Tories or a world slump” may “open up for the working class movement, a return to the more classical, direction action form of struggle”. Thus, according to F. W., the existence of a parliamentary majority of a dozen or so one way or the other will determine whether socialism will be established in Britain by parliamentary means or by means of the proletarian revolution.
This is, of course, not only parliamentary cretinism of the crassest sort but it also represents a dualism in F.W’s political outlook which presumably exists only as a relic of his past and which cannot be lasting. All his remarks go to show that he no longer has any taste for what, he terms “the more classical direct action form of struggle!” He finds such things as “the transformation of the content of education at school and in adult life” (under capitalism!) and the parliamentary sphere so much more congenial D Should in fact a Tory Government be returned we can expect to hear no more from F.W. of such things as direct action but to find him quietly confining himself to the advocacy of parliament action upon traditional lines—traditional, that is, to Reformism.
[1] Since the authors of this article wrote it another of the deserters — J.H.—has also produced a document. The document of J.H. is miserable enough in its content, with its thesis that reformism can do the job. The thesis is served complete with escape-clause that the revolutionary development cannot excluded. What is all the more miserable however, is that while it is evident, that the conclusions of J.H. are identical those of W., he does not have the courage to bring them so sharply before his ex-comrades. The statement of J.H. will be dealt with elsewhere. (Ed.) 

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 25 March 2009


ixon (Denzil Harber): 1946: Economic Revival — the Test of Experience



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Paul Dixon (Denzil Harber)
Economic Revival — the Test of Experience

“Economic Revival — the Test of Experience”, by Paul Dixon, (Denzil Dean Harber) Internal Bulletin RCP, August, 1946, 3 pages, (1,183 words). Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Ted Crawford and Paul Flewers.
One of the differences which the RCP Majority had with the resolution “The New Imperialist Peace and the Building of the Parties of the Fourth International” which was passed at the recent International Pre-Conference arose over the question of Economic perspective for Europe. That resolution stated:
“This restoration of economic activity in the capitalist countries hit by the war, and in particular in the countries on the European continent will be characterised by its particularly slow rhythm and these countries will thus remain on a level approaching stagnation and slump.”
Such was the position held by the Majority of the Fourth International at the Conference; such was the position vigorously defended by our own Minority only a few weeks back in discussions held at London aggregates. The comrades of the Minority stated again and again that only after the European working class had been defeated would European capitalism be able to lift its economy above “a level approaching stagnation and slump.”
The RCP Majority held a different point of view (which as Comrade Healy did not fail to repeat, was in an international minority on this as on other issues) which has been expressed in the resolution to be submitted to our forthcoming congress and entitled “Economic Estimation of our Epoch and the Immediate Economic Perspective for Europe.” There we wrote:
Particularly in view of the fact that this crisis is not a crisis of overproduction and that the capitalists are not being attacked in western Europe by the mass organisations, but receive the direct assistance and support of Social Democracy and Stalinism, a cyclical upswing is inevitable. It is not excluded that, particularly for Western Europe, (with the exception of Germany and Austria) the productive figures can even reach and surpass the pre-war level in the next period.
“All the factors on a world and European scale indicate that the economic activity in Western Europe in the next period is not one of stagnation and slump but one of revival and boom.”
It was, of course, also pointed out in the same resolution, that a new recovery can only prepare the way for an even greater slump and economic crisis than in the past.”
One of the advantages of a discussion over the immediate perspectives of capitalist economy lies in the fact that events themselves very speedily show which prognosis has been correct. The present discussion provides no exception to this—before the discussion is even over the evidence of the events is before us.
We have recently received some internal bulletins issued by our French Section in preparation for its forthcoming National Congress. In one of these bulletins, we find a “Draft General Political Thesis for the Third Congress of the PCI” signed by leading members of the Majority of the PCI comrades who supported the International document, among them Pierre Frank. In this document there is a section headed “Partial Recovery” which reads as follows:
“The Stalinist policy of systematic efforts for production by the working class together with the crumbs obtained from American imperia1ism or from plundering Germany, have permitted a partia1 economic recovery. The revolutionary party must take this fact into consideration in its immediate estimation of the situation.
This recovery must, however, be given its real value. The post-war period begins with enormous needs in every country, especially in the sphere of articles of consumption; during the period of reconversion of industry from a war footing there is, in fact, a relative underproduction. Under present conditions, only a lack of raw materials prevents French production from equalling, and even surpassing the level of 1938.” 
The resolution then goes on to state that this recovery cannot solve any of the fundamental problems of French economy but must even aggravate them in the long run—a point upon which everyone has been in agreement all along. 
Other documents in the French discussion state it as a fact recognised by all sections of the PCI that industrial production in France has now reached about 80% of 1938 and is still growing. A few months ago Comrade Goffe was denying on the Central Committee, that French industrial production had or could reach even 60% of 1938 level!
In a document “The French Situation” (signed by other members of the French Majority, including Marcoux — editor of “La Verite”) we read:
“In August 1944 the productive apparatus was completely disorganised. This situation was full of peril for the French bourgeoisie.
The policy of ‘produce first of all’ advocated by the Stalinists, permitted the bourgeoisie to pass through this difficult period. Thanks to the efforts of the workers and to their super-exploitation, the bourgeoisie has succeeded in getting together again its productive apparatus and in attaining 80% of the pre-war productive level.
The statements that at least twenty three years would be necessary to attain the level of 1938 have been proved to be false.”
The comrades do not state who made the statements referred to in the last paragraph, but it is clear who made them; the comrades of the international leadership who were responsible for the passage in the resolution of the conference which laid it down that the recovery in Europe “will be characterised by its particularly slow rhythm and these countries will thus remain on a level approaching stagnation and slump.”
After the clear evidence of the facts, as demonstrated of the French comrades quoted above, there will be few, one fancies, who will attempt to defend today that most unfortunate prognosis. But there will be quite a number, we fear, who will attempt to slur over the whole issue, who will attempt to correct the false prognosis made at the International conference, silently and without any admission of a mistake, or any attempt at analysing how that mistake came to be made. From past experience, we believe that our Minority will attempt to do this.
For our part, we do not wish to over-emphasise such an error. Any international leadership must make mistakes from time to time, even the most experienced, and, of necessity, our international leadership today is far from being an experienced one. But if mistakes are made, they must be recognised and analysed. Only thus can their repetition be avoided in the future and the lessons drawn for the whole movement.
One such lesson can be drawn straight away so far as the RCP Minority is concerned. These comrades pin their faith not on an objective Marxist analysis of events, but on blind support of an “international majority.” They should have already learned over the question of the withdrawal of the Red Army from occupied territories that this is a dangerous path to follow. Here is another lesson for them. The comrades of the RCP Majority on the other hand, now receive further evidence that in tenaciously holding to the conclusions they draw from an independent Marxist analysis of events, regardless of international majorities or minorities they are helping to establish clear political positions and doing the best service in building the Fourth International.

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 25 March 2009


ixon (Denzil Harber): 1946: Marxism and Prognoses, A reply to comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Paul Dixon (Denzil Harber)
Marxism and Prognoses
A reply to comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy

“Marxism and Prognoses,—A reply to comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy” Internal Bulletin RCP, 22 February 1946, by Paul Dixon (Denzil Dean Harber), 11 pages, (4,604 words). Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Ted Crawford and Paul Flewers.
Our party has now before it a document from comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy entitled: “The Marxist method versus Eclecticism and Empiricism. This document informs the RCP, and the International that: “the discussion, on the concrete question of entry into the Labour Party has now been transformed into a discussion on the marxist method . Consequently the differences between the majority and minority have considerably deepened, a fact which underlines the need for a thorough-going discussion on them. The majority of the leadership of the RCP, also our three comrades inform us, has “pledged adherence to empiricism in the field of tactics”. It has substituted “electicism as a method” for Marxist prognosis.
We have thus weighty matters to discuss with comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy, and we have every right to expect serious arguments from them. Let us see what they give us. We intend confining ourselves in the present document to the general questions of Marxist method raised by our comrades. For on the other questions raised by them they give us nothing that is new.
	' 
1. Marxist Prognoses.
Our three comrades reproduce a quotation from Trotsky’s “In Defence of Marxism” which I gave in my reply to comrade Condon’s “British Perspectives”. This quotation, which it is hardly necessary to reproduce in full yet again ends thus:
“I made reservations several times as to the conditionality of my prognosis as ONE of several possible variants.
They then give a statement of my own, from the same document which runs thus: 
“And comrades are perfectly entitled to put forward the prognosis of entry, to use the words of Trotsky as one of several possible variants and to refuse to bind themselves to one variant as being certain.” 
	 
This the comrades say is a false method of argument “(second rate syllogistic reasoning, etc”). It is a method which our three comrades want the membership “to note carefully”. For, they state, Trotsky in speaking of this prognosis as one of several possible variants”. In actual fact, our comrades state, “although every prognosis is conditional, it by no means follows that it has several variants, otherwise the orientation of the party would be virtually impossible.”
Now from all this one of two things follows; either comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy have, while taking a few quotations from my document, not troubled to read it as a whole, or else they are deliberately attempting to distort, to misrepresent, what I have said in it. For nowhere do I either state that “every prognosis has several variants” or give any grounds for assuming that this is the position that I support.
Let me refer comrades back to my reply to comrade Condon. They will find there the quotation from Trotsky which the comrades have reproduced. They will also find the statement: “And comrades are perfectly entitled to put forward the prognosis of entry, etc., etc.” But in between these two quotations they will find a whole page which our comrades have ignored. They will find, for instance, this passage:
“Now it can be argued that our Congress was correct or that it was incorrect in thus refusing to commit the Party to entry, and in any case there is no serious political issue involved here. But even if it is believed, as I believe myself, that entry in the future is a practical certainty, it is impossible to accuse the Congress of adopting an undialectical approach in refusing to accept this. The whole question is one of prognosis, one of estimating which is the most likely future course of development for the Labour Party under the conditions prevailing in the present period of capital decline.”
and then comes the message already quoted.
“And comrades are perfectly entitled to put forward the prognosis of entry, to use the words of Trotsky, as ‘one of several possible variants’, and to refuse to bind themselves to one variant as being certain.”
What is being argued in this passage? Is it that; “every prognosis has several variants?” Nothing of the sort; all that is being demonstrated is that it is permissable within the framework of the Marxist method, for comrades to “Refuse to bind themselves to one variant (of the prognosis) as being certain.” Whether it is correct for this to be done in a given case is quite another question and I clearly indicate in the above-quoted passage that I personally believe that a definite prognosis for entry can be arrived at.
But the important thing to establish is that, in a given case, it may be a mistake in estimating a situation to lay down several possible variants instead of one definite prognosis, this is not a break with the method  of Marxism. Why was this necessary to argue out this rather obvious point in my reply to comrade Condon? Because it was then the position of at least some members of the Minority that not to arrive at one definite prognosis in all situations was a break with the Marxist method . Comrade Healy gave clear expression to this attitude at our Congress when he stated that to him the method of Marxism was a “precision instrument ”, i.e one that enables us to make exact  prognoses. Moreover it appears that the material on this subject contained in my reply to Comrade Condon did not appear in vain—comrade Healy has now obviously, if silently, abandoned his former viewpoint, as the present minority document (which he signs) shows.
The above, I think, effectively disposes of most of the arguments contained in several pages of the document of comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy, for they are based upon a totally false assumption—that I do not accept the need for a Marxist prognosis, but believe that all that is needed is to have “several possible variants”. In general our three comrades appear to be under a complete misunderstanding as to what was under discussion in my reply to comrade Condon. For instance they state:
“Here lies the basic mistake of Dixon’s documents. Not once does he analyse the objective situation and outline the definite trends which should constitute a prognosis. Instead he snatches a quotation from Trotsky which was related to the Soviet-Finnish war, and implies in his conclusion that such an analysis is not necessary since so far as the ‘entrist tactic’ and ‘open work’ is concerned; ‘You can pay your penny and take your choice’; this he justifies under the formula of ‘one of many (sic P.D.) variants’ (Soviet Finnish Balance Sheet).
“The weapon of Marxist investigation” wrote Trotsky, “must be constantly sharpened and applied”. Quotations from Lenin and Trotsky can never supplant such an investigation. So far as they have any significance it is only when they are related to ‘concrete reality ’. Today, the all-important task is to correctly investigate the objective situation in Britain, and from that derive a prognosis. No amount of quotations can accomplish this by themselves, such a task belongs to the application of Marxism to present conditions.”
Here indeed is a blow which misses its mark. No one reading my reply to comrade Condon could have been under the impression that I had set myself the task of analysing the objective situation in Britain and “outlining the definite trends which should constitute a prognosis.” What I set myself to do in that document was to dispose of the numerous factual and political errors contained in comrade Condon’s “Perspectives”. But if comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy want to know what is my analysis of the situation in Britain and my prognosis arising from this analysis, I can refer them to the document submitted by the Militant Group to the 1944 Fusion Conference, entitled: “Resolution on the Labour Party Tactic ”. This resolution which was submitted at a time when comrade Healy  (comrades Condon and Goldberg were, I believe, not yet members of the Party) was supporting the prognosis entry being “the least likely ” possibility and should be in any case very well known to our comrades of the Minority, since they have liberally drawn upon the ideas contained within it. To make the situation perfectly clear I would remind our three comrades that the ideas contained in this 1944 Resolution were reaffirmed by me in the “Statement of PJB and DDH to the CC and to the Membership ” submitted on the eve of the August 1945 Congress and that this same statement makes it clear why I do not consider this question of entry one which justifies a factional struggle under the present circumstances.
It must be assumed, I think, that our three comrades have read both the 1944 Resolution and the 1945 Statement referred to above, but that for factional purposes, they chose to ignore their existence in writing their present document. Otherwise they could hardly venture to bring forward some of the strange and utterly misconceived attacks which it contains.
“The quotation-snatcher Dixon”, thus comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy in their comradely fashion, “is quite obviously covering something up. He tells us confidently that he is in favour of entry into the Labour Party, but he rejects  the prognosis of the Minority which calls for an orientation in this direction now. At the same time he declares in favour “open work” but fails to define the prognisis from which he draws this tactical conclusion. Dixon rejects  one prognosis and refuses  to outline the other. The conclusion is obvious—Dixon has no prognosis.”
This would be a very telling line of argument on the part of our three comrades were the facts contained in it correct. Unhappily for these comrades, however, the facts are not correct, and even more unhappily them—it can be demonstrated that not only are the facts incorrect but that they—comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy, knew this. This can fortunately be proved with the utmost readiness by quotations from the above mentioned “Statement of PJB and DDH to the C.C. and Membership.” We stated there:
“â¦meanwhile the C.C. resolution lays down as our main immediate task the building of the independent party. With this also we agree—the situation in the LP today is not yet such as would bring us significant gains if we were to enter now. So long as LP work still brings little or none, the main emphasis must lie in independent work. True we could dig ourselves in by entering the LP now and thus gain positions that we would find valuable in the coming period but this gain would be more than balanced by the loss of members and influence that we are at present getting by independent “open” work.
Let us pause here to urge our comrades of the minority to mark the above quoted passage well. Will they please note that it makes perfectly clear why I support “open work” in the present period?
To continue
“True we have one difference with the CC Resolution—it does not state that it is certain that we shall have to enter the LP in the coming period, as we believe it is.”
To pause again for the benefit of our three comrades—will they please observe a definite prognosis  here—in favour of eventual entry into the LP?
But once again to continue:
But we have not thought and do not think that it is worth carrying on a factional struggle inside the Party as to whether it is ‘possible’, ‘probable’, ‘most probable’ or ‘certain’ that we shall have to enter the LP in the future. For we do not consider that any real gain would result from such a discussion for the Party, or that, if the Party were to decide that entry in the future was certain, this would in any way affect our work or the entry itself. And past unhappy experience has convinced us that factional struggle unless thoroughly justified in this way is something to be avoided.”
Once again, will comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy be good enough to note—these are the reasons why I do not support the Minority: Let me remind the comrades that the primary purpose of such internal discussions as we are now conducting is that of clarifying the membership. Such clarification can hardly be assisted by the deliberate misrepresentation on an opponent’s viewpoint of which these comrades are so obviously guilty in the present instance
2. Eclecticism
Comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy spend some three pages of their document in attempting to find contradictions, dual perspectives, etc., in the resolution on Perspectives passed by our recent Congress. Now the arguments which they give here are practically identical in character with those we have already had from the Minority in the document of comrades Goffe and Healy entitled: “After the Conference—the LP and ILP. Discussion”. It so happens that I have dealt very fully with these alleged contradictions in my “Reply to comrades Goffe and Healy”, which appeared shortly after our three comrades had written their present document. Under these circumstances I refer our comrades to this: “Reply to comrades Goffe and Healy” and pass over here these three pages of their document. Needless to say, should they, having read the “Reply to comrades Goffe and Healy”, wish to take the matter up further we shall be  most willing  to discuss it with them.
3. Empiricism.
The section of which deals with this question is perhaps the most remarkable part of the document which our three comrades have written. It displays a quite astounding ignorance—to make the most charitable assumption.
We are first given on co again the well-worn quotation from the P.B. Reply to the “Pre-conference Discussion”; 
“It is precisely in the field of tactics that empirical adaption is necessary .”
 
“Empiricism” exclaim our three comrades, “Comrade Trotsky explained, is to operate from one occasion to the next guided not by the analysis of historica1 development but by practical experience, routinismj rule of thumb and instinct. Empiricism is the adoption of tactics without a Marxist evaluation of events. That is Haston’s conception of the present relationship of the party to the class.”
Let us first reassure our comrades of the Minority once again; Empiricism is all that they (and comrade Trotsky) say it is in fact, a bad thing and alien to the whole conception of Marxism . In fact we have already told them this in our Reply to comrade Condon where we wrote:
“It (Empiricism as a method) means that one does not deduce one’s plan of action for a given situation from a Marxist analysis of that situation and of the development of' society as a whole, but evolves a plan of action based only upon day-to-day ‘practical’ considerations.”
In this same reply to comrade Condon we go on to state:
“Nothing of this sort has ever been advocated either by comrade Haston or any other member of the Majority of our party.”
And we must quite categorically repeat this statement to our comrades of the Minority here. 
 
But, let us point out to them yet once again, this condemnation of Empiricism in no way invalidates empirical adaption in the field of tactics ! Before I go on to explain this riddle which they cannot (or will not) solve, I fear that I must give them a few quotations, despite their professed distaste for these. (One notices, by the way, that they use a. great many quotations themselves.)
(a) “The hypotheses with which we begin are not arbitrary ones, not dogmas; they are real hypotheses which can be made abstract only in the imagination. They are the real individuals, their activities and their material conditions of life, both those already existing and those produced by their own activities. These hypotheses are therefore provable in a purely empirical manner.”
(b) “Empirical observation must in each separate case prove the connection between social and political stratification empirically and without any mystification and speculation.”
(c) “Its hypotheses are men, not in any fantastic seclusion or fixation, but in their real, empirically observable process of development under definite conditions.”
(d) “Communism is empirically possible as the simultaneous act of the dominant peoples â¦.”
What do our three comrades think of these quotations? They emanate, let us assure them from a quite authoritative source, i.e. the “German Ideology” of Marx and Engels , a work from, which several dozen similar quotations could very easily be selected. Do they perhaps suggest to our comrades that while the word “Empiricism ” has one meaning the word, “empirical ” can have as used by Marxists often quite another? Such is in fact the case and when I look up the word “empirisch” (empirical) in the list of difficult words which are explained at the end of the German version of the “German Ideology” (from which I have just made the above translations, I find it explained thus;
 
“Empirical—belonging to the factual world of material experience .”
 
The riddle is in fact a very easy one. Empiricism is a philosophical system which amounts to the abandonment of theory and the sole reliance upon practical experience. But the word empirical has not of necessity any association with such philosophical systems; it can be used by Marxists to mean “based upon factual, material experience” which is after all the basis of the whole of Marxism and indeed of human knowledge.

> This is the sense in which Marx and Engels used the word in “The German Ideology”; it is also the sense in which comrade Haston used it in the pre-Congress discussions.
Thus the whole case  which is so hotly argued against comrade Haston, myself and the PB by the comrades of the Minority rests upon â¦ a confusion in terminology on the part of the comrades of the Minority . To them “empirical” is an “adjective derived from “Empiricism” and nothing more!
This misunderstanding on the part of comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy means that once again their most violent attacks miss their mark and land in the air. Thus they inform us:
“Of course the changing tempo of events sometimes illuminates the precision, incompleteness or incorrectness of our assessment of the situation and of our tactical conclusions. Sometimes far-reaching corrections, as Dixon points out are necessary; a turn of the wheel and we are on the right path again. The difference between Marxists and empiricists is that the former can see the road and the latter cannot. They venture into the unknown and stumble from mistake to mistake precisely because they are minus the faculty which Marxists possess â¦. the dialectical method of analysis.”
Very true comrades, except, of course, that it isn’t only “the changing tempo of events which renders a reassessment on our part necessary—quite often even the events themselves turn out quite differently from what we have expected. But what you refuse to understand, is that the corrections Marxists have sometimes to make are always made upon the basis not only of the dialectical method of analysis  but upon that of the events themselves i.e., upon that of practical experience . Thus in this sense they are made empirically . That is all, and it is surely very simple. But let us make it even simpler by a practical example. We in this country expected at one time that the ILP would be affiliated to the LP within a certain immediate period. We drew this conclusion from a Marxist analysis of the situation as we saw it. But in actual fact the ILP did not secure affiliation in this way and affiliation was in fact postponed — apparently indefinitely. Thus, the empirical fact  of the non-affiliation of the ILP led us to change our tactics in relation to that party. Naturally this change was carried out upon the basis of a Marxian analysis of the new factual, empirical situation. This, comrades of the Minority, is all that we mean by “empirical adaption.”
Our three comrades have a somewhat puzzling passage on this quotation of empirical adaption. They write:
“Haston’s error is quite important as we have shown, but he is cautious and circumspect when compared to Dixon. Haston says empirical adaption is confined to the field of tactics. Dixon says that it is applied to the field of prognosis or perspective .” 
 
Since our comrades underline this passage one can only assume that they attach some special meaning to it but it is difficult to see what this can be. Apparently they wish to differentiate between “the field of tactics” and that of “prognosis or perspective”. Since, however, the former (tactics) obviously flow from, and are dependent upon the latter (prognosis or perspective) it is not possible to see the value of such a differentiation in the present connection. Perhaps our three comrades would explain?
It is to be hoped that by now we have succeeded in making the meaning of the term “empirical adaption” sufficiently clear to our comrades of the Minority, and that in future they will refrain from making themselves ludicrous by launching accusations against comrade Haston of “a. rejection of political prognoses” and against myself of “rejecting the methodology of Marxism itself”(!) 
However to make quite sure let us give them yet another quotation:
 
“A second remarkable lesson in class strategy! It shows that even finance-capital, with the levers of the whole social machine under its contro1, cannot infallibly estimate, at a single a priori glance, the full reality of a political situation. It enters into the struggle and, in the development of the struggle, on the basis of experience gained in the struggle, it corrects its analysis and makes it more precise. This in general, is the only possible method in political questions of being oriented correctly and at the same time actively.” (L. Trotsky Once Again, Whither France .)
It must come as somewhat of a shock to comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy to learn that there is something in common between the method of political orientation used by finance capital and that used by revolutionary Marxists! And an even greater shock to learn that this common factor is precisely what we term empirical adaption! Let us hasten to reassure them that there is also a difference here. Both the revolutionary Marxist and the protagonists of finance capital make an analysis of a given situation, but while the revolutionary Marxist makes his analysis upon the basis of conscious dialectical understanding of the economic social and political forces, the protagonist of finance capital makes his upon the basis of empiricism. But both the revolutionary, Marxist and the protagonist of finance capital have this in common as Trotsky points out,—they both correct and sharpen their analysis upon the “basis of  experience gained in the struggle”, i.e. upon the basis of empirical adaption.
Conclusions
Our three comrades have made great accusations of “empiricism”, “eclecticism” “revisionism”. They have also announced—with a visible air of triumph—that “the differences between the Majority and the Minority have considerably deepened”. One cannot but remark here that,  right from the time of the 1944 Fusion Conference, the attitude of the Minority towards differences with the rest of our Party has been remarkably reminiscent of the attitude of Voltaire towards God—it will be remembered that Voltaire held that if God did not in fact exist, it would be necessary to invent him.
Let us now seek to determine how great are our differences on this question of Marxist prognoses. Let us first state, in as concise a form as possible, the attitude which we hold on this subject.
(i) All Marxist prognoses are conditional. It is not possible to make absolute  prognoses in relation to human society since it is not possible adequately to take into account all the factors involved. (An exception can perhaps be made in the case of certain general  prognoses—such as that capitalism leads to war, class struggle, etc. etc.) 
In other words the method of Marxism is not precision instrument.
(ii) Nevertheless, though no prognosis can have an absolute value, this in no way signifies that prognoses re of no value to revolutionary Marxists. On the contrary, it is a fundamental task of the proletarian party and its leadership to carry out analyses of the economic, social and political forces of society upon the basis of the Marxian dialectical method, and to formulate as a result of such analyses prognoses which shall guide the party in its struggle for the leadership of the working class and the dictatorship of the proletariat.
(iii) This does not mean that under all circumstances it is possible for the proletarian party to arrive at, and to act upon the basis of one single prognosis. Under some conditions, where a more precise analysis is not possible, it can limit itself to defining two or more likely variants of the future course of events. Under other, very fluid, conditions, it has to renounce all prognosis for a time and be content to wait and see.
(iv) Even where a single prognosis has been arrived at, the party must be continually on the watch to ascertain how this prognosis stands up to the empirical unfoldment of events. Where necessary it must carry out a.  new Marxist analysis, to adapt its prognosis and the strategy and tactics flowing from it to this same empirical development of events. This is what is meant by empirical adaption. 
(v) Empiricism as a method  consists in the rejection of analyses based upon the method of Marxism and the formulation of analyses based upon day-to-day episodic considerations. Such a method may sometimes lead to correct results especially where it is employed by the leaders of the capitalist class with their long practical experience of rule and their wide knowledge of the social forces involved. But it is in all respects inferior to the dialectical method of Marxism, and one which cannot be employed by the proletarian party and its leadership.
Now before our comrades of the Minority continue with their accusations of “empiricism”, “revisionism” etc., let them tell us (and the whole International, if, they wish) wherein they differ from the above formulations . The only difference which it can be anticipated they will raise (now that they have tacitly abandoned the definition of the method of Marxism as a “precision instrument”) is that they object to the term “empirical adaption as describing the process outlined in (iv)  above. If that is the only difference they can raise then the whole question become a sterile dispute over terminology. For it is perfectly obvious from my “Reply to Comrade Condon” that we have used this term “empirical adaption” in precisely the sense outlined above, and in no other. Moreover, we were perfectly entitled to use the term empirical adaption in this way according to the traditions of Marxism . Had our comrades of the Minority not been so eager, in the first place to cover up their own unfortunate formulation of the precision instrument and in the second place to invent new differences with the Majority, this whole dispute would never have arisen. 
One last word. In my original reply to comrade Condon I raise a great many points of criticism which are not dealt with in the present document from comrades Condon, Goldberg and Healy,—points which I feel demand a reply. Since all the points in dispute were first raised by Comrade Condon, one of the signatories of this document I feel that it is their duty to let the Party know where they stand with regard to them today. 
Paul Dixon 
22.2.46 

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 March 2009


ixon (Denzil Harber): 1940-43: 4 internal bulletins/documents



Denzil Dean Harber   |   ETOL Main Page

Paul Dixon (Denzil Harber)
4 Internal Bulletins/Documents
The following 4 internal bulletins/documents were all found in the Richardson Collection (Box 93 File 3) at London University Library. For their background and the flavour of the organisation and times see Upham History of British Trotskyism Ch.10 in ETOL .
Document 3 is cited by Upham Chapter 10, note 122. There may be a good many more IBs by Harber in that and other collections.
Of the individuals mentioned S is “Stuart”, that is Sam Gordon JL is John Lawrence, JEG is John Goffe, MJ is Margaret Johns, JLR is John Robinson of the “Left Faction”, ESJ is Starkey Jackson, CvG is Charlie van Gelderen TM is Tom Mercer. Others I have not yet been able to identify. Upham is incorrect that Starkey Jackson was a submariner. An RAMC private, he died when his troopship went down 28 November 1942.
Ted Crawford transcriber

1. Internal Bulletin RSL, August 1940 pp.1-5, by Denzil Dean Harber, 3 pages, (3,208 words). 
August 1940
Price 3d.
Notice: In order to conserve paper supplies, the number of internal bulletins sent to branches are being cut down. Branches should make arrangements to pass them round.
*********
Contents
1.	Our organisation and its immediate tasks 
2.	A note from East London and a reply by ESJ. 
3.	Defeatism and Defencism R.M. (Cardiff).
4.	Origin of the Present Situation T.M. (Glasgow)
Attached. What is Wrong with the Organisation? E. London.
*********
Our Organisation and its Immediate Tasks

Our organisation is at present facing a situation of tremendous difficulty a situation created by the fact that so far as Britain is concerned the present imperialist war only effectively began a few weeks ago with the German invasion of the low countries. Hence that wave of chauvinism among the masses, which we always foretold would take place at the beginning of an imperialist war, but which has been postponed in the present conflict by the hanging fire of actual hostilities, is now at last upon us. Our international organisation in the thesis, “War and the Fourth International” drawn up in 1934, stated with true revolutionary candour that under the conditions created by the mass chauvinism inevitably existing at the outbreak of imperialist war, no party, however revolutionary it might be, no matter how well-trained its cadres might be, could resist in its entirety the influence of chauvinism. The same document points out that even the Bolshevik Party could not escape this influence in the first imperialist war.
In the case therefore of our own tiny organisation, far too small even to play the role of a revolutionary party, we would expect to find under present conditions very definite signs of chauvinist influence. Some of us in the past have even doubted whether such a weak organisation could hope to survive the storms and stress of imperialist war, and even now if a correct policy is not pursued, the possibility of our being able to maintain our organisation is a very small one. Fortunately the influence of chauvinism upon our ranks was not  so great as might have been expected and now appears to have been almost entirely liquidated. Moreover the policy adopted by our organisation and embodied in the resolution passed by the Enlarged E.C.  on 25/5/40 should, if correctly carried out by the membership, enable us to whether the present difficulties successfully and to maintain our organisation and cadres until the not very distant future when the present chauvinism of the masses will be replaced by disillusionment in the war  and the readiness to struggle for class demands.
The policy of our organisation for the immediate future, however, must be based not only on the mood of the masses at  this future period but also upon their present mood. And without any doubt whatsoever their present mood is one of chauvinism based very largely upon the fear of invasion. While this mood lasts not only will the workers not listen to us but they will in many cases denounce us to the police as Fifth Columnists if we carry out an open propaganda against the war. If we had a revolutionary party with a membership of some thousands we could afford to sacrifice some comrades to carry on such open propaganda. Despite the loss of some dozens or even hundreds of members the party could still retain sufficient cadres to be able to function as an organisation. Our case is very different. As cannot be too often repeated we are not a party but merely a group. Of our small membership, a number are already in the armed forces, others will be there very shortly. If of the few active members that are left, a mere handful are arrested for open propaganda, the organisation will undoubtedly collapse. If this were to occur, the workers when they begin to turn away from support of the war, will not find even the nucleus of a revolutionary party in existence. No organised revolutionary movement will exist inside the L.P. to fight for the leadership of the leftward movement which must arise there and all the work of the past few years will have to begin again.
Consequently we cannot afford to smash our whole organisation now precisely when it is about to have the opportunity of playing a decisive role in the probable near future for the sake of those who wish us at all costs to ape the role of a revolutionary party. This does not mean that we must do nothing now. What we can do and how we can do it is stated in the resolution of the Enlarged EC. But it does not mean that we do not at this stage start mass distribution of anti-war leaflets or organise street sales of literature. Even before the war those forms of activity were secondary in importance to our work in the LPs and TUs, for the very good reason that the results obtained were very small. Under present circumstances not only would no results be obtained but expulsion from the L.P. would be certain and arrest either now or a little later highly probable. We cannot, of course, be certain that we will not be molested by the authorities even if we carry on along the lines of the EC resolution. In fact it is probable that arrests will take place, but that is no reason why we  should provoke them or make them more widespread than necessary. The same applies to expulsions from the L.P.
The “Oppositions” in the Group
So far as the bulk of our membership is concerned we feel that most of the  above remarks are unnecessary. After all the whole question was  discussed as long ago as the post-fusion National Conference early in 1939 and the resolution on this subject adopted there forms the basis for the resolution of the enlarged EC. Not a single provincial group has raised objection to this resolution of the Enlarged EC, in fact some provincial, groups, left without direction for some time due to technical difficulties at the centre, had arrived at almost precisely similar conclusions themselves before receipt of the document. But so far as some of the London groups are concerned the situation is rather different and opposition has been shown to the policy of the EC from two main sources. One of these need not be dealt with here at any length. Certain elements centred round the Camberwell Group have for years shown adventurist and sectarian tendencies; it was hardly to be expected that they would deny themselves the pleasure of attacking the EC for its “opportunism”. The other source of opposition is the East London Group which has produced the curious document attached hereto. Quite apart from its political errors, the document contains many gross mistatements of fact (or lies as they may be less politely termed) which are not going to pass unchallenged.
1. “Since the banning of the MLL there has been no leadership of any kind from the CC”. What of the resolution passed by the EC of 25/5/40, an attack up on which occupies almost the whole of the East Group document? By “no leadership” the comrades appear to mean “no leadership acceptable to them”. It might also incidentally be mentioned that since the banning of the MLL there has also been a National Conference of the organisation which laid down in essence the very line which the East Group are endeavouring to attack. But it is always easier to attack a CC than a National Conference.
2. “During this period there has been no paper, no pamphlet issued” There have been in actual fact two issues of the “Militant”!
3 “There has been no contact between the CC and the membership”. Only repeated meetings of the Organising committee to which all  London groups should send their delegates and at which members of the EC are present. Only the visiting of all provincial groups by the organiser!
4. The EC resolution “when presented to the enlarged Organising Committee meeting was …. unanimously condemned”! On what grounds, comrades, and what did you and your associates attempt to put in its place? Let us quote from the report given to the recent CC, “They maintained that we  should be publishing leaflets to be distributed broadcast, explaining the collapse of the French Empire and calling for arms for the workers. They insisted upon appointing a committee to draft such a leaflet.” We understand that most of those who supported the chauvinist slogan “Arm the workers” at this meeting of the CC, now not only do not support but deny that they ever did! So far has the retreat gone that when at the CC the chauvinist leaflet drafted by the sub-committee of the OC was presented, it was quite impossible to find out who was responsible for it although all three members of the drafting committee were present! We are glad that those members of the East Group who supported the slogan do so no longer, but the fact that they did support it marks them out as those who proved most susceptible to the chauvinist mood of the masses after the collapse of French Imperialism.
5. The (EC) resolution states ‘our slogans and activities must be cautious in character’ What is a slogan “cautious in character?” Our comrades in the East if they had read a little more carefully (or a little more honestly?) would have seen that the EC statement in referring to “caution” is quoting the resolution of our 1939 National Conference on work in wartime. The East Group comrades were nearly all present at that conference but did not attack the resolution - in fact they voted for it. Now they attack the EC for putting it into operation!
There follows much discussion of “caution and adventurism”, “Economism as a substitute for revolutionary policies”, etc, out of which come the following remarkable facts.
a. “To call for an immediate armed uprising is incautious (politically) because it would lead the workers to inevitable failure and bloody repression”!! Our comrades in the East Group appear to have no doubt whatever that the workers would rise if they called on them to do so; they only refrain from issuing the slogan because they do not think the rising would be successful!
b. “Every organisation or individual who has forsaken the revolutionary road for reformism has always begun by concentrating on the social and economic grievances of the masses” and therefore  apparently “concentration on the social and economic grievances of the masses” always leads to reformism. If our comrades consult an elementary textbook of logic they will find stated in one form or another a common fallacy of logic, “All Chinamen are yellow, therefore  all yellow men are Chinamen”.
c.  No slogan based on the economic and social grievances of the masses can, apparently, ever be really revolutionary, as it cannot be sufficiently “political.” The East Group comrades are apparently unaware that even the slogan “bread!” may, under certain circumstances have great revolutionary significance. The statement in the EC resolution that “revolutionary slogans must always take into account the degree of class consciousness of the masses” has apparently no meaning for them. It is not sufficiently “revolutionary” for them. We must help the masses to learn through their economic and social struggles the correctness of our political line, which they will otherwise never accept no matter how often or well explain it to them, It should not be necessary to point this out to those who style themselves “Marxists”!
 7. With regard to the title of the “Discussion Bulletin” let us hasten to assure the comrades that it is not  intended as an open forum. We do not think it advisable to go into the reasons for the title here. The comrades can learn them privately if they are really ignorant of them.
8. Discussion on the Finnish question. Shortly after the outbreak of the Russo-Finnish War, the EC published a resolution on the question and called a special GMM with a member of the EC leading the discussion. It is noteworthy that the East Group and Camberwell members did not then wish to discuss this question at all but desired to concentrate on the “organisation question”. Only later when there was delay, largely owing to insufficient material in publishing details of the American discussion, did the East Group suddenly develop a yearning to discuss the issue!
9. M.’s statement on the youth question was presented to the EC (after a very long delay) at the EC’s own request. The statement had very little to do with the issue under discussion (the nature of our work in the LLOY). The attitude of the statement (opposition to the existence of a separate youth organisation) was not new and had been rejected by our international organisation and it was taken into consideration when the EC drew up its own document.
10. Is it not a fact that the East group is in very close contact with a member of the Molinier Group who was even present at the meeting of the sub-committee to draw up a leaflet on “arming the workers”. Is not this “disloyalty”?
11. The “conclusions” of the East Group. “The banning of the MLL from the LP makes a change in policy essential. We are unable to continue our work in the LP…”
“The only way to continue our political work is the issuing of an open Fourth Internationalist paper”. But these questions were discussed at our recent national conference and a decision taken by an overwhelming majority against the point of view forward by the East Group. Must we go on discussing them endlessly for the benefit of a few sectarians? And what alternative has the East Group to LP work  … merely the publishing of a paper. That, of course, would solve everything! And a very strange paper is proposed “Our question must answer and clarify every question posed by  society (????) not merely confining ourselves to the problems raised by the workers” “It must appeal to all the advanced sections of society” (?!) 
On the question of a paper, may we quote a passage from the EC resolution so much attacked by the East Group: “In the place of the present ‘Militant’ we must produce a theoretical-propaganda journal along the lines of ‘Class Struggle’ which can deal with the fundamental problems of the international working class struggle and thus assist our work of individual recruitment and education”.
12. With regard to the inevitable quotation from Lenin, let us hasten to add that we have no differences with it. We suggest that the East Group bring it to the attention of their friends of the Molinier Group who at one time based their whole tactic upon their “mass popular organ” “La Commune”.
13. The Demands of the East Group . Their first - circulation of their document - is already satisfied. Their second, a membership meeting (by which no doubt they mean a meeting of the London Group) was rejected at the recent meeting of the CC for reasons which will be obvious to everyone except those who think that now is the time to start publication of a “fighting Fourth International paper”. We are not now living in a peacetime capitalist democracy. A new EC in violation of the constitu-tion and of the rights of the provincial groups is out of the question. Only a National Conference can elect a new EC and not the London membership meeting. “A responsible EC”, but where would the comrades find an EC more “responsible”? than the present one? with all its admitted weaknesses? We await a list with some interest.
A few remarks about the weaknesses of our organisation and its leadership. Yes, comrades, we  have an EC which has made many mistakes, has shown many weaknesses and we have no doubt that it will go on making mistakes. But the weaknesses of the EC have not sprung from nowhere, nor are they the result of the private vices of its members, they are the reflection of the weaknesses of the whole organisation, which are nowhere more apparent than in the East Group itself. Here are a few extracts from the report of the work of the East Group presented to the EC by the organiser a short time back:
“Militant sales  - practically non-existent. Stated to be due to black-out (!!) As days get longer door to door canvassing will be resumed (what revolutionary enthusiasm!) Four dozen have been ordered of the next issue which they hope to increase to six very soon.
Study Group  - steps are being taken (!) to set up a study class. I have been asked to pass on a request for a lecturer although I recommended that one of the local comrades should be appointed”.
And this is the group which is now clamouring for a paper to sell! 
The EC has made many mistakes and shown weaknesses - but these have almost always been of an organisational and technical character, e,g. when the first issue of the “Discussion Bulletin” appeared its contents were already largely out of date; the resolution of the Enlarged EC was sent out after much delay. On the political side the EC has pursued a correct policy—when chauvinism showed itself in the organisation in the form of the slogan “Arm the workers”, a CC was immediately called and decisively reaffirmed the Bolshevik line. The attitude of some, at least, of the East group members has been mentioned above. And on this question of policy: it is remarkable that in its demands the East group does not include the reversal of the LP perspective although it attacks it in its statement. Why is this? Is it because they would have to replace it by an alternative political analysis, which they are quite incapable of doing, or do they think a paper solves everything?
The political leadership of the EC has assured that today we are the only organisation in this country standing firmly on the policy of revolutionary defeatism.  But for the firm manner in which the EC corrected the deviations of the Camberwell and East Group members, we would have lined up with the C.P., the I.L.P., the W.I.L. and the other opportunist groups now clamouring to defend their country against the Nazis.
In conclusion we  trust that the comrades of the East Group will not think that we have dealt with them with undue harshness, One can and must make allowances for active comrades who, finding that the present situation condemns them to relative if temporary inactivity, try to forgot this situation and seek to act as if they were in a very different one. But the East Group comrades were not active in the way they now wish their organisation to be before the present circumstances arose. They were in the early months of the war one of the least active groups in the organisation, although then they had a fortnightly paper at their disposal. What could be excused as revolutionary impatience in others can in their case only be condemned as political irresponsibility.
D.D. H.
******
Internal Bulletin RSL, August 1940 p.5, by East London and Starkey Jackson, 1 page, (459 words)
On Errors and Half-truths
by East London
In his polemic “On the slogan ‘arm the workers’” directed against CvG, ESJ is trying to identify “some of the East Group members” with the panicky defencism and opportunism of CvG. 
ESJ states “He (CvG) has constituted himself as the theoretician of the Camberwell sectarians who have been joined by some of the East Group members.” On what basis does ESJ state this? Where are the facts which point to any single one  of the East Group members supporting CvG’s defencism?
At the recent enlarged O.C. meeting in East London, CO stated his position as follows:
(a) We remain revolutionary defeatists as always, irrespective of the progress of the war.
(b) The question of arming the workers remains the same in war as in peace. When the workers understand the necessity for an independent revolutionary struggle the problem of arming the worker’s will solve itself. 
Every East Group member accepted this position. CvG expressed his opposition to this viewpoint at the meeting, The position of the Camberwell comrades approximated to that of CvG. However, subsequent discussion with members of the East Group has shown them the error of their position.
Further, ESJ states “It is not accidental that their policy is shared by WIL and the French Molinierists”. Why is it not accidental, ESJ? What facts suggest that any members of the East Group have supported or contemplated supporting the defencism of those organisations. Will ESJ please take steps to rectify those statements. 
On Bad Consciences
When I first received the above statement I was prepared to make apologies for my statement that the East group members, or some of them, had supported the line of “Arm the workers”. I was not present at the enlarged CC meeting owing to the fact that I was out of London and therefore had to rely upon reports from members who were. I have subsequently checked up on my information and find it to be correct. The East Group comrades may have made statements in a heated meeting which they now regret, but they can hardly expect me to apologise for reporting them!
The last paragraph of their statement is very amusing. My references to the Molinierists and the WIL were political appraisals, designed to point out that these opportunist organisations necessarily adopted an opportunist policy. I was not aware when I wrote this that a member of the Molinier group had assisted in the drafting of the now famous “Arm the workers” leaflet. It appears from the extreme sensitivity of the East Group on this point, that my salvo fired for a different purpose has reached an unexpected mark!
E.S.J. 
*********
2. “On the Documents of the opposition”, RSL, May 1942 pp.1-3, by Denzil Dean Harber, 3 pages, (2,138 words)
ON THE DOCUMENTS OF THE OPPOSITION
1. We have had within our ranks, ever since just before the last National Conference, a very vocal and dissatisfied opposition, consisting of a small group of comrades, most of whom were formerly members of the W.I.L. or else expelled members of our own group. These comrades, in speeches and conversations, have continually attacked the policy our organisation and its leadership, but have produced very few documents for the organisation to discuss. One written statement, “On the Military Policy” (signed, North London Group) appeared before our National Conference of last September. Considered as a reply to the C.C. statement on the same subject which was submitted to the same Confer-ence, this “North London” document must be regarded as totally inadequate, as it avoids all the real issues of the discussion. But the Conference, although it accepted the C.C. document, did not close the discussion. On the contrary, it was decided that this should continue for a further period, after which another National Conference should be called to take a final decision. This special national conference will meet in a very few weeks; discussion has continued, but we are still awaiting a fresh statement from the “North London” comrades on the Military Policy.
The history or this statement, which has not appeared is an interesting one. At a meeting of the E.C. held shortly after the National Conference, it was agreed that both sides should draw up documents for presentation to the C.C. JL was to draw up the opposition document, and DDH was to draw up that expressing the viewpoint of the majority. They met, and DDH's statement was presented, but theirs was no statement from JL. The C.C. was told that the opposition considered that their statement presented to the September National Conference was sufficient. But, during the discussion on the C.C. on the DDH statement, both members of the opposition present, JL and EL, agreed that they should and could draw up a statement in answer to it. JL, we must presume, started work on this counter-statement. But at the next meeting of the C.C. JL, instead of producing this counter-statement, announced his conversion to the viewpoint of the majority. And, we may note in passing, he might have stayed “converted”, had not the majority of the C.C. a little later incautiously entrusted to him the task of producing a document expressing their viewpoint. The next meeting of the C.C. found JL with no document, but with a verbal announcement that he had again changed his position and now supported the opposition once more! It appears that this comrade prefers changing his political position to setting it down on paper.
Since that time, some months have passed, and discussion has continued, but we still have no answer from the opposition to the statement on the Military Policy passed by the C.C. at its meeting shortly after the September National Conference. But we have now a short statement entitled ‘On production’, signed JL. Actually, a very casual inspection of the document is sufficient to reveal that the main author is W. Du.
We take it that this statement “On Production” is intended to justify the adoption by our movement of the slogan “workers’ control of production”, as a transitional slogan suitable to the present circumstances. Actually, the statement consists of two parts; the first and longest, gives a general, very general, outline of the present crisis of capitalism as a whole and of British capitalism in particular; it attempts to give, in other words, the objective conditions which face the workers and our movement today. The second part merely states that the slogan “workers’ control of production” has been put forward by certain sections of the working class and that it is the correct transitional slogan for us to put forward today.
This method of presentation is no doubt intended as a logical argument; the second part of the statement is, presumably, intended to flow from the first. Actually, of course, nothing of the sort follows. Cde. W. Du (JL) has mere1y succeeded in begging the question under discussion. Let us, for the moment, assume that his entire analysis of the present position of British capitalism is correct in every detail and see where this leads us.
He starts, “Imperialist War signifies a revolt of the forces of production against the existing social relationships, a revolt against capitalist private property, anarchy in production and the restrictive State frontiers”. And he finished what we have termed the first part of his statement, the general analysis, with the following conclusion, “If the crisis of production cannot be overcome by capitalist measures, if, despite all palliatives it must progressively deepen, then there can be no possible solution which serves the interest of both workers and capitalists. There can be no middle course. It is the revolutionary solution or none at all.”
But this is nothing more than a restatement of something that we knew long ago. In the “Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International” of 1938, we read, “The economic prerequisite for the proletarian revolution has already in general achieved the highest, point of fruition that can be reached under capitalism. Mankind’s productive forces stagnate …. The objective prerequisites for the proletarian revolution have not only “ripened”; they have begun to get somewhat rotten. Without a socialist revolution, in the next historical period at that,—a catastrophe threatens the whole culture of mankind.
In other words, the objective conditions of capitalism are, and have been for some time, ripe for the proletarian revolution. But does this mean that a revolutionary situation exists today and has existed for years, unnoticed by us? Cde W. Du (JL) can hardly maintain this. Then he must recognise that the objective conditions of capitalism are not the only factor he must take into consideration; he must also consider the subjective factor— the consciousness of the proletariat. In fact, he says himself, “The Fourth International, by its transitional demands must hasten the translation of these favorable objective circumstances into the consciousness of the revo1utionary class.” Quite so, Cmde W. Du (JL)—but, why in this case do you quit all analysis of the present status of working-class consciousness, why do you confine yourself to describing the objective circumstances? For, without analysing existing working-class consciousness, ?????  it is impossible to determine what are the correct transitional demands for the present period . To quote once again from our Transitional Programme: “It is necessary to help the masses in the process of the daily struggle ” (our emphasis) to find the bridge between pre-sent demands and the socialist programme of the revolution. This bridge should include a system of transitional demands , stemming from today’s conditions and from today’s consciousness of wide layers of the working-class and unalterably leading, to one conclusion, the conquest of power by the proletariat”.
That is what the whole discussion in our organisation is about, the present consciousness of the masses and the transitional demands suited to it. It is taken for granted by everyone that the only solution to the crisis of capitalism is socialism. But it has been left to Cmde W. Du. (JL) to state this as a profound discovery and to “deduce” from it that the particular transitional demands which he favours, centring around workers’ control of production are “therefore” correct at the present time. One might equally well, “deduce” from the same premises that we should at once call for the seizure of power. Cde. W. Du (JL)  has assumed the very thing that he had to prove, that the transitional slogan he advocates is the one which “stems from today’s conditions and from today’s consciousness of wide layers of the working class”.
Incidentally we would observe that it appears that Cde. W Du (JL) does not fall into the error of believing that every demand in the programme of transitional demands was immediately applicable from the day it was drawn up. He does not, for instance, suggest that we should now issue the slogan of soviets, which, as our programme puts it, “crowns the program of transitional demands” and “can arise only at the time when the mass movement enters into an openly revolutionary stage”, though why he does not do so upon the basis of his method of “analysis” it is difficult to see. But at the same time he utterly ignores as presumably too elementary to be worthy of his notice, those demands concerning wages and hours with which the transitional programme opens. Does the comrade seriously believe that the present level of working-class consciousness is already so high that these demands are out of date?
As Cmde Du W (JL) does not touch upon any of the real issues under discussion, we are relieved of the task of re-stating and defending our own position. This is clearly stated in the recent C.C. document on the subject and we refer comrades to this document.
But there are a few other points in the statement “On Production”, which need clarification.
(1) The Crisis of production: It is correct to say that “the specific weight of British industry is entirely incapable of balancing her world interests”. It is for this reason that British imperialism has been obliged to lean increasingly upon the. U.S.A. with its huge productive capacity and to become increasingly subordinate to it. In this sense, we may speak of a crisis of production particular to British Imperialism, that it cannot produce enough to defend its colonial plunder. But this  crisis of production is of no concern to the British working class, or rather it is of concern only in as much as it weakens British Imperialism and facilitates its overthrow. But there is also a general crisis of production common to capitalism as a whole and of which the war is an expression—the forces of production have outgrown their capitalist framework. This crisis of production is of a different nature from that facing British Imperialism; it can hardly be argued that all  imperialist countries have industries whose specific weights are incapable of balancing their world interests, for the war is being fought precisely in order to re-adjust the spheres of world interests of the respective imperialist powers to their industrial strengths. It is this general crisis of world capitalist production which manifests itself through the war, which concerns the workers,—for without its revolutionary solution, they are condemned to endless slaughter and misery. Thus demands for workers’ control of production, in order to increase production so as to help British Imperialism out of its impasse, are reactionary, while demands for workers’ control of production in order to safeguard their own conditions are progressive. It is not accidental that W. Du (JL) does not distinguish be the two different crises of production for he does not distinguish between the two different types of demand for workers’ control.
2) Cde W. Du (JL)’s examples of working-class demands for control of production. Three examples are given, presumably in order to attempt to prove that this is a demand which is obtaining widespread support. We would note in passing that we were well aware that such a demand is supported by certain advanced workers, and for class  reasons. We of course, support such a demand and carry on propaganda for it, in the same way as we carry on propaganda for the seizure of power, which also finds support among certain advanced workers. But this does not mean that either of these demands is at present a transitional  demand, i.e. one which will draw broad masses of workers into struggle now, before widespread and large-scale class-struggles on more elementary issues have developed, and while the class-truce continues to exist. Certain class-struggles have already taken place in the mining industry, and the whole past traditions of the workers in this industry tend to make the slogan of workers’ control more easily accepted among them than is the case with any other section of the working-class. It is probable that with the development of strike action over questions of hours, wages etc., the demand for workers’ control will rally mass support in the mining industry earlier than in any other. Meanwhile, we must today certainly carry on propaganda for it. The Shop Assistants’ Union can hardly be taken as typifying broad masses of industrial workers; in any case, its resolution goes no farther than the official policy of the Labour Party.
As for the movement in the London A.E.U., which calls for workers’ contro1, this has been initiated by certain political co-thinkers of Cde. W. Du (JL), i.e., the Socialist Workers Group. We wonder that the comrade did not quote the movement for workers control initiated by the W.I.L.! 
5.42 
D.D.H.
*********
3. “Report of Conversations with Comrade S of the IS”, RSL, July 1942, pp.1-3, by Denzil Dean Harber, 3 pages, (1,766 words) 
Report of Conversations with Comrade S of the IS
As is probably generally known this comrade was available for a couple of weeks recently. He visited London on the 18th July 1942, and saw the W.I.L., certain members of the Right Wing and me. Hearing it rumoured that he would again be in London the following week-end, I wrote to JL demanding to meet him. As a result of this, we met, together with JL on the 26th July. As our conversations were sandwiched in between a meeting between him and the Right Wing and another between him and the W.I.L., and further, took place either in the street or in cafes, they were necessarily of a somewhat desultory nature.
All that I wish to do is to summarise the most important points dealt with:-
(i) Comrade S’s main pre-occupation with me was to attempt to persuade me of the importance of keeping the Right Wing in the organisation and of fusing with the W.I.L. We, naturally enough, in view of the limited time etc., did not attempt to discuss the basic political issues, e.g. A.M.P., Production, etc
(ii) On the subject of the W.I.L., he made it quite clear that the I.S. did not intend to recognise them as the British Section, in view of their whole past history. He considered their leaders and members valuable, but politically somewhat backward. He said that they are as much opposed to fusion as I am. He agreed that the W.I.L. is not run on the basis of democratic centralism.
I was informed later by JL and other members of the Right that the I.S. is willing to recognise the W.I.L. as “sympathetically affiliated”, if the W.I.L. agree to state this on the sub-title of their paper. I was not informed of this by S. I need hardly state that my own attitude towards fusion with the W.I.L., which should be too well-know to need restating, was in no way modified as a result of the discussions. No new arguments were put forward by S. in this connection.
(iii) S. stated that in the view of the I.S. the differences that the centre had with it, on the question of the A.M.P. etc., are fully compatible with the membership of the Fourth by the centre, and that the I.S. wishes to convince  us of the correctness of the A.M.P. but would not coerce  us into carrying it out while we remain unconvinced. While expressing my pleasure at this statement, I nevertheless made it clear, that in my opinion, the differences involved questions of fundamental principle. This was questioned by S. who obviously wished to take as conciliatory an attitude as possible.
(iv) S. also expressed the view that the great majority of the Left, if not all, would be retained in the Fourth. He did not, in my presence, characterise them as “crazy Oehlerites”, though, JL had informed me, this was his characterisation of them. On JL using the term in my presence, I made it clear that, though I sometimes thought of them a little crazy, I considered it quite incorrect to term them Oehlerites, but valuable comrades with whom we were in essential agreement on the main questions confronting our movement.
(v) Some discussion took place on the ILP tactic, in which S. revealed an ignorance both of the issues involved and of the past history of the movement which surprised and alarmed me. As he had read none of our documents, no fruitful discussion was possible under the circumstances.
(vi) S. had not read the last I.S. letter to us, nor did he seem to have read any of our documents, though he could have obtained them, while he was here, had he wished.
(vii) The Right Wing (which, incidentally, S. has re-christened the “Fourth Internationalist Fraction”, being no doubt perturbed that the political naivety of these comrades allowed them to accept without question the title of ‘Right Wing’ (!)—though I informed him that for us they would remain the Right Wing until he could supply them with some new arguments as well as a new name); in my initial discussions, I made it plain that I stood for the elimination of the Right Wing on the grounds that adequate discussion has taken place and that now the time has come for turning our attention outwards instead of inwards—an impossibility so long as the Right continue to direct all their energies inwards. He asked me whether I would be in favour of his expulsion if he were to transfer from the US to the British section and become a member of the Right. I replied in the affirmative, which did not seem to please him.
Later, I pointed out that I had not taken part in a last minute attempt to save the situation, when, together with JEG and W. Du, I had suggested a six months’ truce, and that, as I had anticipated, the right had rejected this proposal and had instead circulated the ell-known letter calling upon members to break discipline. Only after this, I stated, had I decided to do all in my power to remove the Right from the organisation.
An interesting discussion then took place, in which the following facts were revealed:-
(a) That JEG had acted with the utmost weakness and dishonesty instead of doing as he had promised and presenting the Right with a written statement on the proposed truce (which, incidentally, was his own idea), he had given a much garbled verbal presentation, which was at once rejected by the Right. He had then completely withdrawn from his position, and told them that the idea was mine and not his. At least, so JL informed us.
(b) That S. was wholeheartedly in favour of the proposed truce.
(c) I therefore proceeded to outline roughly the basis on which I would support it.
	1. No National Conference to he held for a specified period—e.g. six months.
2. During this period all comrades to pledge themselves to observe and carry out the decisions of the last conference.
3. No expulsions during this period except for violation of this last clause.
4. Our practical work to proceed on the basis of the conference decisions, plus certain other slogans generally agreed by all three fractions e.g. expropriation of the mines by a Labour government and their operation under the control of Pit Committees
formation of workers’ defence corps at the factories as a defence against strike-breakers.
5. During this period, internal discussions should not cease, but should take a secondary place.
6. A National Conference should be held at the end of the period to sum up the results attained and to ascertain how they had affected the political standpoints of the three fractions.
So far as the question of the W.I.L. was concerned, I stated that I considered the attainment of internal unity amongst ourselves to be an essential prerequisite for any unity with the W.I.L. With this S. agreed. Discussions could go on with the W.I.L., meanwhile, upon the basis of the conference resolution. Further, as a gesture of conciliation, I agreed, that, if all the above were accepted by the Right, I would, personally, be prepared to support the inclusion of a clause giving them permission to be silent in the discussions with the W.I.L. While S. thought the whole idea excellent, and JL gave it a somewhat grudging assent (stating that, though he supported it at that moment, he might well change his mind very soon), I made it clear that, in the first place, I would only support such a scheme if it were agreed upon not only by the Right but by the Left—I said I was not prepared to support any agreement excluding the Left. Secondly, I said that I did not believe that the Right would accept it, or operate it if they did accept it. I put it forward as a last chance for the Right to stay in the organisation.
Later having parted from S., I went to Trafalgar Square with JL in search of the Right. I met most of them there. Though JL had assured me that they would be selling the “Militant” I found that this was not the case. They deliberately abstained from selling because the headline was “too provocative”  and they feared physical assault by the Stalinists. (W.I.L. members were selling their paper.) Later, I outlined the above proposals to them, pointing out that they had international sanction! (a fact which, though confirmed by JL, did not appear to impress then greatly in this instance.) A few questions were asked and answered, and I left them to thrash the matter out among themselves. As JL aptly puts it, so far as practical activity is concerned, the proposals merely outline the activity that faces the right wing in any case if it stays inside the organisation. Acceptance would merely mean that it carried out such activity willingly and not under duress.
Up to today, 7th August, I have heard nothing from them.
(viii) GENERAL REMARKS. It is interesting and perturbing to note that the only people S. made any effort to meet were W.I.L. and the Right Wing—MJ is the only exception, and he hoped to convert her. I only saw him as a result f contact through the Right, and, as far as I know, no member of the Left saw him at all.
As a general result of my conversations, I was more than ever left with my previous conviction that the I.S. desires to solve the questions in dispute not so much by political discussion as by organisational means. (It is significant that S. was unwilling to commit the I.S. enter into a thorough political discussion with us.) The I.S. seeks, in my opinion, to push us into a fusion with the W.I.L., which they know would automatically give the supporters of the A.M.P. a majority. Such a tactic is typical of Cannonism, and is to be expected from a Cannon controlled I.S. Meanwhile, they are endeavouring at all costs to keep the Right Wing (much against the will of most of its members) inside the R.S.L,, as a lever with which to push us towards the W.I.L. Their relations with that body are, fortunately for us, hampered by the decisions of the Fourth, taken at the Founding Conference, and hence their attitude towards that body has proved disappointing both to it and to our own Right Wing.
D.D.H  7.8.42
Endorsed for circulation by E.C.8.8.42
*********
4. “On Infallibility Based on Dishonesty â JLR and Democratic Centralism”, RSL, Jan-March 1943, pp.1-7, by Denzil Dean Harber, 3 pages, (6,147 words).
On Infallibility Based on Dishonesty—JLR and Democratic Centralism
Another number of the publication mis-called the “Leninist” has just revealed some more of JLR’s wisdom to an astonished world. Contained in it is an article entitled “Democratic Centralism - a Reply to the CC”, unsigned but without doubt issuing from the hand of the master himself. Before dealing with it, there are a few mis-statements from the “Left” which it is as well to dispose of. It is not true that TM informed the CC of the existence of this article before  the resolution suspending the “Left” had been passed. He merely mentioned it during the brief interval which passed between the suspension of himself and fraction and his withdrawal from the meeting. It would even appear that he deliberately refrained from mentioning it before the suspension resolution was passed, so that the majority of the CC should pass a resolution which stated that no defence of the “Left” position on fusion had appeared, whereas he, TM, know that such a defence would be issued shortly. Not that this latter fact makes any essential difference to the content of the CC resolution of suspension. It is also untrue that ELD, SSG, and DDH were informed after the meeting when they were at TM’s place that JLR’s reply to the CC  was already duplicated and could be obtained by them. On the contrary, they were all left with the impression that the document in question had not yet been run off from the stencils. However, before the evening had passed, one of three comrades in question had noticed the loose sheets containing the reply of JLR and had possessed himself of a copy. This was duly read by the three comrades in the train and helped to relieve the monotony of the return journey. All of which one hopes, will indicate to the “Left” that those comrades were quite prepared to treat works of “the Lenin of Britain” with due respect.
Now to the “Reply” itself. But before we; can get down to the essence of the question, there are, as is customary in the writings of JLR, a few preliminary mis-statements and falsifications which have to be refuted.
a) The CC meeting or 15.2.42 at which, says JLR, an attempt was made (happily frustrated by himself) by members of the CC to change policy adopted at the preceding national conference. It is quite true, that at the meeting in question, JLR, by one of those acts of sabotage or so typical of his “work” on the CC, created a deadlock by refusing to vote for a resolution which he had drawn up himself and the basis of which he had already voted for at the preceding CC. It is also quite true that he motivated his refusal to vote by stating that the resolution in question would mean a reversal of the decision of the last conference. It may even be true that no one at the time contradicted this statement - by that time the members of the CC had become a little dazed by JLR’s behaviour, and in any case, they had learned already the folly of wasting time endeavouring to convince JLR of the incorrectness of any statement which he felt inspired to make. But in actual fact, of course, there was no resolution passed by the l941 conference to which JLR’s document, presented to the CC of 14.11.42 could possibly be taken to be in conflict. This fact can easily be confirmed by reading the Report of the Decisions of the 1941 Conference.
b) JLR, with the phraseology so typical of him, accuses the CC of “dishonesty and bureaucratic manoeuvring” because, he writes, we and the Right Wing ruled out of order the “Left”  resolution on fusion, “because it dealt with Democratic Centralism, which was not on the agenda”. Whereas now, in their paper for the forthcoming conference, we ourselves include the question of fusion in that of Democratic Centralism. Here we have a typical JLR falsification, which will at once be obvious to any non-member of the “Left” who attended the last conference, but which, we fear, no amount of explanation will ever make understandable to any loyal follower of JLR. However, we will try. The simple truth is of course, is that the “Left” resolution was ruled out of order because it attempted to smuggle in a matter which was not in order to discuss at that special conference … the question of the powers of the CC . It was obviously quite in order to discuss fusion in relation to democratic centralism, but only insofar as aspects of this latter were dealt with which bore any relation to fusion. The question of the powers of the CC had nothing whatever to do with the question of fusion.
Let us now, having disposed of JLR’s two preliminary falsifications, deal with the issues raised by him in his document. The first and most important is the attitude adopted by JLR towards fusion. Perhaps the easiest way to expose the utter dishonesty of JLR’s attitude is by showing how this issue first arose. The facts are indisputable and known to all. Some time ago pressure was put upon the RSL by the IS to open fusion negotiations with the W.I.L. The I.S. was, in fact, acting according to the right given it in the statutes of the Fourth International, ie. “fusion between an organisation developing towards the Fourth International and a national section may be arranged by the International Secretariat and submitted to the decision of the International Executive Committee”. Now before this, since the recognition of the RSL as the British Section, we had offered fusion negotiations to the WIL and these had been rejected by the latter. A notable example was our offer of fusion to the W.I.L. in the spring of 1939, when we offered, among other things immediate fusion between the R.S.L. and the W.I.L., both bodies to have equal representation on the leadership of the fused organisation. This offer was made in the presence of Comrade Phelan of the American Section. At the time no opposition to our proposals on “principled grounds” was made by JLR or anyone else in our organisation. But, in the Winter of 1941, when pressure for fusion began to come from the I.S., the majority of the CC. were opposed to the opening of such fusion negotiations. Most of the comrades concerned motivated their opposition by the fact that, in their opinion, the W.I.L. instead of  moving towards us was moving away and developing increasingly centrist tendencies. Thus the opposition of those comrades was based on purely tactical grounds. Had they considered the circumstances favourable they would have supported fusion negotiations as they had done in the past. JLR who was also on the CC was likewise in opposition to fusion negotiations with the W.I.L. As he did not then embody his attitude in a document, it cannot be defined by us with complete accuracy, but he certainly did not express on the C.C. any principled opposition to fusion as such.
Such a “principled” attitude towards fusion was only expressed by JLR and his followers on the eve of the 1942 Special Conference in a resolution which stated that “the recognition of the possibility of fusion implies the existence of an organ-isation of parallel status to the Revolutionary Party - but the existence or a recogn-ised section precludes the possibility of such. Hence fusion constitutes a denial of the organisational principle of Leninism that there can be only one revolutionary party”. The practical expression so far as the W.I.L. was concerned was stated thus, “that any of its members (i.e. the W.I.L.’s) desirous of building the Fourth Inter-national must apply as individuals for membership of the R.S.L. - B.S.F.I.” Further the CC majority was attacked as follows: “Fusion with the W.I.L. constitutes the culmination of a long period of departure from the principles of Leninism …. Its (the CC’s) excuses for not fusing with the W.I.L. are entirely irrelevant and reflect the fundamentally anti-Bolshevik position of the CC. They aim to give the impression that were it not for their differences there would exist a basis for fusion. The question of fusion is entirely independent of the two organisations, and were there no difference, there would still be no grounds for fusion”.
It should be obvious that if the position of the CC majority, who opposed fusion with the W.I.L. on the grounds of growing political differences, was “fundamentally anti-Bolshevik”, then the position of the IS. who urged such fusion was equally so, in the eyes of JLR and Co. With customary dishonesty, however, the “left” made no mention of the attitude of the I.S. on this question in their documents. But when, in the presence of the Leeds group, DDH asked Wdi whether the “left” characterisation of the CC’s attitude on fusion did not also apply to that of the I.S., he replied without hesitation that such was the case. 
Thus JLR and Co were accusing the I.S. of adopting a “fundamentally anti-Bolshevik position” for attempting to use the powers given them in the statutes of the Fourth International! And likewise, JLR was accusing the CC majority of the same offence, for not rejecting the action of the I.S. on principled grounds!! At the 1942 Confer-ence the entire “left” fraction voted against the opening of fusion negotiations with the W.I.L. on the “principled” grounds outlined above, in other words, by this vote the whole “left” fraction was, in practice, breaking the discipline of the Fourth International, for it was voting against the practical operation of one of the Statutes of the Fourth International, which its “principled” position forced it to reject. It could have preserved the discipline of the international by stating that it was oppos-ed to the statute in question and would fight for its reversal, but that meanwhile it could not vote against the practical application of the statute, on such grounds, as expressed in the proposal for fusion negotiations, because, under the existing statutes, such a proposal was quite in order. It should be noted that certain members of the “Centre” likewise voted against the opening of fusion negotiations at the conference in question, but did so purely on the tactical  grounds already given. Thus they in no way broke the discipline of the International by their vote  - it should be noted that only proposals, not instructions, had come from the I.S. Their vote  can in no way be taken as practical opposition to the clause of the Statutes under which the I.S. made its proposals, for they made it quite clear that had the political differences with the WIL been less, they would have supported fusion.
It is quite possible that at the 1942 Conference, the members of the “Left” were unaware of the Statute in question and were thus unaware that they were violating international discipline by their vote. 	Certainly the members of the Centre, although they realised that the “Left” had adopted a fundamentally incorrect attitude on fusion, were not then aware that a contrary attitude had been specifically  stated in the Statutes of the Fourth. For this oversight they crave the indulgence of the membership (which, incidentally, seems to have been guilty of a similar oversight) and of the I.S.. But they were not long in becoming aware of the real position and in the CC statement on Democratic Centralism adopted on l4.11.42 they quote the statute in question, expose the political attitude of the “Left” and request them to admit their mistake. Instead of this, however, the “Left”, after the issue  of the CC document, put forward for the forthcoming conference a resolution on the subject of fusion substantially the same as that submitted by them to the pre-ceding conference, i.e. calling upon conference to reject the fusion negotiations proposed by the I.S. on principled grounds.
Thus, by re-issuing this resolution, the “Left” have deliberately and consciously  violated the Statutes of the Fourth. They are urging the RSL to disregard the Statute of the Fourth concerning fusion. This is the justification for the suspension and expulsion of the “Left” carried out by the CC.
Let us now examine the defence of JLR to the CC document on Democratic Centralism. We must state, to begin with, that we did not expect JLR to admit his mistake. JLR has never been known to admit a political mistake. He claims infallibility except on minor questions of inner group tactics. In order to maintain this claim, in the face of obvious errors, he has recourse to dishonesty. He attempts to conceal and twist his original attitude; he tries to confuse the issue; he strives to erect a smoke-screen of meaningless phraseology; he makes slanderous attacks upon his opponents By these methods he strives to impress and deceive his unfortunate disciples and may even succeeded in hiding his mistakes from himself.
We are not in the habit of making charges of this kind without justifying them. Here are the proofs of JLR’s dishonesty in his statement on Democratic Centralism: JLR has been unfortunate enough to state, before the 1942 Conference, that fusion between section of the Fourth and an organisation outside the Fourth such a the W.I.L. constitutes a denial of the organisational principles of Leninism. But JLR learns, to his undoubted horror, that such a fusion is recognised as permissable by the Statutes of the Fourth International. What is the unfortunate JLR to do? For he has made a mistake and though ordinary mortals like ourselves can and do admit our mistakes, JLR cannot admit his, for to do so would be to destroy his carefully built up prestige both in the eyes of his followers and of himself. But all is not lost! perhaps JLR can use the same defence as he used to cover up his “sole enemy” -blunder - perhaps he can so twist and distort the issue, that it will appear that he is really in complete agreement with the Fourth on the subject of fusion?
JLR quotes a passage from the CC document on Democratic Centralism which is concerned with fusion between a section of the Fourth and a centrist body evolving towards us, and which runs as follows: “If, as a result of these discussions, we convince the majority (or possibly even the whole) of the centrist organisation of the correctness of our line, we would naturally fuse with it. “Of course such fusion with the consent of the appropriate organ of the international ”.—JLR points out (quite correctly) that the passage underlined was added to the original draft at the CC meeting, and adds triumphantly, “Seemingly he (DDH) also now considers that such centrist bodies must liquidate and their members join the Fourth individually, it he does not, we do not know what he means. As we see it, he now intends to offer a fusion that it no fusion, only he intends to call it fusion so as not to offend the centrists. Then, once their confidence in us has been established we  will them that what we mean by fusion is that they liquidate into the F.I. Because to hand the final arrangements over to the parent body of one of the parties to the negotiations is the equivalent of liquidation by the other. Let us hasten to note here, before we go any further, a most valuable admission on the part of JLR—he unambiguously states that “liquidation into the FI” by a centrist body “is no fusion”. A little later, we shall have occas-ion to use this admission of JLR’s. Meanwhile, let us examine the truly remarkable “reasoning” contained in this passage. According to JLR, if as a result of discuss-ions between a section of the Fourth and a centrist body, agreement is reached to fuse the two organisations, and the section of the Fourth then asks the consent of the leading organs of the Fourth for it to be allowed to carry out such fusion, this latter stop signifies the “handing over  of the final arrangements” to the Fourth International. And this, in turn, signifies, “the liquidation” of the centrist body. But how can this be so? Asking the consent of the Fourth can in no sense mean, “handing over the final arrangements” to the Fourth, in the sense that the latter dictates  the terms of fusion to the centrist body. For the centrist body has already freely agreed on terms of fusion, and should the F.I. wish to modify these terms, the centrist body is at full liberty to withdraw from the fusion if it wishes. The bringing-in of the leading bodies of the F.I. into the discussion in no way destroys the independence of the centrist body, national though it may be. And even if the centrist body were to agree “to hand over the final arrangements” for fusion to the Fourth International, why should this mean “liquidation into the FI.” on the part of the centrist body? It would only mean this if the F.I. stated that the centrist body must be liquidated and its members apply to join the section as individuals, in other words, if the F.I. did not agree to fusion at all!
And after thus displaying his own confusion, JLR has the audacity to state “that DDH is not at all clear as to what he means is of course obvious(!)”.
JLR goes on, “The discussion last June showed clearly that what the Right Wing and the Centre meant by fusion what we, the Left, took them to mean. Namely that, if agreement with the W.I.L. or any other centrist body on a future occasion, were reached, then both organisations, the BSFI and the centrist body, would liquidate into the new body, which would then become the B.S.F.I. In other words, two bodies of equal status will meet, discuss and decide eventually whether to fuse or not, and whether the now body will take a new name, will retain one of the old names, the R.S.L. or the W.IL.; the com-position of the C.C or whether a conference of the organisation will decide on all such questions …. We, the Left, threw a bomb into the discussion, by our principled objections. That bomb has already had the effect of forcing Cde. DDH to agree that the final arrangements of the fusion will be the business of the I.E.C. of the F.I., not of the two national bodies as originally intended.” It would be hard to find a passage of more flagrant and deliberate dishonesty than this. JLR pretends to be unaware that the whole question of fusion with the W.I.L. arose at the last conference as a result of the request of the I.S .! Thus there could never have been any question of the final arrangements for fusion being confined to the two national bodies, as JLR says was intended. (by whom, JLR?) Apart from this deliberate omission the remarks of JLR with regard to the way in which members of the Right Wing and centre considered that fusion could take place are substantially correct, i.e. that both bodies, R.S.L. and W.I.L, would “liquidate” into a new body which would become the B.S F.I. But what were the “principled objections” of the “left”? This had nothing to do  with the “final arrangements for the fusion being the business of the I.E.C. of the F.I”. They consisted of a rejection of fusion  and in a demand that “any of its (the W.I.L.’s) members desirous of building the Fourth International must apply as individuals for membership of the R.S.L. B.S.F.I.”!_ The whole question of fusion having to be first approved by the International has been dragged in subsequently by JLR, in an attempt to cover up his mistake by confusing the issue.
How does JLR justify his position in the light of the passage in the Statutes of the Fourth International? “This quotation, states JLR, “except for the use of the word fusion, bears out the contention of the “Left, not the “centre”. But unfortunately for JLR, it is just this word “fusion” which expresses the whole difference between himself on the one hand and ourselves and the I.S. on the other. So far as we are aware “fusion” can only have one significance and it is precisely because of this significance that JLR rejects it as a “denial of the national principles of Leninism”, in his resolution for this conference and for the last. The fact that the statute uses the term is a conclusive proof that JLR’s attitude amounts to direct opposition to the statute. But is JLR honest enough to admit this? Naturally not: “It was what was meant by fusion”, he declares, with almost childlike faith in his own powers of deception, “with the W.I.L., that we took exception to last June, and still do, not to the word itself”. In other words, JLR does not object to the word, only to its significance!! And in order to reconcile his position with that of the statutes of the F.I., JLR proposes a simple solution. “However,” he continues, “as the use of the term has led to such a confusion on the part of members of the B.S.F.I.” (so far as we are aware, the only confusion existing is that which JLR himself is doing his best to sow in his present statements) …. it would be better if we dropped the term, and used the term ‘unity’, or some other word that more exactly expresses our meaning”(!!) In other words, JLR proposes that the term fusion, which cannot possibly be interpreted in the way in which he would like it to be interpreted, be replaced by another term, unity, which can be so interpreted! By re-writing, on his own authority and before our very eyes the statutes of the Fourth International, he hopes to be able to conceal his opposition to them.
To make matters plain to even the most ignorant member of the “Left”, even at the risk, of other comrades, let us repeat:-
i ) that fusion has always been taken to mean the organisational merging of two or more bodies to form a new entity, i.e. concretely that the name of the new body is decided by the fusing bodies and that the various governing organs of the new body are constituted according to the terms agreed upon by the parties to the fusion.
ii) That no one has ever suggested in our movement that such fusion between a National section and an outside body should take place without the agreement of the International, in particular, in the present instance of the proposed fusion with the W.I.L., it was im-possible that anyone should take that attitude because the fusion in question has been sponsored from the outset by the International.
 	. 
iii) That the meaning of fusion given in (i) above has been recognised by JLR and the “Left” in their resolution to the last conference and to the forthcoming one, and is rejected by them precisely on the grounds of such an interpretation. Even in his present document he states that, “liquidation into the FI”, “their members joining indivi-dually” “is no fusion”. It is this, “their members joining individually” which JLR supports and he admits that this is not fusion.
iv) That twist and wriggle as he may, with all the dishonesty so characteristic of him, JLR cannot reconcile this position with that clearly stated in the statute of the Fourth which gives the I.S. power to arrange fusion.
JLR continues his argument with an attempt to pile confusion upon confusion. He supposes a case in which negotiations have taken place between a section and a centrist body, without the participation of the I.S., and goes on; “When agreement was reached at the negotiations the I.S. would report to the I.E.C., either that the centrists had liquidated their organisation and joined the F.I. or, if some unforeseeable difficulty had arisen preventing such a course being followed, (unforeseeable by the writer, - sic) yet the membership of the ex-centrists was considered desirable, the I.E.C. could reduce the section to the status of a sympathetic body(!) recognising the other organisation as a sympathetic body also, and then fuse them, subject to the ratification of the next congress of the International”. Perhaps JLR could gave us some reason for the reduction of the section “to the status of a sympathetic body”? Some reason that is, other than a projection of his own, formalistic dishonesty upon our International. Wherein in the statutes does he find the faintest justification for such an interpretation? If the I.E:C. were to act such a manner, how could it hope to escape being charged by JLR with attempting to cover up what he considers a “denial of the organisational principles of Leninism” by means of a dishonest evasion worthy of JLR himself?
And, to cap it all, JLR goes on to state that, “it is not clear what is exactly meant by the quotation” (ie. the passage already quoted from the statutes of the Fourth!) Do we really have to inform JLR that the quotation means exactly what it says, i,e. that fusion between an organisation developing towards the Fourth International and a national section (not a national section reduced to the status of a sympathetic body, JLR) may be arranged by the International. Secretariat and submitted to the decision of the International Executive Committee, and that the only reason why he pretends to find it “not clear” is because he hasn’t the guts to admit that he has made a mistake?
JLR’s attitude on fusion is an example of a typical ultra left mistake. It finds a close parallel with the attitude adopted by the C.I. in its Third Period towards the United Front. JLR, in some passages in his document, pretends that he is not opposed to fusion; he merely “interprets” it as meaning the liquidation of the centrist organisation, and the application of its members as individuals  to the revolutionary organisation. Thus the C.I. was not opposed to the United Front; it merely “interpreted” it as meaning the united front of the members of the reformist party as individuals  with the C.P. JLR howls with horror at the suggestion that the section of the F.I. should fuse with the ex-centrist body, organisation with organisation. So the C.I. howled with equal horror at the suggestion that it should have a united front, organisation to organisation with Socia1-Democracy. The C.I. called the Bolshevik-Leninists, who advocated a correct policy, “Left Social-Fascists”; JLR calls us … “National Socialists”.
In the CO paper on Democratic Centralism we challenged JLR to quote us any authority in the past history of our movement for the attitude which he adopts on this question of fusion. In reply, JLR states that he has been unable to discover a case which was shown to W. Di by PJB (not DDH, as, JLR suggests) and which proves that the C.I. acted in relat-ion to the Belgian section in a manner utterly contrary to the attitude of JLR (in 1921). We suggest that JLR did not find this case because he did not want to find it. He pretends to believer however, that he has discovered a case in Italy which bears out his point of view Fortunately, by a pure accident, we are in possession of the relevant material an this subject, and are thus able to expose JLR’s dishonesty in this instance also.
It is obvious even from JLR’s own quotations that Bordiga in his article in the Communist Review of November 1922 did not adopt JLR’s line. For Bordiga starts off with the words, “It is the case here of a practical  question with which our party is confronted”. For JLR it is a question of principle ”. There is only one body”, says Bordiga, “competent to solve this question - the Congress of the C.P. of Italy”—once again an attitude opposed to JLR’s. Bordiga then described as “ludicrous” a proposal that the C.P. of Italy should dissolve and return to the Italian Socialist Party, in just the same way as we should describe as ludicrous a proposal that the R.S.L. should dissolve and its members join the W.I.L. as individuals (inverted JLRism). And after all this which does not help JLR’s case in the least degree, we come to the passage which he quotes with such high praise (it “might have been written by JLR” â sic!) “For the present moment we will not discuss the admissibility of fusion which would bring with it a complete change in the party organism”. But why, JLR, will not Bordiga “for the present moment” discuss the “admissibility of fusion” - is it because he is opposed to it on grounds of principle, like yourself? - or, is it because, as he has just stated a few 1ines before, fusion (“the structure of the party and perhaps also its name”) is to “stand upon the agenda” of the forthcoming congress of the C.P. of Italy? It is in view of this fact that Bordiga does not “for the present moment” discuss “the admissibility of fusion”, but professes to devote the rest of his article to a political  criticism of the Maximalists (the other party to the possible fusion). But even divorced from its context, the sentence so highly praised by JLR might have been written not only by him but by any one of us—for anyone might have stated in a document devoted mainly to a political criticism, that “for the present moment, we will not discuss, etc. etc.”
But there is more to it than this. For a few lines later on comes a passage that JLR most carefully does not quote, in which Bordiga states that the question has been and will be discussed by the C.I. itself and that “it goes without saying that no Italian Communist would take up an attitude of opposition towards the proposals of the International regarding this question .” It is precisely such opposition, and, on grounds of principle) towards the proposals of our International on the part of JLR that is the basis of our whole polemic with him.
Thus JLR has been quite unable to bring an historical example in support of his unique viewpoint on fusion.
To conclude this question, let us make just a few remarks on the question of the “status” of a section of the. Fourth as compared with the “status” of a national centrist or ex-centrist body. What we still deny, is that even if a centrist body does arrive at a revolutionary point of view, its status is not equal to that of the F.I. states JLR. (We assume that the word “not” is included in error here) what exactly does JLR mean? Does he merely wish to state that there is a fundamental difference between an international body and a national one? Let him consider this difference to be as “fundamental” as he wishes, but let him at the same time explain how this difference prevents the following process from taking place:-
(1) discussions taking place between the national section and the exclusively national body with the participation of the International leadership of the section.
(ii) political unity being attained as a result of these discussions.
(iii) the national section and the national ex-centrist body agreeing to fuse their organ1sations with the consent of the international leadership of the national section.
(iv) out of this fusion coming the emergence of a new national section, with perhaps a different name and a new leadership, both national and local, drawn from both the old section and the ex-centrist body.
As a result of this process, the ex-centrist body will have fused, not only with the national section but also with the International. It will have fused on terms of organisational equality with the section. It may even have got a member or members on the leadership of the International. This is what we mean by fusion, This is what the Fourth International means by it. But, JLR insists that the ex-centrist body should dissolve and its members apply for membership of the section as individuals! And he asks why we term this ultimatism! In the same way, the C.I. in its Third Period could not understand why we termed the ‘United Front from Below’ ultimatism. JLR’s attitude is ultimatist because although we may be able to convince the centrist body of the correctness of our principles, they are not thereby convinced that the leadership of our national section is better than their own leadership, and quite naturally, they will demand that organisational unity should be accompanied by a joint leadership, drawn from both organisations. A leadership can only earn the confidence of the rank and file by close contact over a prolonged period. In the necessary absence of such close con-tact between the leadership of the section and the members of the ex-centrist body there is no reason whatever why the latter should be prepared to accept the former. To demand that they should do so is typical ultimatism.
Just a few words on the other question dealt with by JLR, that of minorities and representation on the C.C. JLR now states that, “We don’t disagree that minorities should be allowed representation on the C.C. We never said that the C.C. should at all times be homogeneous. It would be absurd to do so”. This is a blatant lie. Until confronted by the quotation from the Third Congress of. the C.I., JLR and Co. maintained that if they obtained a majority at a National Conference, only they the “Left” would be elected to the C.C. TM stated this on several occasions to the members of the C.C. since the last conference. Moreover the fact that the members of the “Left” at the last conference at first wished to abstain from voting at all, and then voted exclusively for their own members  for the C.C. is clear proof of this. As usual JLR is now trying to withdraw from an untenable position without admitting his mistake. And, in order to be able to conduct this difficult manoeuvre he is “rewriting” his original position.
In a resolution submitted by the “Left” for the forthcoming conference, we read that the quotation from the Third Congress “specifically limits the matter to ‘divergent tactical opinions’, incidentally thereby implying that principled differences are not to be considered in  this light”. This is yet another dishonest distortion—for the quotation refers to “differences of opinion regarding tactics …. if they are of a serious nature .” (our emphasis) It is obvious that such a serious difference on tactics may easily have behind it a “principled difference” for in our organisation most of our “principled differences” have arisen out of the way in which principles are interpreted in action, i.e. precisely over questions of tactics.
It is true that the Third Congress resolution makes no mention of minorities being compelled  to serve on the C.C and this for a very good reason. It has always been understood in our movement that for a minority to disclaim all responsibility for the organisation, by refusing to serve on its leadership is the sign of a minority being about to split from the organisation. Let JLR find us some historical examples where a minority refused election at a party congress without this being the prelude to a split. The only example they have given, that of Martov at the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. establishes our point—Martov’s refusal to serve was the prelude to his “disloyalty with regard to the Congress decisions”.
We have, we believe, now sufficiently exposed the dishonesty of JLR with regard to his position on Democratic Centralism. Had we been able to confine this exposure to shorter limits, we would have added to it an exposure of the similar dis-honest defence put up by JLR on the question of the “sole enemy” in the April “Leninist”.(1942) However, we intend writing a separate statement on this issue also, when time allows, in order that no instance of JLR’s dishonesty remains unchallenged. We hope that JLR, despite his expu1sion from the R.S.L., will reply to the present document. He may be confident that his reply will be circulated amongst our membership. We do not believe that JLR himself will ever again be a member of the Fourth—except in the unlikely event of the treatment at the hands of a psychologist which he is known to have been receiving bearing unexpected fruits. But he has under his influence young comrades whom we hope to see again in our ranks. It is for them that this statement is written.
D.D.H. 
written on 31.1.43
received and duplicated 2.2.43
circulated 3.2.43 

Denzil Dean Harber Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 March 2009


