

Figures on the economic performance of a small country like Hungary are not the sort of thing to hit the headlines. But those issued over the last six months could be of enormous significance for the whole future of the state capitalist countries.
At the beginning of 1968 Hungary’s rulers inaugurated a ‘New Economic Mechanism’, the most radical economic reform yet seen in Eastern Europe outside Yugoslavia. The aim was to deal with a number of failings that plagued the economy – as they plague the economies of all the Stalinist states, particularly the more economically advanced ones. The most obvious was the tendency for long term growth rates to decline.
But that has not been the only problem. The overall growth rates conceal enormous disbalances and wastages inside the economy. In Czechoslovakia in the years 1956-65 ‘a large part of accumulation – close on a third – was tied down in inventories and capital under construction’. In Poland 28 per cent of accumulation was in inventories alone. [1]
Instead of being available for consumption or investment, products pile up in warehouses or are tied down in massive construction sites that are years overdue on completion. The drain on resources that results is massive. One estimate is that 5-7 per cent of the output of the economies of Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland is lost in this way. [2]
For the rulers of these countries some answer to such wastage has become more necessary as the overall growth rates get smaller. How does the wastage arise?
All the bureaucratically centralised economies display a drive to repeatedly embark on investment plans on a scale that cannot possibly be accomplished in the planned time, given the resources of the economies. At the beginning of each five years a series of massive investment projects are begun. But it soon becomes clear that shortages and bottlenecks are going to prevent them being finished on time.
The overambitious projects run up against what is sometimes called the ‘raw material barrier’. [3]
The initial period in which investments soar is now followed by a period in which growth rates stagnate, and some projects are left to rot unfinished while resources which were initially meant for them are transferred elsewhere. Projects which they in turn were meant to supply with inputs, even if completed, are unable to operate at full capacity. While some projects are held up by shortage of resources, others produce goods for which there is lack of demand. The overall result can even be a decline in the total social product, as in Czechoslovakia in 1962-3, when ‘a policy of very big new investment plans in the metallurgy and chemical industry led to a sudden 2-3 per cent drop in the national income.’ [4]






Source: Goldman & Korba, Economic Growth in Czechoslovakia, Prague 1969



Perhaps even more important are the social and economic consequences of the emergency measures employed to try and rectify the situation. On the one hand threats arise to the political stability of the regime; on the other any possibility of rationally organising the economy in the long term is destroyed. The search for resources to complete ‘priority’ projects invariably means an attack on workers’ living standards. The projects that are abandoned or frozen are usually those concerned with increasing consumer good or food production. Increases in imports of raw materials or components for industrial projects have the same effect: they are paid for either by cutting food imports or by reducing the level of consumption so as to allow greater food exports.
The central management of the economy can only deal with the problem in two ways:


By obtaining the necessary resources from abroad by raising imports.
By scrapping or freezing certain projects and using the resources initially allocated for them to other, ‘priority’ projects.


In this way, the original, optimistic predictions about growth rates are soon invalidated.
‘Analysis of the dynamics of industrial production in Czechoslovakia, the GDR and Hungary supplies an interesting picture. The rate of growth of industrial production shows relatively regular fluctuations ... These fluctuations are still more pronounced if the analysis is confined to producer goods.’ [5]
In extreme cases such measures result in deep social unrest. During the Hungarian First Five Year Plan (1950-55) the attempt to maintain a disbalanced investment programme meant that ‘the real value of wages diminished by 20 per cent’ [6]; in October 1956 the Hungarian workers took their revenge. Years of declining living standards followed by an attempt to cut the meat consumption (so as to raise exports to get desperately needed foreign currency) prepared the ground for the uprisings 18 months ago on Poland’s Baltic coasts. The economic dislocation of the mid-sixties was the necessary background of the Czech ‘spring’ of 1968.
The attempts to deal with the short term economic difficulties also aggravate long term problems. The abandonment and freezing of some projects inevitably means that overall economic development is unbalanced and one sided: it is not unusual to find that when a highly expensive factory is completed it cannot operate at full capacity because a project producing some essential input for it has not been finished. [7]
Whatever talk there might be of ‘five year planning’ nationally, at the factory level a manager hardly knows from one week to the next what he will be expected to produce and in what quantities. If he starts work on one project, there is a strong likelihood he will soon be ordered to scrap existing production plans and start producing for another priority.
At present the allocation of tasks at the factory is not even planned on a yearly basis – as is clear from a statement by Baibakhov, the Chairman of Gosplan:
‘It is essential that the basic form of the planned development of the national economy must be a five year plan, with an annual allocation of the most important tasks ... These requirements have not yet been fully implemented.’ [8]
Faced with such uncertainties, it is hardly possible for the manager to plan the work of his factory on the most efficient basis. Instead, he develops a strong interest in making sure he has excess hidden labour and raw material resources. Then he can make sudden and unplanned switches from one production line to another, from one quantity of output to another, without over-exerting the workforce or the plant. It also means he has an interest in being as little dependent upon outside supplies as possible – hence a marked tendency for enterprises to make as many as possible of the goods they need themselves, regardless of the cost, rather than rely on supplies from outside that might not be available when needed.
The overall result is that any rational calculation of what resources are available in the economy becomes impossible; no real incentives exist at the factory level to increase productivity, despite continual admonishments from the authorities; and conditions are created in which there is no real way of telling whether future investment targets correspond to the resources of the economy.
Of course projects which are delayed do eventually come in to production. Then a massive burst in industrial growth follows. But it is no more planned than was the previous downturn. And it cannot cancel out the other irrationalities in the economy. It does however, have one invariable effect: it prompts the central authorities to overestimate the speed at which future investment is possible and to repeat their previous setting of vastly over-ambitious investment plans.
The aim of schemes of economic reform in the Eastern Bloc countries has been, quite simply, to do away with the disproportionalities and pave the way for balanced growth at a reinvigorated rate. Their proponents argue that the only way to overcome the imbalances and irrationalities is to develop some sort of market mechanism to relate the outputs of different enterprises to each other and, eventually, to the outside world. Then, it is said, the managers will have an incentive to relate their investment plans to those of the needs of consumers and other enterprises, and they will also be forced to adopt a realistic pricing policy, which reflects real production costs.
In the late 1960s there were moves towards the partial implementation of such a programme in many of the Stalinist states. Reforms were pushed through in Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Poland, and even in Russia itself. But they were usually limited in scope by the resistance of strong vested interests inside the bureaucracy. In Czechoslovakia the economic reforms were finally abandoned two years ago with the reimposition of tight bureaucratic control.
So far the Hungarian reforms have avoided such a fate and have been much more far reaching than those suggested elsewhere. The attitude of western experts to the reforms until recently was one of unqualified approval. The reforms seemed to justify the faith of bourgeois economists in the market mechanism as the only possible basis for organising an industrialised society. There was hardly a hint that the Hungarians might have solved nothing with their ‘reforms’.
Yet last August it began to be revealed that the old faults of the state capitalist economy were re-emerging in a scarcely changed form. Rezso Nyers, the head of the Communist Party’s economic department presented a report that indicated that ‘current investment expenditure in Hungary appears to have broken all bounds and is running 23 per cent higher than during the first half of last year’. [9]
The president of the Hungarian National Bank reported that funds tied up in unfinished investments amounted to 65,000 forints – more than the total investment expenditure for the year. [10] In October the prime minister Fock indicated that ‘investment had gone up twice as fast as the national budget and the balance of payments. Too frequently investments were being embarked upon which were not feasible either technically or financially’. [11] Reports have since revealed that last year imports grew at twice the pace of exports, with imports of plant and machinery doubling. The overall investment rate was ten per cent higher than planned. [12] Meanwhile, only 11 put of 19 planned investment projects had been completed. [13]
Faced with these difficulties, Hungary’s leaders seem to have little choice but to revert to old remedies – even if these are bound to give rise to all the old side effects. Fock has announced that the reforms will continue – but with ‘closer control from the centre’. In other words, there will be partial moves back to the old bureaucratically centralised system. The banks have been given orders to give credits only to ‘uncompleted or top priority investments’. At least two major investment projects due for this year will not now go ahead.
The immediate political consequences for Hungary of this state of affairs are difficult to predict. Internally there are already reports of some unrest, with clashes between demonstrators and police on the streets of Budapest for the first time for 16 years. Economic pressures seem to be affecting the country’s international stance as well. Hungarian ministers have let it be known that trade negotiations with the Russians are not going too well. It seems that Russia, which accounts for two thirds of Hungary’s trade, is not taking sufficient account of that country’s short term problems or medium term needs. But it is too early yet to tell whether these are portents of a major social and political crisis on the scale of 1956 or 1968.
However, what is clear is that the balance sheet of Hungary’s reforms is of enormous significance for the long term development of the whole Stalinist world. It indicates the fallaciousness of the belief that there is some magical property in the market mechanism which will enable the bureaucracy to turn to it, belatedly, as a solution to its growing problems.
It does not require any great insight to see why the reforms solve nothing. The roots of the contradictions which beset the bureaucratically centralised economy lie in the drive to accumulate means of production on a scale that bears no relation to the real resources of society. But this drive is not the result of some arbitrary whim of the central planner or of some deficiency in the planning mechanism. It follows rather from the fact that the bureaucracy exists as a ruling class trying to maintain and extend its control in competition with other ruling classes internationally.
The rulers of the Russian bloc are driven to jack up production because of their desire to defend their empire against the rulers of other powers – America, and increasingly, China. It is an important fact, even though it does not accord with the mythologies of many on the left, that there are now 44 Russian divisions on the Chinese frontier, compared with only 31 in Europe. The arms race necessitates an endless drive to accumulate at a speed not determined by internal resources but by the international balance of forces (in turn a reflection of the international level of productive forces). That also explains why ‘priority projects’ are so rarely in the consumer sector. They do not contribute to increasing military potential.
The East European states have to bear an increasing part of this burden. Since 1949 they have faced an average annual rise in their military expenditure of 7.5 per cent a year (compared with 4.1 per cent for the USSR). [14]
In recent years such expenditure has further escalated, with a total of 52 per cent increased military spending by Warsaw Pact countries other than the Soviet Union between 1965 and 1970. This figure must explain at least some of the over-ambitious investment projects and the stagnating or even falling living standards workers have had to put up with. But in the case of the East European states there is another factor also at work.
All of them are heavily dependent on foreign trade. And in foreign markets even within the Soviet bloc, they have to compete not only with western firms, but also with each other. There is virtually no trans-national direction of the industries of Eastern Europe.
To survive in such economic competition the rulers of these states are subject to exactly the same compulsion as that which confronts private capitalists in the west – ‘accumulate, accumulate, that is Moses and all the prophets.’
It was precisely under the classical market of the west that this drive to accumulate periodically outstripped the resources to sustain it profitably, plunging the economy into a slump. [15]
There is surely no reason to believe that the partial introduction of market mechanisms into bureaucratically centralised economies will end their propensity to disproportionate and cyclical development. [16] Only the establishment of an economy no longer dominated by the exigencies of international competition can do that. And that requires first of all the destruction of the national bureaucratic ruling classes as part of the process of international revolution. No amount of reform is a substitute.
But if economic reform does not work, then the sorts of convulsions that have shaken Eastern Europe in the past will inevitably recur in the future. They will also increasingly take their toll in Russia itself, as the high growth rates and the massive spare labour and material resources that previously hid the extent of economic failings become a thing of the past. Whatever the consequences for Hungary itself, the failure of reform indicates that the time may not be far off when Moscow and Leningrad experience their own 1956.
 



Comecon
M. Kaiser
RIIA, Oxford University Press, 55s
Eastern Europe in Transition
ed. K. London
John Hopkins Press, London: Oxford University Press, 72s
The Czechoslovak Crisis 1968
ed. R.R. James
Weidenfeld & Nicholson
The first of these three books is the best. It contains a valuable and interesting account of the development of economic exchanges between the differing so-called socialist States, and of the attempt to base these upon some ongoing institutional framework. Although the exposition is at points heavy (in the normal style of academic economists) and repetitious, what emerges is a picture of the develop ment of conflicting interests between the different state capitalist regimes. Certainly many would-be Marxists would take a less rosy view of these regimes if they took some of the facts presented here seriously. For instance, the
‘special conference ... held from February 22 to March 1, 1966 to discuss the fundamental dilemma that the industrialised members (of Comecon) require assurances of markets and materials that the other members are unwilling to give ...’
The reactions of the less developed state capitalist States to such pressures are also interesting. The Chinese, Rumanians and Cubans have all taken up (without acknowledging its source) the Yugoslav complaint of 1949 about ‘capitalist trade relations between socialist countries’. Significantly, shortly before he left the Cuban government – over the issue of the rate of industrialisation among other things – Guevara, paraphrasing the arguments of Popovic in 1949, denounced
‘... talk of mutually-beneficial trade based on prices imposed on underdeveloped countries by the law of value and by its byproduct, the international relations of unequal exchange. How can “mutual benefit” mean the sale at world market prices of the raw materials that cost backward countries sweat and boundless suffering and the purchase at those market prices, of machinery made in modern automated factories.’
Finally, the Chinese have made the point that
‘the prices of many of the goods we imported from the Soviet Union were much higher than those on the world market’. (Peking Review, 8/5/64)
The other two books are less useful. The Kurt London book contains a couple of interesting essays, but the overall level is not better than that of, say, an average issue of Problems of Communism. The James book starts off well with an account of the background to the Czech crisis, but rapidly degenerates into a boring report of the United Nations discussions.



Introduction
It is now more than 40 years since Stalin eliminated all rival tendencies in the Communist Party and State apparatus and set the Russian society on the course of industrialisation in competition with the West. Since then regimes on a similar model have been imposed (by the Russians) on six States in Europe and one in Asia (North Korea) and have come to power through indigenous movements in at least five countries (Yugoslavia, Albania, China, North Vietnam and Cuba). No analysis of the possibilities for socialism on a world scale can be complete without some analysis of the dynamic that determines the development of these regimes, the domestic and foreign policies of their rulers, and the likelihood of socialist revolution within them.
The underlying dynamic behind the various external and internal policies of these regimes results from their participation in a competitive struggle with other ruling classes (both private capitalist and, increasingly, state capitalist as well) for control over productive forces. No national ruling class can survive this struggle unless it continually expands its military potential by expanding the productive forces at its disposal. If it can do this it can subordinate other ruling classes to itself; if it cannot it will be subordinated. The result is that each ruling class

behaves internally like any capitalist firm, organising production so as to continually force down the price paid for labour power to an historically determined minimum and to transform the surplus over and above this into capital;
utilises whatever opportunities exist for imperialist exploitation of neighbouring nations. This is evident with the large, highly developed Russian bureaucracy, but is a trait that exists in embryo in the others – witness for instance Yugoslav attempts to dominate Albania in the early post-war period. [1]
 

The Russian economy: The Stalin period
During Stalin’s lifetime the forced development of the Russian economy so as to provide the basis for arms competition with the Western powers meant that there was a continual overall adjustment and readjustment of production inside Russia to changes taking place elsewhere. Its insertion in an international competitive system meant, in Marxian terms, that the law of value applied to the Soviet economy as a whole. [2] The bureaucracy had continually to relate the production costs of the economy as a unit to production costs in the capitalist world.
At the same time, however, within the different branches of the Russian economy various factors prevented a fully rational calculation of production costs. [3]

Workers did not freely dispose of their own labour power. Their ability to do so was restricted by legal constraints against absenteeism, lateness and changing jobs without prior permission. For those in the labour camps (up to 10 million, i.e. about a third of the size of the industrial working class in the 1930s) there was no control at all over their own labour power.
Labour power was often paid at below the historically and culturally determined subsistence level (in Marxist terms, below its value). [4] Again the most extreme instance of this was in the case of slave labour.
The form of organisation of planning led each ministry, glavk, trust and firm to attempt to achieve a high degree of autonomy. This followed from the authoritarian nature of the planning system. Those in charge of each section of industry were bent on achieving the highest level of physical production. This was dependent upon maintaining a regular flow of production, which in turn was dependent upon a continual flow of components and resources. This was only guaranteed if production of such resources was directly under the authority of the particular section. Hence, each ministry, glavk, etc., attempted to produce as many of the resources it required as possible itself and to reduce its dependence on the rest of the economy. [5] The result was a continual tendency to departmental autarchy, with continual duplication of production processes.

The cumulative effect of these three factors was that while there was a degree of control over outputs from the economy, fitting these to the needs of competition with the West, there was also a wasteful division of inputs. The pricing system reflected these irrationalities, rather than real production costs. This in turn made any rational comparison of costs within or between productive units impossible.
During Stalin’s lifetime these inefficiencies hardly seemed to matter. The economy expanded at a virtually unprecedented rate. And most of this expansion was concentrated in the crucial heavy industry sector. All this was possible because of the huge spare natural and human resources that were available. [6]
In the 1950s, however, many of these excess resources began to be used up. Although labour productivity was increasing, in terms of what crucially mattered – its relative level compared with the US – it was still the same 40 per cent in 1950 as in 1937-9. [7]
The rate of economic growth could not be maintained unless there was:

An overcoming of at least the worst irrationalities in the allocation of resources. This was partly achieved in the mid-1950s with the ‘freeing’ of the labour force – the liberating of the majority of those in the camps, and the removal of legal sanctions against changing jobs, absenteeism, etc.
A raising of the level of labour productivity. But this was impossible without raising the level of consumption of the workers. Such was the case particularly in those productive processes too complex to be easily supervised from the outside. Wherever production demanded the attention, initiative and therefore the commitment of the worker, crude external threats of the sort that typified the Stalin period could not raise real labour productivity – at best they could result in a quantitative increase in the number of shoddily produced goods. In these areas productivity could only be increased by permitting a devolution of initiative to those actually engaged in the production process while increasing their commitment to production through improved standards of living, etc. [8]

This is particularly true of two sorts of productive processes: on the one hand agricultural production, particularly animal husbandry, on the other the sort of technologically sophisticated production associated with an advanced economy. One of the most striking aspects of the Stalin period was that while industrial production rose at an unprecedented rate, agricultural production stagnated. Even though Stalin could claim that Russia would be the greatest grain-producing country in the world within three years in 1929 and again in 1935, and though Malenkov claimed in 1952 that a target of 130 million tons of grain had actually been achieved, after Stalin’s death Krushchev [9] made clear ‘that as regards grain production the country remained for a long time at the level of pre-revolutionary Russia’. He gave the following figures to back up what he said:



 


Crop Yield per Hectare
(centners)


Total Grain Return
(poods)




1910-14


102.5


4,380




1949-53


105.2


4,942



Thus the harvest in 1949-53 was only 91.7 million tons, despite the fact that the population had grown 30 per cent. Such is the efficacy of Stalinist ‘planning’. As regards livestock farming the situation was even worse. Production actually fell during the Stalin period.



 


Total
Livestock




1916


58.4m




1953


56.6m



Once further development of industry became dependent upon raising real wages, the problem of agriculture became central. For unless more foodstuffs were produced, with the best will in the world, the Russian bureaucracy could not increase substantially the consumption levels of its workers. At the same time the problem was aggravated by the fact that to even achieve existing levels of agricultural production, a very large proportion of the population that would otherwise have been available to raise the level of industrial production had to be employed there – in 1956 43 per cent of the Russian population were employed in agriculture, compared with the mere 9 per cent required to feed the population of the US.
 
Reforms
All these factors produced growing pressure for economic reforms after the death of Stalin. These involved both changes in the emphasis in production – from heavy industry to light industry and agriculture – so as to raise labour productivity and the long term growth rate of the economy, and changes in methods of control over the labouring population, ie’ changes in ‘managerial techniques’ from those employing the ‘stick’ of crude authoritarian control to those using the ‘carrot’ of incentives combined with some devolution of responsibility.
But any such changes faced the following set of problems:
1. The existing form of planning presupposed the subordination of agriculture and light industry to heavy industry, even where this was not immediately demanded by need of arms competition. Left to itself the economic structure and those bureaucratic interests associated with it would automatically continue to expand heavy industry at the expense of light industry, regardless of plan targets:



Percentage Fulfilment of Plan Targets in New Productive Capacity [10]




 


1956-60


1959-65




Coal


53


54-60




Electric power


–


91-94




Pig iron


89


63-68




Steel


83


74-82




Rolled metals


65


59-75




Iron ore


84


–







Saw mills


36


46




Textile mills


36


63




Looms


37


47



In the 1959-65 seven-year plan, while producers’ goods output was increased by between 8 and 12 per cent higher than planned, consumers’ goods output increases fell short of the target by between 2 and 5 per cent. [11] (If a further distinction, between producers’ goods for agriculture and light industry and producers’ goods for producer goods industries is introduced, the gap is even greater. [12])
This tendency for heavy industry to hog resources available for growth could only be overcome by a conscious effort on the part of the central apparatus to change the pattern of economic organisation.
2. Any attempt to change the organisation of the economy, however, of necessity involves a political struggle against important interests within the bureaucracy. In particular those who gained enormous power with the central role the repressive apparatus played in achieving the economic goals of the bureaucracy in the Stalin period resist any changes likely to diminish this role. They are backed by bureaucrats associated with heavy industry and by all those throughout the bureaucracy who identify their own power and prestige with old methods of control.
This central contradiction between the class goals of the bureaucracy (the relentless expansion and transformation of its own economic base) and its, form of class organisation (in a frozen, centralised, totalitarian structure) between the forces of production and the relations of production, cannot be overcome, even partially, without attempts to reform the bureaucracy itself. This will be resisted by those, associated with the old structure, often best placed politically to resist reforms.
In order to try and overcome conservative sections of the bureaucracy opposing reforms in the 1950s, the central political apparatus (or a section of it) attempted to mobilise other elements in the bureaucracy. This was the real significance of the anti-Stalin campaigns of 1953, 1956 and 1962. But there were clear limits within which this was possible. Much of the conservative resistance could not be overcome without the danger arising of the repressive apparatus vis-à-vis the rest of society being paralysed, thus unleashing forces that might easily turn against the bureaucracy as a whole (as in East Germany in 1953, in Poland and Hungary in 1956, in Czechoslovakia in 1968-9 and in China in 1966-7). In Russia itself the bureaucracy stopped short of taking measures that might have had such disastrous effects from its point of view. But this of necessity meant failing to carry through reforms wholeheartedly.
3. At the same time, the pressures of continued short-term military competition with the West (and, increasingly, with other state capitalist countries, eg China) provided arguments for those who oppose reforms. For this means that any deployment of resources towards light industry and agriculture in order to raise long-term labour productivity is likely to mean a slowing down of the short-term rate of accumulation and a weakening in the military sphere. Failures to carry through the redeployment of resources to improve living standards are blamed on the needs of ‘defence’, as for instance with the failure of agricultural investment to grow at the planned rate in 1968. [13]
4. Because the reforms are only reforms, not a complete transformation of the system, and in any case are only carried through half-heartedly, they never achieve the results prophesied by their proponents. They never do more than tinker with the fundamental cause of the problems: the alienation of the worker from the production process and therefore his refusal to display the commitment to his work needed for increased labour productivity in both agriculture and areas of advanced technological production. Like their equivalents in the West the most advanced reformers will talk about ‘workers’ participation’ but not about real control. Even a limited devolution of initiative from the central apparatus to plant managers, allowing them to relate the tempo of production to the possibilities of profitable exchange of products between themselves, the State and the consuming population (so-called ‘market socialism’) has to be carefully controlled by the centre, although it might lead to more efficient employment of resources, lest it also allow managers to make decisions in opposition to the class goal of the State capitalist bureaucracy as a whole: accumulation in competition with other ruling classes.
The result is that reforms introduced cannot come to terms with the real roots of these problems. For instance, two of Khrushchev’s chief attempts to come to terms with the agricultural crisis – the Virgin Lands scheme and the Maize Campaign – merely involved an extension into new areas of bureaucratically controlled production. For this reason they were easy for the bureaucratic mentality to carry through. But they also necessarily reproduced all the failings of the bureaucratic approach to agriculture. Again, in industry, Khrushchev’s attempts to overcome the irrational autarchy of ministerial departmentalism by organising industry on a regional basis through Sovnarchozy merely resulted in new forms of autarchy. Hence the piecemeal dismantling of that system.
At the same time, any attempt to introduce new planning mechanisms alongside old ones may merely mean that the worst of both worlds results. For instance, a weakening of central control over investment and pricing decisions may remove what constraints there are forcing the natural expansive tendencies of those running heavy industry to take account of the needs of the whole economy. The result is then likely to be (as in Czechoslovakia in 1968) disproportionate growth and inflation.
The lack of efficacy of such reforms serves to reinforce the arguments of those who anyway fear change. This makes it more likely that further reforms will be carried through in a hesitant, half-hearted manner and lack success.
 
The Situation Today
The overall result of these differing pressures has been:
1. Reforms have only been introduced slowly within Russia itself. Many of the most important ones introduced during Khrushchev’s rule were abandoned after his fall (due in turn to the failure of reforms, particularly in agriculture). The reforms introduced in industry since have been brought in on a very tentative basis, and there are continual reports of their frustration by sections of the apparatus. The disproportion between the growth of industry and agriculture certainly has not been overcome.



Percentage Achievement of Plan Targets





Plan IV
1946-50


PlanV
1951-5


Plan VI
1956-60


Plan VII
1959-65




Gross industrial output


117


109


99


102




Gross agricultural output


78


–


89


68



2. The rate of growth has slowed down. According to Russian sources it has fallen from 8.2 per cent in the period 1956-62 to 6 per cent 1961-65; according to American sources from 6 per cent 1956-60 to 4 per cent in the 60s. In either case, the rate of growth is nothing like the level displayed during the Stalin period, and is in fact less than that displayed by several Western economies. The difficulty Stalinist economic structures face once a degree of industrialisation has taken place is graphically illustrated by a table showing the growth rates of the different East European states ordered according to their degree of industrialisation:



Eastern Europe: Compound Annual Growth Rates
of National Income [14]





1950-55


1955-60


1960-65




East Germany


11.4%


7.0%


3.5%




Czechoslovakia


  8.0  


7.1  


1.8  




USSR


11.3  


9.2  


6.3  




Hungary


  6.3  


6.5  


4.7  




Poland


  8.6  


6.6  


5.9  




Bulgaria


12.2  


9.7  


6.5  




Yugoslavia


23.0  


7.5  


8.0  




Rumania


13.9  


7.0  


8.7  



The origin of these difficulties quite clearly lies in the fact that as accumulation takes place, unless there is a more than equivalent increase in productivity, the increasing proportion of dead labour to living labour (the organic composition of capital) will result in a relative decline in the amount of value produced.



Average Annual Increment of Output per rouble
of Investment [15]
(in roubles)





1951-5


1956-60


1961-5




National income


2.4


1.6


1.3




Gross industrial output


6.4


5.1


4.7




Gross agricultural output


2.3


3.0


0.8



The implication of these figures is that unless there is a considerably increased rate of exploitation of labour, the rate of profit in Russian industry will undergo a drastic decline, and hence also the resources for further investment and growth of industry. Hence the concern of the central apparatus to prevent factory managers giving wage increases above the level of productivity increases.
The overall result is that the Russian economy faces a chronic crisis of slowing growth rates. A solution to this would only be possible by raising productivity at a faster rate than at present. But this is impossible in industry unless the Stalinist heritage in agriculture is overcome. This, however, is in turn impossible without ploughing into agriculture resources from heavy industry and arms production. Since the overthrow of Khrushchev, the Russian leadership has had certain successes in the agricultural field.



Agricultural Production [16]




 


1948-52


1965


1966


1967




Wheat production (thousand tons)


35,759


–


100,499


77,419




Maize production (thousand tons)


  5,751


–


   8,410


  9,163




Hens’ eggs (millions)


11,700


29,068


  31,372


33,666






 


1947-8/50-1


1962/3


1963/4


1964/5


1965/6


1966/7




Cows (millions)


24,357


37,987


38,384


44,231


45,608


46,813



This has permitted a small increase in the average annual rate of growth – according to Russian sources from an average of 6 per cent 1960-4 to an average of 6.9 per cent 1965-7. [17] But this improvement in agriculture does not seem to have been due to factors that will endure. The level of investment in agriculture seems to have fallen below the level of Khrushchev’s last two years. In 1964-6 it only rose 15 per cent as opposed to 17 per cent in 1962-64. Similarly fertiliser deliveries increased in 1964-6 only 39 per cent and in 1967 by 10 per cent as opposed to 53 per cent in 1962-4. The major change leading to improved production, in fact, seems to have been the fact that for various reasons the agricultural work force which fell by 9 per cent in 1962-4 rose slightly in 1964-6. [18] This, however, is not an advantage that Russian agriculture is likely to have for long. [19] At the same time the constant total work force figure hides two important facts: firstly the work force is an ageing work force, with a continual drain of youth from the countryside [20]; secondly, it does not contain nearly the required number of skilled personnel required for increasingly mechanised agriculture – while the estimated demand for specialists in 1970 is 2 million, the number in 1966 was only 770,000 and was increasing at a decreasing rate. [21]
Finally, the factor that has permitted improvements in agriculture cannot but increase the problems of industry. In the past if long-term plans calculated for increases in labour productivity were impossible under the existing structure, this was to a large extent compensated for by an absolute growth in the labour force ‘by a percentage varying from 13 to 21 per cent of total employment ... in absolute figures, from 6 to 10 million people’. [22] But ‘in 1966 for the first time since the war available manpower fell short of the annual plan (by 100,000 men) and in 1967 ... by 600,000 men’. [23] This perhaps explains why the current five-year programme is being underfulfilled in industry as well as agriculture and why for the first time in 40 years heavy industry is suffering. [24]
All this means that the resources of the Soviet bureaucracy can be expected to grow at a declining rate, while the demands on these resources increase – through military competition threatening to attain unlimitable levels with ABMs and MIRVs, and the conflict with China, through the need to invest in new areas if productivity is to be forced up, through the need to placate the demands of a working class continually growing in numbers, experience and self-confidence.
Because of this. increasing strain on resources, the more grandiose of the promises to the workers of the Khrushchev era stand no chance of being fulfilled. Although wages and conditions for workers have improved, they still remain relatively meagre. Thus despite considerable increases in minimum wages over the last 10 years, they are still low, at 60 roubles [25] (on a rough calculation about £20) a month. [26] Again, increases in paid holidays in 1968 meant that 40 per cent of workers only received a total of 15 days per year.
In housing, despite attempts to overcome the abominable overcrowding of the Stalin period (in 1950 average housing space per inhabitant of the USSR was about a quarter less than in 1923) Khrushchev’s 1957 ‘aim of ending the housing shortage in 10 to 12 years’ is no nearer accomplishment than comparable claims by British housing ministers in the same period. The 1959-65 plan for housing was underfulfilled by 15 per cent, the 1966 plan by 11 per cent and the 1967 plan by 12 per cent. A considerable proportion of this consists of private and co-operative house building, both of which would seem to favour well-to-do bureaucrats at the expense of ordinary workers. [27]
 
Reforms – New Problems
If the introduction of economic reforms does not yet seem to have done much to release more resources for the Russian bureaucracy, it does promise to confront them with new problems. Limited improvements in the living standards and cultural level of workers, while not overcoming their fundamental lack of commitment to the regime, are likely to increase their independence and morale. This can only raise the level of self-confidence and combativity of the masses. At the same time the promise of reforms, the limited destruction of an authoritarian routine, arouses expectations that the regime cannot fulfil. This will inevitably mean the development of class militancy among Russian workers. This will be intensified by the fact that the reforms imply new sorts of hardship for workers. For instance, increased concern with labour costs can only mean a growth in frictional unemployment. ‘As the reform develops, surpluses of manpower will increase, but the element for its absorption – capital investment – may even be reduced in comparison with the initial drafts (of tire current five-year plan). Problems of placing a large number of people in jobs will arise ...’ [28] There is no dole in the USSR, only a fortnight’s pay upon dismissal, although the average period between changing jobs is about 24 days. [29] In addition the reforms make even more transparent the exploitation of the workers in the factories. In the first year of the most recent batch of reforms in 699 out of 703 enterprises subject to them, productivity rose by 8 per cent, but earnings of industrial-production personnel by only 2.8 per cent. In 522 enterprises payments from the ‘material incentives fund’ amounted to only 0.5 roubles per month for workers, as against 4.2 roubles for all personnel. [30]
 
The National Question in the USSR
Finally, successful implementation of reforms can only heighten the forces leading to discontent among the non-Russian nationalities inside the USSR (who now constitute a majority of the total population). The major factors providing a basis for national oppression inside the USSR since the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy in the 20s have been:

The determination of the central apparatus based on Moscow to prevent any tendencies towards autonomy and independent decision-making by sections of the apparatus elsewhere. This means continually curtailing and limiting the powers of local party chiefs, etc (a tendency already manifest as early as 1923 in the disputes over the Georgian question). Local bureaucrats have continually to prove that their major concern is central bureaucratic interests, not those of the local population.
The centralised bureaucracy identifies its ability to dominate and extract surplus value with its ability to prevent other social forces mobilising. This means preventing the formulation and communication of alternative ideologies to its own. This implies continual imposition of a homogenous culture and is aided if there is a single dominant language, for the urbanised areas at least. Hence the continual attempts at Russification of national minorities, the discrimination against them within the bureaucracy, etc.
’Divide and rule’; by discrimination against the minorities and in favour of the Russified, the bureaucracy strengthens the ideological basis of its own rule. This is particularly clear in the case of anti-semitism.
Within the lower ranks of the bureaucracy cultural background undoubtedly determines the likelihood of rising upwards. This, on the one hand, gives millions of petty bureaucrats an interest in maintaining great Russian dominance, on the other it increases the resentment of those from non-Russian backgrounds.

Successful implementation of reforms will add to these at least two more factors. Firstly, as the level of technology advances, those with the most advanced culture (in the main the Russians) will be favoured. At the same time, the increasing stress upon efficiency, productivity and the optimal deployment of resources is likely to concentrate further industrial advance in the most industrialised areas. Already in the late 50s ‘it was a repeated source of criticism that ministries found it convenient to direct investments, wherever possible, to developed regions, to save overheads’. [31]
National pressures can thus be expected to grow on two new bases. There will be increasing anti-Russian feelings among minority nationalities who increasingly find themselves deprived of possibilities for material and cultural advance. And the local sections of the bureaucracy, resentful at the low priority given to the development of the areas of industry under their control will try and trade off this discontent so as to blackmail the central apparatus into providing more resources for investment. There is already a prototype for such developments in the growth of Slovak national feeling within Czechoslovakia prior to the ousting of Novotny. The Slovak bureaucrats were willing to co-operate with the Czech reformers, even though they were suffering from the effects of reforms already implemented and because of the low level of development of Slovak industry saw no need for them, provided they were promised an increased cut of total national investment for their industry. This was crucial in cracking the hold of the central apparatus in 1968.
 
Russia and the Other Satellites
Although the bureaucracies throughout Eastern Europe (except for Yugoslavia and Albania) and in North Korea were put into power by the Russians, they were never integrated into the social structure of Russia itself. Instead, Stalin gave them a high degree of control over the internal running of the economy, providing they subordinated themselves to the Russian bureaucracy as far as the output of the economy was concerned. This meant copying the Russian emphasis on production of means of production (at least as far as the industrially advanced satellites were concerned), passing a proportion of this product straight to the Russians (through reparations, mixed companies, commodity transactions at token payments, etc [32]) and permitting the Russians a near monopoly of their trade.
These bureaucracies were thus established in business on their own, even if by a more powerful partner. They developed interests of their own in developing industry at the fastest possible rate so as to provide themselves with the bases for economic and military independence. They willingly accepted the policies imposed on them by the Russians insofar as they facilitated these goals.
But the interests of the bureaucracies in’ the satellites (and also in the countries where they came to power without Russian aid) can clash with those of the Russian bureaucracy. When this happens the outcome is invariably ideological dispute, giving way to raucous insults, military preparations and even armed conflicts. For instance, economic disagreements played a key role in the split of Tito with Stalin in 1948; the split of Mao and Hoxha with Khrushchev in the early 60s was at least in part motivated by economic questions; the question of the allocation of resources within Comecon underlay the split of Rumania with Russia; and the development of what might be called ‘national bureaucratic’ trends in Poland and Hungary (in 1956) and Czechoslovakia (1968) was similarly motivated.
The result is that there is a shifting pattern of alignments between the differing Stalinist States, depending on the needs of accumulation at a particular point. This might mean a particular national bureaucracy acquiesces in Russian dominance for quite a long period (as the Czechs did during the 50s when their economy grew at a fast rate due to the ability to sell its produce in the rest of Eastern Europe) but it also means that there can never develop a stable State capitalist bloc. Only one other factor can tie a particular national bureaucracy to the Russians for any long period (apart from the crudest of physical threats) – its lack of a viable national base of its own without Russian support (hence the acquiescence of most Eastern Europe bureaucracies to intensified Russian exploitation in the 1948-53 period and Husak’s support for the Russians today).
 
Permanent Revolution
In the past the pressure for reforms has been stronger in Eastern Europe than in Russia itself, for various reasons – the higher level of economic development; the outflow of resources to Russia (particularly in the early period); the greater importance of foreign trade and therefore of trade balances; the deeper traditions of militancy within the working classes; and the shallower roots of the ruling class. While the crisis of state capitalism has been chronic inside Russia, in three cases in Eastern Europe it has taken on an acute form. Events in Poland and Hungary in 1956 and in Czechoslovakia in 1968 reveal a stereotyped pattern of development:

The failure of the economy to achieve balanced growth results in a split within the apparatus. One section begins to demand wholesale reforms and also to question the relationship with Russia.
The ‘reforming bureaucracy’ cannot take over control without immobilising its enemies, who normally control the police apparatus. It therefore begins to demand for itself the right to organise within the party and looks for allies to back it up.
At a certain point the ‘reforming bureaucracy’ calls in certain intermediate strata (intellectuals, journalists, students) to help it paralyse the apparatus and let it take over.
But this permits, even encourages, extra-bureaucratic classes (above all the workers) to mobilise, at first behind the slogans of the ‘reforming bureaucracy’, but increasingly on their own account through workers’ councils, etc. The revolution becomes permanent and its demands take on a new significance.
The ‘reformers’ having come to power try to ride the storm. But they can only do so by reasserting the basic class structure of the society. [34] This means destroying whatever gains the workers have made. At first the ‘cold’ method of ideological hegemony is tried (e.g., Gomulka successfully, and Nagy, unsuccessfully, in 1956 and Dubcek in 1968); if this fails, then the ‘hot’ method of armed repression, based upon Russian troops follows (Kadar in 1956, Husak in 1969).
In any case, the reforming section of the apparatus is forced to come to terms with its enemies, internal and external, and their methods, if it is to avoid complete dissolution by the forces it itself has unleashed. It is forced to reimpose relations of production that, despite modifications, are in contradiction to the maximal development of the national economy.
 

China and Russia
The Chinese bureaucracy faces a crisis similar in some ways to that confronting the Russians, but at a quite different stage in its development.
Mao Tse Tung took power 20 years after Stalin in a country considerably more backward than Russia in 1929. The gap between the forces of production at his control and those in the hands of the Western imperialist powers was immense. In addition from the beginning there was the need to contend with the inclinations of the Russian bureaucracy to dominate China. [35] In sum, the pressures on the Chinese bureaucracy to industrialise have been even greater than those on the Russians.
At the same time, however, the objective possibilities for industrialisation have been much less. The industrial base Mao took over was considerably smaller than Stalin’s in 1929. The specific nature of most Chinese agriculture made primitive accumulation more difficult; rice culture demands intensive care and is not readily accessible to external, authoritarian control. Attempts to force up the surplus through, the crudest sort- of exploitation, in imitation of the Russians, inevitably leads to considerable drops in total production, threats of famine, etc. As a result attempts to overcome Chinese backwardness by a voluntaristic approach to industrialisation have collapsed in disarray. For instance, by any standards the ‘great leap forward’ of 1958-60 was a failure. It has been estimated that with the retreat from this policy agriculture, that had constituted 39.2 per cent of the national product in 1957, rose to 47.1 per cent in 1962, while industry fell from 20.3 per cent to 14.5 per cent. [36] During the period of Mao’s rule the agricultural population has been growing (by about 75 million between 1952 and 1957) not declining, as in Stalin’s Russia, or indeed, in almost any other country undergoing industrialisation.
The Russian bureaucracy has never been willing to aid the Chinese in their difficulties. They gave the Chinese loans of only $300 million in 1950 and $130 million in 1954 (considerably less than to non-Communist countries like Egypt) and Mao’s reported request for a third loan when he visited Moscow in 1957 was rejected. ‘Far from being free, Soviet aid to China was rendered mainly in the form of trade and that is certainly not a one-way affair ... even the war material supplied in the war to resist US aggression in Korea has not been given gratis.’ [37] Nor did the Russian bureaucrats hesitate about exploiting the Chinese: ‘The price of many goods we imported from the Soviet Union were much higher than those on the world market’, complained the Chinese government. [38] Finally, the sudden withdrawal of Russian technicians from China in the early 1960s did incalculable harm to the Chinese economy.
The reasons for the refusal of the Russians to offer aid to the Chinese were clear. To have done so would have diverted resources which, faced with falling growth rates, they preferred to invest more profitably in the. USSR, or at least in wooing uncommitted countries like Egypt. To give in to Chinese demands for more aid would also have encouraged other state capitalist countries to resist the over-riding demands of the Russians. At the same time this attitude could not fail to have an impact on Chinese policies. A growing resentment against the Russian leaders and their policies was inevitable. So was a rejection of the ideology of ‘peaceful co-existence’, with its implication that belt-tightening in order to carry through primitive accumulation was not necessary. The Chinese bureaucrats felt they had nothing to lose by challenging the ideological pretensions of the Russian leaders. Besides which, a propaganda war with the Russians provided a climate in which cohesion needed for industrialisation could gather support.
It should not, however, be thought that the Chinese bureaucracy is intrinsically more revolutionary than the Russian. Although it rejects ‘peaceful co-existence’ as a proclaimed policy, it is willing to pursue it in many individual cases. Hence, the role of the Chinese Communists in tying the Indonesian party to the regime of Soekarno, the undeviating support for the military regime in Pakistan throughout a revolutionary situation there and the ‘cultural revolution’ in China, the support for Boumidiene against Ben Bella in Algeria, the refusal to support the left wing of the Palestinian guerrilla movement. In fact, the Chinese bureaucracy is willing to turn to any ally for support, providing that by doing so it does not weaken its own national independence. [1*]
Finding industrialisation immensely difficult because of the policies of the major capitalist or state capitalist powers, the Chinese bureaucracy is forced into a seemingly revolutionary opposition to all of them. At the same time, its desperate search for friends leads it into support for some of their nastiest lieutenants in the ‘third world’.
Within China itself the dangers of economic stagnation have produced the ‘cultural revolution’. In order to try and break forces he considers an impediment to China’s industrial advance, Mao has felt compelled to try to carry through from above a massive reform of the Chinese bureaucracy. So as to pressurise existing office holders he has unleashed a massive mobilisation of strata transitional between the bureaucracy and the rest of the population (the ‘red guards’ – students and school children). To this extent his methods are similar to those of the ‘reformers’ in Eastern Europe. However, the possibilities of improving the economic situation in this way have been much fewer. If anything, the development of the economy and of the level of culture has been harmed by the turmoil of the ‘cultural revolution’. (It is difficult to know for certain, seeing it is many years since statistics on economic performance were last published.)
The most significant result of this mobilisation of the ‘red guards’ against a section of the bureaucracy, that like the efforts of the reformers in Eastern Europe, it permitted masses of workers to mobilise against the bureaucracy as a whole (in December and January of 1967). Again, as in Eastern Europe, the ‘reformer’ Mao beat a sharp retreat in the face of this danger and came to a reconciliation with many of his enemies, setting up the ‘revolutionary committees’ and restoring order with the use of the army.
The outcome of the ‘cultural revolution’, like the retreat from the ‘great leap forward’ before it, illustrates the extent to which the Chinese bureaucracy finds itself in a blind alley, finding industrialisation increasingly difficult, but unable to relinquish its class goal and submit to the embraces of the great powers. It cannot take effective action to solve its problems. All it is capable of is irrational voluntarism at home, and propaganda unaccompanied by meaningful deeds abroad.
A limited confrontation with Russia aids the Chinese bureaucracy in its attempts to maintain ‘national unity’, ie, its own control over Chinese society. But it must be emphasised, the Chinese cannot gain from any large-scale military confrontation with the Russians. Claims by the Kremlin and its sycophants that the Chinese are preparing an aggressive war merely serve to cloak the aggressive intentions of their authors. It is the Russian bureaucracy which seems increasingly compelled to make threats, which sets about establishing military pacts with a variety of reactionary regimes, which parades its destructive potential – all because of a verbal challenge to its hegemony by the Chinese.
 
The Overall Perspective
The overall trend throughout the state capitalist world is one of declining growth rates and of lessening resources to meet the challenge of the private capitalist regimes and the demands of the indigenous masses. Within each state capitalist country this means increased concern with a stringent allocation of resources. But this inevitably increases the international conflicts between the different bureaucracies.
The Russian bureaucracy controls an empire that displays increasingly centrifugal tendencies. It finds increasing difficulties in keeping the regimes of Eastern Europe in check. In the next few years it will face similar problems vis-à-vis the component nationalities of the USSR itself.
The failure to grow at the desired rate cannot but have repercussions inside the apparatus itself. For the one factor that above all bound dissidents within the ruling class to Stalin in the 30s and 40s no longer holds. The members of the central political apparatus have no tangible evidence that the policies of their leaders are maximising their interests. This lack of ideological certainty is translated to the rest of society by the intermediate strata (intellectuals, students, etc). During the Khrushchev period there were attempts by the bureaucracy to come to terms with all these difficulties. Certain sorts of reforms were carried through. There were successes. But these did not measure up to the demands of the situation. At the same time they presented new sorts of dangers to the apparatus. When, despite the reforms the economy failed to pick up, Khrushchev was jettisoned, and what might be called a ‘conservative bureaucratic reaction’ followed. The apparatus begins to look back upon the Stalin period with a certain nostalgia.
Internationally, the Khrushchev period was one of ‘polycentrism’, in which the Kremlin seemed willing to allow the tendencies towards national independence within the satellites a degree of leeway. Although a ‘propaganda war’ developed with the Chinese, this did not reach the level of physical threats. Rumania and North Korea were allowed to develop near-complete national independence.
Now, however, the Russian bureaucracy has reverted to crude repression in order to prevent changes it sees as dangerous to itself. That is why it has invaded Czechoslovakia and has threatened war against China. That is also why it has clamped down on the ‘literary opposition’ at home.
The new policy of the Russian apparatus consists in trying to freeze social forces. But this of necessity means preventing changes necessary if accumulation is to take place successfully. Nowhere is this more fully illustrated than in the consequences of the Husak regime for Czechoslovakia. But other East European states face similar, if not yet so grave, difficulties (e.g., Poland) that the bureaucracy dares not come to terms with. At the same time the Russians are unprepared to provide the resources necessary to help solve these (as they did with short-term loans to Hungary after 1956). Despite their large rouble balance in Moscow, the .Czechs are still refused a hard currency loan. The failure of the Kremlin to solve its own economic problems means it can no longer bail out its supporters in Eastern Europe. [39]
Such an approach can only lead to a further growth of discontent among the populations both of Eastern Europe and of Russia itself. This in turn necessitates further repression. One of the main aims of the threats to China is clearly to teach a lesson to dissidents within Eastern Europe and within the USSR.
However, these measures only serve to make more difficult the long-term problems of the bureaucracy. Firstly, they make more difficult reforms necessary if the rate of growth is to rise, and secondly, they necessitate a shift in resources from areas which will raise the level of productivity to military expenditure, etc.
The bureaucracy becomes entrapped in a vicious circle. Any way in which it attempts to solve some of its problems is likely to increase others. For instance, it could gain resources for investment and foodstuffs through a series of massive commercial deals with Western capital (which would also have the effect of solving some of Western capital’s problems, by raising profit rates, etc). But this would increase other problems for the bureaucracy: on the one hand, it would make more difficult the subordination of the whole economic process to the needs of military competition; on the other, it would increase the difficulties for the central apparatus in maintaining ideological control over the component section of the bureaucracy. For this reason, the present dominant wing of the bureaucracy is likely to be as hesitant about such developments as about other sorts of reforms.
If reforms, in collaboration with foreign capital or otherwise, are not carried through, however, the chronic crisis of the Russian and East European economy can only grow worse. Despite their repressive methods the leaders of the central apparatus will increasingly seem to be an impediment to efficient production. Working from hand to mouth, their methods will be unable to impress even the central apparatus itself. Covert dissidence will come to characterise whole layers of the bureaucracy. Given its growing cynicism and scepticism, the strong-arm methods of the apparatus will convince no one. Despite the growing level of repression, the pay-off will decline. The bureaucracy will experience increasing difficulty in maintaining control over its own dissident elements, over intermediate strata like intellectuals and students, and over the rest of society.
Yet it is also increasingly clear that the bureaucracy is unable to carry through reforms on anything like a successful basis without a split of the proportions that characterised Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in early 1968. Such a split could only be the prelude to an immense crisis throughout the USSR and Eastern Europe, in which the extra-bureaucratic classes would mobilise behind their own demands. Yet if it cannot or will not split, the bureaucracy faces another danger equally horrifying to itself. This is from the working class of the industrial heartland of Russia itself. As it becomes clear that the promises of the Khrushchev era are not going to be fulfilled, so the likelihood grows of a minor incident causing a massive eruption of working-class insurgency, as in Berlin in 1953, Budapest in 1956 or Paris in 1968, but this time on a scale unprecedented in world history.
In either case, the chronic crises of state capitalism will inevitably reach a nodal point at which the whole system is threatened. What happens then will depend upon the ability of the different classes to mobilise around programmes reflecting their own genuine interests. In such a situation, the most dangerous development from the point of view of the working class would be a ‘Polish’ one, in which the ideological confusion of the masses permitted the reforming bureaucracy to retain power.
Given the impossibility of any sort of generalised political agitation in Russia prior to the collapse of the apparatus, it is difficult for socialists in the West to do a great deal to aid directly the development of class conscious elements inside Russia and the satellites. But we can and must give aid to those elements in the Stalinist states who propagate a revolutionary socialist position (for instance, Kuron and Modzelewski in Poland); build a revolutionary movement in the West based upon clear-cut hostility to the state capitalist bureaucracies which cannot be ignored by those inside the Stalinist states (certainly a source of ideological strength for the bureaucracy in the past was the fact that millions of the most militant Western workers were willing to listen to praise of the Stalinist regimes); within this consistently oppose all those who peddle illusions about the ‘progressive’ nature of any section of the state capitalist ruling classes; and finally, oppose all the means by which the Russian bureaucracy attempts to retain control over the situation. Above all this means opposing its repression at home (against intellectuals, workers and national minorities) and its attempts to subjugate other state capitalist countries (the invasion of Czechoslovakia, the threat to China).
 



The government’s plans for the steel industry, officially embodied in its recent White Paper, envisage a £3,000 million investment programme, an increase in steel production by 50 per cent, and a rundown in the labour force by 50,000 over the next seven years.
If the government’s own figures are taken, then it is quite clear that many single-industry towns, such as Shotton, Ebbw Vale and Consett, will become ghost towns. In other areas, such as Teesside and Motherwell, already high levels of unemployment will be aggravated. In fact indications are that the government’s figures grossly underestimate the real level of redundancies that will be caused.
 
Background to the Crisis
Since the early 1950s there have been internationally major technological changes in the production of steel. The most important of these has been the development of basic oxygen furnaces, known as BOS plants. Japan led with the introduction of the new technology. By 1970, 80 per cent of its total crude steel output was from BOS plants. The European steel industry then began to follow suit.
But the private steel industry in Britain was completely unable to match such efforts. In 1963, 76 per cent of British steelmaking was still based on open hearth plants, technologically most backward.
In the years 1965 and 1966 – preceding nationalisation – there was no investment at all in British industry. A company like the Consett Iron company was capable of paying out £1,318,000 in dividends, despite a loss of £347,000. When the nationalised British Steel Corporation (BSC) was formed in 1966, the (Labour) government paid £1,165 million to private owners for assets later valued by the BSC at only £834 million.
The managers of the newly nationalised corporation saw only one way of competing successfully with Europe and Japan. That was to put into effect the recommendation of the Benson Report of the year before: a productivity drive and closures leading to mass sackings.
Between 1967 and 1972, 27,000 jobs disappeared. Now a further 50,000 redundancies have been officially announced.
 
The Real Figures
Minister for Trade and Industry Peter Walker stated in December that the aim of the steel corporation’s £3000 million development plan would be to increase steel production by 50 per cent while running down the labour force from about 230,000 to about 180,000 by 1980.
But a glance at the overall picture of the steel industry would seem to indicate a much greater fall in the number employed. The government’s figures presuppose that productivity per man will be 180 metric tons a year by 1980. But the BOS plant in the Oita works in Japan produces 1000 tons a year per man. The new British Steel Corporation BOS plant at Redcar aims at 800 tons a man year. On the other sites that the steel corporation is to develop from exisisting works – at Scunthorpe, Port Talbot, Lackenby, Llanwern and Ravenscraig, productivity is likely to vary between 300 and 550 tons per man year.
The corporation hopes to produce 80 per cent of its output from these plants in 10 years time. And its chief executive, Dr H.M. Finniston, speaking in 1970, indicated that the planned level of productivity for the industry as a whole for 1980 was at least 350 tons per man year.
But on such a basis, the number of men required to produce the corporation’s output target by that date would be much less than indicated by the government. Only 94,000 workers including managerial and service personnel would be required to produce 33 million tons and 108,000 to produce 38 million tons. That would mean cuts of about 130,000 in the labour force – more than twice as many as suggested by the minister.
The international context in which the rationalisation is occurring will produce continual pressures on the corporation to achieve such levels of productivity and reductions in the labour force. The other advanced industrial nations in the West are engaged in investment programmes similar to that of the BSC. The largest steel companies in France, Germany, Holland, Italy and Spain are well advanced in BOS developments that match and surpass those at Scunthorpe, Lackenby/Redcar, Port Talbot and Llanwern.
Thus even when the present investment and rationalisation programme is complete, the BSC may still be in an unfavourable position to meet the stringent competition arising from a world surplus of steel capacity.
 
The Tory Strategy
The present programme of closures and redundancies in British steel started in 1971 and is intended to continue until the end of this decade. This is the plan agreed between the BSC and the government for rationalising the industry to the level of productivity and manning earlier indicated. The closures that have already taken place correspond closely to a BSC planning document removed from corporation files in 1970.
In March 1971 closures were announced for iron and steelmaking at Cargo Fleet in Teesside, a complete integrated steelworks at Irlam in Lancashire and a smaller number of redundancies elsewhere on Teesside and also at Scunthorpe. Last summer an end to steelmaking was announced in a number of Scottish open hearth plants. At the end of the year Ebbw Vale, East Moors and Hartlepool received their death sentences, separately and punctuated by the Tory White Paper which confirmed that a number of other steel towns such as Consett, Shotton and Corby were doomed.
What emerges is that despite a clearly agreed strategy which has existed for two years for running down the workforce in BSC, the corporation and the government are making their intentions known little by little and amid a deliberately created flurry of rumour, false promises and diversions. The purpose is to avoid a major confrontation with steelworkers on a national scale. So far they have succeeded.
 
The Offical Response
The policy of all the unions in the steel industry has been to accept in principle the BSC’s rationalisation plans. Dai Davies of BISAKTA, John Boyd of the craft unions and Hector Smith from the blastfurnacemen, all accept the argument that this is the only way to ensure that the industry survives at all. They have therefore played a role mainly as apologists for Lord Melchett and for the Tories. Davies even publicly thanked Melchett for the ‘humane’ manner in which he is imposing mass sackings. Certainly throughout this period the union bureaucracy has been more concerned with the problem of preventing militant outbursts of resistance to closures than with that of opposing the corporation’s strategy themselves.
In some areas new investment has been promised. In particular, Teesside is to have a major new works at Redcar, adjacent to the present Lackenby site. The BSC’s estimate of probable employment on this has dropped form 13,000 to 7,000 over the last year and the final figure is more likely to be around 5,000. This would hardly begin to compensate for the redundancies that will take place in the area between now and the completion of the plant. In all other areas the picture is grim. Nevertheless, Labour MPs have reacted to what is a national strategy in a manner which indicates nothing but gross opportunism based on local chauvinism. For instance the White Paper was greeted with delight by MPs at Port Talbot, Sheffield and Teesside, and with horror in Ebbw Vale, Cardiff and Consett.
 
Resistance
Rank-and-file organisation in BSC has traditionally been weak. Until recently there had never been a national meeting of shop stewards or convenors. Resistance to closures started on a very parochial basis. The common cry was ‘We accept rationalisation in general, but we are a special case.’
As a result local ‘non-political’ ‘broad-front’ organisations have been formed to persuade BSC and the government that a mistake has been made in particular case. These bodies usually include Labour and Tory MPs, church representatives, town clerks, full-time union officials and the like. They are in favour of petitions to Edward Heath and are always opposed to industrial action. In more than one instance they have organised ‘days of prayer’ to save the steelworks.
A variation on this is the ‘scrutiny committee’ proposed by Michael Foot at Ebbw Vale. The purpose of this is to inspect the BSC accounts in order to discover some mistake they may have made in relation to the necessity of closing Ebbw Vale. Such strategies are based on the unlikely assumption that either the corporation’s planners are totally incompetent, or that the government that has made a decision over two years and has anticipated ‘dignified protest’ is going to change its plans when ‘dignified protest’ begins.
This year a more militant and effective form of organisation has emerged in a number of works. Action committees consisting of shop stewards from every union and section in a particular works have started to organise lobbies, demonstrations and strikes. In some cases occupations are being planned, although these are at present of the less effective ‘work-in’ variety.
Action committees are now in operation at Stanton in the Midlands (which is by far the longest established) and also at Ebbw Vale, East Moors, Corby, Consett and Shotton. In Wales there have been a number of one day strikes, and well supported marches in London by Shotton and Ebbw Vale workers have demonstrated the determination and militancy felt despite attempts by hundreds of police to interfere with the demonstrations.
In the meantime a growing number of visits and local conferences are taking place between works threatened with closure. The Shotton action committee made it clear from the start that they were opposed to all redundancies, not just those at Shotton, and the notion of solidarity has been spreading.
In response to the mounting pressure, the TUC steel committee called a delegate conference in Sheffield early in March. This was intended as a diversion from other militant activities. At the conference no resolutions were allowed and the policy of conditional support for the government – BSC programme was spelled out once again. Despite the fact that most of the delegates were hand-picked moderates, there was an overwhelming feeling of disgust with the platform’s attitude.
Following tremendous efforts by the Action Committee at Shotton a National Action Committee was founded on 13 April. At the founding conference 90 delegates were present from 26 different works elected to represent various local shop stewards committees. This was an historic meeting. It brought together, not only the areas facing closure, but the large ‘heritage’ sites that the BSC’s future strategy depends on. It was spelled out and agreed that the function of the committee was to enable the rank and file to embark on the job that the paid officials were unwilling to undertake: to unite steelworkers in a militant fight against the Tories’ plans to throw half the workforce on the dole.
 



The Revolution and the Civil War in Spain
by Pierre Broué and Elime Temine
Faber and Faber £6
The Spanish Revolution 1931-9
by Leon Trotsky
Pathfinder £1.65
THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR ended 34 years ago. But the issues raised by it remain of central relevance to socialists today. The references made to Spain in many recent utterances about Chile underline the point.
Fascist regimes triumphed in Italy and Germany with scarcely a shot being fired against them. They reduced massive socialist and trade union movements to nothing in the space of months with few difficulties.
But the attempt, in July 1936, of Spain’s generals and right wing parties to emulate them led to two and a half years of bitter fighting. A coup that expected to be successful in a matter of hours developed into a full-blooded civil war in which fascist success was by no means certain at all times.
The question that confronted the left – in Spain and internationally – was how to fight back against the fascist threat. The view which came to predominate was that put forward by the right wing socialists in Spain, led by Prieto, and by the Communist Parties in every country.
They argued as they argue about Chile or Greece today that the struggle was between fascism and democracy. On the fascist side stood Spanish feudalism allied with the most reactionary sections of capitalism. On the side of democracy stood the popular front, made up of the working class movement, but also of progressive sections of the bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie. In order to defeat the fascist forces, everything possible had to be done to cement the ties which bound these progressive elements to the popular front, and no action should be taken that might frighten them away.
‘The Central Committee of the Communist Party of Spain requests us to inform the public,’ wrote L’Humanité, the French Communist daily, ‘that the Spanish people are not striving for the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, but know only one aim: the defence of the republican order, while respecting property.’
Nor was this a line meant for propaganda purposes only. In a private letter to Cabellero, the left socialist leader and prime minister, Stalin insisted that he ‘attract the middle and lower bourgeoisie ... [by] protecting them against confiscations.’
According to this view of the Spanish civil war, the ultimate victory of Franco’s forces was due to their superior weaponry and to the massive aid given them by Hitler and Mussolini. The main weaknesses of the republican side were its lack of traditional military discipline and the tendency of ‘ultra-left’ and ‘anarchist’ elements to disrupt the unified military command, frightening off the middle classes by attempting to carry through revolutionary social measures while the war still raged.
Trotsky strongly challenged this standpoint. Not that he regarded the struggle between fascism and democracy as irrelevant to the working class movement. Far from it. In the years before 1934, when Stalin’s followers everywhere were insisting that fascism and social democracy were merely two equivalent forms of bourgeois rule, equally repugnant to the interests of workers, Trotsky had insisted on the importance of their specific differences.
‘Even in the imperialist epoch, democracy continues to be preferable to fascism ... In all cases where clashes take place between them, the revolutionary proletariat is obliged to support democracy against fascism.’
But the all important difference between his conception of the ‘defence of democracy’ and that of the popular front was that
‘we can and will defend bourgeois democracy, not by bourgeois democratic means but by the methods of class struggle, which in turn pave the way for the replacement of bourgeois democracy by the dictatorship of the proletariat. This means in particular that in the process of defending bourgeois democracy, even with arms in hand, the party of the proletariat takes no responsibility for bourgeois democracy, does not enter the government, but maintains full freedom of criticism and of action in relation to all parties of the popular front, thus preparing the overthrow of bourgeois democracy at the next stage.’
Far from it being the case that the fight of the working class for social revolution weakened the anti-fascist struggle, Trotsky insisted that it was essential for the success of that struggle.
‘A civil war is waged, as everybody knows, not only with military but also with political weapons. From a purely military point of view, the Spanish revolution is weaker than its enemies. Its strength lies in its ability to rouse the great masses to action. It can even take the army away from the reactionary officers. To accomplish this it is only necessary to proclaim the programme of socialist revolution...
‘It is necessary to proclaim that from now on the land, factories and shops will pass from the hands of the capitalists into the hands of the people. The fascist army could not resist the influence of such a programme for 24 hours; the soldiers would tie their officers hand and foot and turn them over to the nearest headquarters of the workers’ militia. But the bourgeois ministers cannot accept such a programme. Curbing the social revolution they compel the workers and peasants to spill ten times as much of their own blood in the civil war.
‘The political alliance of the working class leaders with the bourgeoisie is disguised as the defence of the ‘republic’... The word ‘republican’ like the word ‘democrat’ is deliberate charlatanism that serves to cover up class contradictions. The bourgeoisie is republican so long as the republic protects private property. And the workers utilise the republic to overthrow private property. The republic, in other words, loses all value to the bourgeoisie the moment it assumes value to the workers ...’
To the argument that such a revolutionary policy would isolate the Spanish republic while its enemies continued to receive German and Italian arms, Trotsky replied:
‘Revolutions have been victorious up to this time not at all thanks to high and mighty foreign patrons who supplied them with arms. Must we recall the experience of the intervention of French, English, American, Japanese and other armies against the Soviets? The proletariat of Russia conquered domestic reaction and foreign interventionists without military support from the outside. Revolutions succeed in the first place thanks to the help of a bold social programme, which gives the masses the possibility of seizing weapons that are on their territory and disorganising the army of the enemy.’
The history of the civil war by Broué and Temime (or at least the first half of it, written by Broué) provides a striking vindication of Trotsky’s arguments. It shows how insistence by the established working class leaders on keeping the struggle within the limits of bourgeois democracy first of all laid the ground for the fascist coup and then ensured defeat for the republic in the civil war.
The coup was not some aberrant action by a few ‘most reactionary’ sections of the Spanish ruling class, but was the response of the officer corps, the land owners and most industrialists to the rising strength and combativity of working class organisations. In February 1936 a moderate liberal government had been elected to power with the help of socialist, communist and anarchist votes. It tried to restrain the movement of workers and peasants that followed but was unable to. Prisons were torn open to release socialists and anarchists jailed under the previous right wing government; massive strike followed massive strike as workers demanded higher living standards; peasants began to seize land for themselves.
The ruling class, and the officer corps in particular, saw only one way of turning back this movement – to establish a government that would destroy the working class movement from top to bottom. While Franco and his friends more or less openly prepared to put this plan into effect, the liberals in the government did nothing, except make token gestures of displeasure. Even after the army generals in almost every city in Spain had mutinied in July, the government continued to insist that all was well. Had things depended on the ‘moderate’ bourgeois republicans, Franco would have enjoyed overnight success. What thwarted him was the reaction of the workers. In most of the main cities and towns of mainland Spain the officers mutiny was immediately followed by more or less spontaneous uprisings of workers to seize the barracks, and disarm the army.
But ‘in the places where the uprising [of the fascists] had been crushed, it was not alone in suffering defeat. The state, caught between its insurgent army and the armed masses of the people, had shattered to pieces.’ Although the official government still existed in Madrid, real authority in the localities was held by a multitude of revolutionary committees.
Nor was it only the bourgeois state that suffered. Workers who held a monopoly of power in an area used it to forward their own class interests. Factories were automatically taken over and collectivised; the peasants began to divide up the land in earnest, knowing that the workers militia would protect them. With the disintegration of the army, the bourgeoisie throughout most of the republican areas seemed finished.
The main exception was the Basque area, where the capitalists did not immediately throw in their lot with Franco, because they feared that he would do away with the relative autonomy of their own Basque government.
But throughout most of Spain the immediate aftermath of the attempted coup was a situation where effective power lay with the workers’ organisations.
The moderate liberal governments in Madrid just could not cope. One government led by Quiroga resigned; another led by Barrio tried to negotiate with the rebel generals and was forced out of office within hours by workers’ demonstrations in Madrid; a third, led by Giral, agreed to arm the workers and lasted much longer. But it was forced out of office at the beginning of September by the popular discontent that followed the fall of the town of Badojoz to the fascists.
In any war there has to be some central direction, enabling the forces in different localities to co-ordinate their actions as part of an overall strategy. The local committees that were running the armed struggle in the different parts of republican Spain quite rightly did not trust the central direction of a government of bourgeois liberals in Madrid. But lack of coordination made further defeats inevitable. The question posed by the fall of Badajoz was: how was the necessary central co-ordination to be achieved?
For the bourgeois republicans, there was only one conceivable answer: through bringing into the government working class leaders who would then be able to persuade their followers to accept the government’s dictates.
This too was the proposal pressed by the Russian ambassador, Marcel Rosenberg. Such a policy, he told the union leaders, would provide a strong government. And the presence in it of bourgeois republicans would ensure its legitimacy in the eyes of great powers such as France and England.
Eventually such a government was formed, under the left socialist union leader Cabellorro, and shortly afterwards, the leaders of the anarchist union, the CNT, also joined it. But the working class movement had to pay a price for its alliance with the moderate republicans, who insisted on central direction not only over the military policy of the committees, but over their other activities as well.
And the right wing socialists and the Communist Party demanded ever more strongly that the wishes of the moderate republicans be heeded.
What the moderate republicans wanted most of all was respect for private property and maintenance intact, without any revolutionary tampering, of those odd sections of the state machine that had remained on the side of the republic. They saw that the destruction of the old officer corps would entail the removal of their last protection against social revolution.
However, in Spain in the autumn of 1936, ‘respect for private property’ and ‘maintenance of the old state machine’ did not mean merely restraining workers from struggle. It meant somehow, by persuasion or by force, making them concede ground they had already gained. ‘Defending private property’ meant forcing workers to abandon control of the factories they had taken over in July. ‘Maintaining the state machine’ meant taking arms away from workers who had stormed the barracks in July and handing them back to officers who had sat on the fence.
The Communist functionaries and the right wing socialists argued that any attempts by the workers to make social revolution would mean a second civil war with the republican side. But in fact their own efforts to force the workers to abandon social conquests created precisely the elements of such a civil war.
It was they, not the anarchists or the extreme left party, the POUM, that withdrew soldiers and arms from the front for ‘internal’ use. It was they that provoked fighting when workers refused to leave collectivised property or obey the orders of the bourgeois state. It was they that initiated armed clashes behind republican lines in which hundreds of militiamen lost their lives. There was no other way in which a militant working class could be forced to abandon its revolution and wait for the ‘end of the war’.
Yet the sacrifices imposed on the working class did not win the war. Nor could they – every concession made to the bourgeois parties in republican Spain actually played into Franco’s hands.
A typical pattern developed when the republican towns were hard pressed. The workers, who had everything to lose by Franco’s taking of the towns prepared to fight bitterly to the end. But the middle class interests, if they did not positively welcome a fascist victory, believed they could arrange a compromise for themselves. Thus when the Basque bourgeoisie abandoned San Sebastian, it ensured that militants belonging to the anarchist union, the CNT, would not continue the struggle. It waged a civil war within a civil war, shooting ‘looters’ and ‘incendiaries’, to protect property and leaving 50 armed guards patrolling the streets to ensure that the city was handed over fully intact to Franco. The same pattern was repeated in Bilbao, at Santander and at Gijon.
In Madrid itself, similar betrayal took place in the last days of the republic. Two thousand people died as a result of a struggle between the ‘Casado junta’ of republican generals, who wanted to discuss a ‘peaceful’ surrender to Franco, and the Communists who belatedly, opposed them.
The concession to bourgeois respectability took their toll in other ways as well. Almost the whole of the Spanish fleet had imprisoned its officers and opposed the fascist uprising in July 1936. For Franco, attempting to move the bulk of his army from Morroco to mainland Spain, this was a difficult obstacle to overcome. But the chasing after the will-of-the-wisp of Anglo-French support, the governments of Giral and Caballero ordered the fleet away from Tangiers and an end to interference with Franco’s lines of communication.
The same illusory reasoning prevented any attempt to ferment rebellion behind Franco’s lines in Morocco by giving a guarantee of self-determination for the colony. There had been a long and bitter struggle against Spanish rule in Morocco only 10 years before and the chances of some sort of anti-Franco uprising would seem to have been high. Instead, the popular front government preferred to seek Anglo-French favour by offering these powers concessions in a Spanish-ruled Morocco.
Yet, like the internal search for respectability, the attempts to placate the great powers achieved precisely nothing. Britain and France refused to supply the republic with arms, even though the Germans and the Italians were more or less openly backing Franco.
It was not genuine expedience which forced the Spanish Communists to follow the anti-revolutionary line. It was rather that Stalin did not want a Spanish revolution. Its defeat saved him the embarrassment of facing a real workers’ state, based upon mass involvement and genuine workers’ democracy, alongside his own caricature of a workers’ state.
Trotsky, however, was adamant that Stalin was not the only culprit. The mass organisations of the Spanish working class – the socialist UGT and the anarchist GNT – had been to the left of the Communist Party in 1936. It was not good enough for them to blame the CP, (as they did when they saw they were losing the war) they themselves had accepted in practice the policies proposed by Stalin. Their leaders had joined in the coalition with the bourgeois parties in September 1936 at a time when there were no forces in republican Spain capable of resisting the formation of a workers’ government.
‘It was not enough for Moscow to set conditions; Valencia (the republican government) had to concede to them ... Neither the socialists nor the anarchists seriously opposed the Stalinist programme. They feared to break with the bourgeoisie. They were deadly afraid of every onslaught of the workers.’
According to Trotsky’s analysis even the POUM, although it was small (with a membership of only about 8000 at the time of the fascist coup), could have transformed the situation. For, despite the support given to the central government by all the main workers’ parties and unions, the revolutionary enthusiasm of the masses was immense. And in Catalonia where half the working class was based, the POUM’s influence was considerable, particularly in the important industrial town of Lerida. It was represented on the central committee of the Catalan militias – the effective ruling body in the province in the revolutionary weeks immediately after the coup. And when the central committee was replaced by an official coalition government with the bourgeoisie, the generalidad, the POUM was considered important enough to be offered a ministerial seat.
Certainly, the proclamations of the POUM seemed revolutionary enough. It wanted a social revolution in the present, not at some distant point in the future. It insisted that an armed working class was the precondition for military success. It demanded that the popular front government convene a conference of working class;councils, to form the basis of a genuine workers’ state.
Yet words alone were not enough. They had to be translated into the sorts of actions that could gather behind the POUM the mass support of the CNT rank and file to be effective. But it was precisely here that the POUM fell down.
While calling for a workers’ government, the POUM leader, Andres Nin agreed to join the Catalonia generalidad, a coalition with the local bourgeois nationalists, the Esquerra. Even worse, he used his influence to persuade the POUM dominated revolutionary committee in Lerida to dissolve itself into a municipal authority run by moderate republicans in which revolutionaries were in a minority.
Trotsky warned the POUM leaders:
‘The situation in Spain can be saved only by an energetic, radical and heroic comeback by the left wing of the proletariat ... It is necessary to open up an implacable campaign against the bloc with the bourgeoisie and for a socialist programme. It is necessary to denounce the Stalinist, socialist and anarchist leaders precisely because of their bloc with the bourgeoisie. It is not a question of articles more or less confined to the columns of La Batalla (the POUM paper). No. It is a question of marshalling the masses against the leaders, who are leading the revolution to complete defeat.
‘The policy of the POUM leadership is a policy of adaptation, expectation, hesitation, that is to say, the most dangerous of all policies during civil war, which is uncompromising ... The present policy of the POUM is that of Martov, not of Lenin ...’
He later amplified this:
‘In his criticism of the Kerensky-Tseritelli-Dan regime, Martov came very close to the policies of the Bolsheviks ... But in the depths of his consciousness he always hoped to convince his adversaries and not oppose the proletariat to the class enemy. That is why at the moment when the workers passed over into action, Martov, frightened of the harshness of the struggle, jumped aside to play the role not of a leader of the revolutionary action, but of attorney for the defeated masses.’
The final chance for revolution in Spain – and of a policy that could have provided some chance of victory against fascism – came at the beginning of May 1937. For months the resentment of workers had been building up as they saw the revolutionary conquests of the previous July gradually eroded. The flashpoint occurred when three lorry loads of the government’s assault guards (a section of the bourgeois state forces that had half-heartedly come out in opposition to Franco) tried to seize the central telephone building in Barcelona from armed anarchist workers, who had captured the building from the fascists the previous July and held it since. The workers of Catalonia responded en masse to the provocation and the following morning insurgent workers ‘were in control of the Catalan capital’, according to Broue. Such was their power that Companys, the bourgeois head of the generalidad, felt compelled to repudiate the attempted seizure of the telephone building.
The official anarchist leaders hastened to call upon their members to end the defensive action, to return to work and abandon the barricades. The anarchist paper, Solidaridad Obrero later boasted ‘if we had wished to take power, we could have accomplished it in May with certainty.’ But the workers ignored the appeals of their leaders for two days further. They had seen the progress of counterrevolution in the months before and were not going to be fooled so easily.
If at this point the POUM had taken the initiative in demanding joint action of anarchists and marxists to disarm the assault guards and other armed groups backing the reconstitution of bourgeois power, it would have gained massive support from the anarchist rank and file who already effectively controlled Barcelonia and the main industrial centres of Catalonia. Trotsky argued, with justice, that
‘if the Catalan proletariat had seized power they would have found support throughout Spain. The bourgeois-Stalinist reaction would not even have found two regiments to crush the Catalan workers.’
The ‘insurrection’ would have been a small scale police action by the workers against the remnants of bourgeois power. And far from ‘disrupting’ the war against Franco, it would have increased its chances of success.
But the POUM did not seize the opportunity to carry through a socialist revolution at minimal cost. Instead, when the barricades had been up for three days it advised workers to take them down in return for promises of no reprisals from the government.
Bewildered and confused by this advice from what they had regarded as the most left wing of all the parties, the workers eventually complied.
The promises were not worth the paper they were written on. Troops loyal to the bourgeois government or the Stalinists were withdrawn from the front (’disrupting the war’) to occupy Catalonia. Workers were disarmed, anarchist and POUM newspapers censured, radio stations shut down, militants carted off to be murdered by the Russian secret police, the whole central committee of the POUM imprisoned.
The POUM, by refusing the opportunity of leading the working class to power, ensured its own destruction at the hands of the counter-revolution.
The Spanish working class too paid a heavy price. The left wing socialists, around Caballerro, were forced out of the government by the right socialist-Communist alliance, and then were removed from effective control over the socialist trade unions. Even before the final success of Franco on the battlefield, the working class unions and parties had lost a great deal of their power to defend the interests of their members. It was hardly surprising that the war against Franco was waged with less and less enthusiasm from this point on.
The book by Broué and Temime is a welcome addition to the literature on the Spanish civil war precisely because it spells out in detail the consequences of the failure of the workers’ parties in Spain to match up to the spontaneous revolutionary advances of the working class. However, at £6 the book is probably too expensive for most people. Felix Morrow’s book, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Spain, still in print and much cheaper, covers much of the same ground and is better in some respects, although it does not have the same detail.
Trotsky’s writings deal above all with the question of the POUM. They begin with the overthrow of the dictator Primo de Rivera in 1930 and continue to the downfall of the republic in 1939.
They vary enormously in quality and importance. Some are concerned with long forgotten sectarian disputes, of the sort that plague even the best revolutionary organisations at times. Others are among the best things Trotsky ever wrote, dealing with important questions of revolutionary strategy and tactics. What emerges overall is an unsurpassed understanding of the dynamic of revolution and counter-revolution and of the way in which apparently ‘sectarian’ criticisms of parties and leaders can prove to be of massive importance when revolutionary events put them to the test.
 



Nicolae Ceausescu, The Man, His Ideas and his Socialist Achievements
presented by Stan Newens
Spokesman Books, 75p.
Romania’s Ceausescu
Donald Catchlove
Abacus Press, £2.50.
ONCE THERE WAS Stalin. For a certain breed of leftist, socialist activity consisted in bathing in his reflected glory, devouring his words, parading his portrait. The cult received a massive blow after the demise of ‘the greatest leader, sublime strategist of all times and nations’. But it was not destroyed. Instead, it split amoeba-like into, a dozen sub-cults. Mao, Hoxha, Khrushchev, Gomulka, Tito, Togliatti, Ben Bella, Castro, all found their devotees. Now it seems, it is the turn of Ceausescu.
The latest addition to the list of devotees is the publishing house in Nottingham usually associated with the Institute for Workers’ Control. The fact that there is no workers’ control in Romania would hardly bother people whose main aim for a long time has been to hob-nob with the general secretary of the TGWU (elected for life) and to provide a platform for Wedgwood Benn, who doled out so much largesse for big business during the last Labour Government.
The blurb to Newens’ book assures us that ‘readers will learn something of the struggles and achievements of the Romanian people’. Newens himself tells us that ‘Romania under Ceauseseu is the model of a Communist country which is both socialist and fully independent.’
Most of the book is made up of speeches by the hero. The tedium is only occasionally relieved when, inadvertently, some truths about the real nature of Romanian society are let out. So, while on page 87 the former party leader, Gheorgiu Dej, is called ‘the outstanding militant of our party and the international Communist movement’ and a few pages later it is admitted that he ‘initiated and sponsored ... many abuses, grave cases of repression of some party and state officials’, including the leading Communist, Patrascanu. In other words, he was a mass murderer.
After such drivel, it was a relief to turn to the other book. Superficially, it looked even worse than Newens’ hack apologetics. There are over-sized pictures of the hero on almost every other page. But the author does throw some light on the real development of Romania, though the analysis could never be said to be profound.
He mentions, for instance, the way the Communist Party grew from 2,000 members in 1944 when the Russian army entered the country to 300,000 a year later ‘by welcoming anybody and everybody, including former members of the fascist Iron Guard’. (By contrast, Newens reprints without comment Ceausescu’s claim that the underground party had had ‘tens of thousands of members and sympathisers’.)
He also points out that ‘the party today makes great play of the 400 million dollars lost to the Germans, but this is less than a third of what is purported to have been taken by the Russians from September 1944 to June 1948.’ There is some account of the economic origins of the split between Romania and Russia, from the use of ‘Joint companies’ to exploit Romania in the early 1950s to the attempt by the Russians to block the huge Galati investment project in the early 1960s.
However, to say that Catchlove’s book is better than Newens’ is not to say much. The interested reader will have to look elsewhere for a serious account of the Romanian variant of state capitalism.
 



PLUTO PRESS [1*] remind us that still in print, and not selling as well as they ought to be, are four works that should be on the shelves of every reader of International Socialism.
For years, socialists would scour secondhand bookshops for Paul Frölich’s classic biography of Rosa Luxemburg. It provides an unparalleled introduction, not only to the life and ideas of one of the really great Marxist leaders, but also to the history of socialism in the period up to the end of World War One. Although the Pluto edition, at £1.50, might seem a bit expensive, it is in fact a bargain.
Alfred Rosmer’s account of the early years of the international communist movement, Lenin’s Moscow (£1.30) provides a fascinating refutation of most of the myths popularly spread about the Russian Revolution and the early years of the Bolshevik government. It is a damning reply to all those who see the present rulers of Russia as following in Lenin’s footsteps, by telling what it was really like in the early revolutionary years.
Pluto are offering at cut price by mail order, two books obtainable elsewhere at higher prices. Bukharin’s Imperialism (72p including postage), which is reviewed elsewhere in this issue, is in some ways easier to follow than Lenin’s book on the same subject and provides many insights into modern capitalism that are still relevant today.
Finally, Rose Levine-Meyer’s biography of her first husband, Leviné (£1.40 including postage) gives a graphic inside view of the German revolution of 1918-1919. It is one of the most readable such accounts anyone is ever going to find and contains important extracts from the various speeches made by Levine before he was executed by the counter-revolution.

Note
1*. Pluto Press, Unit 10 Spencer Court, 7 Chalcot Road, London NW1 8LH.
 



The Politics of Soviet Agriculture 1960-1970
Werner G. Hahn
For the last 40 years the ideas of most of the Left on Russia have been very largely based on myth. Most prevalent has been the belief that the economic organisation of Russia is more rational than that of the West. Even people who criticise the ‘bureaucratic deformations’ often go on to insist that the existence of ‘planning’ and ‘rational economic organisation’ represent a step forward from capitalism.
Yet the facts of the situation are in open contradiction to this view. The rate of economic growth in Russia is today no greater than that of most western countries. And the productivity of labour is considerably less.
The irrationalities built into the Russian economy are most graphically illustrated by the history of its agricultural sector. This book, though not always easy to follow, provides a fascinating account of them.
It shows how much a myth ‘planning’ has been when it comes to producing food for the mass of the population. Khrushchev, for instance, promised in 1957 that although Russian food production was only a third of that of the US, the gap would be closed quickly. He argued that ‘it would be a tragedy if we were not able to catch America in terms of meat production in 1960’. Yet in May 1971 an article in Voprosy Ekonomiki could point out that total beef production in the US was still twice that of the USSR, and per capita consumption was 2½ times as high. This, despite the fact that a far higher proportion of the population work in agriculture in the USSR than the US.
into its opposite. Under Khrushchev the setting of completely unrealistic targets led to measures which prevented even the limited advances that were possible. As it became clear that success was not going to be forthcoming.
Khrushchev in mid and late 1960 seized upon panaceas ... poorly tested programs developed by scientists and politicians who sought to win his favour and personal power for themselves by promising big progress in meat and grain production.’
The previously discredited Lysenko leapt into new prominence. He was made President of the All Union Lenin Academy of Agricultural Sciences, and one of his protégés, Olshansky, became Minister of Agriculture. It was not that Khrushchev had any particular ideological leaning towards Lysenko’s pseudo-science, its rejection of scientific genetics. Rather. Lysenko was able, on the basis of this pseudo-science, to promise quick results. By contrast his scientifically minded opponents pointed out that it would take 20 years to catch up with the US.
Lysenko was only one of a number to rise in this way. Another example of the same sort was the leader of the Ryazan area, who leapt suddenly into national prominence in 1959 because he claimed to have increased meat production by 3.8 times in a single year; 12 months later it transpired that the whole thing was a fraud, based on buying meat outside Ryazan and selling it back to the central authorities. Nor did this phenomenon end with Lysenko’s final fall in 1962, when his methods were discredited by their disastrous effects on the harvest. Other pseudo-scientists with other panaceas took his place.
After Khrushchev’s replacement by Brezhnev in 1964 such irrational schemes were blamed on Khrushchev’s scatter-brained psychology, just as Stalin’s terror was explained away by references to the ‘cult of the personality.’ But this was no explanation: it did not show why Khrushchev should turn to such methods and why other leaders should accept them.
Men turn to magic only when there is no other way of coping with a hostile and bewildering environment. Khrushchev saw that the system of bureaucratic rule in Russia could not be secure unless the masses were adequately fed. But the resources to develop agriculture were not available as the basis of the system was economic and military competition with the west. So he turned to Lysenko and other crackpots. As Hahn puts it:
‘Khrushchev’s agricultural programs were to a considerable extent substitutes for the huge investment needed by agriculture ... The forces of heavy industry and defence ... controlled the lion’s share of resources and ... managed to withhold most of the funds he needed.’
Under Brezhnev the pseudo-scientists lost much of their influence. But that has not meant a rational organisation of agriculture. Despite promises of increased expenditure on agriculture in 1965. resources were shifted away from agriculture towards industry following a good harvest in 1966. This trend continued further in 1968, when defence expenditure rose instead of falling because, as Brezhnev pointed out, of ‘the international situation.’
Enlarged investments in heavy industry were needed to back up the growth in arms production. These could only be obtained at the expense of agriculture. Once again, accumulation, not the plan, determined how industry in fact behaved. ‘Often planning organs, encountering difficulties in finding capital investments, seek to overcome them with funds meant for agriculture.’ complained Brezhnev in October 1968.
In other words, the need to keep the arms industry abreast of the US (and China) meant ignoring planning targets set two years before. The different units of the economy were not expanding according to a single rhythm so as to fulfill the needs of the population; rather, they were completely dominated by the anarchic play of the world balance of forces. Those who have suffered most from this state of affairs have been the mass of Russian workers. Their living standards have stagnated, while total production has continued to rise. And any spell of bad weather brings with it the spectre of bread queues.
Some people jump from one extreme to another, from seeing Russia as more advanced than western capitalism to seeing its centrally bureaucratised planning as more backward. Yet this too would be mistaken. The hairbrained schemes of Khrushchev are matched in the West by such lunacies as Concorde.
As national industries embark on ever more grandiose projects in an effort to outstrip their international competitors scientific planning is inevitably replaced by wishful thinking. That is part of the price of a world system run by rival ruling classes.



Chris Harman writes: At the beginning of November three senior officers of the armed forces joined the ‘socialist’ government of Salvador Allende in Chile. This gave a new lease of life to the government. But it also marked the effective end of Chile’s ‘experiment’ in ‘moving towards socialism’ by parliamentary means. Like all such previous attempts, Allende’s policy meant pushing through reforms beneficial to worse-off sections of the population, while leaving intact the old state machine and the power of the officer corps of the armed forces, the government bureaucracy, the judiciary and so on.
This policy ensured that when the property-owning classes began to fight back against the reforms, the hands of the popular supporters of the government were tied. Armed defence of the reforms is ruled out of order by the main government parties in case it ‘provokes’ action by the same state forces that these parties have left intact. For two years workers and peasants have been told by the government parties to avoid direct action which might break the constitution and offend the armed forces. The same constraints did not apply to the middle and upper classes. In October they launched a deliberate attempt to displace the leftist government. A ‘bosses’ strike’ by lorry owners closed down most transport operations and threatened to close industry as well. At the height of the crisis opponents of the government in the better-off districts of Santiago lit bonfires and erected barricades. Allende’s response to the threat of civil war was to continue to rest his whole policy on placating the generals. Supplies were kept moving – but by the army. Attempts at popular mobilisation to smash the power of the employers were discouraged. Finally, the crisis was ended by concessions to the lorry owners and the oppositional parties and by bringing the armed forces into the government, with a general, Carlos Prats, as minister of the Interior and number two to Allende.
Although the opposition’s activities have not overthrown the government, they have shifted the political centre of gravity to the right, and made much more difficult any subsequent reforms. Allende’s policy has necessarily led to generals becoming the arbiters of the government’s own future actions. Allende’s recent international trip provided vivid examples of this. For instance, while in New York he spoke to Gordon Murphy, head of the Cerro Corporation, whose Chilean assets have been nationalised. Murphy felt able to declare afterwards that ‘it is not difficult to carry on operating in Chile. In fact we are planning to make new investments.’ And while Allende’s trip was taking place, the US government felt able to announce that its military aid to Chile was to double.
Meanwhile in Chile itself a military court has reduced the prison sentences on a retired general, Vaux, who was involved two years ago in the assassination of the commander-in-chief friendly to Allende, Scheider, from 15 years to two years, so leading to his immediate release.
The drift of the government to the right is likely to lead to further demoralisation of its supporters and increase the power of the anti-government parties. The only way out of a vicious circle of defeats for the left breeding more defeats is through mass action in the factories and the streets. But it is precisely such activity that is ruled out of order by the proponents of the ‘Chilean road’ because it would lead very quickly to armed conflict with the forces of the state.



1. The Problem
This has been a worrying winter for the top men in the Kremlin. The Russian economy faces its most serious difficulties since the present ‘collective leadership’ under Brezhnev came to power. The five year plan targets for 1971-75 propose grain production should average 197 million tons per year. Last year the actual figure was only about 170 million; this year, a few million tons less. This is why Russia has bought on the world market some 30 million tons, at an estimated cost of 2,000 million dollars. The purchase has cut deeply into world grain stocks and forced up bread prices internationally. Yet still there are hungry people in Russia.
The Russian leaders, attempting to put the best face on the situation, claim that ‘there will be no less grain in the country than the annual average during the 8th Plan’ (1966-70). Even if the claim were true, it is no matter for rejoicing. Russia’s population is about 15 million higher now than five years ago. Only an increased grain harvest could feed these extra mouths without making others hungry.
The grain harvest is not the only agricultural problem. Shortage of grain for animal foodstuffs this year is likely to mean a drop in livestock herds and the output of meat in years to come.
 
2. Causes
The official explanation for the grain failure puts the onus on appalling weather conditions. A long period of frost without a covering of snow to protect the crop was followed by an almost unprecedented drought.
There is certainly an important element of truth in this explanation. But it ignores additional, long term, factors of a social and economic character that permitted the weather to have such devastating effect.
The other side of the coin to the massive development of industry in Russia during the period of Stalin’s rule was the stagnation and even decline of agriculture. The countryside was pillaged in order to provide the resources for the development of the towns. From 1929 onwards, peasants were driven from their land into so-called collectives. They were forced to surrender their produce to the State for little or no payment in order to feed the growing workforce in heavy industry. Meanwhile, the level of investment in agriculture (as in consumer goods production) remained very low.
Not even a minimal effort was put into reaching the target figures for grain production set in the ‘plans’ of the Stalin era. The grain-harvest target for the second five year plan was 130 million tons. And although it was claimed that the plan was ‘fulfilled’, the same target was set for the third five year plan. And for the fourth. For the fifth plan (1951-55) the target was raised to 175 million tons. In fact in none of these periods did the actual harvest average more than 100 million tons a year. Stalin’s successors have been aware that agriculture could be the Achilles heel of the whole State-capitalist system. The low level of food production has meant low living standards for Russian workers and great resentment against the regime. Low living standards of Russian workers are part of the explanation for their low productivity as compared to workers in the West. The recurrent nightmare of those who run Russia is that as in East Berlin in 1953, Poznan in 1956, Gdansk and Gdynia in 1970, demands by workers for higher living standards or even attempts to keep the same standard – will lead to strikes, and strikes to insurrections.
The obstacles to any solutions are immense. Years of neglect of agriculture mean that Russia’s farms are far behind those of the West in terms of the material aids to production – tractors, harvesters, dryers, fertilisers. Although a far greater proportion of .the population works on the land than in the West, it is a rapidly ageing population. Poor facilities in rural areas mean that young, mechanically trained people leave for the towns as soon as they get the chance. Even where the tractors and harvesters exist, there are often not enough personnel to man them.
To solve such problems really massive agricultural investment would be necessary. In the early sixties, increased investment in agriculture was only about a fifth as productive as increased investment in industry. The regime cannot afford massive investments in agriculture. The pressures that forced Stalin to neglect the land altogether continue to operate. The driving force behind the economy remains the drive to accumulate capital in competition with the rulers of other powers. In order to compete militarily with the West, to threaten China and to maintain its dominance over Eastern Europe, the Russian bureaucracy needs to spend enormous sums on arms production and even larger sums on building up heavy industry as the base for further arms production.
The urgency of the agricultural situation was apparent to everyone in the mid-sixties, after Krushchev’s fall. Yet in the period 1966-70 actual agricultural investment was about 20 per cent below the level set in the plan. Only 82 per cent of the target for tractor deliveries and 66 per cent for truck deliveries were fulfilled. The planners put the blame, in 1969, on ‘the international situation’. According to the Stockholm Peace Research Institute, Russian arms expenditure grew by 38 per cent in 1965-69.
Inadequate investment in agriculture also means inefficient investment. While some projects are fulfilled, others, essential for their effective running, are curtailed. So there are numerous reports of tractors, harvesters and drivers being produced, but quickly grinding to a halt because there are no spare parts for them; of large areas of land being irrigated, but being inadequately cultivated because of shortage of equipment; of different fertilisers being produced in the wrong proportions for effective use together; of livestock herds being built up without adequate facilities for feeding them. An indication of the size of this problem is the fact that to get in last year’s harvest, 150,000 lorries had to be ‘borrowed’ from industrial plants. What has not been revealed is the extent to which this meant cutting back industry in order to help agriculture.
 
3. Prospects
For two or three years relatively good climatic conditions concealed the continuing under-investment in agriculture. It seemed possible to get both guns and bread (if not butter). Now nature has called Brezhnev’s bluff.
In the short term the bureaucracy has opted for a policy of pulling out all the stops to make sure the population gets fed. With memories of what happened in Poland only two years ago when food prices were raised, it dare not do otherwise.
Industry will be starved of essential imports to pay for grain imports. Already, in the middle of last year, Brezhnev was complaining that industry (in particular consumer oriented industry) was not meeting the targets set for it. The Economic Gazette reported ‘shortfalls’ in the production of textiles, shoes, knitted goods, television sets and washing machines. The diversion of resources to agriculture can only make the situation in industry more difficult.
Those sectionsof the bureaucracy whose power andprestige are closely linked to the fate of such industry are not going to accept passively any downgrading. And if any attempt is made to divert resources from heavy industry and arms to agriculture, the resistance from the ranks of the bureaucracy will be even greater.
A large and very influential section of the bureaucracy will point out that, despite the SALT agreement on arms limitation signed earlier this year, US arms spending is still increasing. Any relaxation in Russia’s pace of accumulation, it will be argued, would mean accepting permanent second place to the US.
Finally, any diversion in the long term of investment resources from agriculture to industry is likely to mean a slower rate of industrial growth. The massive growth rates of Stalin’s time are a thing of the past. With a slower growth rate, the aim of catching up and overtaking the West would have to be abandoned for good. And the bureaucracy might even begin to be haunted by the spectre of falling into third place internationally, behind Japan.
It is precisely such fears and pressures that have meant, in the past, that promises to pay more attention to agriculture, made after particularly bad harvests, have been rapidly forgotten. The stability of any ruling class in the modern world consists in being able to pump a surplus out of the rest of the population for accumulation, without provoking a revolt. In this, the Russian ruling class finds itself with less and less room for manoeuvre.
Any cutting back in the rate of accumulation would lead to a complete schism within the ruling group itself, to bitter and bloody wrangles that could, as in Czechoslovakia in 1968, destroy its ability to cow the rest of society into submission.
But a refusal to cut back on the rate of accumulation would mean that living standards would stagnate in ‘good years’ and threaten to fall whenever climatic conditions worsened. No one can predict when and how 60 million individual Russian workers and their families would react to this. The only real information about their moods and their aspirations is locked away in the files of the secret police.
But inevitably, at some point, the limits of endurance would be broken. The mass, spontaneous working-class insurgency that shook Poland to its foundations two years ago would erupt in industrial centres of Russia itself.
In either case the failure of the grain harvest is a portent for the future. The economic props are being knocked out from under the Russian regime. The days of the monolith could well be numbered.



Let History Judge
Roy Medvedev
Macmillan, £5.75.
Medvedev’s is the first book to emerge from inside Russia for more than 40 years that attempts to deal with the origins and development of the Stalin period. Using many unpublished accounts from leading figures who suffered in the purges of the 1930s, it provides a fascinating picture of what the ‘cult of the personality’ looked like from the inside. Any revolutionary of Maoist tinge who still has illusions about the nature of Stalin’s exercise of power should read through a few chapters of this book. It describes the mysterious circumstances of the Kirov assassination of 1934; the trials of the surviving leaders of the 1917 revolution – Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bukharin, Radek and the rest; the onslaught by Stalin on those of his own supporters surviving from the Bolshevik period, such as Ordzhonikidze; the massive bloodletting from every section of the state machine and the Communist Party; the eradication of every element surviving from the Bolshevik period.
Medvedev shows, with quotations from Lenin and descriptions of Soviet practice in the first and most difficult years of the revolution, that the methods of Stalinism were in no way those of Bolshevism. In the summer of 1918, for instance, the Bolshevik Party leadership sharply reprimanded the editors of a paper called Cheka Weekly, when it advocated the ‘torture’ of the British agent Lockhart. The Bolshevik government declared ‘the thoughts expressed in it (Cheka Weekly) are in gross contradiction with the policy and the tasks of the Soviet regime. Although the Soviet regime resorts of necessity to the most drastic measures of conflict with the counter-revolutionary movement ... the Soviet regime fundamentally rejects the methods advocated as despicable, dangerous, and contrary to the interests of communism.’
Under Stalin, it was not British agents, but old Bolsheviks who were tortured and forced to confess to a list of imaginary crimes. But despite its immense value as a description of Stalin’s methods of rule, there is one grave fault in Medvedev’s book: it does not and cannot provide any coherent explanation of how Stalinism as an historical phenomenon developed. The author never really goes beyond explanations in terms of Stalin’s own psychology.
The reason lies in the author’s starting point. He assumes that Russia today is some sort of socialist society, that in essence the form of government is correct, that the right people manage industry and the state in pursuit of the right goals. Medvedev, like many of the better-known oppositionists in Russia, has been part of a relatively privileged section within Russian society and is prone to accept without question the main features of that society. He merely wants certain liberal freedoms to be transplanted on to it. In short, he wants Stalinism without the secret police.
But the present structure in Russia is the result of a long historical struggle carred out by Stalin and his supporters against the heritage of the October revolution – against working-class democracy and internationalism in 1924, against workers’ living standards and the remnants of inner-party democracy in 1929, against the remaining old Bolsheviks in 1936. Indeed, Medvedev himself implicitly accepts this – he supports the political line of Stalin in all the main debates of the 1920s and early ’30s and merely objects to the ‘extreme’ methods Stalin used to resolve these debates.
Hence Medvedev’s inability to explain the Stalin cult and the purges. Stalin was not an accident. He was the living embodiment of the bureaucratic counter-revolution. His tyranny over the party and the apparatus was part and parcel of the vicious police regime used by the apparatus to destroy the elementary rights of workers and peasants. But Medvedev wants to accept the present power of the class that rules on the basis of Stalin’s methods, and to reject the methods themselves.
A final aspect of the book must be mentioned. The official ideology in Russia today is a bastardised and neutered ‘Marxism-Leninism’ – a ‘Marxism’ that has been turned upside down and emptied of content to justify the ends of the state-capitalist class. Many of the most radical opponents of the regime instinctively reject this official ideology, identify it with Marxism proper, and oppose both. Others try desperately to grope their way through the jungle of distortions, with few established guidelines to aid them (as for instance, did the construction worker Marchenko, who read all 40-odd volumes of Lenin’s collected works in a labour camp, in an effort to discover the truth about Stalinism and Marxism).
Those oppositionists who continue to use the language of Marxism are often the least radical, not the most radical. They maintain the termonology of the official ideology because their questioning of official society is not very deep. Their Marxism is hardly nearer to the real thing than is the doctrine of Brezhnev.
Medvedev is one of this last group. He has courageously fought against many manifestations of Stalinist rule. He has a tendency to quote copiously from Marx and Lenin, but he wants only a limited reform of Russian society, or at most a political revolution at the top, not the thoroughgoing social revolution that alone can satisfy the most fundamental aspirations of Russian workers.



WHEN the workers of Poland struck on 26 June they did more than force a postponement of price increases. They also exploded a myth – the claim that the societies of Eastern Europe are somehow immune from the crises of the world economy.
The myth has been widely propagated. It remains an article of faith for the Communist Parties of Western Europe, even when they claim to have broken with Stalinism and discovered ‘Eurocommunism’. As the British Communist Party put it at its last congress.
‘In contrast to the deep economic crisis in the capitalist world, the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries continue their steady advance, without soaring inflation, mass unemployment, insecurity or cuts in social services.’
The myth has also been given currency by genuine opponents of Stalinism like Ernest Mandel. In for example, his article The Generalised Recession of the International Capitalist Economy:
‘While the recession is hitting all the capitalist economies, the countries with non-capitalist economies are escaping the overall effects of the recession ...’
This perhaps is more guarded than his claim of 20 years ago that
‘... the Soviet Union maintains a more or less even rhythm of economic growth, plan after plan, decade after decade, without the progress of the past weighing on the possibilities of the future.’ (Quatrieme Internationale, 1956, no.1-3)
But it is equally confused.
 
International Economic Crises
CAPITALIST crises have never hit all capitalist countries with the same intensity at the same time. The fact that a world economy exists means that no particular country can escape being affected in some way by the crisis. But there can be very considerable variation in the exact form these effects take.
This can be shown by looking at the biggest ever crisis that of the early 1930s.
This led to a catastrophic drop in production and living standards in the two most powerful industrial economies, the US and Germany.



Industrial Production




 


 


US


 


Germany




1929


100.0


100.0




1930


  80.7


  85.9




1931


  79.1


  67.6




1932


  53.8


  53.3



In both countries industrial output fell to nearly half its 1928 figure.
Real wages fell substantially in Germany and by a third in the US, In France and Britain there were also considerable drops in industrial production, of 30 per cent and 16.5 per cent respectively. These figures were not nearly as bad as for the US and Germany. And in Britain employed workers actually saw their real wages rise in the recession.
This was because the wage cuts enforced on workers were less than the drop in the price of imported food.
Japan was every bit as much a capitalist country as the US or Germany.
But the impact of the recession was much less marked. Industrial production fell 8½ per cent between 1929 and 1931. In 1932, however, when the crisis continued to get worse in the other main countries, production picked up in Japan, until it overtook the 1929 figure in 1933 – something that did not happen in Germany and the US for another three years.
The different impact of the world crisis upon different economies is shown even more vividly in the second crisis of the 1930s, that of 1937-8.
In the case of the biggest capitalist economy, the US, industrial production fell by a fifth, to below the 1928 figure, despite all the talk of Roosevelt’s ‘New Deal’. In Britain too industrial production fell and unemployment began shooting up. But in Nazi Germany where the economy certainly remained capitalist, industrial production soared ahead despite the world recession, from a figure of 106.3 in 1936, to 117.2 in 1937 and 126.2 in 1938 (1928 = 100).
In Japan too the growth of production did not falter in these years.
Such instances show how misguided are those who point to the lack of a western type recession in the last two years as proof that the East European countries are ‘non-capitalist’.
The East European states have not been hit by the most recent crisis in exactly the same way as the main western states. But they have not been able to avoid it affecting them deeply, although in ways that differ in some respects from countries like the US or Britain.
Indeed, one of the most significant things about the last couple of years has been the way in which there has been a growing intermeshing between a form of cyclical crisis experienced by the East European economies and the crises of the west.
 
‘Internal’ Crises in Eastern Europe
DESPITE the mythology the expansion of the East European economies has never been at an even pace. Nor, for that matter, has it been planned, in the sense of being guided by pre-ordained targets that lead to the whole economy growing according to a single rhythm.
There have, in fact, been very sharp fluctuations in the rate of economic growth and, in particular, of the rate of investment.
This is shown by the two graphs (1 and 2) for Poland and Czechoslavakia. [1*] Fluctuations in the latter country have been even more sharp than the ‘particularly marked’ fluctuations that Mandel notes in France (Late Capitalism, p.234) but ignores in Eastern Europe.
The fluctuations often have nothing whatsoever to do with the targets laid down in the so-called ‘plans’, as is shown, for example by the Yugoslav economy in the early 1960s (when it was was still run on more or less the same basis as. the other East European countries).



Rate of Growth




 


 


Plan


 


Achievement




1961


12.0 per cent


 7.2 per cent




1962


12.6 per cent


 7.0 per cent




1963


10.3 per cent


15.6 per cent



It only needs to be added that in 1951, 1952 and 1967 there was a negative of growth in Yugoslavia (as there was in Czechoslavakia in the early 1960s).
Real wages are likewise subject to sudden and unplanned fluctuations. For instance, the Hungarian ‘plan’ of 1950 called for an increase in workers living standards of 35 per cent by 1955. During the ‘implementation’ of the ‘plan’ living standards actually fell by 20 per cent. [1]
In Poland there have been very wide fluctuations in real wages over the last 26 years. Between 1950 and 1955 they fell by about 10 per cent. Then, after the strikes and demonstrations of 1956-7 the official figures show them as shooting up by about 17 per cent by 1959. But in 1960 they fell by l½ per cent.
After that they began to rise again slowly (although no increase at all is shown for the year 1964-5) so that the average increase for the period 1960-70 was under one per cent. [2]
When account is taken of price rises not included in the official statistics and of a restructuring of the wages system to the benefit of managers, it seems likely that real wages hardly rose at all, and may even have fallen.
‘The yearly increases in wages of one or two per cent did not mean real wage increases for the mass of the workforce.’ [3]
At the end of this period, in December 1970 Gomulka decreed increases in the prices of food, clothing, furniture etc that had the effect of pushing real wages below the figure for 1960 – until strikes forced Gomulka’s successor Gierek to abandon the increases.
It is no wonder that the Polish economist Pajerska has pointed to the ‘highly irregular growth of real wages.’
But the wage fluctuations do not take place in a vacuum.
‘They are not an accidental phenomenon, but a logical consequence of other premises in the field of development policy.’ [4]
They are part and parcel of the tendency of the whole economy to oscillate wildly.
‘Analysis of the dynamics of industrial production in Czechoslovakia, the GDR and Hungary supplies an interesting picture. The rate of growth shows relatively regular fluctuations ... These fluctuations are still more pronounced if analysis is confined to producer goods.’ [5]
How do these fluctuations occur?
Many East European economists have pointed to what is sometimes called ‘over-investment’, ‘to a tendency for over fulfilment of plans in the higher stage manufacturing industries’. [6]
All the bureaucratically centralised economies tend to embark on vast investment projects, on a scale that cannot be sustained by the resources internal to the economy. As the famous Polish economist, Kalecki, put it:
‘When the rate of growth of the national income exceeds a certain level, the output of certain industries, particularly those producing raw materials, lags behind the demand for those products owing to technological and organisational factors ...’ [7]
Expansion runs into what is sometimes called the ‘raw material barrier’, and begins to grind to a halt.
The initial period in which investment and apparent economic growth soared is now followed by a period in which growth rates stagnate. So as to complete some of the investments, raw material and components are switched from other investments, which are ‘frozen’, left uncompleted for years at a time.
There is enormous economic waste as whole chunks of wealth are tied down in unfinished projects.
At the same time, other investments are completed, but turn out goods which can only be utilised in conjunction with the products of other investments that are frozen. So, for example, a tyre producing factory may be finished, but a car factory will not be finished. The vehicles for which the tyres are intended do not exist; stocks of tyres accumulate for which there is no outlet.
The total effect of these two forms of waste can be immense – in Hungary in 1961-4 this accounted for eight per cent of the national income for Yugoslavia in 1960-70 for 10 percent [8], in Poland in the years 1960-63 increased stocks alone accounted for 5-8 percent of the national income. [9]
According to Moshe Lewin, four billion rubles of equipment were unused in 1965-7 in the Soviet Union as ‘producers’ goods remained unmarketed or kept accumulating in some parts of the economy when they were needed in some other.’ [10]
The official figures for economic growth include much of this waste as ‘increased production’ – although, in fact, it does not increase the real national wealth at all. So, for instance, in Czechoslovakia in 1967 the official figures for economic growth hid the scale of economic crisis – for three quarters of the official ‘increases’ was made up of unusable stocks.
The authorities are forced to ‘freeze’ investments so as to deal with a crisis produced by their own tendency to over-invest. But their intervention serves, in the short term, only to increase the chaos in the economy. ‘Administrative intervention’, according to the Yugoslav economist Horvat, ‘intensifies economic fluctuation’.
At the factory level, the result is the very negation of planning. Managers are told by ‘planners’ to switch repeatedly from one sort of output to another, at the shortest possible notice.
‘Paradoxically, a system so heavily planned from above, left the factory unplanned, unable to prepare itself correctly for future tasks ...’ [11]
Managers try to protect themselves in advance from such unpredictability by hoarding supplies of raw materials, components and skilled labour. The worker in turn does his best to conceal from the manager the amount of output he can produce when really pushed. The overall result is that no-one knows, least of all the ‘planners’, how much the economy is really capable of producing.
Instead of real planning taking place ‘strict methods of government dictation are evolved for filling the gaps in the economy made by the decisions and activities of the government itself.’ [12]
However, the crisis due to the ‘raw material barrier’ and the freezing of investments does not last indefinitely.
Eventually the pouring of resources into a select group of ‘priority’ projects enables them to be finished and to pass into production. At that point the output of the whole economy begins to rise at an accelerating speed. Resources can then be released to finish other investments. The economy moves from crisis and a slow real growth rate to an overcoming of the immediate crisis and a very rapid growth rate. Meanwhile, however, the crisis has produced unfortunate by-products.
The first is inflation
The vast expansion of investment at the beginning of the cycle necessarily involves an expansion of the workforce (usually through turning peasants into workers, although also now through the use of immigrant labour – e.g. Czechoslavkia and East Germany have imported labour from Poland, from Cyprus and even from Vietnam). The new workers are paid money wages on the assumption that the expansion of the economy will itself produce an increased flow of goods for these to be spent on.
At the same time, in all sections of the economy enterprises are borrowing from the banks to buy materials and components for new investments. And they rely upon a quick increase in production. When the crisis begins and production does not increase as expected, the classic inflationary situation occurs of an expanded supply of money chasing a fixed number of goods.
The actions of the authorities to deal with the crisis by freezing some investments to finish others aggravates this state of affairs. Usually it is the resources intended for consumption and agricultural investment that arc raided so as to finish projects in heavy industry. The result is that consumers have more money at their disposal than the worth of the existing stock of the consumer goods. [13]
The regime has two ways of dealing with such a devlopment. One is to let prices of consumer goods and food rise. That is why countries like Poland had a rate of inflation similar to that of western states during the 1960s.
But in a state where there is only one employer, inflation is likely to get blamed on the government and to have very explosive political consequences (as in Poland in 1970 and 1976). The bureaucracy is often frightened to allow too many obvious price increases, and freezes many prices in the state sector (although not in the quite large semi-private sector – the prices in the Kolkhoz markets in Russia, prices on the black market, the price of so-called cooperative housing, prices in hard currency shops).
However, price freezing does not do away with the cause of inflationary pressure – too few consumer goods being available compared with the money in the population’s hands. What is often called ‘hidden inflation’ results. There are not enough goods to go round, and nothing can be obtained without queuing (except by the bureaucracy itself, which is well supplied by goods from its own shops in its party offices etc.). [14]
It becomes a near-impossibility for workers to find enough supplies in the shops to spend their weekly wage on. Despite many hours spent queuing, they still have unspent money in their pockets at the end of the week. This they can either spend in the highly inflationary non-state sector or effectively give it back to the state by putting it in the savings bank.
So, for instance, last year it was claimed that wages in Poland rose by about 9 per cent. But at the same time savings rose by a figure equal to 6.8 per cent of wages. It seems that workers were unable to spend more than about two per cent more than the year before (even though average prices had risen nearly five per cent). Of course, the worker might eventually be able to use his accumulated savings – except it takes so long to save to buy the sort of things the worker would want to spend them on. like a cooperative flat (a worker can have to wait more than seven years before being able to take possession of a flat after paying down the deposit) as to virtually guarantee that the savings will be devalued by inflation before that point is reached. [15]
The crisis has another important side effect. In order to complete as many investments as possible, the bureaucracy will be strongly tempted to step up its imports from abroad. But it will not have the same ability to arbitrarily increase exports. The result is a balance of payments deficit (as growth runs into what is called the ‘foreign trade barrier’).
 
The Root of the Crisis
SO FAR we have described the cycle of crisis and its by-products, inflationary pressure, foreign payment problems, and a lack of accounting and inefficiency throughout the economy.
But why does the cycle begin in the first place? After all, if the initial cause is ‘over-investment’, surely the bureaucracy can so arrange things as to fit the rate of investment to the resources of the economy?
That would certainly be the case if the Eastern countries really were socialist economies, where production was determined by need and, in Marx’s words, ‘accumulated labour is but a means to widen, to enrich, to promote the existence of the labourer.’ [16]
But this is not the case in these states.
Competition, not need, provides the driving force of their economies.
Superficially it seems that competition plays no role, since the state owns almost all of industry, and its monopoly of foreign trade reduces the direct impact of external competition on particular sectors of the economy to a minimum.
But the barriers erected to trade between each of the East European states and the rest of the world (including each other!) do not stop their having relations with the rest of the world. The world system continues to dominate their internal running, because the bureaucracy is committed above all to trying to ‘catch up and overtake’ its capitalist neighbours. The main goal set the economy is economic growth, particularly in the section of the economy that produces means of production. The bureaucracy deliberately imposes on the economy as a whole the necessity of competing in growth terms with the western economies. The accumulations of means of production outside their borders determine the drive to accumulate means of production inside each of the East European states.
The initial drive to accumulate (in the period 1948-55) was motivated above all by military considerations. Stalin saw the development of heavy industry as providing the military potential he needed in his conflict with the western powers.
However, the very drive to accumulate produced a new pressure for accumulation. As we have seen, accumulation soon exhausted the raw materials to hand within the individual country. Imports were necessary to sustain it.
But imports could only be obtained if exports were increased (and. in practice, this applied just as much to exports to the ‘socialist’ countries as to the west – the state capitalist countries have rarely been prepared to give each other real economic aid). The more industrialisation proceeded the more the East European states depended on pushing up their sales abroad, until with states like Hungary. Czechoslovakia or Poland these account for a very high proportion of the national product.
The Eastern states found themselves in a situation not appreciably different to that of any western capitalist. So as to accumulate they have to sell their goods. But they cannot sell their goods unless they are accumulating as fast as their competitors, continually expanding the scale of production, introducing new technology, keeping wage costs to a minimum, finding the cheapest possible source of raw materials. To survive they have, in fact, to subordinate the internal development of their economies to the needs of external competition.
The result is that once they have embarked on the path of competitive accumulation, there is no turning back and no end to it.
It is this which explains why the rate of accumulation is set at a level that is too big to be sustained by the resources within the economy. They are competing with economies larger and more advanced than themselves. They can only survive if they invest at a similar sale in particular industries as their competitors, even if that scale is too great for the local economy.
The forces of production operate on a world scale, as part of an international social organisation, but they are controlled, appropriated, within the private boundaries of the national bureaucracies. The result is inevitably a continual clashing between the forces of production and the national boundaries. Hence the raw material barrier, the foreign trade barrier, the inflation barrier, the periodic crisis.
 
The Crisis of State Capitalism and the Classical Capitalist Crisis
THE UPS and downs of the bureaucratically centralised economy bear an uncanny resemblance to the ‘business cycles’ experienced by western capitalism throughout most of its life.
In both cases rapid accumulation leads to shortages of raw materials and skilled labour. These shortages can only be solved by a slump in the growth rate (or even a cutback in production, as in the most recent western recession or the recessions in Yugoslavia, or in Czechoslovakia in the early 1960’s). But this in turn enables an equilibrium eventually to be restored so that production can shoot ahead once more, until again shortages are encountered, etc.
In both cases the cause of the initial too-rapid boom is the competition between rival capitalist establishments (in one case rival firms, in the other rival national ruling classes). In both cases, too, the boom leads to production lagging behind demand for raw materials and consumer goods, and therefore to inflation or hidden inflation.
There is, however, one significant difference between the operation of the cyclical crisis typical of the East European states over the last 25 years and that typical of classical western capitalism (i.e. prior to 1940). The western boom-slump cycle went something like this:
When the economy moved from boom to slump, this was expressed in the fear that each capitalist had of being driven out of business.
The boom had pushed up his raw material costs, his interest repayments and the money wages he paid his workers. For the least efficient firms these increases could be enough to wipe out all the profits and to drive them into the red. The increased cost of new investment meant that they can no longer be embarked upon with any certainty of making a profit. New investment declined. But this meant that there was a sudden drop in the demand for the output of the sector of the economy producing means of production (e.g. construction, machine tools). Workers in this sector were sacked. Without wages they couldn’t buy the goods produced by other factories, which sacked their workers in turn.
There was very rapidly a movement from an inflationary boom – too much money chasing too few goods, to a deflationary slump – too little money chasing too many goods. A general crisis of overproduction resulted.
In the crisis many individual firms went bankrupt. Their workers were thrown on to the dole queues for hire at lower wages by more efficient capitalists, and their factory space, machinery and raw materials were sold off at cut-price rates.
Eventually this combination of cheap means of production and cheap labour power would create the conditions for a new burst of profitable investment, a new boom. Paradoxically, it was the event which drove capitalist society to desperation, the slump, that prepared the ground for a new burst of optimism in the boom.
The bureaucratic state, as we have seen, experiences the first part of this cycle, the phase of ‘over-investment’. But it tries to react to it in a slightly different fashion to the classical entrepreneur. Instead of relying on blind competition to determine which sections of the economy go under and which survive at their expense, the bureaucratic state itself intervenes to reestablish equilibrium on a different basis. It is able more or less to dictate which sections are ‘frozen’ and which expand at their expense. Bureaucratic directives, not the market, determine that workers and resources move from making one thing to making another.
The result is that although the crises have cut growth rates and produced unused productive capacity in various sections of industry, they have not usually led to a fall in industrial output, plant closures and sharp rises in unemployment. [17]
The bureaucracy, with its centralised control over all the internal industrial resources of the economy [18] has an ability to intervene and deal with the effects of the crisis that under laissez faire capitalism neither the single firm nor the state could. The individual firm was too small in relation to the national economy to intervene in this way, and the state was politically too weak to impose a single will on the rival capitalist concerns: they would not, for instance, allow it to take control of investable resources and instead insisted that they themselves decide when it was profitable to start investing again.
However, dependence for resolving the crisis on administrative direction rather than blind market forces does not mean that the East European economies are qualitatively different to those in the west and the so-called third world.
Two important considerations apply here.
(1) Within western capitalism the last 80 years have seen a growing tendency for the state to merge with the most powerful capitalist interests. Sixty years ago Lenin and Bukharin already referred to the western states as ‘state monopoly capitalisms’.
Today the process of monopolisation and stratification has gone much further than in Lenin and Bukharin’s time. The corollary of this has been an increasing tendency for the state to try to impose some sort of planning of the constituent parts of the national economy in the interests of the major capitalist groups.
There are still limits to this. In countries like the US, Britain, present day western Germany, etc., the component sections of the capitalist class are still too distrustful of each other and of the capitalist state to permit a single economic power centre to emerge to direct their national accumulation effort. Particular, competing, interests are powerful enough to prevent a full blooded transition from state monopoly capitalism to state capitalism, as Wedgewood Benn with his scheme for state capitalist directed investment through the National Enterprise Board found to his cost. [19]
However, the tendency has still been for the role of the state to increase, and even in certain circumstances to dominate the whole economy.
In Germany and Japan in the 1930’s the different sections of the ruling class forgot their distrust of the state. They enhanced its powers to smash the working class organisations, to force up the rate of profit and to expand out of the crisis at the expense of rival capitalist powers.
In Nazi Germany, by 1937 the state had a complete monopoly of foreign trade, directed a growing proportion of investment, and was over-riding the objectives of particular giant firms to its schemes for saving German capitalism. [20]
It was on this basis, that German capitalism could expand at precisely the point when the US and Britain entered the second deep slump of the 1930’s.
A similar process, of course, happened in 1939-40 in Britain and the US in response to the threat from a reinvigorated German capitalism. The state and the major capitalist groups imposed a war economy, which compelled the individual capitalist groups to accept a centralised direction to the economy. Their mutual antagonisms remained powerful enough, however, to ensure the partial dismemberment of the after 1945. Even then, the state through the permanent arms economy continued to control a substantial sector of the economy and to direct a huge amount of investment more or less regardless of the ups and downs of the non-state sector.
But it has been in the so-called ‘developing’ countries where this process of state intervention has gone furthest. In many of these the individual capitalist groups have been too weak to prevent the state dominating the industrial sector of the economy – indeed, in many cases this has been the only way individual capitalists could conceive of overcoming their own weakness compared with the giant firms of the west.
In the most extreme cases (e.g. Egypt and Syria in the early 1960’s) this has led to a virtual state monopoly of industrial production.
In other cases it has meant the state playing the dominating role in the most important sectors of industry (even if these are a minority of the total) and banking.
So, for instance, even in Brazil the state controls 72.3 per cent of the shareholding in the 100 biggest companies; in Mexico there is
‘... a strong state presence in the vital sectors of the economic system. The state owns the major part of the banking system, of the oil and petrochemical industry, of the electrical production industry and transport. It has a strong articipation in trade, iron and steel and heavy industry ...’ [21]
In Argentina, the industrial capitalists
‘... used the state between 1930 and 1950 to transfer capital from the agricultural export sector to internal industries ... They nationalised foreign capital linked to export industries and made productive services and transport into state monopolies ... After 1953 the state was used in a new cycle to transfer capital from light industry to heavy industry and engineering ...’ [22]
In these countries the state does not respond to a crisis as the individual classical capitalist would, by waiting for a rise in profitability before investing. To do that would be to abandon the pretentions of its national capitalists to ‘catch up’ with their international competitors. Rather the state is likely to step up its own direct and indirect investment to compensate for the failure of the private sector of the capitalist class to invest.
‘The Argentine bourgeoisie opted for a plan of development through the production of means of production ... This politics resolved in a bourgeois manner the narrowness of the internal market for means of consumption and the low rate of profit that caused the fall in private investment. Through successive instalments of inflation and of economic contractions, the rate of surplus value was raised, while capital was transferred from production of means of consumption to production of means of production ...’ [23]
In Brazil the role of the state helped to ensure that the economy has continued to expand (although at a reduced rate) through the world recession, on the basis of a continuing growth of production of means of production. [24]
The rate of growth for 1976 is expected to be 2.5 to 3 per cent. But capital goods output will rise to 15 per cent, ‘due to provision of official finance on.a massive scale’. [25]
(2) But a second point has to be noted both in relation to the East European state capitalisms and to the various hybrids between state monopoly capitalism and bureaucratic state capitalism. The state may be able to reorganise the internal economy so as to deflect some of the classical products of the crisis (above all a collapse of new investment). But it cannot exercise the same control over the external economic relations of the national capital – unless it is in a position to expand in an imperialist manner, as did Germany and Japan in the 1930s.
And the more accumulation takes place, the more important foreign trade and its impact becomes. Productive forces operate increasingly at an international level, and it becomes increasingly difficult for any national capitalism (state capitalist or otherwise) to accumulate in isolation from the world system.
We will expand on this point later, but first it is necessary to look briefly at another vital component to the crisis in the Eastern states.
 
Declining Growth Rates and the Crisis
IF THE cyclical crises were the only difficulty facing the Eastern European economies, the bureaucracy could sleep easily. For by definition, cyclical crises pass and give rise to a new period of expansion and optimism. Trotsky remarked that ‘capitalism lives by slumps and booms, just as a human being lives by inhaling and exhaling.’ [26]
The same might almost be said of the East European state capitalisms.
However Trotsky was quick to add that on top of its cyclical crises, capitalism was faced with a long term tendency at work through slump and boom, to make each crisis worse than the one before. Marx located the origin of this in the trend for the long term rate of profit to decline.
The bureaucratic state capitalisms also face a long term trend towards crisis, on top of their cyclical difficulties.
The more they develop industrially, the more their rate of economic growth tends to decline.
Twenty five years ago they claimed growth rates two or even three times that of their western rivals. Today, their growth rates are only about the same as western growth rates. As Branko Horvat has noted, ‘expansion in the most important countries of the world, capitalist and centrally planned alike, is slowing down ...’ [27]
The fundamental cause of state capitalism’s declining growth rates lies in the fact that new investment is less and less productive.



Growth of national income
per unit of investment,
Poland [28]




1951-54


0.373




1955-58


0.335




1959-63


0.201



In eight years, the new output produced by each unit to increase in investment fell by more than 40 per cent!



Average increase in industrial output
per rouble of investment (USSR)




1951-5


1956-60


1961-65




6.4


5.1


4.7



In this case the fall was by more than 25 per cent in ten years. [29] It might be asked: does this matter? After all, total production is continuing to rise. The use values at the disposal of the state grows ever more massive.
But it is no the volume of use values at the disposal of the rulers of Russia and the East European states that worries them. They do not live in either a socialist society where what matters is the use values available to feed, clothe, shelter and give a happy life to the population. Nor do they live in a hermetically sealed, bureaucratically run state that can forget what is happening elsewhere in the world, and therefore measure its success by the quantity of use values at the disposal of the bureaucrats.
They know that their long term survival depends upon being able to maintain a level of accumulation as high as, if not higher than their rivals’. If the bureaucrats’ economy produces inferior goods at a slower speed than its rivals, then in the long term they will have the economic and military potential to force the bureaucratic state into a subordinate client state role.
Therefore what obsessed the bureaucrats is the success they have in producing greater quantities of goods with less outlays of labour than their rivals – or in Marxist terms, the production of exchange values. [30]
As Brezhnev has put it,
‘... the fundamental question in the economic competition between the two world systems is not only how much you produce, but also at what cost, with what outlays of labour.’ [31]
Yet the rulers of the bureaucratic states find that it takes greater and greater quantities of accumulated labour, of ‘dead’ labour, to expand the value of production. [32]
They face the same long term problem as western capitalists. The more accumulation takes place, the more they are confronted with a tendency for the rate of profit to decline. [33]
As a result, the decline in the rate of growth continues, even though the proportion of industry devoted to producing means of production, to accumulation, grows.
Today about 75 per cent of industrial output of the USSR consists of producer goods, compared to only about 70 per cent in 1950-55; in Czechoslovakia 61 per cent compared with 55 per cent; in Poland 65 per cent, compared with 55 per cent. [34]
It is this which gives added urgency to the short term cycle of crisis. The long term decline in growth rates means that the bureaucracy has fewer reserves for dealing with each crisis than the one before. As in the classical capitalism of Marx, crises get progressively worse, and have more and more political ramification, (as in 1956, 1968-9. 1970-71). [35]
Indeed, in some ways the trend is more pronounced than Marx foresaw for western capitalism.
Despite all its faults, the periodic crisis served a positive function for capitalism in Marx’s day. By leading to the bankruptcy of some capitalists, it cleared the ground for others to prosper.


The most inefficient capitalists would be driven out of business, and the more efficient capitalists could buy up machines and factory space on the cheap. The system as a whole was restructured on the basis of ‘the survival of the fittest’.
The recession created a temporary excess of raw materials, which cut their price.
it created a pool of unemployed which served to weaken trade union organisation and cut money wages.


The cheapening of labour, raw materials and means of production did away with the inflationary pressures that had developed during the boom. And it counteracted the long term tendency of the rate of profit to fall.
In the bureaucratically centralised economies this semiautomatic process of ‘rationalisation’ of production does not take place. There is no automatic mechanism, for instance, for diverting resources from backward, inefficient factories to modern, more efficient ones. [36] Nor is there any automatic countering of the long term inflationary pressures.
It was analyses of the way in which the system was more and more driving towards crisis that enabled revolutionary Marxists writing in the early sixties to foresee and repitition of the workers uprisings of 1953 and 1956. This was especially true of the pioneering work of the Polish Marxists Kuron and Modzelewski. [37]
 
The second part of this article will appear in our next issue. – Ed.
 
Note by ETOL
1*. There are no graphs printed with the article.
 



Chris Harman writes: A favourite theme of western commentators on Portugal is that it is moving rapidly to a regime of the East European sort.
It is not only bourgeois writers who tend to this view. At least one of the Maoist-Stalinist sects in Portugal itself (the AOC) holds that the establishment of a ‘social fascist’ regime by the CP is the greatest danger, and therefore urges support for the pro-NATO Socialist Party as the lesser evil. And, it would seem from the coverage of Portuguese events in their paper Workers’ Power, that some sections of the American International Socialists hold a similar standpoint, seeing the CP in Portugal as on the road to establishing the rule of a new, ‘bureaucratic collectivist’ class.
The trouble with any such view is that it takes no account of the concrete balance of class forces in Portugal, and that it ascribes to the Portuguese CP, and to Communist Parties in general, an ability to act in a supra-historical manner.
Regimes of the East European sort have developed when the extreme feebleness of both the old ruling class on the one hand, and of the workers’ movement on the other (due to internal divisions, demoralisation, repression at the hands of occupying forces etc.) have enabled the leaders of Stalinist political parties to accumulate considerable political power into their own hands, and to use this power to ease out the old owners of industry, establishing their own bureaucratic control.
Conditions in Portugal today are quite different to these. It is true that the local bourgeoisie has been deeply fragmented in the period since the overthrow of Caetano. It has lost direct control of much of the media; key positions in the armed forces are in the hands of a relatively small group of middle ranking officers who are disenchanted with the main sections of the bourgeoisie; major parts of industry and finance have been nationalised.
But the other pre-conditions for a successful Stalinist takeover of society has been absent – the working class is not weak and demoralised, but militant and strong.
Far from being able to act independently of the existing classes, the limited successes enjoyed by the CP have depended upon its ability to balance between the classes, hitting out first at one, then at the other. It was originally allowed to enter the government and to take control of the trade union apparatuses because of its promises to the military Junta after 25 April that it would control the spontaneous militancy of the workers. By carrying through its side of the bargain and denouncing most of the major strikes of the last 12 months, it has lost much of its own base among the most militant sections of workers.
It now finds itself in the situation of trying to organise, under its own control, the bureaucracies of the media, the nationalised industries, and so on. But that control is threatened both by the CP’s military allies, who greet any extension of the CP’s power with suspicion, and by rank and file workers. Its problems are aggravated by the effects of the economic crisis.
Portuguese capitalism desperately needs rationalising. But that means wage cuts, speed-up and redundancies in the nationalised sector of the economy and the state bureaucracy, and the driving to the wall of many of the privately owned small firms. For the CP to support this programme would be to antagonise the workers in both large scale industry and the small enterprises, and to lose the base which the CP wants to build among the petty bourgeoisie.
It is worth remembering that the immediate aftermath of the full establishment of CP control in Eastern Europe was precisely such a massive programme of rationalisation, capital accumulation and wage cutting, a programme that finally destroyed the CP’s base among the working class and alienated wide sections of lower bureaucrats. In Eastern Europe the CP had full control of the state machine (and a Russian military presence) and was able (until the revolts of the mid-fifties and the late sixties) to carry through this state capitalist programme using physical repression.
In Portugal, if the CP loses control of the working class ideologically, then it Ioses the one thing that makes it important to the brigadiers and generals. Already, some of them are indicating that their own Bonapartist inclinations are driving them away from complete dependence on the CP.
In fact, it faces the classic dilemma of social democracy. The strategy which it believes will lead it to permanent power, in fact only serves to demoralise the class on whose shoulder it perches and to improve the prospects of forces to the right of it In this case the beneficiaries would not be the CP, but one or other section of the professional officer corps. Possibly the officers would still need the reformist organisations to play a subordinate role (as in the Germany of 1918-23 or in Peru today). More likely, they will try to destroy all working class organisations, including the reformist ones, in an effort to solve Portugal’s economic crisis.
There is another alternative: a struggle to form workers’ and soldiers’ councils, to destroy the existing hierarchies in the armed forces and the rest of the state, and to establish workers’ power. But this is not open to those who want to travel the road of creeping state capitalism. They are doomed to see their own aspirations smashed by the development of rival class forces that no political apparatus can control.
 



Chris Harman writes: Portugal’s sixth government is already, at the time of writing, as impotent and isolated as the fifth government which preceded it. Formed with the aim of bringing some sort of bourgeois normality to the country, it has so far only succeeded in aggravating the political and military crisis. Its attempts to re-establish bourgeois authority in the army, in the press, in industry have had the effect of speeding up the self organisation of the workers and rank and file soldiers.
The sixth government began by removing various left wing officers from key military positions in an effort to restore full control over the armed forces. It only succeeded in giving the impetus to the formation, for the first time, of a rank and file soldiers’ movement more or less independent of the ‘progressive’ officers – SUV (soldiers united will win). It found how weak its hold over the army was when it sent troops to close down the radio and TV stations (on 29 September). Within hours the troops were solidarising with the broadcasting workers. Indeed, it was only the intervention of commandos newly-back from Angola that silenced the most left wing of the radio stations, Renascenca. By mid-October, joint meetings of delegates from all but four military units in the Lisbon area, made up predominantly of privates, were taking place regularly. Fabiao, the head of the army, acknowledged the impasse the military command was in when he intervened to make important concessions to the SUV led occupation of the heavy artillery (RASP) barracks in Oporto – although the military command is now attempting to renege on its promises.
While the right wing has found its plans for reimposing control blocked, the Communist Party has also suffered some damage over the month.
The Communist Party has been caught all along between its desire to be part of the government using its positions to push pro-Russian, state capitalist reforms, and its need to protect its political base within the working class. The more successful it has been in the governmental sphere, the more it has had to be directly responsible for procapitalist (or pro-state capitalist) policies that have alienated working class support The main effect of its success in indirectly dominating the fifth government (via pro-Communist Party officers) was to isolate it both on the social democratic right and within the working class.
With the sixth government it tried to solve this problem by following two contradictory policies simultaneously – by having a token presence in the government and mending its fences to the right, and by maintaining a presence in the working class opposition to the government (e.g. by leaving its front organisation, the Portuguese Democratic Movement (MDP) in the United Revolutionary Front (FUR) and by giving the go-ahead for limited strikes).
This has meant it has not incurred the odour of the most militant workers by denouncing their struggles, as under previous governments. Nor is it the butt for all the frustrations that result from the inability of any capitalist government to deal with the economic and social crisis (as with the fifth government, particularly in the traditionally anti-Communist north). As the crisis increases the unpopularity of the sixth government, the main party in it, the Socialist Party, will lose support – and in Lisbon that could well mean increased support among less politicalised and militant sections of the class for the Communist Party. Growing numbers of workers could come to look back on the ‘Vasco’ (i.e. fifth) government with growing feelings of nostalgia. Already, the coalition of the Socialist Party and the right moving Maoist group, the MRPP, which won a number of white collar union elections, is paralysed by its inability to respond to the economic and political crisis. By contrast, the Communist Party felt able to throw its support behind a token national stoppage and demonstration of metal workers (over the question of their wages contract), winning Lisbon metal workers’ union election four days later as a result (defeating the revolutionary left by 3-1, although on a poll of under 25 per cent). However, there are limits to the Communist Party’s ability to manoeuvre – and these are creating havoc among the members themselves.
The most important limit is that the Communist Party has not dared organise all-out opposition to the rightward swing of the government even when the situation demands this. It could not initiate SUV, because of its own involvement with a layer of career officers. It could only try, unsuccessfully, to build a rival to SUV and then, more successfully, to infiltrate SUV in certain localities.
Neither could it respond immediately to the government crack-down on the radio and TV.
For three days, all it did was put out leaflets saying it was ‘studying the situation’, while its members opposed strikes and demonstrations. The revolutionary left alone had to organise the revolts of the troops that made the occupations ineffective and to call the demonstrations of shipyard workers etc. On the fourth day the Communist Party issued an hysterical statement alerting its members to the dangers of a Socialist Party ‘march on Lisbon’ before once again lapsing into silence.
It was only after some days that it seemed to arrive at a unified response – to organise non-militant demonstrations to the various barracks, through the tenants’ committees it controlled, supporting the soldiers movement, but also praising the fifth government and demanding ‘no civil war’.
At these demonstrations, the party leadership has attempted to make a distinction between the ‘programme of the sixth government’ and the ‘personality of the prime minister’ on the one hand, and the ‘rightward drift’ of government policy on the other. But this distinction seems lost on some at least of the members, who know Azevedo himself has been personally responsible for the most important government decisions.
There are reports of all sorts of ructions inside the party. The leadership, apparently, is divided into three wings: a right wing group led by Pato with the approach of the Italian Communist Party and supported by the Party youth; the centre led by Cunhal; and a left identified with an old party member, Serra.
More significant there is considerable discontent among many of the Party’s militants in industry.
At a meeting of several hundred cadres in Lisbon shortly after the takeover of the broadcasting stations, a considerable number walked out. Such people are not clear what is wrong with the Party’s policy, but see a clear discrepancy between the leadership’s talk of a right wing offensive and its low key response.
It has been partly to retain the allegiance of such people, partly in order to exert pressure on the government to take in more Communist Party members (the Party talks of the need for ‘more left wingers in the government’ and ‘more revolutionaries on the Council of the Revolution’) that the Communist Party has organised its demonstrations to the barracks and has now allowed the unions under its control to re-open the economic struggle (going so far as to threaten a general strike in Alentejo unless the land reform is speeded up).
The Party’s desire for more positions in the government may even coincide with the need of the bourgeoisie to buy time, while the military command put together reliable military units (a Freikorps). In that case the result would be a sort of 5½th government, with a less pronounced rightward drift than the present government and some of the personnel of the fifth government It could not, however, last more than two to three months.
So far, each political crisis has presented the revolutionary left with opportunities to hold off the right wing offensive and to undercut some of the base of the Communist Party. With SUV, the revolutionary left has emerged as a major contender in the national struggle for power. The fact that the Communist Party has had to follow its initiatives (starting with the last minute support for a revolutionary demonstration on 20 August through to the Socialist Party’s belated support for SUV) is an indication of its growing impact.
But the revolutionary left faces major problems. Its impact within the army is still much greater than within the working class, outside a few major factories (Lisnave, Setenave etc.). The only place where anything approaching even an embryo of real organisations of workers’ power grew up during the crisis of 29 September was Setubal (where the Setenave shipyards are situated). And even the committee of struggle formed there, with representatives from all the major factories and from the local barracks was not able to oveicome Communist Party supported resistance to strike action in most of the plants.
The Communist Party’s influence in the class is being undercut – but not as fast as the revolutionary left would like.
This is bound to have a detrimental effect within the army. The army units cannot remain in a revolutionary ferment indefinitely, unless they gain protection from workers’ organisations. That is why more linkages have been formed at the local level between units and workers and tenants’ committees in the last month than in the whole period previously. These could be embryo of workers’ power. But while the Communists retain some influence in the workers’ movement, the linkages can have the paradoxical effect of undermining some of the revolutionary feeling in the military units. The Communist Party has certainly understood that it can use its hold over certain workers’ committees as a Trojan horse for regaining some of the initiative in the armed forces.
The revolutionary left is not compelled to sit back and, fatalistically, watch this happen. The Communist Party does not by any means fully dominate the workers’ movement in the Lisbon metal workers’ union, more than half the workers prepared to go on the streets shouting a mixture of Communist Party reformist and revolutionary slogans did not feel impelled to vote for either the Communist Party or the revolutionary opposition in the elections a few days later; in a Communist Party strong hold like Barreiro, the PRP could hold a meeting two fifths the size of a Communist Party meeting held on the same night, in Setubal, the revolutionary left-led Committee of Struggle was able to force a Communist Party front to call off a demonstration under reformist slogans and instead support a demonstration under revolutionary slogans (from the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ downwards).
Even the Communist Party’s demonstrations to the barracks have a double effect – its workers have diluted the militancy of the soldiers, but have also been exposed to speeches from left wing soldiers denouncing in no uncertain terms the policies of all the government parties (the Communist Party as well as the Socialist Party). As the revolutionary left continues to take initiatives, the Communist Party will continue to be polarised.
However, there is a great danger that the revolutionary left will not seize advantage of this situation as it should. Partly this is because of politics of the still quite sizeable Maoist chunk of the left, part of which is being driven into the arms of the right by its ‘social fascist’ analysis (the AOC and the MRPP; even the FEC is tending to take a neutral stand between ‘social fascism and fascism’) the rest of which (the UDP) is stuck on a stages theory which makes it support the slogan ‘No Civil War’ and talk of creating a ‘patriotic front’.
But even with the best elements of the revolutionary left – the PRP – there is a failure to understand the need to organise politically those workers who are breaking with reformism. The notion is widespread that the job of the party is to deal with technical questions, like the organisation of the insurrection, while the functioning of organs of workers’ power can be left to the ‘non-party’ bodies themselves. In practice, this means that the Party is seen as being made up of a small, highly trained (in military terms) cadre, which does not need to permeate every single section of the class.
This aversion to a stress on building up tne organisation of the Party and its periphery is perhaps a natural reaction to the crude, Stalinist notion of the Party peddled both by the Communist Party and the Maoist sects (which leads the Maoists to counterpose building the Party to the tasks of the mass movement). But it is extremely dangerous at present.
In Russia in 1905 Lenin stressed again and again the need of the Party to draw to it tens of thousands of workers, to grab at every single worker who in any way was drawing close to revolutionary politics. He recognised that if the revolutionary party did not seize on them and win them to its full position by joint activity in a common organisation, they could all too easily be pulled back into the orbit of reformism or even reaction.
‘We need young forces. I am for shooting on the spot anyone who presumes that there are no people to be had. The people in Russia are legion; all we have to do is recruit young people more widely and boldly, more boldly and widely and again more widely and boldly, without fearing them (Lenin stress) ... Get rid of all the old habits of immobility, of respect for rank, and so on. Form hundreds of circles of Vperyod-ists from among the youth and encourage them to work full blast ... We must with desperate speed, unite people with revolutionary initiative and set them to work. Do not fear their lack of training, do not tremble at their inexperience and lack of development In the first place, if you fail to organise them and spur them to action, they will follow the Mensheviks and the Gapons and this inexperience of them will cause five times more harm. In the second place, events themselves will teach them in our spirit ... This is a time of battle. Either you create new, young, fresh, energetic battle organisations everywhere for revolutionary ... work of all varieties among all strata, or you will go under wearing the aureole of "committee bureaucrats".’
His words apply absolutely in Portugal today. Everyone moving to the left who is not won to an organisation like the PRP will be pulled into the orbit of reformism, centrism or sectarian Maoism, and will present insuperable problems for the revolutionaries in the future. The antics of these organisations can be destructive even if the military balance of forces allows successful revolutionary insurrection. Between them, the elements of reformism. Maoism and centrism could wreck the work of workers’ councils, paralyse a revolutionary government and leave the way open (as in the Paris Commune or the Hungarian Soviet of 1919) for an advance of the right.
The danger can be avoided – but only if the revolutionary left, and the PRP in particular, sharply alters the priority which it gives to Party building. For instance, the fact that it does not even now produce a weekly paper (Revoluçao comes out at roughly three-weekly intervals) means that there is no pressure on its members to bring contacts closer to the organisation. They have no automatic organisational link with those who waver between them and the reformists, Maoists or centrists, not yet being willing to join the Party. They have no ready way of explaining the Party’s view of day-to-day events to the large number of workers attracted to the ideas of SUV or the FUR. They have no easy way to open up a dialogue with the dissident Communist Party members or even those Maoists and centrists bemused by the behaviour of their organisations.
Of course, the Party cannot be built merely by proclaiming it, or by counterposing it to the development of the mass struggle (as most of the Maoist groups believe). But it can be built by an organisation that shows in practice that it knows what needs to be done by the class (as the PRP has, by and large done so far) and insists openly and clearly, again and again, to the rest of the class that it has only been able to do so because it exists as a party around a certain programme (which the PRP has not done nearly enough).
To enter upon the road of insurrection and civil war without a mass Party is the most dangerous thing conceivable for revolutionaries.
In Portugal, there is no possibility of evading for more than a few months (at most) sharp, armed clashes between the classes. That is why the most urgent task for the revolutionary left is to build the political, organisational structure within the class up to the level of its armed, military support within the ranks of the armed forces. A failure to do so will not only condemn the Portuguese working class to defeat It will also throw away the best opportunity for a revolutionary breakthrough in Europe since 1917.
 



I HAVE simplified Kidron’s argument in a number of ways. Firstly, his definition of waste does not just include arms, but all those resources which capitalists use up without leading to further expansion of production – advertising, the police, the consumption of the capitalists themselves, etc. as well as arms.
But I have also made more substantive changes in his argument. He not only refers to arms etc. production as waste production: he also wants to argue that the labour involved in them is ‘non-productive’. He does so by taking up Marx’s argument that for capitalism only that labour is productive that serves to increase capital. Arms, etc, argues Kidron, do not aid in the expansion of the system and therefore the labour expended in their production cannot be ‘productive’.
I think that Kidron makes an important mistake in this argument. Capitalism is not just a global entity; it is also, by its very nature competing, rival capitals. What matters to capitalism about commodities is not just whether they contribute to the expansion of the total amount of wealth produced; but also the extent to which they give individual capitalists a claim to a portion of that wealth. That is why Marx makes the distinction between use-value (the ultimate physical utility of goods, whether for consumption or for further production) and exchange value (which goods only have insofar as they can be exchanged for some other goods – i.e. insofar as they represent to one individual, not to capitalism as a whole, a claim on the products of others).
Now arms may not have any use when it comes to expanding the total production of the whole system. But they do have a use to the individual capitalist state which wants to claim a certain proportion of the total product of the system for its own capitalist class. It can use them to enforce its claim for a share of the wealth belonging to someone else, or to prevent others enforcing such claims on it. That is why an economy dominated by arms competition is still subject to the law of value, relating its internal processes to the world system. Effectively it produces ‘exchange-values’ as well as self-destructive use values.
With other forms of waste production, like luxury goods, the case is even clearer. A Mercedes Benz may not contribute to the expansion of the total system. But it represents to its owner a very palpable exchange value, something he can use to exchange for other, productive resources.
It is the fact that it can be so exchanged that makes the labour that went into it ‘socially necessary’; and the rate at which it is exchanged tells how much of the ‘average labour time of society’ that labour is equivalent to.
That enables one to calculate the difference between the value which goes to the workers who produce the car and the value of the finished product: in other words, the amount of surplus value contained in it. That is why the Mercedes Benz workers can, quite rightly, claim that they are exploited. They produce an object which the capitalist can use to claim a certain chunk of value from society, while they themselves get wages of a considerably lower value.
Kidron, with his identification of labour spent on waste production and unproductive labour ends up by denying the fact of exploitation in such industries. He should also, end up by drawing the conclusion that you cannot talk of ‘socially necessary labour time’ in them. But once that is done, it is difficult to see how they could be subject to the laws of capitalism at all: in that case two thirds of American capitalism is not capitalist!
But Marx himself pointed out:
‘Other economists say that the difference between productive and unproductive applies not to production but to consumption. Quite the contrary. The producer of tobacco is productive, although the consumption of tobacco is unproductive. Production for unproductive consumption is quite as productive as that for productive consumption; always assuming that it produces or reproduces capital.’ (Marx, Grundrisse, p.306)
Clearly, Marx means productive in so far as it gives the individual capitalist an exchange value that he can use for reproducing or expanding his particular capital – even though its consumption is not productive from the point of view of the total output of the system as a whole. For, Marx, unlike Kidron, does not confuse total use values produced with individual exchange values.
However, Kidron’s mistaken definition of waste production as necessarily non-productive does not affect any of the fundamental points he wants to make. The vast amount of waste remains a vast amount of waste. And its effects on the system as a whole remain as described by Kidron.
Waste goods by definition do not enter into production either directly, as means of production, or indirectly, by reproducing labour power. So capital invested in waste industries uses up some of the total surplus value of society, without adding to it in any way.
It necessarily lowers the pressures on accumulation and (assuming waste production is less labour intensive than average production) the tendency of the organic composition of capital to rise. And the organic composition of capital in the waste goods sector cannot alter the average rate of profit throughout the system, since waste goods only give their producers a claim to surplus already produced elsewhere.
The real point Kidron wants to make is that under conditions of late capitalism, the waste sector and its peculiar effects on the rest of the system are central to the dynamic of the system as a whole. It is possible to make that point, and to draw the conclusions which Kidron wants to, without defining waste production as ‘non-productive’ and drawing the other, absurd, conclusions that such a definition entails.
 



Capitalism and Theory
Michael Kidron
Pluto Press, £1.50.
IN ORDER to kill the beast you have to understand its behaviour. That is why the history of the socialist movement has also been a history of theoretical disputes. The great Marxists recognised that without a clear understanding of the most recent developments within capitalism, it was impossible to fight it effectively.
The movement today requires the same determination to understand the system as well as struggle against it. All too many Marxists still walk round with pictures of capitalism in their head that might have corresponded to reality in 1848, 1916 or 1938, but hardly do so today. Part of the job of the International Socialists in building a new revolutionary movement has been to correct these deficiencies.
Over the last 20 years Michael Kidron has made some important contributions to this task. His latest book brings together many of the articles he has written over the years, most of which first appeared in this journal. Its appearance provides an opportunity both to appraise his ideas and to try to put some of them across in a language somewhat simpler than is sometimes used by Kidron himself.
 
Marx’s View of Capitalism
MANY MODERN Marxists still think of capitalism along basically the same lines that Marx described more than a hundred years ago. For them it is still a system based upon competition between large numbers of small capitalists, each of whom employs labour from a labour market over which he individually exercises no control, using the labour to turn out goods for a market which is equally beyond his control.
This ‘anarchy of the market’ forces all capitalists to behave in very much the same way, each cutting the wages he pays to his workers to a minimum, and each using as much of his profit as possible to expand the size and technological level of his enterprise. In this way, out of the ‘anarchy’ emerges a certain sort of order, the ‘laws of capitalist production’, which drive the system forward, but which also drive it into re-current and ever deepening crises.
For Marx, the crisis was the result of two things. The first was the unplanned nature of production, which meant that there was nothing to prevent the competitive expansion of rival capitalists getting out of hand. For a few short years they would respond to the pressure of the market by producing as many goods as possible as quickly as possible. But in the process they would force up raw material prices, interest, rates and wages, until they destroyed the industrial profits which were the motor of the system. Then boom would give way to slump and a period of factory closures and mass unemployment would follow, until the next boom began. Such was the history of capitalism between the 1820s and 1940, with slumps about every ten years.
But the slump and boom as such were not fatal to capitalism. In a certain sense they enabled the system to survive. Because of factory closures and the collapse of markets, the bigger capitalists were able to eat up the smaller ones, reorganising production on a more efficient basis than before. ‘Survival of the fittest’ kept the system as a whole in trim. And, what is more, unemployment was a very effective destroyer of working class organisations. As Trotsky put it in 1921,
‘Capitalism lives by crises and booms, just as a human being lives by inhaling and exhaling.’ [1]
That is why, for Marx, the second factor behind the crisis, what he called the ‘tendency of the rate of profit to fall’, was in some ways more important. This long term factor was at work independently of the short term ups and downs of the system and had the effect of making each boom shorter than the previous one, each slump longer and deeper.
How did the falling rate of profit come about? This is one of the most difficult things in the whole of the Marxist canon to explain simply, yet it is vital to an understanding of the crisis.
Basically, the argument goes something like this.
As capitalism develops, ever greater quantities of surplus value are produced. The pressure of competition means that individual capitalists do not use most of this surplus value for their own individual consumption, but to expand production on an ever greater scale. Only by doing this, can they guarantee that it is they that survive the short term crises, not their rivals.
But the pressure of competition also has another effect. It means that each individual capitalist is also continually pushing up productivity and trimming the number of workers he employs on each piece of machinery.
The overall effect, Marx argued, must be that the amount of the surplus value that was invested in means of production (machines, factories, etc) would grow much faster than the amount of labour employed. Or, to use Marx’s language, the ‘organic composition of capital’ (the value of means of production compared to the value of labour power employed) would grow ever greater.
In the process ever greater quantities of goods would be produced and the total amount of surplus value under the control of the capitalist class would grow. But for capitalism, neither of these facts could be decisive. What matters for the individual capitalist is not the total number of goods or the total amount of profit, but the total profit compared with his total investment. (Just as, if you are making a car journey, what matters is northe total amount of petrol in your tank, but the relation between that and the amount used by your engine.)
The individual industrialist will only invest if he feels sure of achieving a sizeable rate of profit – not just a large total profit.
This is especially true at the end of a boom, when sudden increases on interest rates, material prices and wages cut into his profits. Unless he makes a sizeable rate of profit he can easily find that by the time he has sold his goods he has actually made a loss.
But, if the total value of the means of production rises much faster than the total value of the labour power employed, then the rate of profit (as opposed to total profit) must tend to decline. For, it is labour power that is the source of value and surplus value, not the means of production.
Marx recognised that there were certain mitigating factors that could, for a time, prevent the fatal impact of this equation. But he was convinced that in the long term it was bound to operate. And so it seemed to, until the Second World War, with each slump in fact tending to be deeper and longer than its predecessors.
 
Capitalism Since the War
BECAUSE THE tendency of the rate of profit to fall plays such a crucial part in justifying Marx’s view that capitalism must enter into ever worse crises, it has always been one of the elements in Marxist theory which has been attacked by reformists.
When Bernstein, for instance, broke with Marxism in the 1890s, he attacked this part of the theory, as part of his attempt to portray capitalism as a system becoming less anarchic and destructive.
In the period after the Second World War, the task of defending the theory became much more difficult than ever before. For, superficially, there seemed no evidence to back up Marx’s main contentions. Despite massive expansion of industry in Europe, Japan and America, profit rates did not slump in most countries between 1945 and about 1970 (there were small cyclical variations, but that is a different question to the long term tendency predicted by Marx).
Far from it being the case that each slump was longer and deeper than the one before, and each boom shorter and smaller, what actually took place was the longest boom in the history bf the system, interspersed with only minor recessions (usually invoking a fall in growth rates, not a decline in total production).
Under such circumstances, Marxists were faced with three alternatives. The first, was to insist that the theory was correct and simply to ignore what was happening in the real world. Inevitably the result was a sterile politics, which failed utterly to relate to the lived experience of most workers, which included full employment and annual improvements in living standards.
The second alternative was to abandon the Marxist position on the tendencies of the system. Sometimes this was done explicitly (as, for instance, by the French writer Cardan, who attacked Marx’s formulation about the rate of profit with classical revisionist arguments). More recently a number of would-be Marxists on the left of the Labour Party and in the Communist Party have been denying that any tendency for the rate of profit to fall need exist. More often it was done in practice, while paying lip service to Marx’s formulations (see, for instance, the writings of the mid-sixties by the Belgian Marxist Mandel, who argued that ‘innovation’ could stabilise the system – even though Marx himself thought otherwise and Lenin insisted that
‘the extremely rapid rate of technical progress gives rise more and more to elements of contradiction between the various elements of national economy, to a state of chaos and crisis.’ [2]
In either case, the effect was disastrous for revolutionary practice. It left socialists with no way of understanding the trends in the development of the system, the tempo of the objective factors influencing the class struggle. And it opened up the possibility of succumbing to reformist pressures (whether in relation to the ‘left’ trade union leaders in the west, the dissident bureaucrats in the East, or the leaders of nationalist movements in the Third World). Without a theoretical compass, revolutionaries could wander in almost any direction.
With the breakdown of the post war stability of the system, it might seem that these confusions are no longer important. But that would be a mistaken view. They may not lead socialists to abandon the working class as the agent of socialist revolution, as they did in the past, now that the struggle is under everyone’s nose to see. But they still prevent any clarity as to the nature of the present crisis – its depth, its duration, whether it represents the death throes of the system or a mere breathing space after which capitalism will recommence its long boom.
There was always a third alternative, which was to recognise the changes that were taking place in capitalism, and to use Marxist theory to understand them. This was the alternative which the founders of IS opted for; it is the alternative which Kidron attempts to formulate in his book.
Much of the book is devoted to the question: What actually happened to the tendency of the rate of profit to fall in post-war capitalism? Is it possible to explain the facts as we can see them, without abandoning the theory? And, if so, what implications does this have for the future of the system?
Kidron answers the question by developing the points made by Marxist thinkers such as Lenin and Bukharin during the first world war. These argued that the tendency was for each capitalist country to be dominated by a few giant firms which were increasingly interlocked with each other and with the capitalist state.
‘There is no longer the old type of free competition between manufacturers scattered and uninformed about one another and producing for an unknown market. Concentration has reached the point where it is possible to make an approximate survey of all sources of raw material of a country and even of several countries or the whole world. Not only are ths.se surveys made, but these sources are seized by gigantic monopolist associations. An approximate estimate of the capacity of the market is made and these associations divide it up between themselves by contractual agreement ... Capitalism in its imperialist stage arrives at the threshold of the widest socialisation of production ...’ [3]
‘Various spheres of the concentration and organisation process stimulate one another, creating a very strong tendency towards transforming the entire national economy into one gigantic combined enterprise under the tutelage of the financial kings and the capitalist state ...’ [4]
The national economy is more and more dominated by a few giant firms or trusts, and these increasingly work with the state to ‘plan’its internal organisation. But this does not mean that capitalism has overcome its own anarchic tendencies. ‘Planning’ within the national state is accompanied by ever more bitter competition between states. But this competition is no longer purely economic competition:
‘Friction and conflicts between “national’, groups of the bourgeoisie inevitably arising inside of present day society lead in their further development to war as the only solution to the problem.’ [5]
‘When competition has finally reached the highest stage, when it has become competition between state capitalist trusts, then the use of state power and the possibilities connected with it, begin to play a very large part ... With the formation of state capitalist trusts, competition is almost entirely shifted to foreign countries; obviously the organs of the struggle that is to be waged abroad, primarily against state power, must grow tremendously.’ [6]
But this means that it is no longer chiefly the cheapness of goods on the market that determines who is the successful capitalist and who is the unsuccessful one. Armaments now play a key role.
‘The struggle between the state capitalist trusts is decided in the first place by the relation between their military forces, for the military power of the country is the last resort of the struggling “national” groups of capitalists. The immensely growing state budget devotes an ever larger share to “defence purposes”, as militarism is euphemistically called.’ [7]
Since the time of Lenin and Bukharin there has been a massive increase in the tendency for the state and industry to merge within each country and for competition to take the form of organised violence or preparation for organised violence, between countries. Military force was not just ‘a means of competition’ between Britain and Germany in the period 1940-45, supplementing price competition; it was the almost exclusive form of competition between them.
In the same way, the ‘cold war’ brought Russia and America into continued military competition with one another. This competition played a role in determining the internal organisation of the US economy: as much has been spent each year in expanding the means of destruction for military competition with the Russians as US capitalists have spent on expanding the means of production for price-competition with each other and with foreign capitalists. Even in Britain – for a long time a pygmy in the cold war – arms spending is greater than investment in manufacturing industry.
In other words, you cannot understand the forces driving modern capitalism forward without recognising that industry is dominated by two forms of competition – not just one as in Marx’s day. In some respects these two forms of competition have similar effects. Both drive the ‘national’ capitalist class to accumulate, knowing that if it does not grow faster than its rivals it will not be able to survive in either form of competition. Both therefore, serve to link the capitalists in control of any one country to a world system which is beyond the control of any single national capitalist class.
But the two forms of competition also contradict one another in certain important ways. A national capitalist class which chooses to devote large resources to its arms build-up necessarily has to cut back on the amount it devotes to expansion of those industries that are devoted to old style competition for markets.
This has immensely important consequences. Its long term rate of accumulation must be less than usual. For there is an important difference between goods that are sold on the market and goods which are used for military purposes. When goods are sold, the producer gets in exchange other resources which he can then use to expand production. For instance someone who processes cotton and sells it gets in return a certain amount of money, which he can then use to buy machines or take on more workers to produce even more cotton.
But when a state (or a ‘state capitalist trust’) produces arms, there is no such exchange at? the end of the day, (unless, of course, the arms are sold to some other state and only about 10 per cent of arms are sold in that way). The resources devoted to producing the arms are expended once and for all, and that is the end of the matter. From the point of view of continued accumulation they are wasted. They do not contribute to the further expansion of the economy.
That is why those states which have spent most on arms in the last 25 years (the US, then Britain and France) have had much slower rates of economic growth than those that have spent least (in particular Japan). The Japanese have been able to sell televisions and cars to those employed in the US arms factories and in return get dollars they can use for investment: the Americans have not been able to sell their arms output to those employed in the Japanese car and television factories, and so have not got yens they could use for investment.
In one of his essays in the book, Waste US 1970, Kidron calculates the extent of waste involved. The conclusions are astonishing – no less than three fifths of the output of the US economy was waste. [See Note of qualification.]
 
The Basis of the Long Boom
ACCORDING TO Kidron it is the sheer scale of this waste which explains the peculiar behaviour of the rate of profit in the post war period. For value that is expended on arms, or advertising, or the luxury consumption of the ruling class itself, is value that is not available for further expansion of the means of production. If half the investible surplus in the US is used up on arms, then the amount of remaining for investment in industry is half what it would otherwise be.
Now this cannot immediately affect the rate of profit, however ahnoying it may be to the individual capitalist to have to give up a proportion of his profit to the state in taxes to pay for arms. The overall amount of surplus value that has been created in relation to the total size of industrial investment remains the same as if all the surplus was going into further expansion of means of production. All that has happened is that the state on behalf of the national capitalist class as a whole has chosen to spend some instead on arms. (And those capitalists who make arms are rewarded for doing so by being given some of the profit already made by other capitalists.)
However, in the long term waste production will affect the rate of profit. Because it reduces the overall surplus available for expanding production, it reduces the rate at which industry expands. There is a relaxation of the pressure for the means of production to expand compared with the expansion of the total labour power. By the same token, there is a reduction in the long term tendency for the rate of profit to decline.
In other words, once you recognise the key role of waste production and the arms economy, you can explain the behaviour of the rate of profit without jettisoning Marx’s theory.
The scale of arms spending also had other effects. It has provided a market for goods which do not go up and down in the short term, even if the civilian economy is subject to cyclical fluctuations and therefore served to prevent the reoccurence of the classical slump-boom pattern for many years. It also has provided continual innovations and new technology for the civilian economy, so off-setting tendencies to inflation there.
However, the arms economy always had built into it various contradictions. We have already pointed to one: not all the western economies devoted the same proportion of their resources to arms. Some were less wasteful than others and over time this showed in terms of their enhanced economic compatibility. The very fact that those with a small scale of arms spending grew more quickly than those with a great scale of arms spending grew more quickly than those with a great scale of arms spending meant that the proportion of the total world product going on arms declined. In other words, the clash between the needs of the two different forms of competition, economic and military, led to a long term decline in the stabilising factor.
There were other, subordinate contradictions also at work. As economic competition with Japan, West Germany and so on grew, the US military was under considerable pressure to make its own spending more effective than in the past. It did so by massive technological specialisation. But the more successful it was in this, the less could innovations in military production be of benefit to the civil economy. Improvements in the performance of jet bombers naturally lead to improvements in the design of airliners; advances in missile technology have no such automatic application in the civilian economy.
Finally, the relative growth of the Japanese and European economies compared with the US economy upset the delicate international financial arrangements that had developed at the end of the Second World War. The world was thrown into currency crisis after currency crisis which, while not preventing overall economic growth, did serve to cause all sorts of complications for the system.
 
The Present Crisis
TODAY, ACCORDING to Kidron, all these chickens are beginning to come home to roost. The decline in arms spending has permitted the re-emergence of the classical cyclical crisis. The rate of profit is once again undergoing a long term decline, so we can expect each recession to be worse than the one before. And the break up of the postwar international monetary system has produced huge inflationary pressures on top of this.
Paradoxically, the very waste that enabled the system to expand for so long without crises, makes the problems caused by the present crisis even worse. For it checks the present recession from turning into an all-out slump of the prewar kind. And because of that, it prevents the system dealing with any of the problems that arose during the boom – in particular, it means that firms are not under pressure to go in for an orgy of price-cutting, so that the inflationary pressures associated with a boom persist even though there is recession.
Finally, there is one other factor which, for Kidron, is the final nail in the coffin of the system. The 25 years of arms induced boom saw a massive concentration of capital through mergers and take-overs, until a few massive firms dominate each of the national economies. If any of them goes bankrupt it represents not just devastation for their workers or their shareholders, but devastation of the whole of the national economy. The capitalist state cannot just sit back and watch this happen. It is forced to intervene to prop up the lame-ducks, however much this might seem to contradict ruling class ideology. The trend is not only to state monopoly capitalism, but also to a powerful bureaucratic state capitalist sector.
But this prevents the slump fulfilling the beneficial role it used to play for the system in the long term. If firms are kept in business, then the organisation and rationalisation of the system is vastly more difficult. There can be no talk of the survival of the fittest if the state is compelled to prevent the destruction of the unfit. The more efficient firms solve their problems by cannibalising the less efficient. In short: none of the problems that gave rise to the crisis are solved by its effects. So large are its individual units, that the system no longer has the flexibility needed to deal with its own problems.
The present crisis is not just a passing accident due to the oil crisis following the Middle East War in 1973. It is the first of a long series of crises, the sign that after 25 years during which the curve of capitalist development was upwards, it is now entering a downward phase, its final downward phase, in which growth is replaced by ever worsening, stagflation. That does not, by any means, rule out cyclical shortlived upturns. But it means that the system will never again return to the optimism of the 1950s.
 
The Advanced and the Backward Countries
THE CRISIS of the system does not only affect its advanced parts: its’ greatest impact is on the less industrially developed countries of the so-called Third World. The result over the last year has been a spate of working class militancy – in India, Ethiopia, Egypt, Thailand, Burma ... to name but a tew. But their failure to develop Marxist theory has left many revolutionaries unable to understand its impact in the third world.
Here too, Kidron has much to contribute to a proper understanding of what is happening.
He begins by arguing against the views of the relationship between the advanced countries and the Third World which are still very prevalent on the left.
The first holds, basically, that the workers of the advanced countries benefit materially from the exploitation of the Third World. The world market has been rigged by the advanced countries (including the workers of the advanced countries) in such a way as to cut the prices which the backward countries get for their goods. Workers in the Third World get paid appalling wages and the beneficiaries are workers (as well as capitalists) in the advanced countries, who get a cut from the exploitation of the Third World.
People who hold this view can easily see the solution to the problems of the Third World as something separate from (and in many ways opposed to) the struggle of the working class in the advanced countries. The key thing is seen as being to take action to end the ‘unequal exchange’ and the low prices for Third World goods. The way to do this is through the establishment of strong nationalist (or state capitalist) governments in Third World countries which will use their control over state power to push up the prices at which they sell goods to the advanced countries. And it does not matter whether it is the workers, sections of the bourgeoisie or the military which establish this strong government.
Kidron denounces this view as reformism of a peculiar variety – ‘Black’ reformism (black in a double sense as being concerned with the Third World and as being a peculiarly sick form of evasion of the real problems facing the Third World). It is reformist because it tinkers with odd bits of the system leaving untouched the real cause of the poverty of the Third World – the massive concentrations of wealth in the hands of the capitalist class internationally.
Kidron produces very strong factual evidence. He shows, firstly, that the difference in wages between, say, India and Britain is not nearly as great as is often claimed, and secondly that the difference that does exist is more than compensated for by the much greater efficiency of labour in the advanced countries. Because a worker in Britain is better fed, enjoys better health facilities and has a higher average level of education than a worker in India, he is also more productive. Workers in the advanced countries are, says Kidron, ‘richer but more exploited.’ They do not in any sense benefit from the exploitation of the Third World. Their economic fight against capitalism cannot be construed as a fight to maintain the exploitation of the Third World; it is, in fact, a struggle against the same exploiters who have reduced the Third World to poverty.
Kidron also argues against another view of the relationship between the advanced countries and the Third World. This is a view based upon a certain interpretation of Lenin’s Imperialism, and basically holds that imperialism today is the same as in 1916 when Lenin wrote his book. People who accept this standpoint then argue, as Lenin did, that the key to understanding modern capitalism is an understanding of the dominance in the advanced countries of ‘finance capital’ (the banks and the stock exchange) over industrial capital, with finance capital using its control of the state to physically seize ever greater proportions of the globe for markets, raw materials and above all, outlets for investment.
The trouble with this view, is that it ignores the most important conclusion Lenin himself drew from his theory. This was that the rival western capitalisms were inexorably forced towards war with one another to ‘partition and repartition the world’. For Lenin, there was no other way in which the finance capitalists who dominated each country could overcome the shortage of outlets for investment at home.
‘This conclusion was not a minor part of his theory: it was the centre of it. He was writing in the middle of the First World War, trying to explain its origins and why, without a socialist revolution, any peace made between the different advanced capitalist powers could only be the prelude for yet another war between them.
So what concerned Lenin was not just the fact that the ruling classes of the advanced economies exploited the Third World, but that they did so in bitter competition with one another, establishing colonies to keep each other out as much as to exploit the local population. He bitterly attacked the notion that somehow the different capitalist powers could peacefully work together to exploit the Third World jointly.
‘“Inter-imperialist”, or “ultra-imperialist” alliances, no matter in what form these alliances be concluded ... inevitably can only be breathing spaces between wars.’ [8]
And there is little doubt that he was right as regards the history of capitalism until the 1940s. The First Imperialist War was followed by the Second Imperialist War.
However, since 1945, things have been rather different. The major western capitalisms have been prepared to accept the dismantling of their colonial empires. They have not been driven to ‘partition and repartition’ of the world between them. There may be friction between Europe and America – but it has not led to a third imperialist war. The drive towards war since 1945 has involved the western bloc in conflict with the Russian bloc, and, more recently, Russia in conflict with China. As Kidron puts it, taking Lenin’s ‘last stage’ literally, colonial independence and the continuation of capitalism are incompatible. And yet we have both. The explanation is that international capitalism has changed considerably since Lenin’s day. The factors which Lenin stressed – the merger of the state and industry, the drive towards military as well as market competition – have given rise to a stage in the system’s life rather different to that which Lenin himself described. The drive towards war produced the permanent arms economy.
But the arms economy in turn led to 25 years of expansion of the system, with plenty of opportunities for investment in the economies of the advanced countries.
The main areas of economic growth associated with the arms economy demanded a highly skilled labour force, which only the advanced countries could supply, so investment in the colonies became less and less central to the system and even the search for raw materials (with the all-important exception of oil) became less important as synthetic products arrived on the scene. Finance capital itself was increasingly overshadowed by the giant, often multi-national, industrial firms that fed off the arms boom.
At the end of this process, the Third World is no longer central in understanding the dynamics of the system. The western capitalist powers are no longer fighting one another for control over Bangladesh, or Uganda or Chad. The boom of the last 25 years left these countries more or less stagnating, while the real wealth developed elsewhere – by and large in the old established metropolitan countries.
That does not mean that the Third World is no longer exploited. Its very economic weakness leaves it with less protection than ever. But the relationship between it and the different advanced countries is now different from that described by Lenin. It is that which makes conceding political independence possible to the western powers – and, also, next to useless by itself in solving the problem of the peoples of the Third World.
For, Kidron, does not only criticise the theories of ‘black reformism’ or of the epigones of Lenin – he also provides an account of the conditions of the Third World himself which is much more damning to world capitalism.
This focuses on the way in which the concentration of capital into fewer and fewer, larger and larger units, has taken place. These giant firms are based upon the advanced industrial countries and attached to one or other of the advanced capitalist states, but their tentacles stretch out and dominate the Third World as well. The local capitalists or state capitalists of the Third World are incapable of generating the scale or the technological level of operations needed to stand up to competition from the giants.
The firms and state capitalist concerns of the Third World tend, instead, to become affiliates of one or other of the giants; the funds generated in the Third World tend to flow towards the giants (witness the way in which the sudden wealth of the oil sheiks is invested in western industry or banks); even the skilled labour generated in the Third World is sucked into the metropolitan countries – at immense cost to the Third World itself.
The results for the Third World are catastrophic. They suffer from the impact of capitalism in destroying completely pre-capitalist structures in the countryside, ‘feudalism’ for instance is no longer a meaningful description of any part of the Third World. The market economy penetrates into the smallest village wreaking havoc, driving millions of people into the towns. But in the towns industrial development does not keep rise with the growing population. Poverty, unemployment and homelessness abound. Every hiccup in the system internationally threatens to drive the poor beyond starvation point. The ruling class knows of no way out of the impasse: it engages in rhetorical denunciation of imperialism while strengthening its own ties with the international giants and arming itself to the teeth, at enormous cost, to protect itself against the local population and to prepare itself for military conflict with its neighbours. And even complete state ownership of industry – as in China – is no protection against the massive military burden, the competitive world order imposes on its most impoverished members.
Against such a system, Kidron argues, reformism, even in its ‘black’ version, cannot enjoy more than transitory successes. Nationalising the poverty on the edge of the system is no good, unless you also confront those who control the massive concentrations of wealth at the centre. What is needed is a revolutionary perspective, which sees the working class of all three worlds as playing the key role.
That does not mean ignoring the important contribution to the world wide struggle made by national liberation movements, peasant uprisings or guerrilla struggles (although Kidron on occasions does downplay these): it does mean recognising that these can at best weaken the system temporarily, mobilise a few million people against it. They cannot break it where it matters, where its wealth is concentrated. That demands a different sort of movement, a working class movement with world wide perspective.
When most of the essays in Kidron’s book were written, this was a very distant prospect indeed. The immediate path of state capitalism and black reformism seemed much more realistic to most radicals in the Third World. That path has led to the current impasse, to economic development becoming little more than a ‘memory’ in most of the world. Yet it is precisely at this point that out of the debris, the real alternative is beginning to emerge, in the form of a working class that in virtually every country is responding to the crisis with unparalleled militancy. The job is not to look for magic ways of cutting particular countries off from the world and its crisis, but to build inside the working class internationally, with the perspective of breaking the weak links as the prelude for an assault upon the strong ones.

Notes
1. L. Trotsky, First Five Years of the Comintern, 1, p.200.
2. V.I. Lenin, Imperialism, London 1933, p.28
3. Lenin, op. cit., p.25.
4. N. Bukharin, Imperialism and World Economy, p.73.
5. Bukharin, op. cit., p.104.
6. Lenin, op. cit., p.108.
7. Bukharin, op. cit., p.195.
8. Lenin, op. cit., p.108.
 



The General Strike of 1926 was the decisive turning point in the class struggles of the inter-war years. It was the culmination of all the struggles of previous years, the final confrontation between an employing class determined to force down wages and a working class confident of its ability to resist such cuts.
 
The Union Leaders
Throughout most of its history the British trade union movement has been dominated by leaders whose bureaucratic behaviour and political opinions (Liberal or right wing Labour) has made them incapable of leading the class successfully in major confrontations. In 1925-6, however, it appeared to many people that for the first time a major departure from this tradition was taking place. Some union leaders were speaking in tones not only quite different from those adopted by right wingers like Ramsey MacDonald or Jimmy Thomas, but also quite close to those of revolutionary socialists.
Three leaders in particular epitomised this trend – Purcell of the Furniture Workers, Swales of the Engineers and Hicks of the Building Trade Workers. The first was Chairman of the TUC in 1924, the second in 1925 and the third was to be on the Special Industrial Committee of the TUC set up (in mid-1925) to deal with the mining dispute.
All made speeches far more ‘extreme’ than those normally associated with ‘left wing’ union leaders. Certainly their language was far more militant than one would hear from, say, a Jack Jones or a Hugh Scanlon today.
Purcell addressed the 1924 Conference of the TUC in the following terms:
‘Even a Labour government having a sufficient majority leaves us confronting capitalism on the field – capable of resistance and with the will to resist to the last ditch. A well disciplined industrial organisation is the principal weapon of the workers – a weapon to strike with if need be.’
He could write that:
‘... Workers must organise specifically and universally in direct opposition to capitalism and its political methods. They must so organise as to be able, when the war drum sounds, to silence it forever. We have to declare openly that only militant and universal organisation of the working class can remove the war danger ... Europe industrially organised – Russia, Germany, Britain and France and the rest – is the first step towards the complete destruction of war-lords, market riggers, national and international reactionaries, racial and political strife promoters, in short all working class exploiters. Our patriotism must be that of loyalty, unashamed and unflinching, to our class the world over ...’ [1]
Six months later he could say, after hearing in the House of Commons of governmental strike-breaking plans:
‘I do not think we will flinch from our duty, which is our class first, in order to see that we are well protected and guarded.’ [2]
Alonzo Swales was equally outspoken, as, for instance, in this presidential address to the Trade Union Congress in 1925:
‘We are entering upon a new stage of development in the upward struggle of our class ... The new phase of development which is world wide has entered upon the next and probably the last stage of revolt. It is the duty of all members of the working class so to solidify their movements that, come when the time may for the last final struggle, we shall be wanting neither machinery nor men to move forward to the destruction of wage slavery and the construction of a new order of society based upon co-ordinated effort and work with mutual good will and understanding.’
Against the background of such statements it was possible for much of the revolutionary left to believe the trade union leadership was undergoing a complete transformation. [1*]
One of the chief theoreticians of the British CP could hold that the difference between the leadership of the TUC and that of the Labour Party was that between ‘a leadership which is approaching more and more full recognition of the class struggle and a leadership which directly denies the class struggle ... At the moirtent the friends (of the class struggle) predominate in the General Council ...’ [3]
Swales’ speech (quoted above) was described in the Party’s weekly paper as ‘the most realistic speech to be delivered to a Trade Union Congress in years.’ [4]
A week later it was argued that Bevin was ‘aiming at becoming the centrist leader of the General Council, with Thomas on his right and Purcell on his left.’ [5]
 
Red Friday
The first confrontation was not long in coming. Renewed competition from German coal was once again cutting into the coal-owners’ profits, and unemployment among the 1,200,000 miners was soaring up to 11½ per cent. On 30 June 1925 the mining employers felt strong enough to inform the union that they were ending the current wage agreement four weeks later. Unless the union accepted a wage cut and abolition of national agreements its members would be locked out from that date.
Everyone involved knew that not only miners’ wages were at stake. Prime-minister Baldwin inadvertently made the same, point in a discussion with miners’ representatives:
Miners: But what you propose means a reduction in wages.
Baldwin: Yes. All workers in this country have got to face a reduction in wages.
Miners: What do you mean?
Baldwin: I mean all the workers in this country have got to take a reduction in wages to help put industry on its feet.
The preparations for an Industrial Alliance, proposed by the Engineers, had not progressed far enough for it to intervene in this dispute. But the support for it showed that the organisations of the working class were prepared to fight. When the government appointed a Committee of Inquiry to look into the mine-owners’ proposals, the Miners’ Federation refused to participate. They considered that to do so would be to accept the principle of wage reductions. Instead they prepared for struggle and called upon the TUC to aid them.
Here was the opportunity for the mass defensive action of which the more outspoken members of the General Council had been thinking. A Special Industrial Committee of the Council, under the chairmanship of the ‘left’ Swales was appointed. It was able to obtain the unanimous agreement of the transport and railway unions that a lockout of the miners would be countered by a complete embargo on any movement coal.
At a time when stocks of coal throughout the country were very low, such a decision meant the stoppage of all industry within a matter of days. Baldwin had previously vowed he would not give ground, no doubt hoping the unions would get cold feet. Now, however, he was helpless, He knew, as he later admitted, that his class ‘were not ready’ to take on the whole labour movement. A single defensive move by the chess pieces of the trade unions had put them in check.
Twenty four hours before the lockout was due to begin, Baldwin announced that the government was prepared to avert the stoppage by giving a subsidy to the mineowners for nine months. Wage levels would be maintained while a Royal Commission (under Sir Herbert Samuel) made a detailed inquiry.
The labour movement saw in this decision a great victory’ for itself. RED FRIDAY proclaimed the Daily Herald headlines. A statement from the General Council spoke of ‘an enormous stimulus to every trade unionist’.
 
The Months of Preparation
However, the struggle was far from over. The bulk of the Tory press regarded Baldwin’s climb down as a shameful retreat which would soon have to be reversed. The Home-Secretary, Joyson-Hicks, indicated the temporary nature of the agreement that had been made:
‘I say, coming straight from the cabinet councils that the danger is not over. Is England to be governed by parliament and the cabinet or by a handful of trade union leaders.’
Churchill, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, said that on Red Friday
‘the government were impressed with the fact that the country as a whole was not sufficiently informed about the character and consequences of such a struggle ... We therefore decided to postpone the crisis in the hope of averting it, or if not averting it, of coping efficiently with it when the time comes.’ [6]
On the side of the employing class preparations began to be made in the light of that perspective.
The decisive fact in July had been the coal shortage. Through the coming winter this began to disappear without any conscious effort by the government. The miners had little choice but to continue digging coal which would be stockpiled as a weapon against them. More important from the authorities’ point of view was preparation to transport coal and other goods in a strike situation. In September a statement over the names of various noted dignitaries appeared in the press calling for volunteers to join an ‘Organisation for the Maintenance of Supplies’ (OMS). The government welcomed this and began perfecting its own official war machine. The country was divided into ten regions, each under a Civil Commissioner with a staff of civil servants, and arrangements perfected for transporting food, post and coal in any emergency. Over the subsequent months divisional conferences discussed such questions as the safe conduct of transport and the employment of special mobile squads of policemen. In the same period 12 leaders of the Communist Party were tried and imprisoned for between six and twelve months.
On the trade union side a corresponding need for preparation had been recognised in official statements immediately after Red Friday. The Chairman and Secretary of the TUC had warned that
‘the trade union movement must be alert and vigilant in case the necessity should again arise for it to act in defence of its standards.’
The General Council pointed out in September that
‘It could not escape the feeling that a further attempt might be made to enforce wage reductions or a lengthening of hours.’
The leaders of the Miners Federation were even more explicit. Herbert Smith (the President) told his members:
‘We have no need to glorify about victory. It is only an armistice and it will depend upon how we stand between now and 1 May next year.’
The Secretary, A.J. Cook went even further:
‘Next May we shall be faced with the greatest crisis and the greatest struggle we have ever known and we are preparing for it ... I don’t care a hang for the government or the army or the navy ... We have taken on not only the employers but the strongest government of modern times.’
The Trades Union congress at Scarborough in September was filled with much of the enthusiasm of a victory rally. Swales’ speech (quoted above) set the tone for a whole series of declamatory rhetoric and left wing resolutions. The British Empire was condemned; the Dawes plan (for the reconstruction of Europe on the basis of American capital) was opposed; plans for united work with the Russian Trade Unions were endorsed; a resolution calling for the development and strengthening of ‘workshop organisation’ so as to struggle ‘in conjunction with the Party of the workers for the overthrow of capitalism’ was carried.
The CP’s Workers’ Weekly was certainly impressed by the proceedings.
‘The Congress was intent on its work from start to finish. When Swales delivered his opening speech the real temper of the Congress began to manifest itself. The more militant became the mood, the more the delegates responded to his fighting challenge.’ [7]
The language of speeches and resolutions seemed to indicate that official union leaders were preparing for the showdown in a few months time.
‘... Everyone looked to the General Council to give the lead ... In many places it was assumed that the General Council was secretly making the full preparations. The presence on the council of a left wing (comprising Purcell, Swales, Hicks, Tillet, Bromley and others) lent colour to this idea.’ [8]
Yet rarely in history can the hopes of masses of people been so ill-founded.
In the first half of the nine month period after Red Friday, while the government was publicly supporting the OMS and setting up emergency committees, the General Council and its Special Industrial Committee (still chaired by the ‘left’ Swales) did precisely ... nothing.
In the next four and a half months it did hardly any more. It waited until January to discuss feeding arrangements in the event of a major stoppage with the Co-operative Wholesale Society, and even then nothing definite was organised. Finally, on February 19th it decided that it would take no further steps until the Samuel Commission reported. When the crisis finally burst around it, the TUC General Council found (according to one of its more prominent members)
‘... that the only definite steps taken were of a mediatory character. No definite proposals (for action) had been formed and put down.’ [9]
Outside the General Council, little more was done by the official organisations. The attempt to set up the Industrial Alliance continued, but was effectively ruined when the NUR used as an excuse to withdraw the fact that the Locomotive-man’s union would not merge with it to form an industrial union. Everything in fact bears out J.T. Murphy’s contention that
‘discussion of ... preparations ceased, with the exception of those openly identified with the Minority Movement such as A.J. Cook, and a few leaders associated with Lansbury’s Labour Weekly.’ [10]
Quietism on the union side did nothing to deter the government from its preparations. On 10 March the Samuel Commission presented its report. As was to be expected of a body made up of two former senior government officials and an industrialist it came down on the side of wage cuts, although adding a lot of vague talk about the need to investigate reorganisation of the industry. Nevertheless, the press treated the document as if it were a sacred text, the living embodiment of impartial truth. What of the TUC leaders?
On 19 February the Industrial Committee had unhesitatingly declared:
‘... The Trade Union Movement ... would stand firmly and unitedly against any attempt to degrade the standard of life in the coal fields.’
Now, however, it seemed impressed by the general publicity campaign in favour of the report. It wrote to the Miners’ Federation that ‘matters have not yet reached the stage where any final declaration of General Council policy can be made’, although such statements had been made previously. Again, whereas before it had opposed any reductions now it merely called for negotiations between the miners and the owners ‘to reduce points of disagreement ot the smallest possible dimension.’ Swales’ eloquent leftism was giving way to a mellower, more conciliatory note.
The right wing and ‘centre’ in the General Council had a clear attitude, even if they did not make it public. Arthur Pugh (Chairman of the TUC in succession to Swales) believed that ‘sound tactics implied an acceptance by the miners of the report in substance, subject to subsequent negotiation on any point of reasonable modification,’ [11] and Bevin was privately drawing up elaborate blue-prints for putting the report into operation ‘to the advantage of the miners’. [12] Only the miners’ leaders spoke in terms which implied outright rejection of the report.
The coal-owners, however, felt ready for a confrontation, even if the TUC leaders did not. On 16 April they announced a lockout to begin a fortnight later unless the union accepted wage reductions. They were not prepared to resume negotiations on a national basis.
The General Council had little choice. Its fine words of the previous summer meant that it had to take some action. It called a special conference of all union executives to discuss support for the miners. But this was not to meet until April 29th. Meanwhile the Council did its utmost to get negotiations going. And it thought it would be successful.
‘Everyone was persuaded by the press, by speeches, or by their own reluctance to face the issue, that there was bound to be a settlement.’ [13]
Negotiations dragged on, even after the special conference of executives had started its meeting. But still the coal-owners would not give ground. Finally Thomas was compelled to report that success was not in sight, although ‘In all my experience I have never begged and pleaded like I begged and pleaded today.’ The attitude of the owners and of the government faced the General Council with a choice. Either its members could eat their words and give into the government or they had to prepare some sort of mass defensive action in the hope that the government would still make concessions. On Saturday 1 May they recommended to the conference of executives that it give to the General Council the power to call co-ordinated strike action in support of the miners.
Bevin spoke in the most grandiose terms about the significance of the vote:
‘... You have placed your all upon the altar of this great movement, and, having placed it there even if every penny goes, if every asset goes, history will ultimately write down that it was a magnificent generation that was prepared to do its all rather than see the miners driven down like slaves.’
The delegates left the conference believing that preparations would be put into action for a General Strike as from 26 hours later.
 
On the Brink
But the General Council was actually to devote little time to such preparations, even at this stage. It had called the strike, but saw this as only a negotiating weapon, a last desperate attempt to make the government and the owners give ground. Within hours of the strike call it was visiting Baldwin for further discussions and actually agreed on a ‘compromise’, which accepted ‘the (Samuel) Report as a basis of settlement, and we approach it with knowledge that it may involve some reduction in wages.’ [14] The employers had in reality given no ground at all. But Thomas could say ‘Never mind what the miners or anybody else say, we accept it.’ [15]
However, the government did not want just acceptance of compromise by the TUC leaders. It wanted to defeat the unions so as to be able to impose its own terms all down the line, and not only on the miners. In no other way could the long term problems of British capitalism be dealt with. Having seen how unwilling the trade union leaders were to take decisive action, the cabinet had decided to use the refusal of printworkers to print a lead article in the Daily Mail as a pretext for calling the agreement off.
 
The Strike
Even at this stage the TUC were not talking of a ‘General Strike’. They spoke of a ‘national strike’, and only called out initially certain industries. Others were to be called out later, as a ‘second line of defence’. The rest, including those in such vital services (from the government’s point of view) as the postal service were not to be called out at all. Furthermore, the instructions calling the strike were far from clear. In the localities it was not always obvious who should be on strike and who should not.
Government preparations were much more extensive. Volunteers were asked to come forward and break the strike or to act as special constables. The lists of OMS volunteers were used similarly. Public parks were requisitioned as supply dumps. Two battleships were anchored in the Mersey and battalions of troops marched through Liverpool as if for battle. The Emergency Powers Act was implemented to give the police a whole number of new grounds for arrest.
But despite the combination of half-hearted leadership and governmental provocation, the response of workers to the strike call, according to the TUC, ‘surpassed all expectations’. Government and trade union leaders were equally amazed at the enthusiasm. The General Council’s organising committees ‘were from the start embarrassed by the eagerness of many non-manual workers to join the strike.’
There is little space here to go into the details of the organisation of the strike. But a few points can bring out the degree of mass enthusiasm and initiative. In the localities the Trades Councils were responsible for ensuring that local union branches kept to the General Council’s instructions. Many of them created ‘Councils of Action’, drawing together representatives from the major unions and other sections of the labour movement in each area. A greater willingness to take action existed more than at a national level. Mass meetings were organised, local strike bulletins produced, pickets allocated, sometimes on a mass basis to stop all movements of strike-breaking traffic and in a few places Workers’ Defence Corps were formed to protect workers from police attacks and to prevent scabbing. In at least one area, Fife, the regular police were virtually put out of existence by such bodies. [16] In other areas (such as Doncaster and Barnsley) unorganised mass picketing enabled the police to inflict large scale casualties. Overall, more than a thousand people were to be arrested in the strike, a hundred of them Communist Party members.Usually the offence was ‘having under his control any document containing any report or statement ... likely to cause disaffection ... among the civilian population’: in other words, printing or distributing strike bulletins.
Such activism in the localities was not matched by activism at the centre. A Strike Organising Committee had been set up with the ‘left’ Purcell as the chairman. But it seems to have regarded its chief role as being that of keeping down the activism of the localities. According to one historian of the strike:
‘It was feared that in some provincial towns and cities extreme left-wing elements might take control and conduct the strike as a purely political affair. Hence the Strike Organising Committee tried from the first to maintain a control over provincial activities which was simply unworkable.’ [17]
When the government started issuing its own daily paper the British Gazette, the TUC replied with the British Worker. But there could hardly have been greater contrast between the tone of the two. The government proclaimed that the strike ‘is not a dispute between employers and workmen. It is a conflict between trade union leaders and parliament.’ [18] The British Worker lamely replied that
‘The General Council... wishes to emphasise that this is an industrial dispute ... The Council asks pickets to avoid obstruction and to confine themselves strictly to their legitimate duties.’ [19]
Neither Swales, nor Hicks, nor Purcell, nor any of the other ‘lefts’ now repeated their conference phrases of only eight months before about the ‘destruction of wage slavery’. Instead they sat on TUC committees concerned to stop bulletins in the localities using such language.
 
Ending the Strike
The strike had tapped the latent enthusiasm of millions of workers. They began to see the possibilities of mass action achieving a solution to suffering and frustrations previously taken for granted. Through the Councils of Action and Strike Committees they began to express independent initiative as never before. The lessons learnt in sixteen hard years of struggle were being applied in a massive and unfaltering display of class solidarity. Yet the only centralised leadership for the movement remained the General Council of the TUC. And there the desire for a quick negotiated settlement still prevailed.
The rebuff from Baldwin had forced the General Council to translate its threat of a mass strike into action. But it was still ready to seize upon any opportunity to restart discussions With its opponents. On the fifth day of the strike, the Special Industrial Committee began to work out a scheme for ending the strike with the author of the Samuel Report, although he assured them that he had ‘received no authority from the government’ and could ‘give no assurances on their behalf. According to A.J. Cook,
‘it seemed that the only desire of some leaders was to call off the General Strike at any cost without any guarantees for workers, miners or others.’ [20]
Two days later they agreed with Samuel upon a memorandum which accepted wage deductions in the mines. Not one ‘left wing’ voice was raised against such a proposal. The whole General Council was united in its determination to call off the strike. Yet there was not even the guarantee that the government would consider the memorandum as binding. Samuel had made that clear.
The Miners’ Federation alone suggested that there was a problem. Its leaders asked whether there were any guarantees that other workers who had been on strike would not be victimised when they returned. According to A.J. Cook he received the reply: ‘You may not trust my word, but will you accept the word of a British gentleman who has been governor of Palestine.’ [21] Those ‘lefts’ who had voted overwhelmingly against colonialism in the conference halls made no protest.
It emerged clearly from such discussions that there were no guarantees at all against victimisation, except for the promise of a man who had served the British ruling class faithfully all his life and, on his own admission, could not commit the government or the employers to anything.
What was involved at this point was not a willingness of trade union leaders to issue calls for revolution, or even to lead a limited offensive against the employing class. It only required the most elementary knowledge of the basic tactics of the wages struggle to see that there should be no return to work without cast iron guarantees that the agreement was binding on the government side and that there would be no victimisation. The right wing trade union leaders, however, were not interested in such guarantees, and the ‘lefts’ did not raise the question either. Instead Swales helped Thomas to make the agreement with Samuel, and Purcell joined Bevin in pleading with the miners’ leaders to accept the formula. [22]
The Miners’ Federation rejected the memorandum, and decided to keep on fighting, alone if necessary. But the General Council were determined to end the strike. A deputation went to see Baldwin, assuring him that the strike was over, and asking for guarantees that the miners’ lock-out would be ended and that there would be no victimisation. He replied in vague generalities.
That afternoon, the ninth of the strike, the press (or rather those papers still being published in a stunted form) announced the General Council’s ‘surrender’. Baldwin broadcast a speech making it clear that he too regarded the outcome as an unconditional victory for the government. ‘The General Strike ... has ended without conditions entered into by the government.’
 
Bigger Than Ever
Throughout the country the news was greeted with amazement. There had been few signs that the strike was weakening. Indeed, only the day before hundreds of thousands of workers in engineering and ship-building, the so-called ‘second line of defence’, had been called out – by a General Council that had already decided to end the strike. In many unorganised factories the few unionised members who had come out were now faced with certain dismissal. And even in massive organised concerns there was no guarantee at all against selective victimisation and imposition of worse conditions. Millions of working people, bewildered by the turn of events, felt it best to do nothing and remain on strike. The result was that except for a limited restarting of transport services in some provincial towns there was no immediate break in the strike.
The next day the employers tried to ram home their victory. In the railways notices were posted announcing the workers would only be taken back on an individual basis with reductions in wages. Elsewhere similar conditions were being made. Trying to shut the door after the horse had bolted, the executives of various unions (the T&GWU and the G&MWU, the three railway unions) instructed their members to stay out until re-employment on the old terms was offered.
In the localities, militants were doing their utmost to keep the struggle going. Twenty four hours after the General Council had called the strike off, the number who had stopped work had actually increased by 100,000. The Communist Party issued an appeal calling for ‘emergency meetings of all strike committees and Councils of Action, with a view to continuing the struggle and forcing the leaders to do so.’
These leaders were adamant, however, that the struggle was not going to continue. The rail unions hastened to sign a return-to-work agreement with the management which apologised for the strike, and effectively left it in the companies’ hands as to who would be re-employed.
‘On the strength of this, railwaymen ... were gradually persuaded to return to work ... In many places attempts were made to stay out ... but ... this beginning of reorganisation and reforming the line came too late ...’ [23]
As late as October 1926 something like 45,000 railwaymen had still not got their jobs back.
A similar picture emerged in most other industries. Union organisations were broken completely in some places, militants victimised in others, grovelling apologies from union leaders obtained elsewhere. Such was the extent of victimisation over all that Bevin could boast that ‘only’ 1,500 members of his union had been victimised.
Yet even at this late stage it should have been possible for the union leaders to reform their ranks, reassert the solidarity of the strikers, and at least prevent general dismissals. They refused to do so, ‘left’ as well as right. Why?
 
Motives
Among union leaders generally the excuse for calling off the strike was the claim that it was cracking. There is, however, no evidence whatsoever for that assertion. In most sectors the strike was actually growing in strength. Other statements by individual union leaders give a truer picture of their motives.
Thomas made his position absolutely clear:
‘What I dreaded most about this strike was this: If by any chance it should have got out of the hands of those who knew how to exercise some control ... That is why I believe that the decision yesterday was a big decision.’ [24]
Dukes, of the G&MWU made the same point some months later:
‘Every day the strike proceeded the control and the authority of the dispute was passing out of the hands of responsible executives into the hands of men who had no authority, no control, and was wrecking the movement from one end to the other.’ [25]
The General Council had not wanted the strike. It had felt compelled to make a gesture in defence of the miners. Only in that way could it assert its own importance within existing capitalist society and at the same time prevent itself being outflanked by militants below. But the government forced the strike upon it. Once this had happened there was continual danger to the established leaders of the strike ‘getting out of control’ and of the rank and file engaging in a struggle which could no longer be played according to the rules of existing society, but which would mean a complete challenge to that society. And in such a fight a trade union bureaucracy that had grown up in existing society would have no place. The newly insurgent rank and file would rapidly cast it off.
Rather than face such a prospect, the leaders preferred to put their trust in a government which was determined to weaken enormously the working class organisations that gave the bureaucrats their prestige.
In all this the ‘lefts’ in the union bureaucracy behaved no differently from the right. At each stage the left and right leaders shared the same assumptions and drew the same conclusions. The only added role of the ‘lefts’ was to increase the confusion and bewilderment of militants below. [2*] As the Communist Party leaders were to write, after the strike:
‘The events of 1926 have shown that Purcell, Hicks and Bromley were only with the miners while it was a question of phrases and resolutions ... When the crisis came they ran away, and those who were once the critics of the reactionaries are now their most fervent apologists.’ [27]
 
The CP and the Minority Movement
It has not been the intention of this articte to deal in detail with the question of the policy followed by the Communist Party in the period up to the General Strike. [3*] But two points do need to be made: firstly the CP in its public propaganda was as much deceived by the left phrases of the union officials as anybody else. And secondly, that the developing Stalinist forces in the Comintern played a major role in bringing this about.
Among the other ‘left’ gestures of the TUC had been an agreement early in 1925 to work jointly with the Russian trade union organisation through an ‘Anglo-Russian Joint Trade Union Committee’ for an international defensive alliance of trade unions.In doing so it had broken with the predominant anti-Communism of the European trade union movement. Moreover, at a time when a general election was being fought on a programme of anti-Communism (the Zinoviev letter) it seemed to have made an important stand.
At first there had been considerable scepticism in the British CP about the significance of such gesture.The Workers’ Weekly had made the point that ‘Unity that is based upon political agreement among leaders is useless unless backed up by mass pressure’ and Harry Pollitt had written that
‘The workers organised under the leadership of the National Minority Movement ... have witnessed on so many occasions defeats and betrayals . . . that they realise that even at this time it is necessary to bring the question of International Trade Union Unity down from the clouds to the sphere of practical politics.’ [28]
But in the months that followed both the leaders of the British Party and their advisers in Moscow were so carried away by the seeming friendship of prominent union leaders that they completely forgot such reservations. By the time of Red Friday and the Scarborough Conference they described the ‘present General Council of the TUC’ as ‘in many respects the most progressive official body in the trade union movement’. [29]
Accompanying this belief in the sincerity of the ‘lefts’ was an unwillingness to criticise them. In the months between Red Friday and the General Strike the failure of the General Council to make preparations was rarely criticised, and, when it was, the tone was mild. Rank and file militants were in no way prepared for the sell-out which was to come. When the CP issued its appeal condemning the sell-out, and wrote that ‘most of the so-called left-wing have been no better than the right’, this was the first indication that the ‘so-called lefts’ could not be trusted to run the mass struggles of the class. Indeed, on the eve of the strike. T.A. Jackson had made an explicit distinction between the majority of trade union leaders who would retreat when they saw any revolutionary implications and others who ‘do not look for a path to retreat’ and had ‘sufficient courage to stand firm on the demands of the miners, but are totally incapable of moving forward to face all the implications of a united working class challenge to the state.’ [30]
Such an analysis of the role of the ‘left’ union leaders meant that no preparation was made for militants to take the initiative when the sell-out occurred. In every locality mechanisms for keeping the strike going had to be improvised on the spot.
Yet a year before the whole policy of the CP had been to build up the sort of united class institutions that could both hold the class together in struggle and prevent leaders selling out. They had seen this as meaning a struggle both to use the old institutions of the labour movement and to create new organs to control them. More power was demanded for the General Council of the TUC, as a way of ensuring that sectional differences could be over-ruled in any major confrontation; but this demand was always coupled with demands for a democratisation of the TUC, based, for instance, on the representation on it of trades councils directly linked to the factory floor. For the CP at this period the call for the Industrial Alliance only made sense when linked to the demand that at the local level union branches and factory committees would form Councils of Action. In this way the fight for united action of the whole trade union movement was linked to the fight for rank and file control over the actions of that movement’s leaders.
Uncritical support for the trade union ‘lefts’ after Red Friday shattered the cohesion of this programme. The central slogan became ‘All power to the General Council’, no longer linked to any demand for the transformation of that institution. The ‘left’ leaders were relied upon to ensure that it acted in the interests of the class - with what consequences we have seen. Such an attitude meant that in their preparations for struggle (which were much greater than those of the whole official movement of the trade unions put together) the revolutionaries of the Communist Party and the Minority Movement did not prepare for the eventuality of a sell-out. If they expected a sell-out from Thomas and the like, they expected Purcell, Hicks, Swales and the rest to counter it.
Even after the strike, the lessons were not learned all at once. The Stalinisation of the Communist International meant that no criticism of the party line during the nine months ever took place. It meant further that the one man – Trotsky – who, from the distance of Moscow saw through the words of the ‘lefts’, had to be ignored by the leaders of the British CP.
After the General Strike, as before, there was still a tendency for the CP to continue its policy of collaboration with the ‘lefts’. A statement of the party’s EC warned against the danger of ‘a reaction within our party against working with left-wing leaders’. [31] And the slogan ‘All Power to the General Council’ was retained.
This approach was eventually abandoned – but only when the harm had been done. At the time when criticisms of every hesitation of the ‘lefts’ was required, the party which alone could have begun to build an alternative source of direction for the struggle, feted to do so.
 
Conclusions
The General Strike of 1926 was a watershed in the history of the class struggle in Britain. Previous defeats, such as that of Black Friday, had weakened the unions and meant worse conditions for their members. But they had not entailed any massive loss of faith in the effectiveness of united action. In 1926 millions of workers had put their hopes in such action as never before – and were sold out by those leaders whose words had gone furthest in expressing their own desire to fight. It was to be many years before such hopes were to build up again. In the meantime, the British ruling class got its way. The massive misery occasioned by the slump of the thirties, which elsewhere produced determined and militant action, produced despair in Britain. Workers had, by and large, lost the faith they had had in the twenties that they could challenge the powers-that-be.
The union leaders survived, and so did the unions, but on the basis of collaboration with the employers, negotiating one wage reduction after another, exerting themselves to the full to prevent renewed class conflict.
In 1927, George Hicks, the ‘left’ of 1925, was Chairman of the TUC, His presidential address was quite different to Swales’ two years earlier. He called for a ‘direct exchange of practical views’ between employers and union leaders – a call taken up in the ‘Mond-Turner’ talks of the following months which prepared the ground for forty years of class-collaboration and bureaucratisation of the unions.
Some lessons of the strike stand out clearly: never trust the government; freedom of speech in a situation of social crisis is a myth; the right wing union leaders will sell out. Such lessons will be accepted by most people on the left today. But there is another one, which is much more important precisely because it is often ignored by those who should know better: the ‘left’ wing of the trade union bureaucracy is part of a social group that is isolated in all sorts of ways from workers on the shop floor, and can only be trusted in so far as it is directly and immediately controlled by shop-floor militants.
 



The riots in Gdansk and other Polish ports just before Christmas were the most significant expression of working class discontent to hit Eastern Europe since the crushing of the Hungarian revolution in 1956.
The immediate cause of these disturbances – a sharp increase in food prices and the introduction of new wage systems – were not just accidents or governmental mistakes. They were deeply rooted in the problems that confront the Polish bureaucracy.
Poland, like all the East European regimes, suffers from a long run tendency for economic growth rates to fall. As reserves of surplus labour and untapped raw material resources are used up, a rational costing of the different sectors of production become necessary. But this is prevented by the form of organisation of the economy (and the accompanying bureaucratic interests). The productivity of labour also becomes more important. But the resentments which workers hold against the system make improvements here – particularly in the most advanced area of industry, and in agriculture – very hard to obtain. (For a fuller description of these points, see Prospects for the Stalinist States in IS 42).
Failure to come to terms with problems, leads to low growth rates and – particularly for the smaller state capitalist regimes massive bottlenecks in industry that can only be overcome by increasing exports. The failure of raw material resources to grow at the same speed as the rest of the economy necessitates the buying of these abroad. Growing technological lag with the west (due to the low productivity in advanced industry) can only be overcome by imports of advanced engineering products. But imports have to be paid for. As the Polish economist Kalecki has put the matter
‘Another obstacle to the acceleration of growth is the difficulty of balancing foreign trade, which is more a problem the higher the rate of’ growth.’
The significance of these factors can be seen by what has taken place over the last few years in Poland (a process predicted in the pamphlet by Kuron and Modzelwski). The five year plan for 1966-70 provided for an expansion of industry (particularly heavy industry, but also arms production which has grown between 8 and 10 per cent per annum recently) in excess of what was possible given the level of resources and the inefficient organisation of the economy. Construction projects which were begun could not be completed. This in turn increased the general lack of resources (since such projects were supposed to supply the rest of the economy). Industry could be kept going only if exports were were raised. Still worse, industrial products which were intended for sale in the west could not find markets because of their low quality (yet another expression of the alienation of workers from production). The overall result was that 60 bn more zlotys than planned had to be spent on investment. Yet only a limited number of ‘selected’ projects were finished.
There was only one way out of this vicious circle: to cut back on the ‘consumption fund’ and use the savings to pay for the needed additional investment. In other words, real living standards of workers had to be cut. Increased prices would lower the amounts of food eaten by workers, enabling greater quantities to be exported to cover import costs.
Simultaneously, the Party leaders were forced to try and put into effect a limited and half-hearted reform. The central aim of this is to make managers more worried about production costs. High among such costs were wages. So ‘wage adjustments’ took place at the same time as price rises.
The riots have had an effect in producing political changes. But it is very doubtful if these will in themselves be of any great benefit to Polish workers. The leader of the authoritarian right, Moczar, who initiated the anti-semitic campaign of 1968, has increased his power. Although the majority of the other new leaders have been called ‘technocrats’ by commentators, it is unlikely that they will in fact do more than initiate a few temporary, palliative measures. For, if the riots have revealed the danger of not dealing with the problems of the economy before it is too late, the Polish bureaucrats (and their Russian backers) are aware of another lesson: that of Czechoslovakia in 1968 (and, for that matter of Poland and Hungary in 1956). Then efforts to put the economy on a sound basis led to the complete fragmentation of the whole apparatus. Carrying out economic reforms required dismantling the whole structure of control over society. But this permitted the mass of the population, excluded from political debate for twenty years, to discuss and agitate in their own interests. The ferment released threatened the very bases of bureaucratic class rule. Russian military occupation was required to kill that ferment.
What is more, the Czechoslovak experience was riot even successful in purely economic terms. Managers gained the freedom to set their own prices and trade with whom they want, but continued to produce expensive goods that nobody wanted. And workers took the freedom to demand decent living standards and working conditions. In 1969 the mass of Czechoslovak bureaucrats showed that they preferred collaboration with the Russian occupiers to these hazards. The society over which they rule has since grown back into the pre-1968 mould. The economy continues to stagnate (the official figures if adjusted to take account of price rises, reveal that there was no economic growth at all last year). The resentment of workers at wage freeze, as well as at Russian occupation, grows. But the leaders, if not happy, at least passively accept the situation. It is the price they pay for keeping the mass of the population under control.
If the Czechoslovak experience shows that reforms are dangerous, other examples indicate that perhaps they are not particularly useful. The Hungarian economy has undergone changes which are much praised by western experts. But it is clear that the Russians are slightly anxious that their own influence might be affected. Such anxiety would be greater were a larger and more important economy than the Hungarian involved. Moreover, recent Hungarian growth rates have been far from spectacular.
East Germany, which has witnessed reforms of a more limited character than those of Hungary, and has also been accordingly praised in the west, has been encountering increasing difficulties recently. Last year industrial production grew at only 6 per cent as against the planned 8 per cent, while the growth of investment, at 7 per cent, was half what was aimed at. This year’s targets have all been cut – planned GNP growth from 6.3 per cent to 4.9 per cent.
The Polish leadership dare not now force local managers to cut wage costs. It will be even more reluctant than previously to undermine the cohesion, and therefore political control, of its own apparatus. It will not want to run the risks involved in transforming the structure of the economy and, therefore of the internal organisation of this apparatus. In shor.t: it will be less willing than in the past to risk carrying through real reform. Yet failure to introduce such changes will mean failure to attempt to solve current problems. Polish state capitalism will not be able to crawl out of its impasse. The possibility does exist of an economic revival for a couple of years. After all, however slow progress, investment projects at present ‘frozen’ will eventually be completed and give a once and for all boost to growth. But the meagre concessions made after the government reshuffle (accounting altogether for only about 4 per cent of total government expenditure) will not lessen the alienation of workers from the productive process, even if they do stave off further physical confrontations for a time. The bureaucracy’s class goals (and Russian pressures) will force it to attempt further levels of accumulation that the economy cannot sustain. Crises of the present sort will recur on an accentuated scale.
The threat of Russian troops might continue to keep the resentment of the workers under physical control, but will not be able to end its deterious impact on production. As in Czechoslovakia, the price of security for the state capitalist system will be increasing stagnation, which will further increase the general alienation of the masses from the system and the difficulties of maintaining control. Within the bureaucracy itself the inner decay – the factionalism unrelated to anything but careerist interests, the ideological bankruptcy that resorts to crude nationalism and anti-semitism – will continue its spread.
All this would be quite depressing, were it not that the same malaise afflicts the Russian gendarme. All the economic – and therefore also political and ideological – contradictions that have come to the fore in Poland and Czechoslovakia are developing, although at a slower pace, in the Soviet Union. The social forces released when these come to fruition could shatter the Stalinist system forever. A year ago we wrote (in IS 42) that the Russian bureaucracy faced the choice between: either an inner-split which ‘could only be the prelude to an immense crisis throughout the USSR and Eastern Europe, in which the extra-bureaucratic classes would mobilise behind their own demands’; or ‘the likelihood of a minor incident causing a massive eruption of working class insurgency, as in Berlin in 1953, Budapest in 1956 or Paris in 1968, but this time on a scale unprecedented in world history.’ 1968 in Czechoslovakia gave the Russian ruling class a bitter foretaste of what was involved in the first alternative. The workers of Gdansk and Stettin have shown how real the second is. As the imprisoned Polish Marxists, Kuron and Modzelewski have written
‘Revolution is a necessity for development ... Revolution is inevitable.’
 



The Bolsheviks and Workers Control
Maurice Brinton
Solidarity (123 Latham Road, London E6), 25p
Kronstadt 1921
Paul Avrich
Princeton University Press
The question as to why the Russian Revolution degenerated has long perplexed socialists. Quite naturally people have been led to ask whether there was any inevitable connection between Bolshevism and Stalinism. Lenin built an organisation better at leading a revolutionary workers’ movement than any other, before or since. If that organisation somehow contained the seeds of present day totalitarianism, then the consequences as regards the present attitudes of socialists must be immense. Logically it would mean that we could not build an effective organisation to fight for workers’ power, for fear that this would rapidly turn into its opposite.
Maurice Brinton is convinced that Lenin’s methods did foreshadow Stalin’s. He attempts to show in this pamphlet how in 1918 the Bolsheviks destroyed the mass spontaneous movement of the workers that had previously put them in power. To back up his thesis Brinton produces quotations to show the Bolsheviks supporting workers’ control in 1917, and then rapidly reverting to talk of one-man management in 1918.
The argument, in its simplicity, seems attractive. The only trouble is it is wrong.
In 1917 Lenin and the Bolshevists certainly argued for workers’ control. They believed that no force in Russia could overcome the chaos and disruption resulting from three years of war but the mass initiative of the working class. Only this could hold together and develop the productive apparatus on which millions depended for their livelihood.
By 1918 the direct representative of the workers, the Soviets, had taken power, with the Bolsheviks as the majority party in the Soviets. The devastation of industry, by this time was enormous. Chaos succeeded chaos; the war with Germany was finally ended with Brest Litovsk, only for the Bolsheviks to suffer casualties from terrorists who wanted the war to go on. Within months the remnants of the old regime were to launch a full-scale civil war, backed up by a dozen or more foreign armies. The question now was not just to call for the workers to run the economy, but to actually build the structures through which this could be done. The spontaneous movement of 1917 had produced a whole number of different, cross-cutting, often conflicting, organisational forms by which control was exercised in the factories and localities – Soviets, factory councils, trade unions, and so on. The problem was to integrate these into a single framework, so that ‘one will’, reflecting the common interest of all workers, would manage industry. Otherwise there was the danger that each group of workers, running its particular factory, would merely look to its own interests. Bukharin (in The Programme of World Revolution, 1919) summed up the problem:
‘Some of the workers, who are not sufficiently imbued with the class spirit argue as follows: we are here to take our own factory into our own hands and there is the end of the matter ... Such a point of view is wrong ... If a state of affairs came about in which every factory belonged to the workers of only that particular factory, the result would be competition between factories; one factory would try to gain more than another, they would strive to win over each other’s customers: the workers of one factory would be ruined, while the others would prosper; these latter would employ the workers of the ruined factory and, in a word, we would have again the old familiar picture ... capitalism would soon revive’.
What Brinton describes as the struggle of the ‘Bolsheviks against workers control’, was in fact a debate between different sections of the Bolshevik Party (and other workers) on how best to develop a coherent national framework. Some sections argued for the factory councils to be co-ordinated so as to constitute this mechanism. Others argued for the different organisations – factory councils, industrial unions and Soviets – to be integrated into a single structure for doing the job. The latter were to carry the day.
Unfortunately, the debate as to how the workers were to control industry in Soviet Russia was to "be largely academic. Not because of the ‘elitist’ views of the Bolsheviks, but because within a matter of months neither the working class nor the factories were still to exist. The most militant workers rushed off to the front to form the shock troops of the largely peasant army. Shortage of essential raw materials closed down most factories.
The Bolsheviks could not just surrender power because the class that had given it to them had become atomised and decimated. They had somehow to fight on, in the hope that at some time in the future workers’ democracy would revive. Meanwhile they had to hold together the vast area of Russia by building up a new state machine. Unfortunately, without workers, this could not be based on direct workers’ initiative. Instead many of the personnel and methods of the old regime had to be employed as a stopgap measure.
Yet the traditions of revolutionary socialism and of worker’s democracy still played an important role. Russia remained for some years a bridgehead of world revolution.
Although cut off from its living roots in the class, Soviet democracy did still function. Brinton inadvertently gives facts that belie his own contentions about the ‘Stalinist’ nature of Bolshevism. The five congresses of the Soviets between 1917 and 1920 were not mere rubber stamps for the regime, but did involve considerable debate. The trade unions did still enjoy a degree of autonomy as against the party – ‘only two of the sixty or more Bolshevik trade union leaders supported the militarisation of labour’. And in the party the tradition of free discussion between conscious socialist militants still survived, so that, for instance, Trotsky could be ‘shouted down at conferences of Party members, administrators and trade unionists’ in December 1919.
Over a period of time the functionaries of the party were to be corrupted by the environment in which they found themselves. The gangrene of bureaucracy and authoritarianism was to spread upward through the organs of the regime. However this process can only be understood by locating what happened in the real conditions of civil war and devastation. Brinton has an open disdain for such realities. Instead he distorts the meanings of discussions and conceals facts. For example, one small instance which typifies his whole approach: Brinton quotes as a critic of the Bolshevik line on workers’ control the anarchist Shatov; however, his account deliberately omits to mention that Shatov later joined the Bolsheviks, accepting their discipline as necessary to defend the revolution.
Such distortion means that Brinton’s work is little help to serious revolutionaries trying to come to terms with how the revolution was eventually lost.
Avrich’s book is far more useful. It describes another event often taken to prove the implicit totalitarianism of Bolshevism – the suppression of the Kronstadt revolt. Avrich himself has clear sympathies with the insurgents who seized the fortress commanding the naval approaches to Petrograd in March 1921. Yet he concludes that ‘the historian can sympathise with the rebels and still concede that the Bolsheviks were justified in subduing them.’
At the beginning of 1921 Russia had just emerged from Civil War and foreign intervention. Wrangel was just out of Russia – but still had an army of eighty thousand or more on its borders. Fighting with the Poles had ended, but no peace treaty was signed.
To the Russian peasants, however, it seemed that the war was over. All the measures they had previously been prepared to tolerate, they now rebelled against. Above all they objected to their grain being taken from them to feed the army (five million strong) and the workers of the towns. Yet the towns, with production at less than a fifth of its 1916 level had nothing to offer the peasants in exchange for crops. Armed force had to be used to force the peasant to give up his produce – but force in turn destroyed the incentive for the peasant to produce at all. Famine grew and with it an overriding sense of hardship and privation. The Bolsheviks were hardly to blame. They were not responsible for the foreign invasion and the consequent desolation. They did seize the peasants’ crops – but they could hardly let the towns starve. But for whole layers of the population the misery of hunger and coldness was just too much to bear any longer. They reasoned that somehow there must be a way to overcome it. The Bolsheviks had not found this way, and must therefore be to blame. In February 1921 alone there were 118 uprisings against the government. The logic was reinforced by an element of truth in talk of corruption and bureaucratisation of the Bolshevik Party. Whole layers of the party had already been corrupted. Yet the fact remained that 90 per cent of the starvation and poverty was not curable by any amount of governmental change or action.
This is clearly shown by contrasting the programmes of different oppositional tendencies. The peasants rose up against, as they saw it, the parasites of the towns, denouncing ‘the government and the Jews’. They demanded ‘free trade’, which meant, in a situation when the towns were not producing enough value to feed their inhabitants, letting the condition of the workers deteriorate still further.
The Workers’ Opposition, on the other hand, although pointing to bureaucratisation, complained that the peasants had benefited from the revolution, not the workers.
In Petrograd in February massive strikes took place because of a cut in the bread ration – yet such a cut was necessary, not because the Party members were eating more than their share, but because supplies of grain from the countryside were not coming through.
Kronstadt was composed of 75 per cent of former peasants. With the end of the civil war these began to have the chance, for the first time, to visit their families. They would return to the fortress horrified by the poverty and desolation they found in the countryside. Bewilderment spread at the unexpected outcome of the revolution. Even among party members there was enormous difficulty in coming to terms with the harsh realties of an isolated revolution. By February 1921 half the Bolsheviks in Kronstadt had torn up their party cards. The experience of Petrichenko (who was to be chairman of the uprising’s Military Revolutionary Committee) seems to have been typical. He returned for a period to his native village in April 1920 and ‘had ample time to see the Bolshevik food detachments in action and to build up considerable hostility to the government’. Such was his incomprehension at such actions that ‘he tried to join the Whites only to be turned away as a former Bolshevik’. Anything, it seemed, was better than the way the villages were being bled to feed the towns.
Whatever the motives of the insurgent sailors who were to seize Kronstadt on March 1, 1921, one thing was clear. The rebellion threatened the very survival not only of Bolshevik rule, but revolutionary rule of any sort in Russia. Both Bolsheviks and Whites saw that.
Avrich produces documents to show that even a month before the uprising White emigrant organisations were predicting some such incident in the fortress. They prophesied that the insurgents would be forced to turn to them for help – first of all in the way of supplies and foodstuffs. It did not matter that the rebels might proclaim opposition to the old regime – in Russian in 1921 if the towns (and the navy) were not to be fed by robbing the peasants, the only alternative was to turn to foreign sources for supplies. A rebellion isolated in Kronstadt would have to turn abroad even sooner – given the probability of a Bolshevik blockade of the fortress.
Those who led the revolt did not see the logic of the situation at first. They voted four to one against accepting help immediately from Chernov (chairman of the defunct Constitutional Assembly) – but did express ‘to all our brothers abroad deep gratitude for their sympathy’. However, by the thirteenth day of the rebellion Petrichenko was to wire the even more dubious figure of Grimm, representative of the openly counter-revolutionary ‘Russian Union’, for aid.
The Bolshevik leaders understood only too well the harsh logic of the Kronstadt revolt. The whole country was threatened with renewed civil war which could tear the fragile Soviet state asunder and permit renewed opportunities of intervention to the White forces.
It was a threat which grew with every day that the revolt lasted. The scruples of the rebels about making contacts with the White emigrants were being eroded by hunger and cold. All that was stopping that contact was the fact that the Baltic was frozen over, and ships could not reach the fortress from abroad. But the ice would melt within a matter of weeks. And this posed an even greater threat to the Bolsehviks. Once the thaw had set in the fortress would be virtually unassailable.
Attempts were made to discuss a peaceful solution to the situation. The Petrograd Soviet asked if ‘a delegation of both party and non-party workers might visit Kronstadt’. The rebels refused the offer. There was only one alternative if the likelihood of a White bridgehead 20 miles from Petrograd was to be avoided.
The Bolsheviks had to prepare for the difficult task of trying to cross the vast expanses of ice to seize the fortress by force. The first attempts were rebuffed at enormous cost to the government troops. ‘As the troops approached they were met by a murderous barrage of artillery and machine-gun fire from the forts and batteries around the island. Some of the exploding shells cracked open the ice, plunging scores of attackers into a watery grave’. However, after drafting in more troops (including delegates from the 10th Party Congress – in the vanguard of which were members of the Workers’ Opposition!) the government troops finally succeeded in entering the fortress on March 17. The leaders of the rebellion fled across the ice to Finland (where two months later Petrichenko and some other fellow refugees entered an agreement with General Wrangel to fight together against the Bolsheviks and restore ‘the gains of the March revolution’).
Those who remained were treated punitively, many being imprisoned or executed as an example to discourage further mutinies or peasant revolts. The treatment of the rebels was certainly harsh. It is also true that the proclamations of Kronstadt (some are reproduced by Avrich) were full of talk about the need for real soviet democracy. This has led many people to see Kronstadt as a precursor of modern revolutions against Stalinism (as in say Hungary in 1956) and the putting down of Kronstadt as clear evidence of the continuity between Bolshevism and Stalinism.
However, the comparison just does not work out. The deprivation against which the Kronstadters rose up was natural privation, a result of war, civil war and famine; the privation of 1956 (and more recently) was the result of forced accumulation of wealth in order to satisfy the class goals of an entrenched bureaucracy. The rebels of 1921 were unable to produce a programme that could have bridged the gap between the workers and the peasants; those of modern Eastern Europe can easily do so. Above all, Russia’s Bolsheviks in 1921 were trying to break the stranglehold of world capitalism by spreading the revolution; today’s Stalinists have for long been collaborating with capitalism to divide the world.
 

s Harman: The Common Market (2. Can They Unite?)



Chris Harman Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chris Harman
The Common Market

2. Can They Unite?

From International Socialism (1st series), No.48, June/July 1971, pp.10-14.

EUROPE’S capitalists find themselves driven by the scale of business operations, the ever greater expense of technological advance and the requirements of military defence to try and integrate their efforts. This cannot be restricted to the mere removal of trade barriers. It seems to necessitate an actual merging of the ruling classes themselves. Only in this way could they develop the resources to enable them to compete with other giants of the modern world economy.
There are a number of steps which would have to be taken for such a merging of interests to occur. They have been outlined in numerous programmes for action by particular capitalist concerns, by governments and by the European Commission,

Present impediments to the free movement of capital from one country to another would have to be done away with. The development of a European capitalist class is inconceivable unless any of its members can invest as easily in one country as in another. In other words national states have to give up the right to control capital movements across their frontiers.
The environments within which investment decisions in different countries are taken need to be ‘harmonised’ – i.e. legislation and tax policies in different countries have to be made homogenous with one another, so as to prevent advantages for investment in one country rather than another.
In the long term any integration of different national capitals would require that the exchange rates of the different European currencies with one another should be fixed immutably. Otherwise it would be impossible to determine in advance the advantages of investing in any particular country.
The tendency of national states to give preferential treatment in the allocation of governmental contracts to national rather than other European firms would have to be overcome, and there would need to be joint governmental purchases in the fields of advanced technology so as to provide the basis for a European technology capable of competing with that of the us.
 

The obstacle
However, the wish is not the deed. Just because the different national capitalisms regard a fusion of their activities as desirable, it does not follow that it will actually come to pass.
Capitalism is by its very nature a competitive system. The survival of each enterprise depends upon a continual life and death struggle with other enterprises. There is no easy way by which those drawn into the struggle can suspend its effects for any length of time. Much of the history of the Common Market so far bears witness to this.
The whole trend of the development of production might be to transcend national boundaries, but the fact remains that the vast majority of firms continue to be owned from and operate within a particular national base. Even the multinationals usually have such a base from which they spread out (only a few exceptions – Shell, Unilever, have what might be called a bi-national base). Indeed, firms are more closely bound together than ever before into blocks of national capital – by interlocking directorships, the role of banks and financial institutions, and so on.
The role played by the national state in the functioning of the system has increased parallel with the concentration of national capital. It has moved from being a mere tool used by ruling classes to enforce their control over the rest of society to being an active factor in the expansion and rationalisation of their economic activities.
The bureaucracy of the state and the management of industry now interact at thousands of different contact points. The state intervenes to promote the mergers necessary if industry is to compete internationally; it becomes an important economic factor itself as it takes over industries too unprofitable to attract private capital; it has to provide the incentive, and often the capital, for developments in technological industry that are on too vast a scale for private industry to undertake without such aid.
Above all the state remains the chief means by which the capitalist class exercises its political and ideological control over the rest of society. This does not only mean repression, although it remains of crucial significance. Also involved is guaranteeing the conditions under which subordinate classes can identify with the status quo. Left to themselves the rival capitalist concerns would tear society apart in their relentless search for profits. The state prevents this, in so far as it can, in the interests of continued capitalist domination. It tries to integrate the middle classes into the system by all sorts of privileges for them; it attempts to placate working class discontent by ‘welfare’ policies and the like; budgetary and other measures are used to impose some restraint on economic fluctuation and to ensure some evenness of economic development in the different regions of the country.
The increasing concentration of capital on a national scale and the heightened importance of state intervention mutually reinforce one another. The state is by its very nature a national institution. Its increased economic role makes it into one of the key elements binding different capitals into a national bloc. This, for instance, was the task which the Industrial Reorganisation Commission consciously carried out in Britain during the period of the last Labour government – in industry after industry welding together relatively small capitals into firms deemed large enough to compete internationally.
Paradoxically, the very internationalism of capitalism is an important factor enhancing the role of the national state. It is because of the pressures of international competition that the state encourages the merger of national capital and plays an initiating role in the development of technology. When the internationalisation no longer means just world wide markets, but also an increasing tendency for an international organisation of production in certain key fields (through the multinational firms) and a rapidly growing international system of credit (through the ‘Eurodollar’ and other mechanisms), the economic role of the national state is further strengthened.
The growing number of international business operations means that funds cross and recross frontiers on an ever more massive scale. To take one example only: in the eight years following 1960 the amounts involved in the Eurodollar Market rose from 1 billion dollars to 25 billion. But this means that pressures for revaluation of currencies due to short-term speculative movements can build up much more rapidly than ever before. It also means that the normal measures used by individual states to protect their currencies have to be more stringent than would otherwise be the case.
Far from the internationalisation of business operations leading to an automatic withering away of national boundaries, it can have the opposite effect. The national state remains the chief means by which national groups of capitalists provide themselves with a stable environment within which to operate. If an internationalisation of capitalism endangers such stability, then they will resort to the protection of the national state more than ever before.
 
The Common Market and the National States
The Common Market represents a deliberate attempt to encourage internationalisation of business. But so far it has not in any way weakened the tendency towards concentration of capital on a national basis.
The removal of tariff barriers has increased competition and caused a rationalisation of industry. There has been a wave of mergers within Europe. But these mergers have been overwhelmingly between firms in the same countries. Between 1961 and 1969 there were 1,861 of these, as opposed to only 257 between firms in different EEC countries. [1]
‘Through mergers and cross-holdings the biggest names in French industry are now closely linked: de Weddel/Sidelor/Pont-à-Mousson/Pèchinay/Saim Gobin/Progil/Rhône-Poulenc. Like the Italina IRI they have a finger in every pie ...’ [2]
Germany similarly has seen a merging of major firms in industries such as steel, in electrical engineering and in chemicals. By contrast, progress towards the merging of companies across national boundaries has been very slow.
‘Apart from the Agfa/Gevaert joint German-Belgian operation in the photographic components business there have been no complete transfrontier mergers of any size ...’ [3]
The different national states themselves have played an important part in bringing about this situation. They have encouraged national concentration and discouraged cross-frontier mergers. The French government has been the most notable in this respect – for instance, preventing a planned merger between Citroen and the Italian firm of Fiat. But although not so obviously, other countries have behaved similarly. The German government, for instance, sponsored a consortium of eight oil companies and gave them a grant of £60m so as to ward off cooperation between them and the French Companie Française des Petroles.
All the time the concentration of industry on a national basis and its dependence on the national state is increased. But this makes much more difficult the ideal of integrating the capitalist classes on a European wide basis and cutting away their links with the separate state apparatuses. The British CBI has concluded:
‘The nationalistic tendencies of governments in discouraging or indeed disallowing cross-border mergers or acquisitions poses real problems. This tendency has now reached the point at which in some sectors the present degree of national concentration makes international restructuring on a European basis, although essential, increasingly difficult.’ [4]
The Common Market’s failure to eliminate the importance of national boundaries when it comes to the organisation of industrial ownership is parallelled in other related fields. Basic to any merging together of the European capitalist classes would be their ability to invest their wealth wherever they wanted to within the area of the Market, without being hindered by different governmental regulations. Yet, in reality:
‘The EEC ... has made no progress towards greater freedom of capital movements since 1966.’ [5]
Again the major obstacle has been the enhanced role of the national state in the functioning of the system. Because funds can flow at a greater rate than ever before from one country to another, upsetting national balance of payments accounts, the individual states can only protect their national currencies by keeping a tight check upon capital movements. The need to do so is re-emphasised by the fact that quite considerable social movements, such as the May events of 1968 and the Italian ‘hot autumn’ of 1969, have hit particular countries, throwing the different national economies out of gear.
Indeed, at certain crisis points, individual governments have felt compelled not only to impede further integration, but even to suspend the most minimal steps already taken. The most fundamental point of the Common Market – freedom of industrial and agricultural goods to move across national frontiers unimpeded by tariffs or quotas – has been threatened.
In 1968, following the ‘May events’, the French government sought to protect industry from the effects by imposing import quotas for motor cars, steel, textiles and domestic appliances for a number of months. When the franc was devalued in 1969, the ministers of the six agreed to a system of levies on agricultural exports which was to isolate the French agricultural market from the other five for up to two years – a serious breach with the idea of a single market for agricultural produce. Even more serious was the result of the effective upward revaluation of the German mark (through it being allowed to float) in the same year. The German government sought to protect its farmers by imposing border taxes without even consulting the other governments – a move which the European Commission and the European Court denounced to no effect. German big business had to keep its political domination over the German farmers – and it could only do so by using the German state, even if that meant a grave blow to the whole concept of the Common Market.
The reaction of the Common Market governments to the most recent world monetary .crises has been again to use the national state to protect national economic interests, even while speaking of the need for European monetary union. Again the result has been to necessitate the use of border surcharges and the like which make nonsense of considerable chunks of the customs union.
It is not only major crises that have imposed restrictions on the movements of goods across frontiers. Although tariffs have been eliminated, a variety of border taxes continue to remain. And here
‘the governments of the six have exercised great ingenuity in thinking up new taxes just as fast as they agreed to eliminate the old ones at the request of the Commission ...’ [6]
 
The Consequences of Failure
The failure of the nationally based capitalisms to begin to merge with one another does not, however, do away with the need for them to do so. Resources have to be mobilised and production organised on a continental, rather than a merely national basis, for survival in the most advanced industries. Europe’s failure to integrate has been paralleled by a failure to keep up with the international leaders in such fields.
‘The existing EEC has not been at all successful in stimulating the growth of high-technology industry. The EEC’S success has been a brilliant increase in productivity in what might be called the less antiquated of the old mass manufacturing industries’. [7]
In the areas of advanced technology, success has gone to those firms that do operate on a continental scale – which means the existing multinational firms, which are in most cases American. based (55 per cent of multinationals are us owned and about 20 per cent British). These have been able to dominate almost unchallenged in fields like computers. Indeed, the point has now been reached at which in these newer industries European firms have preferred to join with an American partner, rather than another European one. [8]
This development has been encouraged by the nationalistic tendencies of governments attempting to protect industries from takeovers by other, European, competitors. Thus de Gaulle objected to the creation of a European computer industry, for fear that it would escape from the control of French capital. The result was that one of France’s leading computer firms, Machine Bulls, was taken over by the us firm General Electric. Similarly, his opposition to a European regroupment in the electrical engineering field led to a takeover of Jeumont-Schneider by the American firm Westinghouse. [9]
The nation states cannot do away with the forces pushing towards the internationalisation of capitalism. All they can do is impede one way these work themselves out – but the process then takes place through different forms, behind their backs.
Similarly, pressure pushing towards an international mobilisation of resources for investment has grown. Over recent years a ‘Eurobond’ market has developed to take account of this. But again, it is dominated by those who operate on an international basis – the American, and, less often, British or Dutch, multinationals.
‘The resources of the Eurobond market are only available to large companies of international standing, and up to now have been exploited more by American than by European companies.’ [10]
It has been estimated that since 1967 two-thirds of the expansion of us subsidiaries in Europe has been based upon their ability to attract local capital. [11]
A vicious circle develops for European capitalism. Multinational, non-European firms dominate the most advanced industries. They alone are able to mobilise capital resources on a Europe wide basis. Local firms that want to remain in industry merge with them. In this way their ability to dominate the field is further strengthened.
The point can even be reached at which a national government wanting to stimulate a particular industry can only do so by giving special advantages to the local branch of a US firm. In this way, for instance, the Italian government at the moment is giving preferential treatment to the US giant, IBM.
But European capitalism as a whole cannot welcome such a tendency. Its ability to fight for its own particular interests over the whole range of industries is threatened.
 
A European State?
It wants a ‘Europeanisation’ of capital – but this continually clashes against national state boundaries. The only way out would seem to be to somehow reduce the dependence of firms on the national state by developing some sort of European state.
The hopes of the proponents of integration have usually been placed in the European Commission in Brussels. Its five-thousand civil servants have been seen as the embryo out of which a European state could grow. The theory has been that as the economic integration of Europe slowly proceeds, the Commission will gradually accumulate in its hands decision making powers. Over time the powers of the different national states would gradually be undercut, without there ever being any real clash between them and the Commission.
The aim, as seen by the Commission itself, would
‘... gradually forgo national economic policies into a common short-term and long-term policy designed to secure the fastest expansion possible, economic stability and a smoothing out of cyclical swings and national or regional disequilibria ...’ [12]
Such a perspective was built into most of the early plans for the development of the European institutions. The statutes of the Coal and Steel Community (formulated in the early ‘fifties) explicitly spoke of the Commission as a ‘supranational body’, relegating the meetings of national ministers to an ‘advisory’ role. The Treaty of Rome played down slightly the emphasis on the powers of the Commission. But it foresaw a situation in which the Commission alone would be able to make positive proposals to ministerial meetings, which would then decide on them by majority voting. No single national state would be able to impede the development of policies seen as standing for the interests of European capital as a whole.
The Commission, it was implied, would represent a political projection of the economic trend for national boundaries to be superseded. What the international companies were accomplishing in economic terms, the Commissioners would accomplish politically. Eventually they would concentrate in their hands the budgetary and monetary prerogatives of national governments, and oversee on a European scale the economic and social needs of the system as a whole. At this point the present national governments would be effectively redundant. Such was the dream of the more extreme ‘Europeans’ [13] – and the nightmare of those who criticise the Market from the point of view of ‘national sovereignty’.
However, there is little evidence that the Commission has been able to fulfil this role at all, even in an embryonic form. So far the European institutions have not begun at all to rise above the squabbles of opposed national interests.
The Commission’s chief impact so far has been in encouraging national states to drop restraints on trade between them. But it has had little success in furthering positive integration or in acquiring greater powers.
The only area in which it has been able to implement on a European level anything comparable to the ‘planning’ of national governments has been agriculture. Here the Commission does intervene with considerable powers. It ensures the imposition of import levies on produce coming from outside the area of the Market and intervenes by buying produce to keep prices up.
However, it is no sort of ‘supranational’ interest that lies behind this policy. Rather it corresponds to the needs of a very concerete national force – the French government. The most advanced sectors of European capitalism resent the agricultural policy and would like to see it deeply modified, or even dropped. Integration has proceeded where they would rather it did not. Meanwhile, in those areas where they would like to see integration, it has hardly proceeded at all.
‘In the other main managed-market sectors, energy and transport, the Community has made relatively little progress towards an effective common policy.’ [14]
The Coal and Steel Community seemed able to offer positive guidance to industry in its earlier days. But this was in conditions of an overall shortage of the raw materials concerned. Since the ‘sellers’ market’ disappeared, the role of the Commission in providing a mechanism for control over national programmes has been minimal.
In one of the central fields from the point of view of advanced technology, the use of atomic energy, the Euratom programme for Community-wide collaboration in research has virtually fallen apart. The different governments put most of their resources into competing national research efforts, and not into the integrated Euratom one.
‘Up to now governments have tended to back European projects only to the extent that their national companies are involved.’ [15]
Taxation is one sphere in which any body aspiring to be the embryo of a European government would need to develop considerable powers. But although national governments have been prepared to adopt similar approaches for indirect taxes, based upon value-added tax (VAT), they have been unwilling to concede positive taxing powers to the Commission. In deference to the national states the Commission has never even used to the full the small taxing powers given to it under the Coal and Steel Community. And although it now receives directly the product of levies on agricultural imports and will eventually receive all customs duties collected by the constituent governments, these revenues will hardly cover the cost of the agricultural fund. At present that fund consumes £1,096m of the Commission’s total expenditure of £1,273m (itself only a small proportion of the spending of the different national governments).
These facts are indications of the real weakness of the Commission. Its lack of financial autonomy makes sense if it is merely an executor of the decisions agreed between six individual governments, but not if it is supposed to gradually take over their powers. In reality there are virtually no indications of it developing such independent powers. In formal terms these have been curtailed, not enlarged over the years.
‘... In the Coal and Steel Community the Special Council of Ministers (originally purely an advisory body) has become more important than was really intended.’ [16]
The key to greater powers for the Commission under the Treaty of Rome, the introduction of majority voting in the Council of Ministers, was abandoned when it was agreed in 1966 that ‘majority voting would not be used where a vital national interest was at stake’. [17] And a measure which would give the Commission a degree of legitimacy independent of the national governments, the introduction of direct voting for the European Parliament, has been indefinitely shelved.
When the Commission was founded in the ‘fifties its members saw their roles as that of enlightened idealists, who could foresee better than the national states what the long term needs of European capitalism were. Today they are generally reckoned to be cynical bureaucrats, whose only function is to find the lowest common denominators which will reconcile the interests of rival powers and to ensure that routine details already agreed upon are enforced. [18]
Things have now reached the point where a member of the Commission has been able to describe it as:
‘An illiberal and bureaucratic leviathan, obsessed with harmonising things just for the sake of harmonisation ... This Europe is also ceasing to function. The Common Agricultural Policy is threatening to fall apart as country after country gets special treatment for its farmers, and the customs union threatens to be nothing more than a fiction ... The check to economic and monetary union as a result of disagreement between France and Germany ... (is) a further example of how weak the Community has become ... It is time to abandon the idea that the nine-man Brussels Commission is the embryo which will one day grow into the government of Europe.’ [19]
The failure of the Commission to develop as an autonomous power has effectively left real power with the separate governments. But these remain under the sway of different national economic interests and political orientations. Their interaction so far has failed completely to produce the sort of single minded direction that would correspond to the needs of the advanced sections of capital seeking integration.
‘Far from the establishment of the Community proving a source of ever closer political union between the six countries ... international events between 1962 and 1969 were marked by increasing dissension between France and her five allies’. [20]
The Council of Ministers has been nothing like a body discussing how to plan the integration of Europe on the basis of shared assumptions. It has resembled more a prolonged poker session – with members even threatening to break the rules and leave the game if they do not get their way (as the French threatened to in 1965-6, when they boycotted the institutions of the Community for seven months). What has emerged has been a series of ad hoc compromises, not a strategy for unification.
The fact that one of the issues that divided the Market’s members – the question of British entry – has been settled does not at all mean that the pressures preventing the integration of Europe have been overcome. The dependence of industry in each country upon the national state to protect it from instabilities means that in a period of considerable international financial turmoil, the obstruction to a real capitalist unification of Europe can grow more insistent than ever before. The pressures driving the European capitalist classes to mutual integration are growing, but so too are the centrifugal forces driving them apart. The failure of the six to present a common front in the recent financial crisis has shown the power of these forces.
Of course, the development of the forces of production demands the creation of a European state. But then the development of the forces of production also demands a socialist revolution. It may well be the case that the former will take place after the latter.
Indeed, it is an important fact that there seems to be no historical precedent for the peaceful integration of different bourgeois states. A minimum of physical force has always had to be used. The examples of Germany, Italy and the us bear this out. In the modern world national ruling classes are more closely linked to national state structures than ever before. There is no certainty that such an obstacle to unity can be removed.
It is, to say the least, extremely unlikely under modern conditions, that one European power will physically coerce the others into common state boundaries. There are external forces pressing to integration – fear of Russian military potential as us forces withdraw from Europe on the one side, fear of us dominance of the most profitable industries on the other. It is impossible to predict at this stage whether these will be strong enough to have the necessary coercive effect. All that one can foresee is that British entry into the Common Market will by no means solve the question of the final form of capitalist Europe. We face a long period of hard bargaining between rival, national capitalisms, in which national ideologies will remain of key importance to the ruling classes and in which political and social struggles will by and large remain nationally based.
 



 
1. Their Europe

2. Can They Unite?

3. The Attitude of the Left
 

s Harman: The Common Market (1. Their Europe)



Chris Harman Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chris Harman
The Common Market

1. Their Europe

From International Socialism (1st series), No.48, June/July 1971, pp.6-10.

THE Common Market has become one of the central political issues in Britain in the last few months. Support for entry has become the rallying cry for the main body of the Conservative Party, the Confederation of British Industries and important right wing figures inside the Labour leadership. Opposition to entry has become a key point (and in some cases the key point) in the programme of the established left in the Labour movement, and more recently of the Labour Party itself.
But knowledge as to what the Common Market really implies is much less frequently found, particularly among the left. Opposition often seems to have little to do with the realities of how the European Economic Community (EEC) has really operated over the last decade. What is the Common Market in reality? And what should the attitude of the left to it be?
 
Background to the Common Market
The Common Market is essentially what its title says it is – a business arrangement, an agreement between different capitalist ruling classes, relating to the way in which they organise their markets.
Underlying the turn towards acceptance by the different powers of such a scheme was their common experience in the half-century up to 1945.
Each had discovered in the most damaging and harrowing ways that the scale of capitalist production could no longer be contained within narrow national boundaries. The monopolies and cartels that dominated each national market found that to compete internationally they had to spread their scale of operations beyond state boundaries. But this meant clashing with rival capitalist enterprises operating from within other states. In the last resort such conflicts could only be resolved by the military forces which national blocks of capital had at their disposal.
The politicians of Europe were coming to a dim awareness of what the classical Marxist theorists of imperialism had grasped during the First World War:
‘When competition has finally reached its highest stage, when it becomes competition between state capitalist trusts, then the use of the state power and the possibilities connected with it begin to play a very large part ... With the formation of state capitalist trusts competition is almost entirely shifted to foreign countries ...Whenever a question arises of changing commercial treaties, the state powers of the contracting groups of capitalists appear on the scene, and the mutual relations of those states is reduced in the final analysis to the relations between their military forces ...’ [1]
By the 1930s the stage had been reached in which it was no longer possible for the rival capitalist states in Europe to coexist without being driven inexorably to military conflict. For French capitalism, the precondition for survival was the confining within restricted boundaries of the sphere of operation of German big business. For German industry, survival meant physically eliminating frontiers by extending the Reich and incorporating the industry of Austria, Czechoslovakia and finally most of Europe under its control. Out of such equations came the holocaust of 1939-45.
Continental Europe emerged from the Second Imperialist War battered and devastated. Industrial output in 1947 was only 27 per cent of its pre-war total in Germany, 66 per cent in Austria, Italy and Greece, and remained below pre-war levels in France and the Netherlands, although the population had grown eight per cent. The result was high levels of unemployment, continual inflation, and wide ranging social discontent. [2] The post-war wave of working-class radicalism was held back by the combined efforts of Stalinism and Social Democracy, who collaborated in the French and Italian governments. But in a situation of social crises it could easily revive.
The European bourgeoisie had somehow to get their economies functioning again if they were not to face either a Russian takeover or the development of genuinely revolutionary movements. They feared both. And their fears were shared by the American government. In 1947 a policy planning body of the us State Department concluded:
‘The present crisis (in Europe) results to a large part from the , disruptive effects of the war ... The Communists are exploiting the European crisis and further Communist success would create serious dangers for US security ... American effort in and to Europe should be directed ... to restoration of the health and vigour of European society ...’ [3]
The us government was prepared to dole out through Marshall Aid the funds’ needed to put European capitalism back into a viable condition. Its problem was that in doing so it was likely to recreate precisely the forces that had produced the Second World War. If Europe remained based upon rival national firms tied to national states circumstances of the interwar years seemed likely to be resurrected. And so the us tried to persuade the different governments of Europe to plan the reconsolidation of capitalism on some sort of continental wide basis.
‘The programme this country is asked to support must be a joint one, agreed by several European nations.’ [4]
The chief administrator of the Marshall Plan, Hoffman (who was also head of the Studebaker Corporation) made the point even more forcefully in an important speech to a conference of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation in October 1949. [5]
In the following months the European powers responded to this pressure by a series of measures that facilitated trade between them. Tariffs were cut, quota restrictions reduced and the beginnings of a multilateral trade system built up.
A year later the first moves towards what was eventually to be the Common Market took place. The French government announced its willingness to join with the other European states in order to provide a single framework for the coal (then the principal fuel) and steel industries of Europe to operate within. Behind this move lay a desire for German economic revival as a necessary bulwark against Russian invasion combined with a fear of German dominance. The coal and steel industries were those most sharply clashing with national boundaries – no single European country had within it the necessary balanced supplies of iron ore and coking coal for steel production. The Coal and Steel Community would ensure that such supplies could be obtained without any recourse to military intervention. A free market in these goods was to be established and any one country would be stopped from achieving a monopoly position. The French plan was accepted by the five other powers (Germany, Italy, Holland, Belgium, and Luxemburg – henceforth to be called the ‘five’), and began to take effect in 1953.
The Common Market was agreed upon three years later as an extension of the principles of the Coal and Steel Community to the whole range of industrial and agricultural products.
 
The Aims of the Common Market
Basically the aim of the Common Market was two-fold.
1. Firstly, it was to be a ‘customs union’ – in other words, barriers to the free marketing of the goods of any of the countries in any of the others were to be eliminated, while each would impose identical obstacles to the import of goods from outside the Common Market. Producers from all the member countries would be able to compete on equal terms in a single market of supranational proportions. In this way the traditional limitations on the development of each national European capitalism would be overcome short of military conflict.
As regards industry, such proposals created difficulties. But they did not seem insuperable. In so far as positive intervention was needed by any supranational agency, it was to ensure that the different states did not give unfair advantages to national industry through methods other than orthodox tariffs and quotas, e.g., through hidden subsidies and so on.
Agriculture, however, presented a much greater problem. For a whole variety of reasons the conditions and costs of agricultural production vary enormously from country to country. Free trade in agricultural products would have meant the immediate driving out of business and impoverishment of millions of small farmers, particularly in France. The political and social consequences would have been explosive.
Finally a solution to this problem was arrived at. There was to be planned intervention in the market for agricultural goods by a central body, the European Commission. This would start buying such goods if the market price began to fall, so as to keep the price up and provide a reasonable income for the individual farmers. At the same time, there would be a surcharge on any such goods imported from outside the Common Market area so as to raise their price to that guaranteed to local producers.
What this really meant was that the consumers in some countries – notably Germany – would be helping the French state maintain its political stability by subsidising its peasants. The German ruling class was prepared to accept such an arrangement, because it was convinced that it would easily outweigh the cost to itself by its ability to sell industrial products in the French market. As it turned out, however, its losses were often to be greater than its gains. Because of political consideration
farm prices were always set at such level as to lead to a massive overproduction of produce that nobody wanted to buy, and the Commission had to intervene to absorb this excess production at an ever rising cost to the different national exchequers.



Cost of Farm Fund




 


$




1962-3


    38m




1964-5


  217m




1966-7


  494m




1968-9


2,437m




1969-70 (estimate)


3,124m



This has caused increasing resentment among France’s partners, who have tried repeatedly to alter the basis of the fund. 2. The second aim of the Common Market has been to move beyond being merely a unified arena within which different competing national capitalisms compete, to the beginnings of a positive integration of the rival capitalist classes. What is foreseen is the emergence of European, rather than French, German, etc, firms, working within an overall framework provided by a European Commission whose powers grow until it becomes the framework for the state structure of a Eureopean superpower.
 
Britain and the Common Market
Such schemes for eliminating the traditional rivalries in Europe lacked one important element. Britain’s rulers were unable to bring themselves to join in the plans of the Six when the Market was formed.
There has been a tendency since for commentators to blame this decision on the myopia of one or other set of politicians. But at the time there was near unanimity about its wisdom. The ‘Commonwealth’ was still of major importance for British big business’s profit making. It had been a protected market for the products of British industry, with tariff barriers that discriminated against Britain’s industrial competitors for 30 years. In 1951 51 per cent of Britain’s exports went to the Commonwealth, as against only 10 per cent to the Six. To join the Market meant to dismantle the system that made this possible. Tariff barriers would be erected against Commonwealth produce and would invite retaliatory measures against British goods. British big business’s privileged position in its major markets would be eroded. The attitude of the leading firms was expressed quite succinctly by the Federation of British Industries:
‘The UK could not join this common market, for it also involved a common external tariff and to adopt this would mean for the UK the end of the imperial preference system’. [6]
Instead, the Tory government of the time proposed to the Six an alternative – the creation of a free trade area including the Six, Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia, etc. The Six’s external tariff would not apply to Britain, and their industrial (but not agricultural) goods could enter Britain freely. But Britain would still be able to get its food cheaply (which industrialists valued as a way of preventing too much upward pressure on wages) and Commonwealth goods would not be discriminated against.
The Free Trade Area plan failed, however, for a reason that was later to doom to failure the attempts of British governments to get into the Common Market for a 10 year period – French opposition. French big business saw the political advantages of preventing a renewed fragmentation of Western Europe into hostile states. It was prepared to risk the dangers (as it saw them at the time) of competition with more efficient German industry – particularly if it could also obtain a subsidy for French agriculture from German sources. But it was not prepared to face the added risk of British competition – especially, since under the Free Trade Plan British industry would have the advantage of cheap food prices and would make no contribution to solving France’s agricultural problems.
And so the Common Market was established in 1959 with no form of British association. Instead Britain had to make do with a poor alternative – a Free Trade Area of those West European states not in the Common Market.
 
British Capitalism Changes Its Mind
In the early 1960s the British ruling class did a complete 180 degree turn on its attitude to the Common Market. The Tory government of Macmillan began negotiating for entry, although with certain reservations, in 1961. These were to become increasingly marginal as years passed and as subsequent governments, Labour and Tory, attempted to overcome the French veto and get into the Market. A number of distinct reasons lay behind the new attitude.
1. The influence of the multi-national corporation
The scale of many industrial operations today is too great to be contained within existing national boundaries. The growth of the multi-national firms is the clearest expression of this. A comparison of the largest firms and some medium sized countries gives the following picture:



GNP1969


  


  


Sales




Holland


28.24


General Motors


24.30




Sweden


27.85


Standard Oil NJ


14.93




Belgium


22.82


Ford


14.70




Switzerland


18.82


Royal Dutch-Shell


  9.74




Denmark


13.99


IBM


  7.20




Norway


  9.73


Unilever


  6.03




Greece


  8.40


Phillips


  3.60




Ireland


  3.40


ICI


  3.25




(all in thousand million dollars)



The multinational firms continue to operate from national bases. But their productive operations are carried on in a number of different countries and integrated into a single international pattern. IBM, for instance, has a range of computers, the 360/40, with memory components manufactured in Scotland, solid logic ones near Paris, boxes’ and peripheral equipment from the Netherlands, Switzerland and Italy.
For such companies national boundaries constitute an increasing irrelevancy, an impediment to their own international planning. Customs barriers make more difficult the free flow of components from country to country. And any trend towards continual revaluations of national currencies makes it impossible to make rational investment decisions. How can Shell, for instance, determine the relative cost of building a refinery outside Manchester as opposed to outside Rotterdam if it cannot foresee with accuracy the relative values of the pound and the guilder?
The Common Market represents for such firms a means for overcoming uncertainties. It enables them (even if they themselves are American owned) to develop their operations on a European scale.
Multinational firms are far from dominating any single capitalist economy. The main markets and the main outlets for investment remain in all countries nationally located. To that extent capital remains overwhelmingly national capital. But the multinationals have come to dominate certain key industries and to exert an influence greater than their size alone might suggest.
In Britain, for instance, they dominate in car production, in petroleum, and in rubber. In chemicals, the trend is increasingly in that direction – British firms in the industry invest more than half as much overseas as in this country. British owned firms get 30 per cent of their profits from overseas operations, [7] while 25 per cent of British exports are by foreign owned multinationals operating in this country. [8] us owned firms, for instance, account for 17½ per cent of exports, although they only employ 6 per cent of the labour force and produce 10 per cent of goods. [9]
Such firms are in a powerful position to influence the political orientation of the ruling class as a whole – although the policies implemented might even be detrimental to the numerical majority of that class.
 
2. The growing importance of firms that would like to operate internationally
The attitude of the multi-nationals finds backing among a growing number of firms who have reached a size that impels them to seek to operate across national frontiers – both as regards marketing and production – but who have not yet been able to overcome the barriers to this.
‘Far many firms national markets have always been, and will continue to be adequate ... (but) many large firms have reached the point at which further national restructuring is impossible because, of the present scale of the enterprise in relation to the market’. [10]
 
3. The needs of the technologically advanced sectors
The drive to overcome national boundaries is even greater for the most technologically advanced industries. The European countries individually cannot provide the domestic markets, the capital resources or the government backing needed to survive in international competition. The result is perhaps most graphically shown, in the case of computers, where one American firm dominates in most of Europe, and where most of its competitors are also American.
British competitors believe they can only survive by looking to Europe.
‘It is precisely in the most advanced industries that management leaders with very few exceptions, are most enthusiastic for British entry’. [11]
It has been estimated that whereas ‘old’ industries such as motor car manufacturing begin to acquire ‘economies of scale’ with markets of ten million people, newer industries such as computers need a minimal market of one hundred million. [12]
The American computer firm IBM is able, because of its larger market, to have manufacturing runs five times as large as those of its British competitor, ICL; its productivity is consequently twice as high. [13]


 



† OTHERS INCLUDE Homeywell/GE, Siemens, Univac, Burroughs, CDC, NCR



The amounts of capital needed for development in such industries ara also vast. In the mid-’sixties IBM produced a complete new range of third generation computers, the system 360, which used a high proportion of micro-circuits and made obsolete former transistor based models. It took an investment of 4.5 billion dollars – more than double what it cost the American government to develop the nuclear bomb before Hiroshima. Such resources are not available within the individual countries of Europe.
‘Successful European industrial policy will require very substantial capital resources, which will only be forthcoming through a mechanism which permits its savings to be mobilised on a continental scale’. [14]
Finally, and most importantly, the technological industries are dependent for their development upon massive government aid and contracts. It is since the launching of the first satellites in the late ‘fifties that the technological gap between Europe and America opened up. Government spending (i.e. arms and militarily motivated space programmes) accounted for 64 per cent of total US expenditure on research and development (R and D) in 1963-4. It sustained the total at 23,685 million dollars, or 3.1 per cent of the Gross National Product.
The European governments singly cannot compete with such massive sums. Britain has by far the largest R and D effort of them all. It was spending 2.3 per cent of its GNP in this way in 1963-4, as opposed to only 1.6 per cent for France and 1.4 per cent for Germany. Yet the total sum spent in Britain was less than a tenth of that spent in the us. [15]
Each of the European governments is moving in to provide guaranteed markets and to underwrite research costs in fields like that of computers. The French firm CII receives £12m a year in government grants; the German computer firms, chiefly Siemens, £10m; the British ICL £4m, which is likely to increase. But these figures do not begin to measure up to what the us firms gain as a by-product of defence expenditure. Only support by the combined efforts of several European states could do so. This explains the CBI’s demand that:
‘Industry must intervene vis-à-vis governments to ensure that all government action in this area is well designed, timely and consistent with sound strategies for technology and industry in Europe’. [16]
The Common Market is seen as leading towards the creation of a state of multi-national dimensions capable of providing the resources needed to stand up to American competition. However, it does not at all follow that such hopes can be realised.
 
4. The so-called ‘dynamic’ effects of entry
A fourth reason is always given when supporters of capitalism argue about the merits of entry. This concerns the so-called ‘dynamic’ effects of entry. It is said that the effect of increased competition will be to push up the overall efficiency and productiveness of British industry. The increased market pressures will force industries to rationalise themselves that at present can afford to work inefficiently because of their monopolistic position in the British market. Labour and capital will then flow to lines of production which are more productive, and, so the theory goes, the national wealth will rise and everyone will be better off.
Again, the CBI has put the argument in its simplest form:
‘... The opportunities offered by, and the stimulus of, free access to a fast and growing market should provide the necessary conditions for achievement by the UK of a significantly faster rate of growth than has been realised in the last 15 years ...’ [17]
Two points need to be made about this argument. Firstly, the rationalisation of industry that is spoken of so glibly will be at the expense of working class people. Whether or not it has a dynamic effect in producing economic growth, the ‘shakeout’ of labour from ‘inefficient’ industries means a dislocation of the lives of many workers. They will lose their jobs – and at a time when unemployment is rising to an ever higher plateau.
Secondly, it is not even evident that this argument is correct from a capitalist point of view. There is no space to go into the technical arguments here, but there is little evidence to back up the facile optimism of the CBI that entry to the Market will somehow overcome the long term stagnation and chronic decline of British capitalism.
The highest hard estimate for the increase in British production as a result of these ‘dynamic’ effects has been one per cent [18] (its smallness can be seen by comparing it with the loss of increased production this year of at least four per cent due to unemployment and under-utilisation of plant). Other favourable estimates are much lower.
Indeed, the National Institute Economic Review, in a report favouring entry into the Common Market, has been driven to conclude that
‘It is hard to think that if the dynamic properties of entry were really so great as is sometimes suggested the statistical evidence would be so completely and consistently lacking’. [19]
It adds that
‘... It is hard to see anything ... which suggests that the United Kingdom’s performance would be improved more rapidly inside than outside the Community’. [20]
What seems to be happening is that mass of the not-so-big British firms, perplexed by the inability of successive governments to solve the problem of economic stagnation and declining profit rates, are prepared to support almost any policy that seems to promise a way out. The leaders of big business who operate oa an international scale are presenting the Common Market as such an easy cure, and business generally is prepared to respond. But it is not at all certain that the cure will work.
 
5. Military-industrial reasons
The four motives we have given so far for the desire to enter the Common Market have been economic. Yet, as we pointed out earlier, the original motivation for the six coming together was essentially political. More recently such a political motive has once again begun to come to the forefront.
Since the war the defence of the European capitalist states against expansion or coercion from the Russian block has depended upon the presence of massive us forces. Because the strategic needs of the us demanded physical forces in Europe, the European governments were able to feel at ease with levels of arms expenditure substantially below that of the US and Russia.
But in the last few years the increasing difficulties of the us economy have led to growing pressures from within the American ruling class for an end to massive military subventions to Europe. Military strategy – and the profits of the key arms producers – depends upon missile weaponry, operating from the oceans or from continental America itself, not upon land based armies. Voices begin to ask, as Senator Mansfield has, ‘why should 250m Europeans depend upon 200m Americans for their defence?’ [21]
The European governments recognise the difficulties that could confront them in the future. The British government uses the word ‘security’ no fewer than seven times on the first page of its white paper arguing for entry into the Common Market. [22] It stresses that:
‘The United States of America have played and are playing a great and generous role in the defence of Europe; but it is a burdensome one and they now feel it is time for Europe to play a larger part in maintaining her own security ...’ [23]
Some time within the next decade some of the 300,000 us troops at present in Europe will be withdrawn. The European powers will be forced to fend for themselves. But none of them can do so alone.
However, they can dream of reverting to superpower status if the process of economic and political integration is completed. Their combined defence expenditure, they argue, is already half that of Russia’s – and the Russian leaders have also to worry about China on their eastern border. [24]
The construction of a single defence effort would also fit in with the needs of the technological sectors of industry. It would provide a common pool of resources able to match that at the disposal of the American firms. The political needs of European capitalism in all its sectors, it is argued, tie in with the economic-needs of its most advanced industries. Or as the Economist puts it:
‘The defence reasons for Britain joining begin to merge into the economic reasons for doing so.’ [25]
 

s Harman: The Common Market (3. The Attitude of the Left)



Chris Harman Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chris Harman
The Common Market

3. The Attitude of the Left

From International Socialism (1st series), No.48, June/July 1971, pp.15-18.

ENTRY into the Common Market is one means, among others, by which British capitalism is attempting to rationalise itself and become more competitive internationally. But such changes never take place without a cost – and in the case of the Common Market some of the cost at least will be laid at the door of the working class.
 
Prices and Taxes
Part of the price British Capitalism is having to pay for acceptance into the Market is adoption of the EEC agricultural prices. British farmers, whose costs of production are well above the world average, have in the past been enabled to sell at world prices because of direct government subsidies. In the Common Market, on the other hand, consumer prices are raised above those prevailing on the world market by means of levies (i.e. taxes) on imports, and by government buying of domestic produce to force prices up. All told the result is that farmers are subsidised by consumers, rather than by direct government grants. The British government’s white paper estimates that adoption of the EEC system will increase food prices at about 2½ per cent a year, which it claims means an increase in the cost of living of ½ per cent a year.
But these are average figures. In reality there are enormous divergencies between the proportion of their incomes that families in different income groups spend on food – varying from a mere 15 per cent for the top income groups up to 50 per cent for the bottom. In other words, lower paid workers will be hit more severely than others.
Again, the price increases for certain foods basic to working class eating patterns will go up by considerably more than the average.
‘For beef and butter ... retail prices could go up by as much as 50 per cent ... Pork and poultry prices will almost certainly go up ... and imported lamb will be subjected to a 20 per cent tariff by the end of the transitional period.’ [1]
A second precondition for Britain joining the Common Market is a change in the system of indirect taxes. Present purchase tax is to be replaced by Value Added Tax. This might seem to be a merely technical change, of little consequence to workers’ interests. But there is likely to be an attempt with the introduction of VAT to shift the burden of taxation by increasing indirect taxes (which hit the lower paid most heavily) and reduce direct taxes. The CBI has expressed itself strongly in favour of this.
‘The adoption of VAT would also encourage investment, provided it was accompanied by a reduction of corporate profit taxation, because of the incentive effect of a shift from a tax on profits te a tax on costs.’ [2]
 
Rationalisation of industry
One of the motives behind the desires of industrialists to get into the Common Market is the belief that it will somehow automatically increase the competitiveness, and therefore the profit margins, of British capitalism. According to the Financial Times
‘the increased competitive environment at home should stimulate investment, productivity and structural change and thus lead to an improvement in British exporters’ competitiveness.’ [3]
The Economist has similarly argued:
‘Firms will be forced into greater specialisation, abandoning product lines which might otherwise have drifted on for years. Fear of greater competition on the home market will lead if only defensively, to a change in the attitude towards exporting.’ [4]
There is no certainty that the overall standing of British capitalism will be improved in the way that such commentators take for granted (as we pointed out above). It is also extremely difficult to predict the extent of the post-entry shake up.
‘The experience of regional liberalisation of trade inside the Common Market has not led to close-down of industries or an increased rate of redundancies.’ [5]
However, regardless of the extent of the shake-up, it is likely to be at the expense of workers’ conditions. A changed job structure necessarily implies disruption in many workers’ lives – particularly at a time when unemployment is already rising. It will also be used by employers as a weapon to erode working conditions, push productivity dealing further, and uproot shop-floor defences (so-called ‘restrictive practices’). Insofar as there are ‘dynamic effects of entry’ they will be at our cost.
In general it can be said that entry into the Common Market will be used by the government as part of its overall strategy of trying to solve the problems of British capitalism by eroding workers’ wages and conditions. In certain respects, it has advantages for the government over other measures designed to achieve the same goal. Once entry is completed, it can hope that the free play of market forces will achieve what would otherwise require government intervention. Instead of the government having to bear the political onus of forcing industry to cut costs and declare redundancies, it hopes to be able to rely upon increased competitiveness (over which it will claim to have no control because of EEC regulations) to achieve the same end.
 
The Reaction of the Labour Movement
Within the trade unions and the labour movement the polarisation over the Common Market issue has to a very large extent reflected the wider polarisation between left and right. Those labour leaders who identify most closely with the ruling class on other issues have also done so over the Common Market. At the opposite extreme, those trade unionists who oppose government policies on the Industrial Relations Bill, productivity deals, etc., also tend to be opposed to the Market.
Underlying this alignment is the fact that many rank-and-file militants instinctively distrust the government’s entry policy. They feel that it will be used to weaken their position. However, the most common political expression of such fears is expressed via the left trade union bureaucracy and organisations that align themselves with it (e.g. the Communist Party).
The bureaucrats feel compelled to give some expression to rank and file discontent, but want to do so in harmless ways which do not entail any real struggle. Their whole perspective is reformist, based on the idea of pressurising the existing State. The natural tendency of such elements is to articulate opposition to the government’s strategy in chauvinistic language.
The link between a reformist strategy and a chauvinistic attitude is made quite explicit in the Communist Party policy statements on the Common Market:
‘A new government, committed to socialist policies, would use its parliamentary majority, together with its mass support in the country, to challenge the power of the ruling class. The developing movement to the left over recent years points in this direction. That is why the ruling class, as part of its attack on positions gained by the working class, is out to deprive Parliament step by step of its authority, and to transfer it to the supranational institutions of the EEC ...’ [6]
From the reformist belief that somehow the working class can take over the structure of the capitalist state (as if the lessons of successive Labour governments have not proved exactly the opposite) is finally drawn the conclusion that: ‘Britain’s national sovereignty is of vital concern to the British working class.’ [7] Or, as a Communist Party Broadsheet puts it: ‘Sovereignty is a class issue’.
Over recent months many who have not been traditionally on the left inside the labour movement have also moved into opposition to entry into the Common Market. As on the Industrial Relations Bill, the welfare cuts, and so on, the Labour leaders feel the need to oppose measures that they pioneered when in office.
Because of their own very close links with the British capitalist state, the Labour leaders also emphasise the ‘sovereignty’ issue. But they do so in ways that enable them to remain on the terrain of an unreformed British capitalism. They try to justify an opposition designed to attract working class votes and trade union money in terms of the ‘real’ interests of the ruling class.
The central point in such arguments (as in the similar ones put out by the extreme right wing of the Tory Party) is basically that whatever may be the case for the international companies, most of British capitalism will suffer from entry. The rationalisation will hit the more backward section of industry, but few dynamic effects will follow. Indeed, they could, it is argued, have the opposite impact to that normally suggested. New capital will flow to the areas of highest growth, which will tend to be on the continent rather than in Britain, as higher prices and an increased drain on the balance of payments (due to the several hundred million a year subventions from the British treasury to the European Commission’s expenses) make British industry even less competitive than at the present. Established firms with a purely domestic base will then find themselves in a declining national area. New investment will further move abroad in an effort to find adequate markets. A vicious circle of industrial decline will follow, the only way out of which would be to cut real wages by repeated devaluations of the pound. [8] The alternative which the Labour leaders argue for is an increased role for the national state, which they claim, is incompatible with the terms the Tories have accepted for entry. This enables them to come out with rhetoric very similar to that of the CP and the left union leaders.
 
The Attitude of Revolutionaries
A consistent socialist position of the Common Market must begin by rejecting out of hand the chauvinism explicit in the approaches of the Labour leaders and the established left. The national state is not our state. It functions to defend the ruling class, and cannot operate in any other way. The harping of the left about ‘national sovereignty’ only serves to sustain the illusion that somehow we have an interest in common with those who run the state at present. It intensifies the differences between workers in different countries. And it does so at a time when the growth of international firms emphasises the need for united international working class action.
The advent of the Common Market in no way means that chauvinism ceases to he an ideological weapon in the hands of the ruling class. The very way in which decisions are arrived at – by continual, and often very bitter haggling between different governments – creates an environment in which nationalistic talk can flourish. National governments can blame unpopular moves on the pressure of the other member states and demand national ‘sacrifices’ in order to resist them. They can claim that they, are being forced by the EEC to carry through unpopular measures – even when, in reality they could ignore such Community rulings (as the German government, for instance, ignored the verdict of both the European Commission and the European Court in 1969 when it imposed border taxes on agricultural imports, or as the French government has refused to let the Commission interfere with its regional policies). They can simultaneously blame the Commission for unpopular policies, and divert protest into a nationalistic blind alley.
This also means that chauvinistic ideas can become the main competitors with socialist ones in movements expressing social discontent. Both the Labour Party right wing and the Powellite Tories can be relied on to use chauvinistic talk as a means of gaining a popular following without committing themselves to concrete popular struggles. And both Wilson and Powell know that they will be able to argue that the process of integration had already gone too far to be ‘unscrambled if they ever gain governmental power.
At the same time, the increased reliance on the national state which they argue for could well be in the interests of the majority of national capital – even when it is operating within the Common Market. The arguments of the Labour leaders are based in part on an expectation that this will be the case. Sovereignty is a class issue for that section of the capitalist class that might suffer in any moves towards thorough going European integration – quite possibly the majority section. Those, like the CP and the Labour left, who argue that it should be an issue for the working class are merely providing a convenient cover for that section and its political spokesmen to cloak themselves in.
Revolutionaries, then, must be adamant in their ideological opposition to those inside the working class movement who resort to chauvinistic arguments. But this cannot mean that we are neutral on the question of Common Market entry. There are a number of interrelated reasons which make it imperative for us to oppose entry.

Entry is being used, alongside other measures, to hit at working class living standards and conditions. Of course, if the ruling class could not achieve its ends through entry, it would try to get what it wanted through other means. We should never forget this as those who peddle chauvinistic ideas within the Labour movement do. But that does not provide us with a reason for not opposing entry. We should oppose it as we would oppose other forms of attack if they were used instead.
Entry is aimed to rationalise and strengthen capitalism. It is an attempt to solve certain of capitalism’s problems by capitalist methods. There was a time when revolutionaries could regard certain such measures as historically progressive. Marx, for instance, gave support to the movement for German unity. Again, he could write during the Crimean War that ‘in this instance the interests of the revolutionary Democracy and of England go hand in hand.’ [9] But he did so in a period in which capitalism as a system was still struggling for supremacy against older forms of class society and, in the process, preparing the preconditions for socialism. Today, however, these preconditions exist. Rationalisation of the system means strengthening it at a time when we as socialists argue that revolutionary change alone offers mankind any future. We have to oppose such measures, counterposing not continuation of the system under its present form, but a. socialist transformation of it.
Not only is the rationalisation of capitalism no longer progressive in any sense, it also speeds up the development of intrinsically destructive forces. In the case of European integration this is expressed in the aim of creating on a European scale what cannot be built up by the isolated states – an effective independent arms potential. According to the British government white paper there is no other way by which British imperialism could have the same opportunities to ‘safeguard’ its ‘national security and prosperity’. Revolutionaries have to oppose this as they have opposed previous arrangements serving the same purposes, e.g. NATO, SEATO, etc.

There is a fourth, subordinate, reason, that emphasises the need for clear opposition. All summer the makers of official opinion in this country have been worried about the difficulties of ensuring that the decision of the ruling class to go into the EEC is implemented politically. They fear that they might have difficulty getting parliamentary ratification for entry. And so they have been putting enormous moral pressures on sections of the Labour leadership to break with the party and to vote with the Tories for entry.
At such a political conjuncture the position of revolutionaries should be obvious. The defeat of the Tory government, in the present context of growing working class opposition to its policies, would give a new confidence and militancy to workers – even if the defeat occurred purely in the parliamentary sphere. Moreover, a defeat on the Common Market would not in fact be a defeat on that issue alone; behind much of the working class opposition to entry is a general, if vague and not fully conscious, distrust of the government’s intentions. The general anti-Tory feeling in the country is feeding the flames of opposition to the Market.
Revolutionaries in the labour movement have to make it absolutely clear that they do not abstain on such a question. We are for the defeat of the Tories and for purging the Labour movement of those sections of the Labour leadership whose votes help to keep the Tories in power.
In general, our position should be that

We oppose the attempt through the Common Market to rationalise capitalism at our expense.
We also oppose the ideological illusion being peddled in the labour movement that somehow a ‘sovereign’ capitalist Britain is a real alternative to entry into the Market for working people. We have to make clear that while we oppose the capitalist integration of Europe we would be for a Socialist United States of Europe. However, the demand for the United States of Europe is not going to be an immediate agitational demand in the conceivable future. That would require that political life was really moulded on a European scale. The fact, however, is that the failure of capitalist attempts at European integration means that national peculiarities still determine the tempo of the class struggle. In the Belgian and French general strikes (of 1961 and 1968) the key demands had to relate to class power in particular countries not in Europe as a whole.
We argue, against the chauvinists, for a linking of opposition to the Common Market to opposition to the other attacks on working people – the Industrial Relations Bill, the welfare cuts and so on, so as to build up a class based opposition to the whole range of government policies, counterposing demands pointing towards a socialist transformation of society.
At all possible times we put forward our own consistent class based viewpoint in opposition to that of the confusion of the CP and the Tribunites. But if we are unable to get a majority for our clear and consistent positions, we have to vote against the government Common Market strategy in the only way possible – by voting with the CP and the Labour left while making our reservations known (just as, for instance, we would, if we had no choice, give critical support to a resolution opposing the Industrial Relations Law, even if it spoke in terms of the law aggravating ‘industrial unrest’). We are completely steadfast in our opposition to the peddling of ideological illusions in the Labour movement, while being relentless in our opposition to government policy.

 



The Accidental Century
Michael Harrington
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 36s
This book attempts to document and explain the ‘crisis of the twentieth century.’ The origins of this are seen as being in the failure of men to consciously intervene in the restructuring of society that characterises late capitalism. The result is that the restructuring takes place behind their backs, intensifying rather than alleviating the general social crisis. The crisis is portrayed not merely in terms of its economic features – chronic if not particularly heavy unemployment, welfare disparities, poverty – but also in terms of its ramifications in virtually every cultural sphere, from literature to theology. In particular the great writers of the century are shown reacting against present day reality by a retreat from rationalism and an artistic acceptance of the ‘decadent.’ Unfortunately so many writers are dealt with that the argument in each case amounts to little more than the obvious. Further, the whole treatment is slightly facile. The aim is to prove that what the writer sees as a result of the human condition is a solvable human problem. This leads him to argue that their acceptance of decadence is a false choice, since there is an alternative. In political terms this is of course correct, but its application to literature produces superficial results. For the artist is not a politician. He does not intend to point to solutions to problems. He is concerned with a completely different facet of human reality. Literature attempts to express the ideological unease of society in its own terms, not to trace it to socio-economic origins. Its greatness lies in its ability to convey to men who think in those terms (all of us for part of our lives) a living expression of them. In the twentieth century the contradictions within life have become so great that the real expression of them is usually found in ‘degenerate’ writers.
Harrington’s tendency towards a facile treatment of literature is the result of a deeper fault in his standpoint. His alternative to the ‘cold decadence’ of capitalism is conscious planning. But he is far from clear as to how this planning is to come about. He does not quite dismiss the working class out of hand (he still claims to remember Hungary ’56). But he doubts the likelihood of its moving. So he begins to search elsewhere for support. This leads him to look at those groups that seem to stand above the play of interests of ordinary life. At points he glances in the direction of the church. At others he seems to be appealing to the consciousness of decadence (one is never sure whose consciousness) which the great writers have instilled. He ends up by opting for the refuge for all fleeing socialists – the state. Senate subcommittees are quoted approvingly. It seems that if only such bodies would carry their own arguments to their logical conclusions all would be well. If only ... The fact is there are very good reasons why they should not. It should not need repeating to anyone who has ever been near the Marxist movement that the institutions of the state do not float around above class antagonisms. The course of history is not going to be altered by ‘entrism’ into them with demands that they accept the logic of their own arguments.
No doubt Harrington’s own ‘entrism’ (he is an adviser to the government’s ‘Poverty Programme’) will be as effective as so many other similar attempts in more orthodox social democrat circles.



The first part of this article appeared in IS 21, Summer 1965.
1. Honeymoon
With the disintegration of the Keep Left coalition in 1948-49 Tribune became no more than an addendum to the official Labour propaganda machine. Neither the content of its articles nor the affiliations of many of its writers indicated its origins in the traditional Left. Transport House paid for two pages of each issue to put across official party policy. These were rarely at odds with the rest of the paper. Critics of Tribune referred to a Transport House subsidy.’
Agreement between Tribune and its former enemies extended to virtually the whole range of policy. What reservations there were on support for US foreign policy ‘were largely in the background from 1947 to 1950.’ [1] As late as July 1950 Michael Foot was writing:
’American soldiers are fighting in Korea ... to uphold the principles of collective defence against wanton aggression ... a principle which the Labour Party since 1918 has considered essential for the preservation of world peace.’ [2]
Truman’s four point proposal was for Jennie Lee ‘a helping hand from ordinary American people, particularly from the organised industrial workers of America.’ [3] Keeping Left argued that the foreign policies of Keep Left had to be scrapped as ‘America has been moving towards the same ideals (as Britain) only more slowly.’ [4] An American political scientist has commented:
’With relatively little change in the American political situation from 1945-6 to 1948-50 the socialist accolade was ‘granted.’ [5]
In home affairs support was just as complete. The economic policy of Cripps was considered to be socialist:
’Steady and stolid progress is the picture that emerges from Stafford Cripps’ economic review last week.’
The Government-imposed wage freeze was supported:
’The TUC has done a magnificent job in offsetting inflation by continued and difficult restraint on wages.’
When the calm of the austerity years was disturbed by dockers’ attempts to defend living standards, Tribune referred to ‘tragic events’ and blamed bosses, union leaders and dock-workers equally. The former political rebels of the labour movement looked with disdain upon the attempts of trade unionists to resist the redistribution of income to their detriment and to the benefit of capital:
’Inhibitions on both sides of industry have too long held up intelligent reorganisation of methods and layout, and the application of time studies ...’
It was one thing to concur with the policies of those in power. It was another to participate in the exercise of that power and to determine the ends for which it was used. The Left was able to influence policies only insofar as its demands for reforms in the structure of industry and society coincided with the needs of the core of post-war capitalism. Beyond this, all the obeisance in the world before the Right wing could achieve nothing. When the limit was reached the Right wing of the Labour Party immediately raised the cry of ‘consolidation.’ The fervour of 1945 began to disappear from speeches. The defence of nationalisation began to sound apologetic. Disquiet on the Left was inevitable. The shock of near defeat in the 1950 election made this even more profound. But the first reaction of Tribune was to criticise not the content of policies, but their presentation. Woodrow Wyatt thought that nationalisation had not been defended sufficiently in the election campaign:
’The great tragedy of the campaign was that those managing it too blatantly set out to get the middle-class vote.’ [6]
It was still thought that ‘To a great extent the question of who is more “left” than “right” is meaningless.’ [7] The King’s speech was thought to be ‘encouraging.’ [8]
 
2. The Birth of Bevanism
The point of departure for the Left in the fifties was Bevan’s resignation from the Government in the spring of 1951. The apparent reason for this was opposition to the raising of arms expenditure to an unprecedented peace-time level at the same time that charges for health-service dental and optical treatment were introduced. But it is difficult to accept this policy dispute as the sole cause of the resignation. Bevan himself not only accepted the basic presupposition of the Budget – the need to protect ‘British commitments’ – but had also lambasted Left critics who had attacked the arms programme in Parliament two months before and as Minister of Health he had been quite willing to steer the measure that made the health charges possible through Parliament, even though he had opposed it in the Cabinet. If he tried to appear consistent by arguing that the strain on the economy had only recently become apparent, this was not to convince everyone.
The arguments elaborated in the resignation controversy were to form the basis for the ideology and composition of the ‘Left’ of the early fifties. What was peculiar about these was that they combined a perceptive, and undoubtedly correct critique of the arms programme from the point of view of British capital, with a socialist critique of foreign policy and its domestic consequences. The basic argument was that realisation of the arms programme would produce such a strain on resources as to raise raw material prices and produce ‘mass-unemployment.’
’The fact is the West has embarked upon a campaign of arms production upon such a scale, so quickly, and of such an extent, that the foundations of political liberty and parliamentary democracy will not be able to sustain the shock.’ [9]
Besides which ‘Today the policies of the west are based upon a gross overestimate of Soviet strength.’ [10] The real strength of the Soviet Union lay in its ability to utilise the revolutionary forces of the world. So ‘it is the task of British socialism to persuade our western allies to assist (the colonial revolution)’ instead of forcing it into the grip of the Russians.
This argument combined beliefs in the progressive nature of the Truman administration (’we must ... assist the Truman administration in its battle against McCarthyism’) and of the Cold War as a struggle between freedom and totalitarianism, with the traditional liberal pacifist view that solutions to conflicts could and must be found by ‘statesmen not soldiers.’ Also combined were a perceptive insight into the extent to which Western imperialism was in danger of clinging too long to obsolescent forms of exploitation in the colonies when newer forms based upon aid and trade, not military government, were more apposite, and the traditional socialist opposition to colonialism. All this and more. For Tribune also defended the Welfare State, calling for rearmament to be financed ‘not by inflation, but by a system of socialist controls.’
This admixture of socialist and neo-capitalist demands was the logical continuation of the politics of 1945. It also explains the strange coalition of those, who, even if they were unaware of it, were in the vanguard of the bourgeoisie with the remnant of socialist idealism in the Labour Party. On the one hand stood Harold Wilson, in whom one could already see the embryo of the ‘new dynamism’ of the sixties. On the other stood the remnants of pre-1945 radicalism, led by Bevan, and still occasionally speaking with the tones of the thirties.
Such an alliance could not last. When British capitalism was forced to reassess its arms programme drastically, the basis of the Bevanite coalition was gone. Such figures as Wilson and Crossman were to be hostile to the Left through most of the late fifties. But in the immediate aftermath of the resignation controversy the hostility between ‘Left’ and ‘Right’ was real enough, despite a brief subsequent lull during the election of 1951, when, ‘For the sake of presenting a united front, Bevan and Morrison spoke words bordering on brotherly love ...’ [11]
Immediately after the election Right-wing trade-union leaders led by Deakin decided to try and get Bevan expelled from the Party, and constituency representation on the NEC abolished. Simultaneously, ‘Outside Parliament every effort was made to boost the circulation of Tribune, at that time almost moribund.’ [12]
A central feature in this was the Tribune Brains Trust.
’Novel in form, manned frequently by well-known radio personalities, these ... were the biggest, most continuous and widespread propaganda effort ever conducted within the Labour Movement.’ [13]
Tribune itself soon ceased to be a fortnightly poor man’s New Statesman, made up in the main of book reviews, and began appearing as a weekly, journalistically exciting, tabloid.
Yet real policy differences between ‘Left’ and ‘Right’ in this period were never great. For instance Tribune still favoured maintenance of British imperial interests, although it opposed the use of force in their defence. If British intervention in Persia was considered dangerous,
’For Britain to bow to the loss of the Anglo-Iranian’s property would be an unmitigated disaster.’ [14]
At home it was a continuation of the 1945-51 policies that was demanded:
’There are two factors,’ wrote Mikardo, ‘seriously inhibiting the proper functioning of a planned economy in Britain: one is the government’s tenderness about applying physical controls to private industry, and the other is the anarchy of the wages sector.’ [15]
Industrially the best traditions of Personnel Management theory were still adhered to. ‘Entirely unjustified distrust of T&GWU officials among the men (dockers)’ was the fault of ‘a failure of communication.’ Deakin’s support for wage freeze ‘was in his members’ interests, but he failed to inform them properly.’
It was not surprising that many contemporary observers expressed doubt as to the genuineness of the policy differences within the Party:
’There are not really two clear-cut rival policies, each commanding a resolute following. The main body of Labour Party workers ... is ... very uncertain what the right policies are and for what policies the combatants really stand.’ [16]
Nevertheless, the Bevanite revolt received a warm response from the CLPs. Party activists, although unclear as to what had happened between 1945 and 1951, were shocked by the turning of an impregnable majority into a Tory victory. They were even more shocked when the new Labour opposition failed to oppose. When Tribune demanded, ‘End the sham fighting,’ [17] they concurred. They gave expression to this feeling by knocking first Shinwell and then Morrison and Dalton off the Constituency Section of the National Executive and replacing them by ‘Bevanites.’
The more Tribune expressed the mood of the rank and file, the more it aroused the hostility of union leaders. As each side rationalised its opposition to the other and argued for support, ideological issues crystallised.
 
3. Morecambe
As opposition in the constituencies to the Right wing grew, Tribune reflected it. The week before the 1952 Conference at Morecambe Tribune carried an article by Bevan which expressed the belief that
’The polarisation of British political life is not therefore as between Labour and Tory. The formal struggle will be expressed in those terms. But the real struggle is for the soul of the Labour Party.’
But when the front page of the same issue, arguing for the need for independence from the US, asserted that
’Our country is in greater danger that at almost any time since 1940 ... The danger is of creeping decay and a mortal surrender of British independence’ [18]
One could have been excused for asking whether by the soul of the party was meant socialist principle or open chauvinism.
The Morecambe Conference revealed both the ambiguity of the Left’s position – both Left and Right acclaimed the policy resolutions passed – and its strength. 1,728,000 votes were recorded for strike action to turn out the Tory Government. Gaitskell, with the political tact for which he later became famous, claimed that ‘one sixth of the delegates appear to be Communist or Communist-inspired.’ [19]
But Morecambe was not to be the beginning of a great revival of the Left. In Tribune the meagre policy differences separating it from the orthodox Right were allowed to decline. At the 1953 Conference of the Party an executive document Challenge to Britain was passed without amendment:
’As so often before ... the Executive programme, meagre though it was, served to neutralise the pressure from the Left.’ [20]
Michael Foot, however, remained confident that ‘Morecambe did not mark a retreat.’ [21]
Tension and hostility between ‘Left’ and ‘Right’ remained. But as often as not this was not over the content of policy, but over the failure of an ageing leadership to push the policy. Such an approach had the advantage of blurring the extreme differences existing within the Bevanite grouping and within Tribune itself. Providing these were not raised, young careerists and the old Left could work together with ease. Unity was possible on this basis, but no other, between Wilson, already drawing up blueprints for the New Britain, Bevan, grasping at ever-elusive levers of power for himself and, as he saw it, for his class, the Left radicals like Foot, and the rearguard of Stalinism, defending the last position captured in the thirties and fortified in 1945.
 
4. German Rearmament
The Bevanites could not forever evade having to pose questions of policy. But their own heterogeneity meant that this could only be done in a vague and incoherent way. The price of ‘unity on the Left’ was carefully veiled confusion. The reaction to the problem of German rearmament in 1954 revealed this more than anything else.
Prior to this becoming a central political issue Tribune’s position had remained that held during the war. Then, it had emphasised time and again that the struggle was against Naziism and not against the German people, who had, after all, been the first to suffer at the hands of the Nazis. All shades of ‘Vansittatism’, whether of the racist Right-wing variety, or of the even more despicable ‘Left’ variety emanating from King Street, had been condemned out of hand. As late as 1952 Jennie Lee had been able to blame the German problem on the restoration of the class-structure of Western Germany by the Allies.
But now the German problem had become an issue which could hardly fail to influence the struggle for power within the PLP. Tribune saw its role as that of gaining for the Bevanite coalition the maximum number of allies. The old arguments began to merge with a whole variety of new ones, many of which contained tinges at least of the previously rejected racist view. References began to appear that could only suggest that Germans were innately aggressive. They were blamed for overrunning France ‘three times in sixty years.’ [22] At the same time concern was expressed that the US would not be able to control the German general staff, and that it might change sides in the Cold War.
Tribune could, in fact, hardly avoid having to use arguments that were racist in implication. For it was demanding that the German ruling class be refused arms while at the same time acknowledging the right of the British ruling class to have them. This argument could only make sense if the German rulers were intrinsically more dangerous to peace that those of Britain, France or America. In the next ten years, when Port Said was to be bombed, Algeria terrorised and Cuba abortively invaded, this was shown obviously not to be the case. Such arguments as were used against German rearmament would at best fail to seek the roots of international tension in the forces that drive capitalist states to war; at worst, they would become an apology for the hegemony of established powers. Ten years later the same arguments are still being used at a time when that hegemony is much more in question. The attempts to maintain it through ‘non-proliferation pacts’ and the like find the ‘Left’ on the side of powers who over the past twenty years have alternately plundered, policed, terrorised and directed the rest of the world.
The widening of alliances that the struggle over German rearmament produced was to do little to widen support for Bevanism. Although 1954 saw the executive win only a very narrow majority on German rearmament at Conference, it also saw the disintegration of parliamentary Bevanism. After an open disagreement with Attlee over the foundation of SEATO, Bevan was forced to resign from the shadow cabinet, and Wilson, with an eye to the future, took his place. [23]
Whatever Sevan’s own motives had been he was now forced into the position of having to fight the leadership – and to do so without many of his former allies. He put down a resolution demanding parliamentary support before manufacture of the British H-bomb began and was supported by 65 MPs. In June he announced that he would give up his seat on the NEC as a representative of the CLPs to fight Gaitskell for the Treasurer-ship of the Party.
 
5. A turn to the rank and file
If he was to fight in this manner, the automatic support of the CLPs was no longer sufficient. Deakin, when he had attempted to destroy Bevanism, had had to attempt – although unsuccessfully – to pack the CLPs with ‘loyal’ union members; Bevan now had to try and permeate the unions with his own brand of ‘Leftism’ if he were ever to hope to beat Gaitskell. The election of Gaitskell at the 1954 Conference with.twice as many votes as Bevan made it clear that that it was not sufficient to rely upon entrenched trade-union, bureaucrats for support. At the Tribune meeting after the Conference Bevan announced that he intended to campaign among the rank and file to ‘break the hold of the present union leaders.’ [24]
Tribune could not aid Bevan in this struggle by confining itself to purely political issues. It had to tackle the union leaders on their own ground. It had to take the fight into industry.
The major enemy at this time was Deakin. He above all epitomised the block vote that stood between Bevan and power in the party. It was to be in Deakin’s union, the T&GWU, that Tribune for the first – and probably the last – time was to be involved in struggle with the rank and file against the bureaucracy. When the dockers flocked behind Trotskyist-influenced leaders from the T&GWU into the NASD [25] in the northern ports, Tribune supported them. Deakin’s logic was ridiculed when he called a strike against compulsory overtime a ‘CP plot’ when in fact King Street was clearly siding with Deakin and the employers against the strike. An encounter with the NEC followed in which it was implied that members of the Labour Party had no right to expose the dictatorial incompetence of the union leadership. Tribune stuck to its line and emerged unscathed.
’It seems that the only supporters of the Stevedores’ Union are the dockers,’ wrote Foot. [26] But the motives behind Tribune’s support for rank-and-file rights were not unmixed. Desire to strengthen Bevan in the struggle for parliamentary leadership was as great as concern for dockers’ conditions. That this struggle was still basically conceived as one of bureaucratic manoeuvring is shown by the degree to which such an undeserving individual as Dick Barrett was built up in the pages of the paper. It must have been a considerable embarrassment to Tribune when in May and June 1955 leading NASD officials were to blackleg with impunity during an ‘official’ strike, and Barrett himself was conveniently sick. [27]
But even now, despite the vehemence of tone on both sides, and the vigour of a struggle for leadership into which parts of the Labour Movement normally beyond the legitimate confines of such a struggle had been dragged, divisions over policy were not that basic. When the PLP abstained on the decisive vote on German rearmament, the leading ‘Leftists’ around Bevan did not join the six MPs who broke discipline. Bevan could still serve as co-leader of an important delegation of party members to China.
This appearance of consensus did not result from tactical caution alone. Had it done so the abrupt clash with the leadership only months later when Bevan was temporarily expelled from the PLP would have been inexplicable. Underlying the periodic tactic of overt opposition to the leadership was a fundamental consensus. This did not concern this or that particular item of policy as much as the basic question as to who .should take decisions, entrenched bureaucrats or the rank and file. Although in particular unions Tribune might support the rank and file, or at least those bureaucrats it thought best for the rank and file, when it came, to major decisions, action was recognised as the prerogative of existing ‘leaders.’ Thus Tribune would demand disarmament. But this was not to be disarmament of the ruling class by an active, self-conscious working class, but disarmament through negotiations by representatives of the ruling classes themselves. That such disarmament was, given the dynamics of the systems over which the ruling classes presided, impossible, and that the repeated failures of conferences were no accident, never occurred to Tribune. Nor did it occur to Tribune that the most that could result from great power discussions would be a detente which would institutionalise the dominance of existing powers without solving either the problem of war or that of poverty and misery. Even more to the point was the fact that while this way of attempting to deal with problems gave great opportunities for leading politicians to impress their followers with rhetoric, it gave no role to these followers themselves. If the future of mankind was being decided over cocktails in Geneva, what was the point in occupying Trafalgar Square?
Such a consensus over the basic question marked polemics on questions of foreign affairs in particular with an aura of unreality. The Left would demand summit talks and the Right would refuse them. Or Labour would demand them and the Tories refuse them. Eventually someone would concede them, they would break down and the cycle would have to begin again. Inevitably the mode of argument became one of awarding points to different national leaders. If the US administration proposed a ‘peace plan’ Tribune would disregard the motives behind it, praise it and condemn the Russians for not discussing it. At another time the roles would be reversed. In either case the fact that the motives behind ‘initiative’ or rebuttal of initiative were basically the same would be ignored. When, for instance, Tito and Khruschev came to a diplomatic agreement part of the price of which seems to have been the imprisonment of Djilas, Tribune praised them. [28] While Khruschev – whose record of brutality and oppression in the Ukraine should need no reiterating – was beginning his period of ascendancy, the Rev Donald (now Lord) Soper could write: ‘Some of the Russians may be good and faithful men.’ [29] ‘Nehru the Peacemaker’ [30] became one of Bevan’s favourite cries.
Praise for rulers whose interests led them to want negotiations was paralleled by condemnation when the negotiations failed. ‘Russia must take her fair share of the blame,’ Bevan could write when the four-power talks he had been demanding for a year achieved nothing. The alternative to praising the ruling class was to prick pins in the puppet. Utopian hope would be replaced by moralising. Demonology continued to be a substitute for analysis. The argument merely moved from one elitist position to another: from belief in the abilities of rulers to act, to moral condemnation of them for not acting, to explaining to the rulers their failure to understand their own best interests.
Even in the period 1955-6 when for the first time for twenty years the shop steward appeared in the pages of Tribune, and when the divisions within the Labour leadership led to Bevan’s exclusion from the parliamentary party, this elitism remained basic, and with it remained adhesion to the presumptions of social democracy. The real enemy remained the Tories, and their real crime as often as not was mere ineptitude ‘Anti-communist military pacts’ were wrong because ‘they weakened the position of the Western world.’ Nation remained more important than class. Tribune’s policies were no more coherent at this time than at any other. On the docks its allies were the rank and file. In the United Nations it supported Tito and Nehru. In four-power talks it saw Eden as an ally, even if a misguided one. The texture of the Tribunism in the fifties is above all demonstrated by the events of late 1956, when British imperialism and Russian imperialism were to face crises simultaneously.
 
6. Suez
The Suez crisis had the unusual effect of producing agitation in opposition to it not only from those who were in principle anti-imperialist, but also from those who favoured US policies and those who were far-sighted enough to understand the long-term interests of British capital. In the process of development of the crisis these were by no means in the same camp all the time. And Tribune certainly was not in the anti-imperialist camp all the time. As the situation evolved it tended to jump from one position to another.
Tribune began by condemning Gaitskell’s suggestion that economic sanctions be applied after Egypt had nationalised the Suez Canal, but it was by no means unanimously in favour of the right of Egypt to control what its people had constructed. For Bevan Egypt was right ‘in a narrow and legalistic sense’ only. Her action was condemned as ‘treating the canal like a medieval caravan route.’ He called for the ‘internationalisation’ of the canal – presumably under the US-dominated UN or the Anglo-US-dominated ‘Canal Users’ Committee.’ Because he would not accept this, Nasser was condemned more than the British owners he had thrown out:
’Egypt has a right to come into her own, but not into someone else’s.’ [31]
Tribune itself dissented from this position a week later – although it demanded that the UN guarantee freedom of passage through the canal. Bevan himself was by this time defending the right of the Egyptians to nationalise, while attacking their determination to exercise this right:
’It must not be all take, Colonel Nasser.’
This ambiguity could not however stand the test of events. When it was a question of abstract right Egypt could be condemned, but the whole tradition of the British Left ruled out support for armed intervention. ‘Don’t risk one British life,’ wrote Bevan, although this was followed by ‘Egypt as much as anyone else owes it to the world to show moderation.’ [32] The nationalism of a country fighting foreign oppression was still abstractly equated with that of the oppressor.
When intervention came, criticism of it was as much because it endangered the UN as for the imperialist motives behind it. And when the US, clearly from motives of her own, condemned the aggression, Bevan could write ‘the US emerges with an enhanced reputation.’ [33] Unfortunately Bevan could not believe in this ‘enhanced reputation’ for long. Within a fortnight he was criticising the US for trying to replace British influence in the Middle-East.
 
7. Eastern Europe
When in the spring of 1956 Krushchev shocked the world, both ‘communist’ and ‘non-communist, with his 20th Congress CPSU speech, he presented to Tribune an unparalleled opportunity to combine elitism and liberalism. Tribune embraced Khrushchevism with the same sort of enthusiasm with which it had once greeted Stalinism. According to Foot the Soviet leaders were telling the Russian people ‘Think for Yourself’. [34]
But criticism never expressed more than a liberal moral standpoint. The rights of individuals in Russia would be supported. But the Russian leadership themselves were expected to defend these. The attempts of the Russian ruling class to adjust its rule to a changing industrial base were described as ‘the first steps in the most difficult and honourable of operations – the dismantling of a dictatorship.’ The most prominent criticism of Soviet leaders in this period was for making ‘utterances (in India) that gave offence to almost all shades of political opinion in Britain.’ [35]
In the summer of 1956 the workers of Poznan in Poland took the injunction to think for themselves seriously and rose against the state capitalist bureaucracy. Although Tribune could claim to understand their difficulties and frustrations, it could see only one remedy: for the bureaucracy to liberalise its own rule. For this reason regret was expressed at the rising.
’It comes at a time when there is a real prospect of an improvement throughout the Socialist world.’
Workers could suffer; but for Tribune only rulers could act. Poznan was only the prelude to the revolution that broke out in Hungary a few months later. Tribune had drawn reformist conclusions from the revolutionary potential of Poznan; when this developed into the revolutionary activity of Hungarian workers and students, its conclusions were blatantly counter-revolutionary. Of course, it did not support counter-revolution under the old leaders, but it was quite prepared to see it under new ones:
’The new authorities in Budapest must make strenuous efforts to reestablish order.’
The national communist leaders, it argued, by preventing ‘unrestrained violence’ (i.e. social revolution)
’offered their countrymen a policy whereby they can begin to regain their national independence by themselves and without jeopardising either the peace of Europe or Soviet security’ [36] (no doubt the security of the ‘security police’).
That national independence on these terms would involve continued rule by a more or less totalitarian party did not worry Tribune. That the deepening and spreading of the revolution might lead not to the alleviation of exploitation, but to the abolition of it and of the national conflict produced by it throughout Central Europe and beyond, was inconceivable to Tribune. Its only solution to the problems of Central and Eastern Europe remained that of a meeting together of representatives of different ruling classes. Such meetings were endangered by social upheaval and this had to be prevented. The trouble was that in 1956 the spectre of revolution was much more real than the dream of a successful summit conference.
But Tribune had its dream, and had to adhere to it even when it became a nightmare. It asked for ‘sympathy with the Russian leaders as they grapple with the problems involved in slackening the reins ...’ [37] As the copies of Tribune containing these words appeared on the streets the Russian tanks began to move into Hungary.
When the shelling of Budapest began, Tribune put itself ‘passionately on their (the Hungarians’) side.’ [38] But it still saw the solution of their difficulties not in an intensification and spreading of the revolution, but in a ‘relaxation of Russian fears of Western hostility.’ It continued to support Gomulka and the Polish national state capitalist bureaucracy against the ‘hotheads’ who wanted a Polish Hungary: ‘Gomulka must prevent provocations against the Russians.’
In both Poland and Hungary the revolutionary tide subsided – in the first case more or less peacefully, in the second beaten back by Russian tanks. But in the long run the ‘hot-heads’ in Budapest, even in reformist terms, gained more than the ‘moderates’ in Warsaw who compromised both with national and with Russian Stalinism. This was to be expected. The outcome of the situation in both Poland and Hungary depended on class forces. In Hungary the working class, once having begun to move along the path of self-liberation, was, even in defeat, stronger than the Polish working class that had been stopped short of battle by, among other things, the Polish equivalents of the ‘Tribunites.’
The cases of Hungary and Suez were both ‘crises’ of sorts – although one threatened a whole social structure while the other expressed only the process of readjustment of a structure to new conditions of exploitation. As such they were bound to emphasise what were normally only potentialities in Tribunite thought. But these expressed themselves, although less clearly, in the paper’s treatment of virtually all issues right through the fifties. Here, to avoid repetition, and because this period has already been subjected to some good Marxist analyses, it is only proposed to deal with three issues: the retreat of the Labour bureaucracy from any sort of verbal commitment to socialism, the rise of CND, and the issue of the Common Market.
 
8. Public Ownership
A further stage in the retreat of official Labour policy on public ownership was marked in 1957 by the publication of the policy document, Industry and Society. This was notable for its vagueness on specific commitments and for its refusal to question the distribution of power in industry. The immediate response of Tribune itself was one of strong criticism. But some of those normally close to it took a rather different line. Bevan, recently elected treasurer of the Party by a narrow margin and subsequently received back into the parliamentary leadership, interpreted it as a ‘Left’ document. Mikardo wrote ‘I think that this document is a good one’ [39] although he qualified this by adding that the wrong interpretation might be put on it by Gaitskell, Wilson and Crossman.
Given such initial confusion the Left was bound to react in a purely negative fashion to the NEC’s dilution of policy. It merely asked that conditions be attached to the document at some points making it less ambiguous. Conference failed to attach these conditions.
 
9. Goodbye to Bevan
But, for the development of the Left, the crucial event of the 1957 party conference was the fact that the man around whom the ‘Left’ had been organising for the previous six years and in whom so many of its hopes were placed – Bevan – finally made his peace with the leadership. Appointed by the NEC to reply to a resolution calling for unilateral nuclear disarmament, Bevan, by now shadow foreign minister, turned on to his own former supporters the rhetoric that had once been used with such effect against the Right.
Bevan’s performance threw the Tribunites into utter confusion. A break between them and Bevan seemed inevitable. But this was not to take place either suddenly or completely. If Foot ‘remained entirely unconvinced by Sevan’s arguments’ he persuaded himself that other policies adopted (presumably Industry and Society) marked ‘a substantial shift ... away from the rigid positions of the Right wing of some years ago ...’ [40] Bevan continued to write for Tribune, and Tribunites continued to express the hope that Bevan would find his alliance with Gaitskell intolerable. [41]
Despite the shock of many of the ‘Left’ Bevan’s actions were only a natural culmination of Bevanism. This had rarely aimed at more than a replacement of one set of parliamentary leaders by another. Its criticisms were often not so much about the content of policy as about the inability of the existing leaders to push it dynamically. At the same time the mixture of utopian-ism and illusion that replaced analysis when the Left tried to understand and affect events prevented it from seeing what was happening to its own leaders. Bevan could swing from Left to Right unrestrained by the need for consistent theory. The difference between the sogginess of Tribunite thought and the stodginess of the empty official rhetoric has never been that great.
After the sacrifice of so much activity to one man’s career it hardly seemed possible for the Left to continue the merely ritualistic candidate-pushing that had constituted politics for it in the early fifties. At the same time Suez – with thousands involved in demonstrations for the first time for years – and Hungary – where workers had actually made a bid for power – were to give a new impetus to Left thought and imagination. A rebirth of a creative Left seemed possible out of the destruction of the old attitudes embodied in Bevanism and Stalinism.
The new fervour was channelled above all into CND. [42] Here enthusiasm seemed to prevent stultification and to challenge the old elitist attitudes. Yet these hopes were not to be realised. If the rise of CND seemed to herald new attitudes and new possibilities, this was to be followed by a long drawn out decline which was part cause and part consequence of a return, at least partially, to the old attitudes. An organisation which had started off fighting the bureaucracy in the Labour Party was rapidly to become dominated by a bureaucracy of its own. The decline of CND was not the fault of the old Tribunites and others who became involved in it alone. Degeneration and fragmentation would seem to be the inevitable fate of any movement which aims at generalised goals at a time when the struggles most workers are engaged in are localised in extent even if not in ultimate implications. Divisions arise between groups demanding apparently opposed but equally unrealistic short-term answers; on the one hand those who replace the task of changing reality by that of trying to purify their own souls, often combining this with a quasi-magical belief in the power of personil witness to move power blocks; on the other hand those who hope to change reality by identifying themselves and their aspirations with the completely different intentions of those already holding power. But such a development only occurs in so far as individuals accept the false logic implied. Tribune could supply to CND many who already could see no other logic than that implying the whispering-in-the-ears-of-the-great approach.
Tribune welcomed CND, and many of the old Left played a prominent role in its leading ranks. But in no sense did they carry the movement. Rather, they themselves were carried along by a wave of enthusiasm from below. This, although often mouthing the old slogans of the traditional Left, tended to demand immediate action outside of the manoeuverings of trad-ional Left politics. For the old ‘Left’ the task was to channel this fervour into traditional politics, emasculate it, and benefit from it. For the old Left the demand for unilateralism would be less important than the need to appeal to diplomatically minded politicians. After CND’s extremely successful inaugural meeting Tribune wrote, ‘Magnificent, inspiring, historical’. Yet in the same period it was to praise first Gaitskell [43], then Khruschev [44], and even Macmillan, for demanding summit conferences.
Sharing so much common ground with the Right wing at the theoretical level, Tribune was more or less incapable of seriously confronting it when a fight took place within the party. It could only ride on waves produced by more or less spontaneous action from below. Individuals could of course be left behind in the corridors of power when the wave had subsided.
In the early months of 1960 the bureaucracy in the Labour Party found itself confronting a threat to its ability to dominate the party on the one issue of the bomb. Union conference after union conference came out in support of the Left on this issue – even at one point the virtually dictatorial NUGMW. The extremely small numbers of individuals actively involved in the making of union decisions made possible the defeat at the Scarborough Conference of the executive (the CLPs are estimated to have voted 60-40 for the Right). But such a narrowly based victory could easily be overturned by the established leaders of the bureaucracy, even if some effort was required. There was probably nothing the Left could have done to prevent such an outcome. But it could have made the effort to fortify its own real strength in the experience of the struggle. It could have organised and campaigned to lay the basis for future victories. Tribune, however, rather than face the difficulties of defending an extreme Left position with what few extreme Left forces were available, itself joined with its bureaucratic friends in the movement to the Right that followed Scarborough; Foot, for instance, argued that the Crossman-Padley plan was progressive. [45] While the full machinery of Transport House was being utilised to overturn what should ‘constitutionally’ have been official party policy, direct action demonstrations were criticised for ‘undermining people’s beliefs in the effectiveness of constitutional action.’
 
10. The Common Market
One major value has always been held in common by both Left and Right: devotion to the idea of ‘Britain.’ Even in the heyday of CND ‘Let Britain Lead’ had seemed an appropriate slogan. For the Left, ‘Britain’ was more than a body of private interests. It was the embodiment of moral purpose. Appropriately, when the Left took its opposition to the status quo seriously it found in Britain a vehicle (at times it seemed the only vehicle) through which transcendence could take place. It was Britain that had to lead a ‘third force,’ reconcile the US and Russia, act as an ‘honest broker’ (how 300 years of imperialism makes one honest was never asked). Britain was seen as deserving, or having a duty to play, a special role, even with the Tories in power. With Labour in power a great extension of this ‘moral power’ was imagined.
Nothing then was more natural than that Left and Right should achieve unity if the Conservatives threatened to extinguish the name of Britain. When they applied to join the Common Market, the most important need for Tribune became opposition to it. So important was the ‘nation’ to it that it was willing to unite with anyone (including outright reactionaries like Hinchingbrooke) to defend it. Chauvinism had always been a distinctive feature of Tribunism. Often this had meant little more than a willingness to accept the myths of official society. Now it meant leading the applause when Gaitskell spoke of Gallipoli and Dunkirk. They themselves wrote that government policies should assume that ‘Britain’s main interest should be British interests.’ Against such a background expressions of internationalist sentiment had to take pious forms – for instance ‘Labour’s slogan must be “Save the United Nations”.’
This chauvinism could be justified because a whole demon-ology developed during the previous decade was at hand. If Khrushchev, Truman, Macmillan, Gaitskell, Attlee and Mendes-France had at various times appeared as angels, Adenauer and de Gaulle had usually been the most prominent of the devils. To make this somewhat arbitrary awarding of black and white marks appear rational all sorts of arguments were employed. One of the commonest was to ascribe to the German Government as a whole the residual aspirations of its most extreme members (themselves clearly out of touch with needs of modern German capitalism): ‘Bonn’s aim is to recreate the Germany of 1937.’ [46] In the Berlin crisis of 1961 misinterpretation of facts even led to a tendency among certain writers to sympathise with the most oppressive regime in Europe – that of Ulbricht in Eastern Germany:
’Whether you like it or not, the closing of the sector boundary to Grenzeganger is warmly welcomed by the great majority of East Berliners,’ [47]
wrote Ian Mikardo at the time of construction of the Berlin wall.
Acceptance that the line-up in the Labour Party should be principally determined by the Common Market issue was bound to lead to a devaluation of the question of unilateralism. When the Right retrieved control of the Party Conference on this issue in 1961 Tribune was not unduly worried:
’The Left has no reason to be depressed ... It shows signs of having educated its opponents ...’ [48]
 
11. Wilson’s advent
By the end of 1962 Tribune was in a position to forget its former battles and line up behind the chauvinistic calls for a ‘New Britain.’ GaitskelPs death and replacement by Wilson removed the last obstacle. The new leader was seen as a ‘man of the Left’ – although, apart from an opportunistic opposition to Gaitskell’s tactics after Scarborough, he had not been seen near the Left for eight years.
Disillusion and disappointment, the weariness of eleven years of opposition, the smell of the spoils of office, all contributed to the surrender. But above all it was the illusions that had always sustained Tribune which were to blame. In terms of practical activity they had always shied away from the only alternative to moving to the Right: the acceptance of a revolutionary perspective and the willingness to give up immediate parliamentary pretensions in order to fight for this perspective among the rank and file. Instead they accepted the illusion of Labourism that the mere insertion of working-class leaders into the bourgeois political process and not the pressure of working-class activity produces reforms. The detachment of Labour politics from the day-to-day struggles of the working class which has typified British Labourism from its inception was as welcome to them as to the Right wing. Labourism had always been willing, of course, to benefit from die organisation and consciousness which working-class activity produces, but its concern was always, simultaneously, to restrict this, to make it ‘respectable.’
In the fifties the fragmentation in working-class struggle and consciousness produced by the expansion of capitalism meant that the struggle itself would not raise Labour leaders any higher in the bourgeois political hierarchy. For the Right this mattered little, as they had already become an integral part of the established political process and received all the spoils entailed. For the Left it meant attempting to maintain a position in bourgeois institutions that no generalised struggle backed up. It had been the parliamentary beneficiary of the increased working-class consciousness of the war years in particular. Now that this had subsided (or, rather, taken different forms) it could maintain its position only by emphasising its detachment from class politics.
No longer borne forward in any sense by pressures from outside official politics, it could maintain itself only on the terms of the latter. This it could only do by talking its language and thinking in its terms. Its terms and its language were suited to the purpose of adjusting the status quo to the interests of those who benefitted from the status quo, and to no other. In this situation the remedies of the parliamentary ‘Left’ for the world’s ills could hardly differ from those of the Right. They shared a belief in the ability of ruling classes and ruling-class institutions – the UN, summit conferences, neutral leaders – to overcome the tensions arising out of capitalist competition East and West. They shared a belief in the primacy of the ‘national interest.’ They only stopped short when the Right’s policies were carried to their logical conclusions.
Isolated from the numerous but fragmented struggles that alone could constitute a basis for any class-based politics in the fifties, Tribune and the Left could never appreciate the texture of the period they were in. On the one hand they always tended to be over-optimistic about Labour policies – only to be disillusioned later. The possibility of short-term parliamentary alliances always led them to overestimate their own strength. On the other hand they made a similar but opposite misappraisal of Tory policies. Every attack upon the working class would be exaggerated in its scope. Prophecies of considerable unemployment, major struggles, legislation against trade unions, were a recurrent feature of Tribune throughout the fifties: ‘If the Tories win on 8th October – expect attacks on trade unions.’ This misappraisal of the situation was conjoined with an underestimation of the real strength of working-class organisation (a strength which did in fact prevent the Tories from staging a major struggle against it). Given this double misconception of reality, Tribunism could never range outside of the spectrum between an instinctive defence of past loyalties and beliefs and a continued misinterpretation of these into apologies for neo-capitalistic measures.
This being the case, their capitulation before Harold Wilson was quite natural. In him they found someone whose policies had the ‘realism’ of the Right, yet who was capable of covering them with the rhetoric of the Left, who was not frightened to call in a US-dominated UN if necessary, who would support an India dependent upon Western aid, who could chase working-class votes with demagogic promises, who would praise Clause Four while postponing indefinitely the day of reckoning. With him they could praise state capitalist planning as the socialist measure they had demanded for years. They could shudder with him when an upstart racialist from the Midlands threatened their parliamentary seats, and surrender with him what remained of their internationalist tradition. With such a leader the pen as sword could become the pen as sycophant.
Yet it was not only in the Strand office that the Left fell for the seductive pose of Wilsonism. The Left of the early fifties had given way to its temptations long before. The average rank-and-file Bevanite of 1951 had probably by 1965 ended up either disillusioned and out of political activity or disillusioned and a councillor. The latter would suffer corrupting forces as great as those confronting his parliamentary equivalent, if not greater. For in the major cities Labour had not faced the exigencies of running capitalism for just six years out of thirty, but had done so for decades. Those who held municipal power knew the difficulties of explaining the requirements of finance to irate ratepayers, knew the impossibility of proceeding too fast, knew the necessity of deception, and above all the need to keep the working class – for its own sake – out of participation in politics for more than one day every three years. They also understood the necessity for keeping the young CNDer or the old Trotskyist out of the party.
Even those not themselves corrupted by the pressures of these years, pressures which the use of phony arguments and the practice of self-deception did not help to resist, could only with difficulty avoid the temptation of looking for a solution where none existed. The somewhat harder Left around the Voice newspapers tended to share with Tribune the general bemusement in the first days of the Labour Government. Even the self-consciously ‘hegemonic’ mandarins of New Left Review saw the advent of Harold Wilson not as a passing adjustment of British capitalism to a changing situation, but as an event of tremendous moment for its whole development. [49]
But Tribunism was not in its own terms a failure. If its aim was to capture citadels within the capitalist state machinery, it succeeded. By 1965 ex-Tribunites controlled Parish Councils and they controlled the government. If in the process the needs of the capitalist state came to dominate Tribune’s politics, it had only itself to blame. The building of a mass Left in the fifties was impossible, given the continued ability of capitalism to expand. But the building of a larger and more influential hard Left that could have resisted the ravages of Wilsonism was not. Tribune, seeking respectability and parliamentary ‘power,’ above all resisted attempts to do this. The one attempt made in the fifties to organise outside of Parliament in seriousness on generalised policies, Victory For Socialism, collapsed under the weight of the Parliamentary elitists that dominated it.
If after only a few months of seeing so much of its past activity crystallised as acceptance of racialism, support for aggression in Vietnam and a complete reconciliation with capital, Tribune shies away, its whole approach makes it inevitable that it should go through the whole process again. For Tribune remains as committed to its own form of ineffectual elitism as ever. Young progressives replace old ones as these move on into the Cabinet. The best way of building the Left is still seen as lying in short-term alliances with frustrated Right-wing careerists. Wilson is cast out of the pantheon, to join Truman and Stalin on the black list, but new figures are to be built up. The search for the charismatic leader who will automatically solve its and the working class’s problems continues.
When the working class itself begins to solve its own problems, Tribune will no doubt, as in 1956, be looking the other way.
 



Age of Austerity 1945-51
M. Sissons & P. French
Penguin, 5s
Despite my expectations, this is a useful and interesting collection of essays. The texture of a period in which Labour ruled and the Left did not become disillusioned, although many workers did, is presented dearly and in an easily accessible manner. The writing is journalistic but this does not prevent at least a glimpse at the deeper issues of the period: the re-integration of war-time radicalism into the well-greased channels of the system; the willingness of the ruling class to have nationalisation of dying industries imposed upon it for its own well-being; the recognition by British imperialism that it needed to be submissive to its American co-exploiter. If most of the writers do not belong on the Left they are detached and cynical enough to see the Labour Government for what it was:
‘Far from introducing a social “revolution” the overwhelming Labour victory of 1945 brought about the greatest restoration of traditional social values since 1660.’



Socialist Humanism
Ed. Erich Fromm
NY, Doubleday, $1.75
‘Socialist Humanism’ has been in fashion on the intellectual Left ever since one of Stalin’s more vicious disciples turned on him in the spring of 1956. It was the expression of an attempt to break with the heritage of the Stalinist past without breaking with Marxism. Its characteristic standpoint was either to cling to the young Marx who wrote the 1844 manuscripts in opposition to the old Marx who wrote Capital, or to use the earlier writings in order to justify a particular reading of the later ones.
But the revulsion against Stalinism was not a simple process. In the state capitalist countries, led from above, it meant different things to different social classes. For the leadership it was an attempt to adjust the nature of class rule to the realities of a changing economic base. To middle level bureaucrats and industrial managers in the Soviet Union and to the locally rooted bureaucrats of the satellite countries, it offered an opportunity for increased power vis-à-vis the central apparatus. To workers and peasants it meant an uneasiness in the ruling class which would enable them to force concessions from it – or even, as in Hungary, briefly to overthrow it. Similarly in the West revulsion united those looking for some marginal amelioration of existing society, whether inside or outside the Communist Party, with those in revolt against all forms of oppression.
As the standard of this movement, ‘Socialist Humanism’ embodies all these ambiguities. This is brought out by Fromm’s collection. A veritable popular front of attitudes, concerns, class ideologies, are united together beneath adherence to the title: genuine revolutionaries such as Dunayeyskaya; the President of Senegal; admirers of Gandhi and theoreticians of the Italian CP. A member of the Central Committee of the Polish CP is separated only by pages from those who would share the fate of Hass, Modzelewski and Kuron were they Polish. It is almost embarrassing to write down the names of some of the contributors; Stephen King-Hall for instance.
This is all testimony to the dangers inherent in the ‘Socialist Humanist’ approach. However admirable, the humanistic sentiments of the young Marx do not reveal a great deal about the actual world of oppression and revolt. That is why Marx wrote Capital, The Eighteenth Brumaire, The Civil War in France. Stalinism as a theoretical form was built upon the systematic distortion of these. It is this distorted approach that has to be overthrown, not a ‘truly critical and therefore truly scientific appraisal of reality. Yet it is precisely this emphasis on concrete analysis that much of ‘Socialist Humanism’ ignores. At the same time its semi-philosophical terminology obscures the real interests being expressed by its adherents. The most divergent standpoints are concealed behind like-sounding references to ‘human alienation.’ This may have its uses. For Left critics in the state capitalist countries, it offers a convenient Aesopian language. But it is one that can just as easily be used by their opponents to confuse.
If Marxism is a humanism, it is because its key terms express the contradiction between human potentiality (potential development of the forces of production) and the existing social structure which distorts and cramps this. This means that the human society is not something that exists but something to be created. ‘Humanity’ in general will not do this, but men as they really are; that is men whose interests, personalities and comprehension of reality depend upon their class situation. Socialist humanism, to be meaningful, has to relate the final goal to the real situation as it confronts men in the present, not as ‘men’ but as worker, capitalist or whatever. This means that it has to return to the old Marx, not merely to the young one. If it fails to do this, it merely obscures instead of revealing. ‘Man’ can be the Stalinist bureaucrat or the enlightened capitalist whom the leftist psychoanalyst treats. Any view starting from such a standpoint remains in the realm of ideology. It merely accompanies action, hiding its real roots, instead of, like scientific socialist theory, guiding it.



1. The Two Revolutions
The period between the two revolutions of February and October 1917 was moulded by two concurrent processes. The first occurred in the towns, and was a very rapid growth of working-class consciousness. By the July days, the industrial workers at least seem to have arrived at an understanding of the different interests of the classes in the revolution. In the countryside, a different form of class differentiation took place. This was not between a propertied class and a class that could not even aspire to individual ownership of property. Rather it was between two property-owning classes. On the one hand the landowners, on the other the peasants. The latter were not socialist in intention. Their aim was to seize the estates of the landowners, but to divide these upon an individualistic basis. In this movement even Kulaks, wealthy farmers, could participate.
The revolution could not have taken place without the simultaneous occurrence of these two processes. What tied them together was not however an identity of ultimate aim. Rather it was the fact that for contingent historical reasons the industrial bourgeoisie could not break politically with the large landowners. Its inability to do this pushed the peasantry (which effectively included the army) and the workers into the same camp:
“In order to realise the soviet state, there was required the drawing together and mutual penetration of two factors belonging to completely different historic species: a peasant war – that is a movement characteristic of the dawn of bourgeois development – and a proletarian insurrection, the movement signalising its decline.” [1]
The urban insurrection could not have succeeded but for the sympathy of the largely peasant army. Nor could the peasants have waged a successful struggle unless led and welded together by a centralised, external force. In Russia of 1917 the only possible such force was the organised working class. It was this possibility of drawing the peasantry behind it at the crucial moment that made it possible for the workers to hold power in the towns.
The bourgeoisie and its land-owning allies were expropriated. But the classes which participated in this expropriation shared no simple long-term common interest. In the towns was a class whose very existence depended upon collective activity. In the countryside a class whose members would only unite even amongst themselves momentarily to seize the land, but would then till it individually. Once the act of seizure and defence of that seizure was over, only external inducements could bind them to any State.
The revolution, then, was really a dictatorship of the workers over other classes in the towns – in the major towns the rule of the majority in Soviets – and a dictatorship of the towns over the country. In the first period of the division of the estates this dictatorship could rely upon peasant support, indeed, was defended by peasant bayonets. But what was to happen afterwards?
This question had preoccupied the Russian socialists themselves long before the revolution. The realisation that a socialist revolution in Russia would be hopelessly lost in the peasant mass was one reason why all the Marxists in Russia (including Lenin, but excluding Trotsky and at first Parvus) had seen the forthcoming revolution as a bourgeois one. When Parvus and Trotsky first suggested that the revolution might produce a socialist government, Lenin wrote
“This cannot be, because such a revolutionary dictatorship can only have stability ... based on the great majority of the people. The Russian proletariat constitutes now a minority of the Russian population.”
He maintained this view right up to 1917. When he did come to accept and fight for the possibility of a socialist outcome for the revolution, it was because he saw it as one stage in a world-wide revolution that would give the minority working class in Russia protection against foreign intervention and aid to reconcile the peasantry to its rule. Eight months before the October revolution he wrote to Swiss workers that “the Russian proletariat cannot by its own forces victoriously complete the socialist revolution.” Four months after the revolution (on 7 March 1918) he repeated, “The absolute truth is that without a revolution in Germany we shall perish.”
 
2. The Civil War
The first years of Soviet rule seemed to bear out the perspective of world revolution. The period 1918-19 was characterised by social upheavals unseen since 1948. In Germany and Austria military defeat was followed by the destruction of the monarchy. Everywhere there was talk of Soviets. In Hungary and Bavaria Soviet Governments actually took power – although only briefly. In Italy the factories were occupied. Yet the heritage of fifty years of gradual development was not to be erased so rapidly. The old Social-Democratic and trade-union leaders moved into the gap left by the discredited bourgeois parties. The Communist. Left on the other hand still lacked the organisation to respond to this. It acted when there was no mass support; when there was mass support it failed to act.
Even so the stabilisation of Europe after 1919 was at best precarious. In every European country, the social structure received severe threats within the subsequent fifteen years. And the experience of both the Communist Parties and the working class had put them into a far better position to understand what was happening.
The Russian Bolsheviks did, not however, intend to wait upon the revolution abroad. The defence of the Soviet Republic and incitement to revolution abroad seemed inseparable. For the time being anyway, the tasks at hand in Russia were determined, not by the Bolshevik leaders, but by the international imperialist powers. These had begun a “crusade” against the Soviet Republic. White and foreign armies had to be driven back before any other questions could be considered. In order to do this, every resource available had to be utilised.
By a mixture of popular support, revolutionary ardour, and, at times, it seemed, pure will, the counter-revolutionary forces were driven out (although in the Soviet Far East they continued to operate until 1924). But the price paid was enormous.
This cannot be counted in merely material terms. But in these alone it was great. What suffered above all was industrial and agricultural production. In 1920, the production of pig iron was only 3 per cent of the pre-war figure; of hemp 10 per cent; flax, 25 per cent; cotton, 11 per cent; beets, 15 per cent. This implied privation, hardship, famine. But much more. The dislocation of industrial production was also the dislocation of the working class. It was reduced to 43 per cent of its former numbers. The others were returned to their villages or dead on the battlefield. In purely quantitative terms, the class that had led the revolution, the class whose democratic processes had constituted the living core of Soviet power, was halved in importance. In real terms the situation was even worse. What remained was not even half of that class, forced into collective action by the very nature of its life situation. Industrial output was only 18 per cent of the pre-war figure, labour productivity was only one third of what it had been. To keep alive, workers could not rely on what their collective product would buy. Many resorted to direct barter of their products – or even parts of their machines – with peasants for food. Not only was the leading class of the revolution decimated, but the ties linking its members together were fast disintegrating. The very personnel in the factories were not those who had constituted the core of the revolutionary movement of 1917. The most militant workers had quite naturally fought most at the front, and suffered most casualties. Those that survived were needed not only in the factories, but as cadres in the army, or as commissars to keep the administrators operating the State machine. Raw peasants from the countryside, without socialist traditions or aspirations, took their place.
But what was to be the fate of the revolution if the class that made it ceased to exist in any meaningful sense? This was not a problem that the Bolshevik leaders could have foreseen. They had always said that isolation of the revolution would result in its destruction by foreign armies and domestic counter-revolution. What confronted them now was the success of counterrevolution from abroad in destroying the class that had led the revolution while leaving intact the State apparatus built up by it. The revolutionary power had survived; but radical changes were being produced in its internal composition.
 
3. Soviet Power to Bolshevik Dictatorship
The revolutionary institutions of 1917 – above all, the Soviets – were organically connected with the class that had led the revolution. Between the aspirations and intentions of their members and those of the workers who elected them, there could be no gap. While the mass were Menshevik, the Soviets were Menshevik; when the mass began to follow the Bolsheviks, so did the Soviets. The Bolshevik party was merely the body of coordinated class-conscious militants who could frame policies and suggest causes of action alongside other such bodies, in the Soviets as in the factories themselves. Their coherent views and self-discipline meant that they could act to implement policies effectively – but only if the mass of workers would follow them.
Even consistent opponents of the Bolsheviks recognised this. Their leading Menshevik critic wrote:
“Understand please, that before us after all is a victorious uprising of the proletariat – almost the entire proletariat supports Lenin and expects its social liberation from the uprising ...” [2]
Until the Civil War was well under way, this democratic dialectic of party and class could continue. The Bolsheviks held power as the majority party in the Soviets. But other parties continued to exist there too. The Mensheviks continued to operate legally and compete with the Bolsheviks for support until June 1918.
The decimation of the working class changed all this. Of necessity the Soviet institutions took on a life independently of the class they had arisen from. Those workers and peasants who fought the Civil War could not govern themselves collectively from their places in the factories. The socialist workers spread over the length and breadth of the war zones had to be organised and coordinated by a centralised governmental apparatus independent of their direct control – at least temporarily.
It seemed to the Bolsheviks that such a structure could not be held together unless it contained within it only those who wholeheartedly supported the revolution – that is, only the Bolsheviks. The Right Social Revolutionaries were instigators of the counter-revolution. The Left Social Revolutionaries were willing to resort to terror when they disagreed with government policy. As for the Mensheviks, their policy was one of support of the Bolsheviks against the counter-revolution, with the demand that the latter hand over power to the Constituent Assembly (one of the chief demands of the counter-revolution). In practice this meant that the party contained both supporters and opponents of the Soviet power. Many of its members went over to the side of the Whites (e.g. Menshevik organisations in the Volga area were sympathetic to the counter-revolutionary Samara government, and one member of the Menshevik central committee, Ivan Maisky – later Stalin’s ambassador – joined it). [3] The response of the Bolsheviks was to allow the party’s members their freedom (at least, most of the time), but to prevent them acting as an effective political force – e.g. they were allowed no press after June 1918 except for 3 months in the following year.
In all this the Bolsheviks had no choice. They could not give up power just because the class they represented had dissolved itself while fighting to defend that power. Nor could they tolerate the propagation of ideas that undermined the basis of its power – precisely because the working class itself no longer existed as an agency collectively organised so as to be able to determine its own interests.
Of necessity the Soviet State of 1917 had been replaced by the single-party State of 1920 onwards. The Soviets that remained were increasingly just a front for Bolshevik power (although other parties, e.g. the Mensheviks, continued to operate in them as late as 1920). In 1919, for instance, there were no elections to the Moscow Soviet for over 18 months. [4]
 
4. Kronstadt and the NEP
Paradoxically, the end of the Civil War did not alleviate this situation, but in many ways aggravated it. For with the end of the immediate threat of counter-revolution, the cord that had bound together the two revolutionary processes – workers’ power in the towns and peasant uprisings in the country – was cut. Having gained control over the land, the peasants lost interest in the collectivist revolutionary ideals of October. They were motivated by individual aspirations arising out of their individualistic form of work. Each sought to maximise his own standard of living through his activities on his own plot of land. Indeed, the only thing which could now unite peasants into a coherent group was opposition to the taxes and forcible collections of grain carried out in order to feed the urban populations.
The high point of this opposition came a week before the tenth party Congress. An uprising of sailors broke out in the Kronstadt fortress, which guarded the approaches to Petrograd. Many people since have treated what happened next as the first break between the Bolshevik regime and its socialist intentions. The fact that the Kronstadt sailors were one of the main drives of the 1917 revolution has often been used as an argument for this. Yet at the time no one in the Bolshevik Party – not even the workers’ opposition which claimed to represent the antipathy of many workers to the regime – had any doubts as to what it was necessary to do. The reason was simple. Kronstadt in 1920 was not Kronstadt of 1917. The class composition of its sailors had changed. The best socialist elements had long ago gone off to fight in the army in the front line. They were replaced in the main by peasants whose devotion to the revolution was that of their class. This was reflected in the demands of the uprising: Soviets without Bolsheviks and a free market in agriculture. The Bolshevik leaders could not accede to such demands. It would have meant liquidation of the socialist aims of the revolution without struggle. For all its faults, it was precisely the Bolshevik party that had alone whole-heartedly supported Soviet power, while the other parties, even the socialist parties, had vacillated between it and the Whites. It was to the Bolsheviks that all the best militants had been attracted. Soviets without Bolsheviks could only mean Soviets without the party which had consistently sought to express the socialist, collectivist aims of the working class in the revolution. What was expressed in Kronstadt was the fundamental divergence of interest, in the long run, between the two classes that had made the revolution. The suppression of the uprising should be seen not as an attack on the socialist content of the revolution, but as a desperate attempt, using force, to prevent the developing peasant opposition to its collectivist ends from destroying it. [5]
Yet the fact that Kronstadt could occur was an omen. For it questioned the whole leading role of the working class in the revolution. This was being maintained not by the superior economic mode that the working class represented, not by its higher labour productivity, but by physical force. And this force was not being wielded directly by the armed workers, but by a party tied to the working class only indirectly, by its ideas, not directly as in the days of 1917.
Such a policy was necessary. But there was little in it that socialists could have supported in any other situation. Instead of being “the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority in the interest of the immense majority,” the revolution in Russia had reached the stage where it involved the exploitation of the country by the towns, maintained through naked physical force. It was clear to all groups in the Bolshevik party that this meant the revolution must remain in danger of being overthrown by peasant insurrections.
There seemed to be only one course open. This was to accept many of the peasant demands, while maintaining a strong, centralised socialist State apparatus. This the New Economic Policy (NEP) attempted to do. Its aim was to reconcile peasants to the regime and to encourage economic development by giving a limited range of freedom to private commodity production. The State and the State-owned industries were to operate as just one element in an economy governed by the needs of peasant production and the play of market forces.
 
5. The Party, the State and the working class 1921-8
In the period of the NEP the claim of Russia to be in any way “socialist” could no longer be justified either by the relationship of the working class to the State it had originally created or by the nature of internal economic relations. The workers did not exercise power and the economy was not planned. But the State, the “body of armed men” that controlled and policed society was in the hands of a party that was motivated by socialist intentions. The direction of its policies, it seemed, would be socialist.
Yet the situation was more complex than this. First, the State institutions that dominated Russian society were far from identical with the militant socialist party of 1917. Those who had been in the Bolshevik Party at the time of the February revolution were committed socialists who had taken enormous risks in resisting Tsarist oppression to. express their ideals. Even four years of civil war and isolation from the working masses could not easily destroy their socialist aspirations. But in 1919 these constituted only a tenth of the party, by 1922 a fortieth. In the revolution and Civil War, the party had undergone a continuous process of growth. In part this reflected the tendency of all militant workers and convinced socialists to join in. But it was also a result of other tendencies. Once the working class itself had been decimated, the party had had to take it upon itself to control all Soviet-run areas. This it could only do by increasing its own size. Further, once it was clear who was winning the Civil War, many individuals with little or no socialist convictions attempted to enter the party. The party itself was thus far from being a homogeneous socialist force. At best, only its leading elements and most militant members could be said to be really part of the socialist tradition.
This internal dilution of the party was paralleled by a corresponding phenomenon in the State apparatus itself. In order to maintain control over Russian society, the Bolshevik party had been forced to use thousands of members of the old Tsarist bureaucracy in order to maintain a functioning governmental machine. In theory the Bolsheviks were to direct the work of these in a socialist direction. In practice, old habits and methods of work, pre-revolutionary attitudes towards the masses in particular, often prevailed. Lenin was acutely aware of the implications of this:
“What we lack is clear enough,” he said at the March 1922 Party Congress. “The ruling stratum of the communists is lacking in culture. Let us look at Moscow. This mass of bureaucrats – who is leading whom? The 4,700 responsible communists, the mass of bureacrats, or the other way round? I do not believe you can honestly say the communists are leading this mass. To put it honestly, they are not the leaders but the led.”
At the end of 1922, he described the State apparatus as “borrowed from Tsarism and hardly touched by the Soviet world ... a bourgeois and Tsarist mechanism.” [6] In the 1920 controversy over the role of the trade unions he argued
“Ours is not actually a workers’ state, but a workers’ and peasants’ State ... But that is not all. Our party programme shows that ours is a workers’ state with bureaucratic distortions.” [7]
The real situation was even worse than this. It was not just the case that the old Bolsheviks were in a situation where the combined strength of hostile class forces and bureaucratic inertness made their socialist aspirations difficult to realise. These aspirations themselves could not remain forever uncorrupted by the hostile environment. The exigencies of building a disciplined army out of an often indifferent peasant mass had inculcated into many of the best party members authoritarian habits. Under the NEP the situation was different, but still far from the democratic interaction of leaders and led that constitutes the essence of socialist democracy. Now many party members found themselves having to control society by coming to terms with the small trader, the petty capitalist, the kulak. They had to represent the interests of the workers’ State as against these elements – but not as in the past through direct physical confrontation. There had to be limited co-operation with them. Many party members seemed more influenced by this immediate and very tangible relationship with petty bourgeois elements than by their intangible ties with a weak and demoralised working class.
Above all the influence of the old bureaucracy in which its members were immersed penetrated the party. Its isolation from class forces outside itself that would sustain its rule meant that the party had to exert over itself an iron discipline. Thus at the Tenth Party Congress, although it was presumed that discussion would continue within the party [8], the establishment of formal factions was “temporarily” banned. But this demand for inner cohesion easily degenerated into an acceptance of bureaucratic modes of control within the party. There had been complaints about these by opposition elements in the party as early as April 1920. By 1922 even Lenin could write that “we have a bureaucracy not only in the Soviet institutions, but in the institutions of the party.”
The erosion of inner-party democracy is best shown by the fate of successive oppositions to the central leadership. In 1917 and 1918 free discussion within the party, with the right of different groups to organise around platforms, was taken for granted. Lenin himself was in a minority in the party on at least two occasions (at the time of his April Theses and nearly a year later during the Brest Litovsk negotiations). In November 1917 it was possible for those Bolsheviks who disagreed with the party taking power alone, to resign from the government so as to force its hand without disciplinary action being taken against them. Divisions within the party over the question of the advance on Warsaw and over the role of the trade unions were discussed quite openly in the party press. As late as 1921 the Programme of the Workers’ Opposition was printed in a quarter of a million copies by the Party itself, and two members of the opposition elected to the Central Committee. In 1923 when the Left Opposition developed, it was still possible for it to express its views in Pravda, although there were ten articles defending the leadership to every one opposing it.
Yet throughout this period the possibilities of any opposition acting effectively were diminished. After the tenth Party Congress the Workers’ Opposition was banned. By 1923 the opposition Platform of the 46 wrote that “the secretarial hierarchy of the Party to an ever greater extent recruits the membership of conferences and congresses.” [9] Even a supporter of the leadership and editor of Pravda, Bukharin, depicted the typical functioning of the party as completely undemocratic:
“... the secretaries of the nuclei are usually appointed by the district committees, and note that the districts do not even try to have their candidates accepted by these nuclei, but content themselves with appointing these or those comrades. As a rule, putting the matter to a vote takes place according to a method that is taken for granted. The meeting is asked: ‘Who is against?’ and in as much as one fears more or less to speak up against, the appointed candidate finds himself elected ... [10]
The real extent of bureaucratisation was fully revealed when the “triumvirate” that had taken over the leadership of the Party during the illness of Lenin split. Towards the end of 1925 Zinoviev, Kamenev and Krupskaya moved into opposition to the party centre, now controlled by Stalin. Zinoviev was head of the party in Leningrad. As such he controlled the administrative machine of the northern capital and several influential newspapers. At the fourteenth Party Congress every delegate from Leningrad supported his opposition to the centre. Yet within weeks of the defeat of his opposition, all sections of the Party in Leningrad, with the exception of a few hundred inveterate oppositionists, were voting resolutions supporting Stalin’s policies. All that was required to accomplish this was the removal from office of the heads of the City Party administration. Who controlled the bureaucracy controlled the Party. When Zinoviev controlled it, it was oppositional. Now that Stalin had added the city to the nation-wide apparatus he controlled, it became an adherent of his policies. With a change of leaders a Zinovievist monolith was transformed into a Stalinist monolith.
This rise of bureaucracy in the Soviet apparatus and the Party began as a result of the decimation of the working class in the civil war. But it continued even when industry began to recover and the working class began to grow with NEP. Economic recovery rather than raising the position of the working class within the “workers’ state” depressed it.
In purely material terms the concessions made to the peasant in the NEP worsened the (relative) position of the worker.
“Everywhere acclaimed under war communism as the eponymous hero of the dictatorship of the proletariat, he was in danger of becoming the step-child of the NEP. In the economic crisis of 1923 neither the defenders of the official policy nor those who contested it in the name of the development of industry found it necessary to treat the grievances or the interests of the industrial worker as a matter of major concern.” [11]
But it was not only vis-a-vis the peasant that the status of the worker fell; it also fell compared with that of the directors and managers of industry. Whereas in 1922, 65 per cent of managing personnel were officially classified as workers, and 35 per cent as non-workers, a year later these figures were almost reversed, only 36 per cent being workers and 64 per cent non-workers. [12] The “red industrialists” began to emerge as a privileged group, with high salaries, and through “one-man management” in the factories, able to hire and fire at will. At the same time widespread unemployment became endemic to the Soviet economy, rising to a level of one and a quarter millions in 1923-4.
 
6. The divisions in the party 1921-29
Men make history, but in circumstances not of their own making. In the process they change both those circumstances and themselves. The Bolshevik Party was no more immune to this reality than any other group in history has been. In attempting to hold together the fabric of Russian society in the chaos of civil war, counter-revolution and famine, their socialist intentions were a factor determining the course of history; but the social forces they had to work with to do this could not leave the Party members themselves unchanged. Holding the Russia of the NEP together meant mediating between different social classes so as to prevent disruptive clashes. The revolution could only survive if the Party and State satisfied the needs of different, often antagonistic, classes. Arrangements had to be made to satisfy the individualistic aspirations of the peasants, as well as the collectivist democratic aims of socialism. In the process, the Party, which had been lifted above the different social classes, had to reflect within its own structure their differences. The pressures of the different classes on the Party caused different sections of the Party to define their socialist aspirations in terms of the interests of different classes. The one class with the capacity for exercising genuinely socialist pressures – the working class – was the weakest, the most disorganised, the least able to exert such pressures.
 
7. The Left Opposition
There can be no doubt that in terms of its ideas, the Left Opposition was the faction in the Party that adhered most closely to the revolutionary socialist tradition of Bolshevism. It refused to redefine socialism to mean either a slowly developing peasant economy or accumulation for the sake of accumulation. It retained the view of workers’ democracy as central to socialism. It refused to subordinate the world revolution to the demands of the chauvinistic and reactionary slogan of building “socialism in one country.”
Yet the Left Opposition could not be said to be in any direct sense the “proletarian” faction within the Party. For in the Russia of the twenties, the working class was the class that less than any other exerted pressure upon the Party. After the civil war, it was rebuilt in conditions which made its ability to fight for its own ends weak. Unemployment was high; the most militant workers had either died in the civil war or been lifted into the bureaucracy; much of the class was composed of peasants fresh from the countryside. Its typical attitude was not one of support for the opposition, but rather apathy towards political discussions, which made it easily manipulable from above – at least most of the time. The Left Opposition was in the situation, common to socialists, of having a socialist programme for working-class action when the workers themselves were too tired and dispirited to fight.
But it was not only the apathy of the workers that created difficulties for the opposition. It was also its own recognition of economic realities. Its argument emphasised that the objective lack of resources would make life hard whatever policies were followed. It stressed both the need to develop industry internally and the necessity for the revolution to spread as a means to doing this. But in the short term, it could offer little to the workers, even if a correct socialist policy was followed. When Trotsky and Preobrazhensky began to demand increased planning, they emphasised that this could not be done without squeezing the peasants and without the workers making sacrifices. The unified opposition of “Trotskyists” and “Zinovievists” in 1926 demanded as first priority certain improvements for the workers. But it was also realistic enough to denounce as utopian promises made to the workers by Stalin that far exceeded its own demands.
There is no space here to discuss the various platforms produced by the Left Opposition. But in outline they had three interlinked central planks.

– The revolution could only make progress in a socialist direction if the economic weight of the towns as against the country, of industry as against agriculture, was increased. This demanded planning of industry and a policy of deliberately discriminating against the wealthy peasant in taxation policy. If this did not happen the latter would accumulate sufficient economic power to subordinate the State to his interests, thus producing a Thermidor, internal counter-revolution.
– This industrial development had to be accompanied by increased workers’ democracy, so as to end bureaucratic tendencies in the Party and State.
– These first two policies could maintain Russia as a citadel of the revolution, but they could not produce that material and cultural level that is the prerequisite of socialism. This demanded the extension of the revolution abroad.

In purely economic terms, there was nothing impossible in this programme. Indeed its demand for planning of industrialisation and a squeezing of the peasant was eventually carried out – although in a manner which contradicted the intentions of the Opposition. But those who controlled the Party from 1923 onwards did not see the wisdom of it. Only a severe economic crisis in 1928 forced them to plan and industrialise. For five years before this they persecuted the Left and expelled its leaders. The second plank in the programme they never implemented. As for the third plank, this had been Bolshevik orthodoxy in 1923 [13]. only to be rejected by the Party leaders for good in 1925.
It was not economics that prevented the Party accepting this programme. It was rather the balance of social forces developing within the Party itself. The programme demanded a break with a tempo of production determined by the economic pressure of the peasantry. Two sorts of social forces had developed within the Party that opposed this.
 
8. The “Right” and the “Centre”
The first was the simplest. This was made up of those elements who did not see concessions to the peasant as being detrimental to socialist construction. They consciously wanted the Party to adjust its programme to the needs of the peasant. But this was not just a theoretical platform. It expressed the interest of all those in the Party and Soviet institutions who found cooperation with the peasants, including the Kulaks and capitalist farmers, and NEPmen, congenial. They found their theoretical expression in Bukharin, with his injunction to the peasants to “enrich themselves”.
The second drew its strength as much from social forces within the Party as outside. Its ostensible concern was to maintain social cohesion. As such it resisted the social tensions likely to be engendered, were there to be conscious effort to subordinate the country to the town, but did not go as far in its pro-peasant pronouncements as the Right. In the main, it was constituted by elements within the Party apparatus itself, whose whole orientation was to maintain Party cohesion through bureaucratic means. Its leader was the chief of the Party apparatus, Stalin.
To the Left Opposition at the time, the faction of Stalin seemed like a centrist group that oscillated between the traditions of the Party (embodied in the Left programme) and the Right. In 1928 when Stalin suddenly adopted the first plank of the opposition’s own programme, turning on the Right as viciously as he had only months before attacked the Left, and beginning industrialisation and the complete expropriation of the peasantry (so-called “collectivisation”), this interpretation received a rude shock. Stalin clearly had a social basis of his own. He could survive when neither the proletariat nor the peasantry exercised power.
If the Left Opposition was the result of groups motivated by the socialist and working-class traditions of the Party attempting to embody these in realistic policies, and the Right opposition a result of accommodation to peasant pressures on the Party, the successful Stalinist faction was based upon the Party bureaucracy itself. This had begun life as a subordinate element within the social structure created by the revolution. It merely fulfilled certain elementary functions for the workers’ Party. With the decimation of the working class in the civil war, the Party was left standing above the class. In this situation the role of maintaining the cohesion of the Party and State became central. Increasingly in the State and then in the Party, this was provided by bureaucratic methods of control – often exercised by ex-Tsarist bureaucrats. The Party apparatus increasingly exercised real power within the Party – appointing functionaries at all levels, choosing delegates to conferences. But if it was the Party and not the class that controlled the State and industry, then it was the Party apparatus that increasingly inherited the gains the workers had made in the revolution.
The first result of this in terms of policies was a bureaucratic inertness. The bureaucrats of the apparatus offered a negative resistance to policies which might disturb their position. They began to act as a repressive force against any group that might challenge their position. Hence their opposition to the programmes of the Left and their refusal to permit any real discussion of them. While the bureaucracy reacted in this negative way to threats of social disturbance, it quite naturally allied itself with the Right and Bukharin. This concealed its increasing existence as a social entity in its own right, with its own relationship to the means of production. Its repression of opposition in the Party seemed to be an attempt to impose a pro-peasant policy on the Party from above, not to be a part of its own struggle to remove any opposition to its own power in State and industry. Even after its proclamation of socialism in one country, its failures abroad seemed to flow more from bureaucratic inertia and the pro-peasant policies at home than from a conscious counter-revolutionary role.
Yet throughout this period the bureaucracy was developing from being a class in itself to being a class for itself. At the time of the inauguration of the NEP, it was objectively the case that power in the Party and State lay in the hands of a small group of functionaries. But these were by no means a cohesive ruling class. They were far from being aware of sharing a common intent. The policies they implemented were shaped by elements in the Party still strongly influenced by the traditions of revolutionary socialism. If at home objective conditions made workers’ democracy non-existent, at least there was the possibility of those motivated by the Party’s traditions bringing about its restoration given industrial recovery at home and revolution abroad. Certainly on a world scale the Party continued to play its revolutionary role. In its advice to foreign parties it made mistakes – and no doubt some of these flowed from its own bureaucratisation – but it did not commit crimes by subordinating them to its own national interests. Underlying the factional struggles of the twenties is the process by which this social grouping shook off the heritage of the revolution to become a self-conscious class in its own right.
 
9. Counter-Revolution
It is often said that the rise of Stalinism in Russian cannot be called “counter-revolution” because it was a gradual process (e.g. Trotsky said that such a view involved “winding back the film of reformism’). But this is to misconstrue the Marxist method. It is not the case that the transition from one sort of society to another always involves a single sudden change. This is the case for the transition from a capitalist State to a workers’ State, because the working class cannot exercise its power except all at once, collectively, by a clash with the ruling class in which, as a culmination of long years of struggle, the latter’s forces are defeated. But in the transition from feudalism to capitalism there are many cases m which there is not one sudden clash, but a whole series of different intensities and at different levels, as the decisive economic class (the bourgeoisie) forces political concessions in its favour. The counter-revolution in Russia proceeded along the second path rather than the first. The bureaucracy did not have to seize power from the workers all at once. The decimation of the working class left power in its hands at all levels of Russian society. Its members controlled industry and the police and the army. It did not even have to wrest control of the State apparatus to bring it into line with its economic power, as the bourgeoisie did quite successfully in several countries without a sudden confrontation. It merely had to bring a political and industrial structure that it already controlled into line with its own interests. This happened not “gradually,” but by a succession of qualitative changes by which the mode of operation of the Party was brought into line with the demands of the central bureaucracy. Each of these qualitative changes could only be brought about by a direct confrontation with those elements in the Party which, for whatever reason, still adhered to the revolutionary socialist tradition.
The first (and most important) such confrontation was that with the Left Opposition in 1923. Although the Opposition was by no means decisively and unambiguously opposed to what was happening to the Party (e.g. its leader, Trotsky had made some of the most outrageously substitutionist statements during the trade-union debate of 1920; its first public statement (the Platform of the 46) was accepted by its signatories only with numerous reservations and amendments), the bureaucracy reacted to it with unprecedented hostility. In order to protect its power the ruling group in the Party resorted to methods of argument unheard of before in the Bolshevik party. Systematic denigration of opponents replaced rational argument. The control of the secretariat of the Party over appointments began to be used for the first time openly to remove sympathisers of the opposition from their posts (e.g. the majority of the Komsomol Central Committee were dismissed and sent to the provinces after some of them had replied to attacks on Trotsky). To justify such procedures the ruling faction invented two new ideological entities, which it counterposed to one another. On the one hand it inaugurated a cult of “Leninism” (despite the protests of Lenin’s widow). It attempted to elevate Lenin to a semi-divine status by mummifying his dead body in the manner of the Egyptian pharaohs. On the other, it invented “Trotskyism” as a tendency opposed to Leninism, justifying this with odd quotations from Lenin of ten or even twenty years before, while ignoring Lenin’s last statement (his “Testament”) that referred to Trotsky as “the most able member of the Central Committee” and suggested the removal of Stalin. The leaders of the Party perpetrated these distortions and falsifications consciously in order to fight off any threat to their control of the Party (Zinoviev, at the time the leading member of the “triumvirate” later admitted this). In doing so, one section of the Party was showing that it had come to see its own power as more important than the socialist tradition of free inner-Party discussion. By reducing theory to a mere adjunct of its own ambitions, the Party bureaucracy was beginning to assert its identity as against other social groups.
The second major confrontation began in a different way. It was not at first a clash between members of the Party with socialist aspirations and the increasingly powerful bureaucracy itself. It began as a clash between the ostensible leader of the Party (at the time, Zinoviev) and the Party apparatus that really controlled. In Leningrad Zinoviev controlled a section of the bureaucracy to a considerable extent independently of the rest of the apparatus. Although its mode of operation was in no way different from that prevailing throughout the rest of the country, its very independence was an obstacle to the central bureaucracy. It represented a possible source of policies and activities that might disturb the overall rule of the bureaucracy. For this reason it had to be brought within the ambit of the central apparatus. In the process Zinoviev was forced from his leading position in the party. Having lost this, he began to turn once more to the historical traditions of Bolshevism and to the policies of the Left (although he never lost fully his desire to be part of the ruling bloc, continually wavering for the next ten years between the Left and the apparatus). With the fall of Zinoviev, power lay in the hands of Stalin, who with his unrestrained use of bureaucratic methods of control of the Party, his disregard for theory, his hostility to the traditions of the revolution in which his own role had been a minor one, his willingness to resort to any means to dispose of those who had actually led the revolution, above all epitomised the growing self-consciousness of the apparatus. All these qualities he exhibited to their full extent in the struggle against the new opposition. Meetings were packed, speakers shouted down, prominent oppositionists likely to find themselves assigned to minor positions in remote areas, former Tsarist officers utilised as agents provocateur to discredit oppositional groups. Eventually, in 1928, he began to imitate the Tsars directly and deport revolutionaries to Siberia. In the long run, even this was not to be enough. He was to do what even the Romanoffs had been unable to do: systematically murder those who had constituted the revolutionary Party of 1917.
By 1928 the Stalinist faction had completely consolidated its control in the Party and State. When Bukharin and the Right wing split from it, horrified by what they had helped to create, they found themselves with even less strength than the Left Oppositions had. But the Party was not in control of the whole of Russian society. The towns where real power lay were still surrounded by the sea of peasant production. The bureaucracy had usurped the gains of the working class in the revolution, but so far the peasantry remained unaffected. A mass refusal of the peasants to sell their grain in 1928 brought this home sharply to the bureaucracy.
What followed was the assertion of the power of the towns over the countryside that the Left Opposition had been demanding for years. This led certain oppositionists (Preobrazhensky, Radek) to make their peace with Stalin. Yet this policy was in its spirit the opposite of that of the Left. They had argued the need to subordinate peasant production to worker-owned industry in the towns. But industry in the towns was no longer worker-owned. It was under the control of the bureaucracy that held the State. Assertion of the domination of the town over the country was now the assertion not of the working class over the peasantry, but of the bureaucracy over the last part of society lying outside its control. It imposed this dominance with all the ferocity ruling classes have always used. Not only Kulaks, but all grades of peasants, whole villages of peasants, suffered. The “Left” turn of 1928 finally liquidated the revolution of 1917 in town and country.
There can be no doubt that by 1928 a new class had taken power in Russia. It did not have to engage in direct military conflict with the workers to gain power, because direct workers’ power had not existed since 1918. But it did have to purge the Party that was left in power of all those who retained links, however tenuous, with the socialist tradition. When a reinvigorated working class confronted it again, whether in Berlin or Budapest, or in Russia itself (e.g. Novo-Cherkassk in 1962), it used the tanks it had not needed in 1928.
The Left Opposition was far from clear about what it was fighting. Trotsky, to his dying day, believed that that State apparatus that was to hunt him down and murder him was a “degenerated workers’ one”. Yet it was that Opposition alone which fought day by day against the Stalinist apparatus’s destruction of the revolution at home and prevention of revolution abroad. [14] For a whole historical period it alone resisted the distorting effects on the socialist movement of Stalinism and Social Democracy. Its own theories about Russia made this task more difficult, but it still carried it out. That is why today any genuinely revolutionary movement must place itself in that tradition.
 
Top of the page
 
Notes
1. Trotsky, The Russian Revolution, p.72.
2. Martov to Axelrod, 19 November 1917, quoted in Israel Getzler, Martov, Cambridge, 1967.
3. Israel Getzler, op. cit., p.183.
4. Ibid., p.199.
5. See Trotsky, Hue and Cry over Kronstadt.
6. Quoted in Max Shachtman, The Struggle for the New Course, New York, 1943, p.150.
7. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.32, p.24.
8. See Lenin’s response to Riazanov’s demand that the habit of different groups within the Party putting forward “platforms” be prohibited: “We cannot deprive the Party and the members of the central committee of the right to appeal to the Party in the event of disagreement on fundamental issues. I cannot imagine how we can do such a thing!” Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.32, p.261.
9. Appendix to E.H. Carr, The Interregnum, p.369.
10. Quoted in Shachtman, op. cit., p.172.
11. E.H. Carr, op. cit., p.39.
12. Ibid.
13. Cf. Stalin, Lenin and Leninism, Russian ed. 1924, p40: “Can the final victory of socialism in one country be attained without the joint efforts of the proletariats of several advanced countries? No, this is impossible.” (Cited by Trotsky, The Third International after Lenin, p.36.)
14. We do not deal here with the earlier oppositions, e.g. the Workers’ Opposition and the Democratic Centralists. Although these arose as a response to the early bureaucratisation and degeneration of the revolution, they were also partly a utopian reaction against objective reality as such (i.e. the real strength of the peasants and the real weakness of the working class). What survived and mattered in the Workers’ Opposition eventually became part of the Left Opposition, while its leaders, Kollontai and Shlyapnikov, capitulated to Stalin.



A Short History of Ethics
Alasdair MacIntyre
Collier-Macmillan, 42s.
Secularisation and Moral Change
Alasdair MacIntyre
Oxford, 12s 6d.
Marxists always find themselves in an ambiguous position when discussion on ethical questions arises. On the one hand they want to deny the possibility of any ahistorical system of morality; on the other they are usually quite categorical that certain things like gas chambers and H-bombs are wrong. These two books by a writer at least very much influenced by Marxism (one does not know whether he still considers himself a Marxist) point to both the origins of and the necessity for this dilemma. They also show that it is not peculiar to Marxism.
The prime aim of the first book is to provide a concise account of the history of moral philosophy for university students. As such it is probably the best introduction available. But it is only this because it attempts to provide more than just a historical outline. In attempting to make meaningful the discussions that constitute the history of ethics it has to provide an interpretation of the relationship of ethical theory to moral practice, or more generally of philosophy to social life. MacIntyre’s starting point is that ‘Moral concepts change as social life changes.’ They ‘are embodied in and partially constitutive of forms of social life.’ The arguments of moral philosophy are then not just arguments about how an existing morality is to be justified, but between protagonists for different modes of social life.
To preçis here what the author says about different historical forms of ethical theory would both take up too much room and because of simplification inevitably distort complex and sophisticated arguments. The major criticism to be made is not of the argument itself, but rather that too much – top many philosophers, too many ideas – is crammed into too short a space.
For Marxists the author’s conclusions are interesting. He seems to rule out the possibility of meaningful ethical discussion between protagonists of rival positions.
‘Between the adherents of rival moralities and between the adherents of one morality and the adherents of none there exists no court of appeal, no impersonal moral standard.’
This seems close to the position he ascribes to Marx: ‘the situation (is) one in which moralising can no longer play a genuine role in settling social differences.’ But in fact the two positions are not identical. It is possible to hold the second without holding the first. Even if it is only material interests or individual caprice that force men to adopt a certain moral, and necessarily social and political, standpoint (and, as a matter of fact, it is not), this does not mean that all standpoints cannot be judged one against the other. The fact is that discussion between rival viewpoints does occur – precisely because certain premises seem to be shared. For instance, it would seem that no system could claim to be ‘moral’ that did not serve the end of maintaining human life. One can judge between different social commitments according to the degree to which they do this. Possibly in this sense scientific socialism is scientific morality.
Whatever one thinks of MacIntyre’s conclusions, there is no disputing that his Short History of Ethics is a a useful and interesting work. Unfortunately one cannot say the same about Secularisation and Moral Change. Insofar as the book has strength it is through a redrafting of arguments already contained in the Short History. What is added is very lightweight indeed; schematic and misleading pocket histories of the consciousnesses of different classes, aphoristic arguments with Marx that do not take Marx’s own arguments seriously, proofs that Bishops and judges are not privileged in making moral pronouncements. One wonders why it was produced. At points it seems to mouth under its breath vague references to socialist alternatives. Yet its audience is hardly likely to be any group that could take these seriously. The cover blurb says that Maclntyre’s ‘answers ... will prove illuminating to sociologists and churchmen.’ Unfortunately that is about all.



The Unfinished Revolution
Isaac Deutscher
Oxford, 25s
Isaac Deutscher was a great historian. Unfortunately this achievement was not carried through to analysis and interpretation of current events. Yet one fears that it is to the latter rather than the former that much of his present popularity is due.
Deutscher’s critical failing was that he refused to accept the immensity of the counter-revolution carried through by the bureaucracy of Stalin. This is clearly brought out in this book when he appears to suspend judgment upon the central issue of whether Russia is a class society. Yet even this suspension of judgment is ambiguous. He describes the ‘elements of power’ of the bureaucracy as having their ‘origin in an act of liberation,’ as if there was any real continuity between the centralised bureaucracy of today and the workers’ councils, between Lenin’s party and Kosygin’s. He writes that ‘the privileged groups have not solidified into a class,’ not because they have not succeeded in acting as a cohesive force (few classes in history have shown the same cohesion in acting ‘for themselves’ as, say, the Russian bureaucracy did in Hungary), but because they have not ‘obtained ... the sanction of social legitimacy.’
In appearance Deutscher’s views on these issues coincide with those of Trotsky. In reality the different context in which they appear makes them vitally different. Trotsky’s basic reaction was against the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy. His central concern was to refute all its pretentions, while continuing to assert the achievements of 1917. He could carry out this polemic against the deformation of the revolution without giving any positive characterisation of the bureaucracy and of its relation to the social forces of production. His failure to grasp adequately the inner dynamic of Russian society did not impede him in his revolutionary critique.
Thirty years later the same characterisation cannot have the same meaning. Rather than being a part of a movement away from the bureaucracy it becomes part of a movement towards it. Much of Deutscher’s current comments reflected this movement. At points he seemed to identify the rationalisation of its rule that the bureaucracy carried through in the mid-fifties with Trotsky’s ‘political revolution.’ He never understood the revolutionary significance of the risings against the bureaucracy in 1956. He never grasped the real depths of the divisions between the state capitalist countries; for him the ‘socialist’ nature of these meant that policy differences could only be ephemeral.
This not only made much of what he said politically suspect, it also meant that his unparalleled ability to describe the development of history was not matched by a grasp of its inner dialectic. This was even true of his magnificent biography of Trotsky. For instance he described in full detail the decimation and destruction of the Russian working class in the civil war (in The Prophet Unarmed), yet failed to see this fundamental balance of class forces as determining what followed. In the present book this is even more so. The difficulties in his interpretation are not obscured here by the lucidity of the presentation of historical material. At points the split within the dialectic between conceptual schema (e.g. the ‘fate of every revolution’) and disjointed empirical observations becomes complete. Hence a tendency towards that apparent willingness to discuss isolated points within a dogmatically held world view that characterises so much liberal empiricist sociology.
This perhaps explains the appeal of the book to a wide variety of audiences. He can appeal to liberal Stalinists because he accepts Stalin as carrying forward the historic mission of the revolution (even if peace, bread and land do turn into permanent war, hunger and collectivisation). He can appeal to would-be Trotskyists by showing that at many points the policies of the opposition would have made this task easier. Above all he can appeal to the academic leftists of the New Left Review sort. For here is exactly the sort of analysis needed if one is to succeed in both being with the bureaucracy and being liberal, in obtaining vicarious pleasure from the successes of different ‘socialist rulers’ and remaining safe in Hampstead. For revolutionary socialists there is little of interest in all this. By reading Deutscher’s biographies one can begin a re-evaluation of Russia, Stalin and Trotsky, but it will be very different from the one provided by Deutscher here.



Essays on the Materialistic Conception of History
Antonio Labriola
Monthly Review
Historical Materialism and the Economics of Karl Marx
Benedetto Croce
Cass, 42s
Pareto and Mosca
Ed. J.H. Meisel
Prentice-Hall, 20s
One of the more important by-products of the destruction of the Russian revolution and the Comintern by Stalinism has been the complete distortion of Marxist theory. Current debate was prevented by all sorts of means ranging from murder to emotional blackmail. But the traditions of Marxist discussion were also distorted by a more or less conscious sifting of the classics. Works at best limited in their relevance (What is to be Done?, Empirio-Criticism, much of Anti-Dühring) were proclaimed as universal truths. Other writings, not benefiting from the cheap printing and massive propaganda available from Moscow, faded into oblivion. One of the writers most to suffer (outside Italy at least) was Labriola. For decades his Essays on the Materialistic Conception of History have been virtually unobtainable. Yet they are one of the best expositions of historical materialism. That is not to say that they are perfect. Their style may not be immediately appealing and some of their factual content is dated. But had they been more readily available much that still passes as Marxism and much that still passes as academically respectable criticism of Marxism could not have seemed like the real thing.
Croce’s book consists of essays which attempt to criticise or elucidate various concepts of Marxism. These first appeared in the 1890s as Croce himself was moving away from his earlier Marxism to his later peculiar form of idealism. Their approach is essentially eclectic. Nurtured on Labriola, Croce could not accept the facile criticisms of Marxism made, for instance, by subjectivist economists. But neither does he reject them. Instead he tries to combine them; alongside the ‘sociological’ economics of Marx there is supposed to be room for the ‘general’ economics of the Austrian school. The only merit of this position is that it is more honest than so many other ‘refutations’ of Marx.
Pareto and Mosca were Italian contemporaries of Labriola and Croce. Despite substantial differences both believed in the inevitability of a small class ruling society. This enabled them to combine a view of society emphasising class struggle with a conservative elitism. The selection of essays Meisel has edited are in the main critical, pointing the empty, almost tautological character of the theories and their reactionary consequences (Pareto sympathised with the Fascists). But the very emptiness of the theory means that criticism of it can hardly be interesting, even if ideologically satisfying.



The Radical Papers
Ed. Irving Howe
Doubleday, $1.45c.
Fabianism has always combined a willingness to countenance the major dimensions of the existing system with a Utopian belief in the ability of men of good will to change individual, particularly nasty, aspects of it. The result has always been a combination of simplistic naiveté with the nastiest forms of realpolitik. The latest collection from the American ‘democratic socialists’ around Dissent is no exception. For them it is the Democratic Party that has to be permeated and the welfare state that can be influenced. The fact that both embody quite definite social forces, and will only change when these are changed, is ignored. Where repression exists, as in Harlem, it is blamed on ‘moral indifference, social timidity and racial meanness.’ The ongoing systems of exploitation that constitute these hardly exist for the authors. Above all the realities of modern society are just ignored. ‘The Western democracies are still far less guilty ... of the drive toward transforming man into a passive object manipulable in behalf of abstract slogans, production plans and other mystifying apparitions ... than the Communist nations.’ It might seem like this to the liberal sociologist, but one doubts if the difference between life on the factory floor in Moscow and Detroit is perceptible. The very real ‘manipulation’ of men with napalm and other means in Vietnam is dismissed in an aside as ‘failures, stupidity and reactionary.’ Despite the general tone of the book one or two essays, in particular the one by Harold Rosenberg, are worth reading.



Few questions have produced more bitterness in Marxist circles than that of the relation between the party and the class. More heat has probably been generated in acrimonious disputes over this subject than any other. In generation after generation the same epiphets are thrown about – “bureaucrat”, “substitutionist”, “elitist”, “autocrat”.
Yet the principles underlying such debate have usually been confused. This despite the importance of the issues involved. For instance, the split between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks that occurred over the nature of the organisation of the party in 1903 found many of those who were to be on the opposite side of the barricades to Lenin in 1917 in his faction (for instance, Plekhanov), while against him were revolutionaries of the stature of Trotsky and Rosa Luxemburg. Nor was this confusion an isolated incident. It has been a continuous feature of revolutionary discussion. It is worth recalling Trotsky’s remarks, at the second Congress of the Comintern, in reply to Paul Levi’s contention that the mass of workers of Europe and America understood the need for a party. Trotsky points out that the situation is much more complex than this:
If the question is posed in the abstract then I see Scheidemann on the one side and, on the other, American or French or Spanish syndicates who not only wish to fight against the bourgeoisie, but who, unlike Scheidemann, really want to tear its head off – for this reason I say that I prefer to discuss with these Spanish, American or French comrades in order to prove to them that the party is indispensable for the fulfilment of the historical mission which is placed upon them ... I will try to prove this to them in a comradely way, on the basis of my own experience, and not by counterposing to them Scheidemann’s long years of experience saying that for the majority the question has already been settled ... What is there in common between me and a Renaudel who excellently understands the need of the party, or an Albert Thomas and other gentlemen whom I do not even want to call ‘comrades’ so as not to violate the rules of decency? [1]
The difficulty to which Trotsky refers – that both Social Democrats and Bolsheviks refer to the “need for a party”, although what they mean by this are quite distinct things – has been aggravated in the years since by the rise of Stalinism. The vocabulary of Bolshevism was taken over and used for purposes quite opposed to those who formulated it. Yet too often those who have continued in the revolutionary tradition opposed to both Stalinism and Social Democracy have not taken Trotsky’s points in 1920 seriously. They have often relied on “experience” to prove the need for a party, although the experience is that of Stalinism and Social Democracy.
It will be the contention of this argument that most of the discussion even in revolutionary circles is, as a consequence, discussion for or against basically Stalinist or Social-Democratic conceptions of organisation. It will be held that the sort of organisational views developed implicitly in the writings and actions of Lenin are radically different to both these conceptions. This has been obscured by the Stalinist debasement of the theory and practice of the October revolution and the fact that the development of the Bolshevik Party took place under conditions of illegality and was often argued for in the language of orthodox Social Democracy.
 
The Social-Democratic View of the Relation of Party and Class
The classical theories of Social Democracy – which were not fundamentally challenged by any of the Marxists before 1914 – of necessity gave the party a central role in the development towards socialism. For this development was seen essentially as being through a continuous and smooth growth of working-class organisation and consciousness under capitalism. Even those Marxists, such as Kautsky, who rejected the idea that there could be a gradual transition to socialism accepted that what was needed for the present was continually to extend organisational strength and electoral following. The growth of the party was essential so as to ensure that when the transition to socialism inevitably came, whether through elections or through defensive violence by the working class, the party capable of taking over and forming the basis of the new state (or the old one refurbished) would exist.
The development of a mass working-class party is seen as being an inevitable corollary of the tendencies of capitalist development. “Forever greater grows the number of proletarians, more gigantic the army of superfluous labourers, and sharper the opposition between exploiters and exploited” [2], crises “naturally occur on an increasing scale” [3], “the majority of people sink ever deeper into want and misery” [4], “the intervals of prosperity become ever shorter; the length of the crises ever longer”. [5] This drives greater numbers of workers “into instinctive opposition to the existing order”. [6] Social Democracy, basing itself upon “independent scientific investigation by bourgeois thinkers” [7], exists to raise the workers to the level where they have a “clear insight into social laws”. [8] Such a movement “springing out of class antagonisms ... cannot meet with anything more than temporary defeats, and must ultimately win”. [9] “Revolutions are not made at will ... They come with inevitable necessity.” The central mechanisms involved in this development is that of parliamentary elections (although even Kautsky played with the idea of the General Strike in the period immediately after 1905-6). [10] “We have no reason to believe that armed insurrection ... will play a central role nowadays.” [11] Rather, “it (parliament) is the most powerful lever that can be used to raise the proletariat out of its economic, social and moral degradation.” [12] The uses of this by the working class makes “parliamentarianism begin to change its character. It ceases to be a mere tool in the hands of the bourgeoisie.” [13] In the long run such activities must lead to the organisation of the working class and to a situation where the socialist party has the majority and will form the government. “... (The Labour Party) must have for its purpose the conquest of the government in the interests of the class it represents. Economic development will lead naturally to the accomplishment of this purpose.” [14]
Not only did this perspective lay the basis for most socialist action throughout western Europe in the 40 years prior to the First World War, it also went virtually unchallenged theoretically, at least from the Left. Lenin’s astonishment at the SPD’s support for the war is well known. Not so often understood, however, is the fact that even Left critics of Kautsky, such as Rosa Luxemburg, had not rejected the foundations of the theory of the relation of the party to the class and of the development of class consciousness implied. Their criticisms of Kautskyism tended to remain within the overall theoretical ground provided by Kautskyism.
What is central for the Social Democrat is that the party represents the class. Outside of the party the worker has no consciousness. Indeed, Kautsky himself seemed to have an almost pathological fear of what the workers would do without the party and of the associated dangers of a “premature” revolution. Thus it had to be the party that takes power. Other forms of working-class organisation and activity can help, but must be subordinated to the bearer of political consciousness. “This ‘direct action’ of the unions can operate effectively only as an auxiliary and reinforcement to and not as a substitute for parliamentary action.” [15]
 
The Revolutionary Left and Social-Democratic Theories
No sense can be made of any of the discussions that took place in relation to questions of organisation of the party prior to 1917 without understanding that this Social-Democratic view of the relation of party and class was nowhere explicitly challenged (except among the anarchists who rejected any notion of a party). Its assumptions were shared even by those, such as Rosa Luxemburg, who opposed orthodox Social Democracy from the point of view of mass working-class self-activity. This was not a merely theoretical failing. It followed from the historical situation. The Paris Commune was the only experience then of working-class power, and that had been for a mere two months in a predominantly petty-bourgeois city. Even the 1905 revolution gave only the most embryonic expression of how a workers’ state would in fact be organised. The fundamental forms of workers’ power – the Soviets, the workers’ councils – were not recognised. Thus Trotsky, who had been President of the Petrograd Soviet in 1905, does not mention them in his analysis of the lessons of 1905, Results and Prospects. Virtually alone in foreseeing the socialist content of the Russian revolution, Trotsky did not begin to see the form this would take.
Revolution is first and foremost a question of power – not of the state form (constituent assembly, republic, united states) but of the social content of the government. [16]
There was a similar omission in Rosa Luxemburg’s response to 1905, The Mass Strike. Not until the February revolution did the Soviet become central in Lenin’s writings and thoughts. [17]
The revolutionary Left never fully accepted Kautsky’s position of seeing the party as the direct forerunner of the workers’ state. Luxemburg’s writings, for instance, recognise the conservatism of the party and the need for the masses to go beyond and outside it from a very early stage. [18] But there is never an explicit rejection of the official Social-Democratic position. Yet without the theoretical clarification of the relationship between the party and the class there could be no possibility of clarity over the question of the necessary internal organisation of the party. Without a rejection of the Social-Democratic model, there could not be the beginnings of a real discussion about revolutionary organisation.
This is most clearly the case with Rosa Luxemburg. It would be wrong to fall into the trap (carefully laid by both Stalinist and would-be followers of Luxemburg) of ascribing to her a theory of “spontaneity” that ignores” the need for a party. Throughout her writings there is stress upon the need for a party and the positive role it must play:
In Russia, however, the Social-Democratic Party must make up by its own efforts an entire historical period. It must lead the Russian proletarians from their present "atomised" condition, which prolongs the autocratic regime, to a class organisation that would help them to become aware of their historical objectives and prepare them to struggle to achieve those objectives. [19]
The task of Social Democracy does not consist in the technical preparation and direction of mass strikes, but first and foremost in the political leadership of the whole movement. [20]
The Social Democrats are the most enlightened, the most class-conscious vanguard of the proletariat. They cannot and dare not wait, in a fatalistic fashion with folded arms for the advent of the “revolutionary situation”. [21]
Yet there is a continual equivocation in Luxemburg’s writings on the role of the party. She was concerned that the leading role of the party should not be too great – for she identified this as “the prudent position of Social Democracy”. [22] She identified “centralism”, which she saw as anyway necessary (“the Social Democracy is, as a rule, hostile to any manifestation of localism or federalism” [23]) with the “conservatism inherent in such an organ (i.e. the Central Committee)”. [24] Such equivocation cannot be understood without taking account of the concrete situation Luxemburg was really concerned about. She was a leading member of the SPD, but always uneasy about its mode of operation. When she really wanted to illustrate the dangers of centralism it was to this that she referred:
The present tactical policy of the German Social Democracy has won universal esteem because it is supple as well as firm. This is a sign of the fine adaptation of our party to the conditions of a parliamentary regime ... However, the very perfection of this adaptation is already closing vaster horizons to our party.
Brilliantly prophetic as this is of what was to happen in 1914, she does not begin to explain the origins of the increasing sclerosis and ritualism of SPD, let alone indicate ways of fighting this. Conscious individualists and groups cannot resist this trend. For “such inertia is due, to a large degree to the fact that it is inconvenient to define, within the vacuum of abstract hypotheses, the lines and forms of non-existent political situations”. [25] Bureaucratisation of the party is seen as an inevitable phenomenon that only a limitation on the degree of cohesion and efficiency of the party can overcome.
It is not a particular form of organisation and conscious direction, but organisation and conscious direction as such that limit the possibilities for the “self-conscious movement of the majority in the interests of the majority”.
The unconscious comes before the conscious. The logic of history comes before the subjective logic of the human beings who participate in the historic process. The tendency is for the directing organs of the socialist party to play a conservative role. [26]
There is a correct and important element in this argument: the tendency for certain sorts of organisations to be unable (or unwilling) to respond to a rapidly changing situation. One only has to think of the Maximalist wing of the Italian Socialist Party in 1919, the whole of the “centre” of the Second International in 1914, the Menshevik-Internationalists in 1917, or the KPD in 1923. Even the Bolshevik Party contained a very strong tendency to exhibit such conservatism. But Luxemburg, having made the diagnosis, makes no attempt to locate its source, except in epistemological generalities, or looks for organisational remedies. There is a strong fatalism in her hope that the “unconscious” will be able to correct the “conscious”. Despite her superb sensitivity to the peculiar tempo of development of the mass movement – particularly in The Mass Strike – she shies away from trying to work out a clear conception of the sort of political organisation that can harness such spontaneous developments. Paradoxically this most trenchant critic of bureaucratic ritualism and parliamentary cretinism argued in the 1903 debate for precisely that faction of the Russian party that was to be the most perfected historical embodiment of these failings: the Mensheviks. In Germany political opposition to Kautskyism, which already was developing at the turn of the century and was fully formed by 1910, did not take on concrete organisational forms for another five years.
Considerable parallels exist between Luxemburg’s position and that which Trotsky adheres to up to 1917. He too is very aware of the danger of bureaucratic ritualism:
The work of agitation and organisation among the ranks of the proletariat has an internal inertia. The European Socialist Parties, particularly the largest of them, the German Social-Democratic Party, hive developed an inertia in proportion as the great masses have embraced socialism and the morethese masses have become organised and disciplined. As a consequence of this, Social Democracy as an organisation embodying the political experience of the proletariat may at a certain moment become a direct obstacle to open conflict between the workers and bourgeois reaction. [27]
Again his revolutionary spirit leads him to distrust all centralised organisation. Lenin’s conception of the party can, according to Trotsky in 1904, only lead to the situation in which:
The organisation of the Party substitutes itself for the party as a whole; then the Central Committee substitutes itself for the organisation; and finally the “dictator” substitutes himself for the Central Committee. [28]
But for Trotsky the real problems of working-class power can only be solved,
by way of systematic struggle between ... many trends inside socialism, trends which will inevitably emerge as soon as the proletarian dictatorship poses tens and hundreds of new ... problems. No strong “domineering” organisation will be able to suppress these trends and controversies ... [29]
Yet Trotsky’s fear of organisational rigidity leads him also to support that tendency in the inner-party struggle in Russia which was historically to prove itself most frightened by the spontaneity of mass action. Although he was to become increasingly alienated from the Mensheviks politically, he did not begin to build up an organisation in opposition to them until very late. Whether he was correct or not in his criticisms of Lenin in 1904 (and we believe he was wrong), he was only able to become an effective historical actor in 1917 by joining Lenin’s party.
If organisation does produce bureaucracy and inertia Luxemburg and the young Trotsky were undoubtedly right about the need to limit the aspirations towards centralism and cohesion among revolutionaries. But it is important to accept all the consequences of this position. The most important must be a historical fatalism. Individuals can struggle among the working class for their ideas, and these ideas can be important in giving workers the necessary consciousness and confidence to fight for their own liberation. But revolutionaries can never build the organisation capable of giving them effectiveness and cohesion in action comparable to that of those who implicitly accept present ideologies. For to do so is inevitably to limit the self-activity of the masses, the “unconscious” that precedes the “conscious”. The result must be to wait for “spontaneous” developments among the masses. In the meantime one might as well put up with the organisations that exist at present, even if one disagrees with them politically, as being the best possible, as being the maximum present expression of the spontaneous development of the masses.
 
Lenin and Gramsci on the Party and the Class
In the writings of Lenin there is an ever-present implicit recognition of the problems that worry Luxemburg and Trotsky so much. But there is not the same fatalistic succumbing to them. There is an increasing recognition that it is not organisation as such, but particular forms and aspects of organisation that give rise to these. Not until the First World War and then the events in 1917 gave an acute expression to the faults of old forms of organisation did Lenin begin to give explicit notice of the radically new conceptions he himself was developing. Even then these were not fully developed. The destruction of the Russian working class, the collapse of any meaningful Soviet system (i.e. one based upon real workers’ councils), and the rise of Stalinism, smothered the renovation of socialist theory. The bureaucracy that arose with the decimation and demoralisation of the working class took over the theoretical foundations of the revolution, to distort them into an ideology justifying its own interests and crimes. Lenin’s view of what the party is and how it should function in relation to the class and its institutions, was no sooner defined as against older Social-Democratic conceptions with any clarity than it was again obscured by a new Stalinist ideology.
Many of Lenin’s conceptions are, however, taken up and given clear and coherent theoretical form by the Italian Antonio Gramsci. [30] What is usually ignored by commentators on Lenin is that throughout his writings are two intertwined and complementary conceptions, which to the superficial observer seem contradictory. Firstly there is continual stress on the possibilities of sudden transformations of working-class consciousness, on the unexpected upsurge that characterises working-class self-activity, on deep-rooted instincts in the working class that lead it to begin to reject habits of deference and subservience.
In the history of revolutions there come to light contradictions that have ripened for decades and centuries. Life becomes unusually eventful. The masses, which have always stood in the shade and therefore have often been despised by superficial observers, enter the political arena as active combatants ... These masses are making heroic efforts to rise to the occasion and cope with the gigantic tasks of world significance imposed upon them by history; and however great individual defeats may be, however shattering to us the rivers of blood and the thousands of victims, nothing will ever compare in importance with this direct training that the masses and the classes receive in the course of the revolutionary struggle itself. [31]
... We are able to appreciate the importance of the slow, steady and often imperceptible work of political education which Social Democrats have always conducted and always will conduct. But we must not allow what in the present circumstances would be still more dangerous – a lack of faith in the powers of the people. We must remember what a tremendous educational and organisational power the revolution has, when mighty historical events force the man in the street out of his remote garret or basement corner, and make a citizen of him. Months of revolution sometimes educate citizens more quickly and fully than decades of political stagnation. [32]
The working class is instinctively, spontaneously Social Democratic. [33]
The special condition of the proletariat in capitalistic society leads to a striving of workers for socialism; a union of them with the Socialist Party bursts forth with a spontaneous force in the very early stages of the movement. [34]
Even in the worst months after the outbreak of war in 1914 he could write:
The objective war-created situation ... is inevitably engendering revolutionary sentiments; it is tempering and enlightening all the finest and most class-conscious proletarians. A sudden change in the mood of the masses is not only possible, but is becoming more and more probable ... [35]
In 1917 this faith in the masses leads him in April and in August-September into conflict with his own party:
Lenin said more than once that the masses are to the Left of the party. He knew the party was to the Left of its own upper layer of “old Bolsheviks”. [36]
In relation to the “Democratic Conference” he can write:
We must draw the masses into the discussion of this question. Class-conscious workers must take the matter into their own hands, organise the discussion and exert pressure on “those at the top”. [37]
There is, however, a second fundamental element in Lenin’s thought and practice: the stress on the role of theory and of the party as the bearer of this. The most well known recognition of this occurs in What is to be done when Lenin writes that “Without revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary practice.” [38] But it is the theme that recurs at every stage in his activities, not only in 1903, but also in 1905 and 1917 at exactly the same time that he was cursing the failure of the party to respond to the radicalisation of the masses. And for him the party is something very different from the mass organisations of the whole class. It is always a vanguard organisation, membership of which requires a dedication not to be found in most workers. (But this does not mean that Lenin ever wanted an organisation only of professional revolutionaries. [39]) This might seem a clear contradiction. Particularly as in 1903 Lenin uses arguments drawn from Kautsky which imply that only the party can imbue the class with a socialist consciousness, while later he refers to the class being more “to the Left” than the party. In fact, however, to see a contradiction here is to fail to understand the fundamentals of Lenin’s thinking on these issues. For the real theoretical basis for his argument on the party is not that the working class is incapable on its own of coming to theoretical socialist consciousness. This he admits at the second congress of the RSDLP when he denies that “Lenin takes no account whatever of the fact that the workers too have a share in the formation of an ideology” and adds that “... The ‘economists’ have gone to one extreme. To straighten matters out somebody had to pull in the other direction – and that is what I have done.” [40]
The real basis for his argument is that the level of consciousness in the working class is never uniform. However rapidly the mass of workers learn in a revolutionary situation, some sections will still be more advanced than others. To merely take delight in the spontaneous transformation is to accept uncritically whatever transitory products this throws up. But these reflect the backwardness of the class as well as its movement forward, its situation in bourgeois society as well as its potentiality of further development so as to make a revolution. Workers are not automatons without ideas. If they are not won over to a socialist world view by the intervention of conscious revolutionaries, they will continue to accept the bourgeois ideology of existing society. This is all the more likely because it is an ideology that flavours all aspects of life at present and is perpetuated by all media. Even were some workers “spontaneously” to come to a fully fledged scientific standpoint they would still have to argue with others who had not.
To forget the distinction between the vanguard and the whole of the masses gravitating towards it, to forget the vanguard’s constant duty of raising ever-wider sections to its own advanced level, means simply to deceive oneself, to shut one’s eyes to the immensity of our tasks, and to narrow down these tasks. [41]
This argument is not one that can be restricted to a particular historical period. It is not one, as some people would like to argue, that applies to the backward Russian working class of 1902 but not to those in the advanced nations today. The absolute possibilities for the growth of working-class consciousness may be higher in the latter, but the very nature of capitalist society continues to ensure a vast unevenness within the working class. To deny this is to confuse the revolutionary potential of the working class with its present situation. As he writes against the Mensheviks (and Rosa Luxemburg!) in 1905:
Use fewer platitudes about the development of the independent activity of the workers – the workers display no end of independent revolutionary activity which you do not notice! – but see to it rather that you do not demoralise undeveloped workers by your own tailism. [42]
There are two sorts of independent activity. There is the independent activity of a proletariat that possesses revolutionary initiative, and there is the independent activity of a proletariat that is undeveloped and held in leading strings ... There are Social Democrats to this day who contemplate with reverence the second kind of activity, who believe they can evade a direct reply to pressing questions of the day by repeating the word “class” over and over again. [43]
In short: stop talking about what the class as a whole can achieve, and start talking about how we as part of its development are going to act. As Gramsci writes:
Pure spontaneity does not exist in history: it would have to coincide with pure mechanical action. In the “most spontaneous” of movements the elements of “conscious direction” are only uncontrollable ... There exists a multiplicity of elements of conscious direction in these movements, but none of them is predominant ... [44]
Man is never without some conception of the world. He never develops apart from some collectivity. “For his conception of the world a man always belongs to some grouping, and precisely to that of all the social elements who share the same way of thinking and working.” Unless he is involved in a constant process of criticism of his world view so as to bring it the coherence:
He belongs simultaneously to a multiplicity of men-masses, his own personality is made up in a queer way. It contains elements of the caveman and principles of the most modern advanced learning, shabby prejudices of all past historical phases, and intuitions of a future philosophy of the human race united all over the world. [45]
The active man of the masses works practically, but does not have a clear theoretical consciousness of his actions, which is also a knowledge of the world insofar as he changes it. Rather his theoretical consciousness may be opposed to his actions. We can almost say that he has two theoretical consciousnesses (or one contradictory consciousness), one implicit in his actions, which unites him with all his colleagues in the practical transformation of reality, and one superficially explicit or verbal which he has inherited from the past and which he accepts without criticism ... (This division can reach the point) where the contradiction within his consciousness will not permit any action, any decision, any choice, and produces a state of moral and political passivity. [46]
... All action is the result of diverse wills affected with a varying degree of intensity, of consciousness, of homogeneity with the entire mass of the collective will ... It is clear that the corresponding, implicit theory will be a combination of beliefs and points of view as confused and heterogeneous. (If practical forces released at a certain historical point are to be) effective and expansive (it is necessary to) construct on a determined practice a theory that, coinciding with and being identified with the decisive elements of the same practice, accelerates the historical process in act, makes the practice more homogeneous, coherent, more efficacious in all its elements ... [47]
In this sense the question as to the preferability of “spontaneity” or “conscious direction” becomes that of whether it is:
preferable to think without having a critical awareness, in a disjointed and irregular way, in other words to “participate” in a conception of the world “imposed” mechanically by external environment, that is by one of the many social groups in which everyone is automatically involved from the time he enters the conscious world, or is it preferable to work out one’s own conception of the world consciously and critically. [48]
Parties exist in order to act in this situation to propagate a particular world view and the practical activity corresponding to it. They attempt to unite together into a collectivity all those who share a particular world view and to spread this. They exist to give homogeneity to the mass of individuals influenced by a variety of ideologies and interests. But they can do this in two ways.
The first Gramsci characterises as that of the Catholic Church. This attempts to bind a variety of social classes and strata to a single ideology. It attempts to unite intellectuals and “ordinary people” in a single organised world view. But it can only do this by an iron discipline over the intellectuals that reduces them to the level of the “ordinary people”. “Marxism is antithetical to this Catholic position.” Instead it attempts to unite intellectuals and workers so as to constantly raise the level of consciousness of the masses, so as to enable them to act truly independently. This is precisely why Marxists cannot merely “worship” the spontaneity of the masses: this would be to copy the Catholics in trying to impose on the most advanced sections the backwardness of the least.
For Gramsci and Lenin this means that the party is constantly trying to make its newest members rise to the level of understanding of its oldest. It has always to be able to react to the “spontaneous” developments of the class, to attract those elements that are developing a clear consciousness as a result of these.
To be a party of the masses not only in name, we must get ever-wider masses to share in all party affairs, steadily to elevate them from political indifference to protest and struggle, from a general spirit of protest to an adoption of Social-Democratic views, from adoption of these views to support of the movement, from support to organised membership in the party. [49]
The party able to fulfil these tasks will not, however, be the party that is necessarily “broadest”. It will be an organisation that combines with a constant attempt to involve in its work ever wider circles of workers, a limitation on its membership to those willing to seriously and scientifically appraise their own activity and that of the party generally. This necessarily means that the definition of what constitutes a party member is important. The party is not to be made up of just anybody who wishes to identify himself as belonging to it, but only those willing to accept the discipline of its organisations. In normal times the numbers of these will be only a relatively small percentage of the working class; but in periods of upsurge they will grow immeasurably.
There is an important contrast here with the practice in Social-Democratic parties. Lenin himself realises this only insofar as Russia is concerned prior to 1914, but his position is clear. He contrasts his aim – a really iron strong organisation”, a “small but strong party” of “all those who are out to fight” – with the “sprawling monster, the new Iskra motley elements of the Mensheviks”. [50] This explains his insistence on making a principle out of the question of the conditions for membership of the party when the split with the Mensheviks occurred.
Within Lenin’s conception those elements that he himself is careful to regard as historically limited and those of general application must be distinguished. The former concern the stress on closed conspiratorial organisations and the need for careful direction from the top down of party officials, etc.
Under conditions of political freedom our party will be built entirely on the elective principle. Under the autocracy this is impracticable for the collective thousands of workers that make up the party. [51]
Of much more general application is the stress on the need to limit the. party to those who are going to accept its discipline. It is important to stress that for Lenin (as opposed to many of his would-be followers) this is not a blind acceptance of authoritarianism. The revolutionary party exists so as to make it possible for the most conscious and militant workers and intellectuals to engage in scientific discussion as a prelude to concerted and cohesive action. This is not possible without general participation in party activities. This requires clarity and precision in argument combined with organisational decisiveness. The alternative is the “marsh” – where elements motivated by scientific precision are so mixed up with those who are irremediably confused as to prevent any decisive action, effectively allowing the most backward to lead. The discipline necessary for such a debate is the discipline of those “who have “combined by a freely adopted decision”. [52] Unless the party has clear boundaries and unless it is coherent enough to implement decisions, discussion over its decisions, far from being “free” is pointless. Centralism for Lenin is far from being the opposite of developing the initiative and independence of party members; it is the precondition of this. It is worth noting how Lenin summed up the reasons for his battle for centralism over the previous two years in 1905. Talking of the role of the central organisation and of the central paper he says that the result was to be the:
creation of a network of agents ... that ... would not have to sit round waiting for the call to insurrection, but would carry out such regular activity that would guarantee the highest probability of success in the event of an insurrection. Such activity would strengthen our connections with the broadest masses of the workers and with all strata that are discontented with the aristocracy ... Precisely such activity would serve to cultivate the ability to estimate correctly the general political situation and, consequently, the ability to select the proper moment for the uprising. Precisely such activity would train all local organisations to respond simultaneously to the same political questions, incidents, and events that agitate the whole of Russia and to react to these “incidents” in the most rigorous, uniform and expedient manner possible ... [53]
By being part of such an organisation worker and intellectual alike are trained to assess their own concrete situation in accordance with the scientific socialist activity of thousands of others. “Discipline” means acceptance of the need to relate individual experience to the total theory and practice of the party. As such it is not opposed to, but a necessary prerequisite of the ability to make independent evaluations of concrete situations. That is also why “discipline” for Lenin does not mean hiding differences that exist within the party, but rather exposing them to the full light of day so as to argue them out. Only in this way can the mass of members make scientific evaluations. The party organ must be open to the opinions of those it considers inconsistent.
It is necessary in our view to do the utmost – even if it involves certain departures from tidy patterns of centralism and from absolute obedience to discipline – to enable these grouplets to speak out and give the whole Party the opportunity to weigh the importance or unimportance of those differences and to determine where, how and on whose part inconsistency is shown. [54]
In short, what matters is that there is political clarity and hardness in the party so as to ensure that all its members are brought into its debate and understand the relevance of their own activity. That is why it is absurd, as the Mensheviks tried to do, and as some people still do, to confuse the party with the class. The class as a whole is constantly engaged in unconscious opposition to capitalism; the party is that section of it that is already conscious and unites to try to give conscious direction to the struggle of the rest. Its discipline is not something imposed from the top downwards, but rather something that is voluntarily accepted by all those who participate in its decisions and act to implement these.
 
The Social-Democratic Party, the Bolshevik Party and the Stalinist Party
We can now see the difference between the party as Lenin conceived it and the Social-Democratic party simultaneously envisaged and feared by Rosa Luxemburg and Trotsky. The latter was thought of as a party of the whole class. The coming to power of the class was to be the party taking power. All the tendencies within the class had to be represented within it. Any split within it was to be conceived of as a split within the class. Centralisation, although recognised as necessary, was feared as a centralisation over and against the spontaneous activity of the class. Yet it was precisely in this sort of party that the “autocratic” tendencies warned against by Luxemburg were to develop most. For within it the confusion of member and sympathiser, the massive apparatus needed to hold together a mass of only half politicised members in a series of social activities, led to a toning down of political debate, a lack of political seriousness, which in turn reduced the ability of the members to make independent political evaluations, increased the need for apparatus-induced involvement. Without an organisational centralisation aimed at giving clarity and decisiveness to political differences, the independence of the rank-and-file members was bound to be permanently undermined. Ties of personal affection or of deference to established leaders become more important than scientific, political evaluation. In the marsh, where no one takes a clear road, even if the wrong one, then there is no argument as to which is the right one. Refusal to relate organisational ties to political evaluations, even if done under the noble intention of maintaining a “mass party” necessarily led to organisational loyalties replacing political ones. This in turn entailed a failure to act independently given opposition from old colleagues (the clearest example of this tendency was undoubtedly Martov in 1917).
It is essential to understand that the Stalinist party is not a variant of the Bolshevik party. It too was dominated by organisational structures. Adherence to the organisation rather than to the politics of the organisation mattered. Theory existed to justify an externally determined practice, not vice-versa. Organisational loyalties of the apparatus are responsible for political decisions (the former relate in turn to the needs of the Russian state apparatus). It is worth noting that in Russia a real victory of the apparatus over the party required precisely the bringing into the party of hundreds of thousands of “sympathisers”, a dilution of the “party” by the “class”. At best politically unsure of themselves, the “Lenin levy” could be relied upon to defer to the apparatus. The Leninist party does not suffer from this tendency to bureaucratic control precisely because it restricts its membership to those willing to be serious and disciplined enough to take political and theoretical issues as their starting point, and to subordinate all their activities to these.
But does this not imply a very elitist conception of the party? In a sense it does, although this is not the fault of the party, but of life itself, which gives rise to an uneven development of working-class consciousness. The party to be effective has to aim at recruiting alt those it conceives of as being most “advanced”. It cannot reduce its own level of science and consciousness merely in order not to be an “élite”. It cannot, for instance, accept that chauvinist workers are “as good as” internationalist party members, so as to take account of the “self-activity” of the class. But to be a “vanguard” is not the same as to substitute one’s own desires, or policies or interests for those of the class.
Here it is important to see that for Lenin the party is not the embryo of the workers’ state – the Workers’ Council is. The working class as a whole will be involved in the organisations that constitute its state, the most backward as well as the most progressive elements. “Every cook will govern.” In Lenin’s major work on the state, the party is hardly mentioned. The function of the party is not to be the state, but rather to carry out continual agitation and propaganda among more backward elements of the class so as to raise their self consciousness and self reliance to the pitch that they will both set up workers’ councils and fight to overthrow the forms of organisation of the bourgeois state. The Soviet state is the highest concrete embodiment of the self-activity of the whole working class; the party is that section of the class that is most conscious of the world historical implications of this self-activity.
The functions of the workers’ state and of the party should be quite different (which is why there can be more than one party in a workers’ state). One has to represent all the diverse interests of all the sections – geographical, industrial, etc – of the workers. It has to recognise in its mode of organisation all the heterogeneity of the class. The party, on the other hand, is built around those things that unite the class nationally and internationally. It constantly aims, by ideological persuasion, to overcome the heterogeneity of the class. It is concerned with national and international political principles, not parochial concerns of individual groups of workers. It can only persuade, not coerce these into accepting its lead. An organisation that is concerned with participating in the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism by the working class cannot conceive of substituting itself for the organs of direct rule of that class. Such a perspective is only available to the Social-Democratic or Stalinist Party (and both have been too afraid of mass self-activity to attempt this substitution through revolutionary practice in advanced capitalist countries). Existing under capitalism, the revolutionary organisation will of necessity have a quite different structure to that of the workers’ state that will arise in the process of overthrowing capitalism. [55] The revolutionary party will have to struggle within the institution of the workers’ state for its principles as against those with opposed ones; this is only possible because it itself is not the workers’ state. [56]
This enables us to see that Lenin’s theory of the party and his theory of the state are not two separate entities, capable of being dealt with in isolation from one another. Until he developed the theory of the state, he tended to regard the Bolshevik Party as a peculiar adaptation to Russian circumstances. Given the Social-Democratic (and later the Stalinist) conception of the party becoming the state, it is only natural for genuinely revolutionary and therefore democratic socialists not to want to restrict the party to the most advanced sections of the class, even if the need for such an organisation of the most conscious sections is recognised. This explains Rosa Luxemburg’s ambiguity over the question of political organisation and theoretical clarity. It enables her to counterpose the “errors committed by a truly revolutionary movement” to the “infallibility of the cleverest central committee”. But if the party and the institutions of class power are distinct (although one attempts to influence the other) the “infallibility” of the one is a central component in the process by which the other learns from its errors. It is Lenin who sees this. It is Lenin who draws the lessons, not (at least until the very end of her life) Luxemburg. It is not true that “For Marxists in the advanced industrial countries, Lenin’s original position can much less serve as a guide than Rosa Luxemburg’s ...” [57] The need is still to build an organisation of revolutionary Marxists that will subject their situation and that of the class as a whole to scientific scrutiny, will ruthlessly criticise their own mistakes, and will, while engaging in the everyday struggles of the mass of workers, attempt to increase their independent self-activity by unremittingly opposing their ideological and practical subservience to the old society. A reaction against the identification of class and party elite made by both Social Democracy and Stalinism is very healthy. It should not, however, prevent a clear-sighted perspective of what we have to do to overcome their legacy.
 
Top of the page
 
Notes
1. Leon Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol.1, New York 1977, p.98.
2. Karl Kautsky, The Erfurt Program, Chicago 1910, p.8.
3. ibid.
4. ibid., p.43.
5. ibid., p.85.
6. ibid., p.198.
7. ibid., p.198.
8. ibid., p.198.
9. Karl Kautsky, The Road to Power, Chicago 1910, p.24.
10. See Karl Kautsky, Social Revolution, p.45. Also Carl E. Schorske, German Social Democracy 1905-1917, Cambridge, Mass. 1955, p.115.
11. Karl Kautsky, op. cit., p.47.
12. Karl Kautsky, The Erfurt Program, p.188.
13. ibid., p.188.
14. ibid., p.189.
15. Karl Kautsky, The Road to Power, p.95.
16. Leon Trotsky in Nashe Slovo, 17th October 1915. Quoted in Leon Trotsky, Permanent Revolution, London 1962, p.254.
17. e.g. Although these are referred to as “organs of revolutionary rule”, in an important article on perspectives in Sotsial-democrat in 1915, they receive very little emphasis – references to them accounting for only five or six lines in an article of four pages.
18. cf. both Organisational Questions of the Russian Social-Democracy (published by her epigones under the title Leninism or Marxism), and The Mass-Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions.
19. Rosa Luxemburg, Leninism or Marxism, Ann Arbor 1962, p.82. Interesting enough, Lenin, in his reply, does not concentrate on the question of centralism in general, but on factual mistakes and distinctions in Luxemburg’s article.
20. Rosa Luxemburg, The Mass Strike, p.57.
21. ibid.
22. Rosa Luxemburg, Leninism or Marxism, p.92.
23. ibid., p.85.
24. ibid., p.94.
25. ibid., p.93.
26. ibid., p.93.
27. Leon Trotsky, Results and Prospects (1906), in The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects, London 1962, p.246.
28. Quoted in I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, London 1954, pp.92-93.
29. ibid.
30. Unfortunately there is no room here to deal with Trotsky’s later discussion on these matters.
31. V.I. Lenin, Revolutionary Days (31st January 1905), in Collected Works, Vol.VIII, p.104.
32. V.I .Lenin, Revolutionary Army and Revolutionary Government, ibid., p.564.
33. Quoted in Raya Dunyevskaya, Marxism and Freedom, New York 1958, p.182.
34. ibid.
35. V.I. Lenin, The Collapse of the Second International, in Collected Works, Vol.XXI, pp.257-8.
36. Leon Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, London 1965, p.981.
37. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.XXVI, pp.57-58.
38. V.I. Lenin, What is to be Done, Moscow, n.d., p.25.
39. q.v. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.VII, p.263.
40. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.VI, p.491.
41. ibid., Vol.VII, p.265.
42. ibid., Vol.VIII,p.157.
43. ibid., Vol.VIII, p.155.
44. Antonio Gramsci, Passato e Presente, Turin 1951, p.55.
45. Antonio Gramsci, The Modern Prince and other Essays, London 1957, p.59.
46. ibid., pp.66-67.
47. Antonio Gramsci, Il Materialismo storico e la filosofia di Benedetto Croce, Turin 1948, p.38.
48. Antonio Gramsci, The Modern Prince and other Essays, p.67.
49. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.VII, p.117.
50. ibid., Vol.VIII, p.145.
51. ibid., Vol.VIII, p.196.
52. V.I. Lenin, What is to be Done, p.11.
53. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.VIII, p.154.
54. ibid., Vol.VII, p.116.
55. For a naïve statement of the opposite view see An Open Letter to IS Comrades, Solidarity Special, September 1968.
56. Some confusion creeps into the argument because of the experience of Russia after 1918. The Important point, however, is that it is not the form of the party that produces party as opposed to Soviet rule, but the decimation of the working class. (See C. Harman, How the Revolution Was Lost, IS 30) Cliff makes this point in Trotsky on Suhstitutionalism, but for some unaccountable reason, also says that in Trotsky’s early claims that Lenin’s theory of organisation was “substitutionist”, “one can see his prophetic genius, his capacity for looking ahead, to bring into a unified system every facet of life”.
57. T. Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, London 1959, p.54. Here again Cliff’s desire to honour a great revolutionary seems to overcome a genuine scientific evaluation.



The Quicksand War
Lucien Bodard
Faber, 45s
North Vietnam: A Documentary
John Gerassi
Allen & Unwin, 45s
Ho Chi Minh
Jean Lacouture
Allen Lane, the Penguin Press, 35s
Government and Revolution in Vietnam
D.J. Duncanson
Chatham House/Oxford, 63s
The first three of these books about Vietnam are by journalists. This has the advantage that they are readable and full of information, but leave much in the way of analysis to be desired. The fourth is not even readable. It is a collection of often irrelevant (and often unfactual) facts on the history of the Vietnamese conflict to justify the author’s beliefs – in Ngo Dinh Diem as the best leader the Vietnamese have had, and in ‘America’s unprecedentedly altruistic help.’ The author was, it should be added, an advisor to the Americans in Vietnam for four years. If the advice he gave them stems from the same level of understanding as he shows in this book, it is probably the NLF that owe him thanks.
Bodard’s book is an account of the war waged by the French in Indo-China up to 1950. Its earlier sections deal with life in Saigon on the French side – the corruption, the intrigues, the authorities and the various groups to differing extents parasitic upon their presence – the puppet emperor, the gangsters, the sects, and even the same Nam Bo Vietminh that was fighting them in the countryside. The war is shown as only intruding on to this scene occasionally – in particular for a brief period of mass demonstrations and near insurrection that all but brought the Vietminh to power. The later sections go on to describe the gradual wearing down and piecemeal destruction of the occupying forces in the far north. The trouble is it is all looked at from the French side. Any real appreciation of either the aspirations of the Vietminh or the decades of oppression that had nourished these is lacking. At points the author even accepts the glib, and more or less racist, rationalisations of the colonising community.
Gerassi provides an account of some of the atrocities he witnessed during a stay in North Vietnam together with a number of Vietnamese analyses and descriptions of what is taking place. Important for anyone who still believes in the benevolence of the Americans; useless (one hopes!) for IS readers.
Lacouture is a French liberal with a good deal of sympathy for the NLF and North Vietnam. He does not hide his revulsion from American policies. But neither does his biography of Ho Chi Minn operate at the level of idolatry. It is an account of a lifetime of activities, from the early years of the French CP through the Stalinist Comintern to the two anti-imperialist wars. The trouble with it basically is that it does not begin to come to grips with the sorts of social forces embodied in first the Vietminh and now the NLF. For instance, he does not see that to talk about Ho-the-Nationalist as against Ho-the-old-Stalinist is facile in a world in which increasingly the only future for nationalist regimes built by indigenous intellectuals and petty officials on a peasant base is a state capitalist one. The result is that there is page after page of more or less superficial discussion.
But there are also useful outlines of the major events of the Vietnamese struggle. Although, for instance, the author himself refers to Ho’s ‘masterly helmsmanship’ his account makes it clear that Ho was remarkably naive in taking French negotiators at their face-value in 1945-6 and ignoring the other forces that were bound to intervene, betray his trust, and force the yietnamese to fight again from less favourable positions. The importance of the Vietnamese Communists was not due to their ability at analysing situations (an ability which Stalin had effaced from virtually the entire international Communist movement) or even their initiation of struggles, but rather from their capacity at organising and giving cohesion to forces that were going to struggle anyway.
It is worth noting that as an introduction to what is happening in Vietnam none of these books compares with the Penguin edited by Marvin Gettleman two or three years ago and still available ...
 



Antonio Gramsci and the Origins of Italian Communism
John M. Cammett
Stanford/OUP 68s
When the hurricane of revolution hit Europe in the years after 1917 a new generation of Marxists rose to direct and aid it. Not content merely to reiterate established doctrines or just to extend in a quantitative sense the compass of Marxist interpretation, they ensured that the revolution in practice was accompanied by a renovation of theory. The theories and writings of Lenin and Trotsky are only the pinnacle of an intellectual ferment in every socialist movement in Europe. Yet this was not to last. The rise of Stalinism was once again to reduce Marxism to the level of an apology for a pre-ordained political practice. Those who had participated in the reforging of Marxism were either transformed into ideologues for the Russian bureaucracy or forced to try to maintain a scientific socialist tradition in the sort of sects on the periphery of the established movement from which they had emerged with the revolution.
Antonio Gramsci was to occupy a unique place in this movement. His personal history meant that like Lenin (who died just as the bureaucracy began its climb to power) he was never forced into an open head-on clash with the new deformation of socialism. Arrested by the fascists in 1926 he was to be in prison for the decisive years in which Stalinism established itself as an international force and was to die before the bureaucracy definitively settled accounts with the revolution by murdering its leaders. [1] This has meant that his heritage has seemed to be peculiarly ambiguous. Within Italy all sorts of tendencies claim to follow his ideas: Stalinists and Trotskyists, Maoists and ‘Revisionists,’ bureaucrats and activists. Yet outside Italy his writings have until recently been largely unknown. And when reference has been made to him as often as not it has been by narrow groups of intellectuals who have presented his ideas only to distort them. The appearance of Cammett’s book must do much to remedy these deficiencies. Although at first sight it might seem like a typical product of the American thesis industry it is in fact a clear and accurate presentation of many of Gramsci’s contributions to socialist theory which shows how these developed out of a real process of action and polemic. This is not only of historic interest; it must also serve as a corrective to the distortion Gramsci’s theories have suffered in the hands of those who ignore the concrete situation in which they arose. The crucial experience influencing Gramsci’s theories was that which the working class of Italy (and in particular Turin) went through in the period between the first world war and the rise of fascism. This was characterised by an unprecedented level of industrial militancy culminating in huge stay-in strikes when the workers actually took over the physical running of the factories and an adhesion to the most extreme left-wing form of social democracy. All this occurred in a period in which the ruling class was deeply divided over fundamental issues, the state machine half paralysed, while in the South peasant movements threatened the established order. Yet the outcome was not to be socialism but the complete
destruction of independent working-class organisation. Gramsci’s practical concerns at this time and his later theorising in his Prison Notebooks were both a reaction against the sorts of policies and organisation that had been so capable of creating defeat out of insurgency.
Two series of concerns predominate in Gramsci’s thought. One is round the question of the state. What are the crucial differences between a workers’ state and a bourgeois state? How can the elements of a workers’ state be developed out of working-class struggle in bourgeois society? Where in the concrete reality of a given country (Italy) at a particular stage in the struggle are these elements to be found? The other set concerns the role of the party and of theory. How can this be developed so as to be able to relate to the experience of the masses while enabling them to transcend the routine of everyday existence in bourgeois society?
These concerns are intimately linked in Gramsci’s thought. Although the question of the state tends to predominate in the period of Ordine Nuovo (1918-21) and the question of the party and theory in the Prison Notebooks (1926-34), they are organically linked in a total view of the problems of revolutionary organisation. It is only later interpreters of Gramsci who have separated the two, either because they wished to justify the rule of a party not based upon working-class democracy (e.g. Togliatti) or because they wished to glorify the development of theory and of intellectualism unrelated to concrete practice (e.g. the epigones around New Left Review in this country). In fact both concerns arise out of the failure of the Italian revolution.
The concern with the state centres around the attempt to find an Italian analogue to the Russian Soviets. Here Gramsci differentiates himself from those who attempt to see the elements of the workers’ state as being an existing party; in his time the left social democrats, the maximalists and the ultra-lefts, the Bordigists; today it is a position characteristic of Stalinists and certain would-be ‘Trotskyists;’ or in existing forms of official trade-union organisation. He holds that ‘the socialist state already exists potentially in the institutions of social life characteristic of the exploited labouring class. To collect together these institutions to coordinate them and subordinate them in a hierarchy of functions and powers, to strongly centralise them while respecting their necessary autonomies and articulations, means to have already created a true and proper workers’ democracy in efficacious and active opposition to the bourgeois state, already prepared to replace the bourgeois state in all its essential functions ...’ This cannot be achieved by the party or the unions which are of necessity voluntary organs, encompassing only the most conscious sections of the working class. The party has to guide and educate the masses; it cannot absorb them so as to be the organ of their self-activity without failing in its own essential functions. ‘But the social life of the masses is full of institutions articulating with each other in a multiplicity of activities.’ These can give rise to a ‘political form that contains in itself the power of developing itself, of continually integrating itself so as to become the foundation of the socialist state ...’ For this reason Gramsci focusses on the workers’ organisation he considers most intimately related to the life of the masses: the institution of ‘factory commissars,’ which in many ways resemble shop-stewards. ‘The internal commissars are organs of working-class democracy that must be freed from the limitations imposed by the managers, and into which new life and energy must be infused. Today the internal commissars limit the power of the capitalist in the factory and develop functions of decision and discipline. Developed and enriched they must tomorrow be the organs of proletarian power that replace the capitalist in all his useful functions of direction and administration.’ (All quotations from Democrazia Operaia in Ordine Nuovo, Turin, 1954, p.10.) This concern with the state attempts to adapt the theory of State and Revolution to the concrete situation of Italy in the period immediately following the first world war It is worth emphasising because most discussions of Gramsci in English minimise
the importance of these writings. [2] They in fact represent one of the most fruitful attempts to extend and make concrete Lenin’s writings on the state. But in concentrating on finding an Italian form for the Soviet, Gramsci tended to be less concerned with specifically political forms of organisation. In 1919 and 1920 the industrial struggle reached unparalleled peaks. But only in Turin did anything approaching the Italian Soviets envisaged by Gramsci develop. While the maximalist leaders of the Socialist Party talked about Soviets they did nothing to give concrete form to them. Indeed the abstract adherence of the official leaders to the idea of a Soviet state impeded its actual development. Gramsci was well aware of this. ‘The formula "dictatorship of the proletariat" must stop being a mere formula, an occasion for giving vent to revolutionary phraseology. If one wills the end one must will the means.’ But he lacked the independent political organisation that could generalise the experiences of Turin and present a viable alternative to the phraseology of the Maximalists. The tragedy of Italy in the twenties was that the working class was to suffer decisive defeats before such an organisation had been created. It is in the light of this that one must view Gramsci’s later concern with problems of theory and leadership. This centres around three questions: firstly, how to build an organisation that helps workers come to a consistent revolutionary socialist consciousness, by struggling against the ideas of the ruling class and their vestiges in ‘common sense;’ secondly how to develop an autonomous tradition of Marxist theory that does not itself reflect the existing subordination of the working class to capitalism by an overemphasis on the element of mechanism and determinism in social life; finally there is a concern, arising out of specifically Italian developments, with the role of intellectuals in mediating between diffuse subordinate classes (of the petty bourgeois and peasant type) and the competing programmes of the major classes.
This section of Gramsci’s work is notoriously difficult to understand. Most of it was produced under extremely difficult conditions while he suffered in fascist prisons. But just as in Lenin the theory of the party and the stress on the battle of ideas is a necessary correlate of the theory of the state. It is not for Gramsci, as for his epigones, a disjointed intellectual exercise. Here again Cammett’s book is extremely good at rendering many of the basic ideas comprehensible and implicitly correcting the self-consciously obscure interpretations of them that have often been circulated until now.
Any such work is bound to contain errors of interpretation and of fact. The main disagreement with Cammett must be over his tendency to equate Gramsci with the party that Togliatti later controlled. This is dependent however more on an acceptance of Togliatti’s revolutionary pretensions than on a distortion of Gramsci’s own position. Thus Cammett notes the divergence of Gramsci from the party line on the United Front in the early thirties. Given Gramsci’s history of opposition to a Bordigist position that in many ways resembled that of third-period Stalinism this was hardly surprising, but he ignores Togliatti’s role in imposing these policies from the Comintern. He just ignores the contrast between the revolutionary spirit of Gramsci and the role of Italian Communism in helping the reimposition of a discredited capitalism after the war. But these are minor blemishes on a fine book. Get hold of a copy and read it.

Footnotes
1. This is not to say he was ignorant of everything that was happening. One of his last acts as a party leader was to write to Togliatti expressing dismay at the conflict within the Russian Party. Victor Serge, who had met him at Comintern meetings in Moscow, claims that Gramsci returned to Italy (and arrest) in 1926 as a reaction against the distasteful atmosphere in the Comintern.
2. The worst example is the Lawrence and Wishart translation called The Modern Prince. Only two articles from this period are included, and one is so cut up as virtually to destroy the sense of the arguments. But less obviously Stalinist interpreters have been almost as bad: see for instance the output of those around NLR in this country or the review of Cammett by Genovese in Studies on the Left.
 



The Tyranny of Concepts – A Critique of Marxism
Gordon Leff
Merlin, 21s.
The Problem of Method
J.-P. Sartre
Methuen, 30s.
Marx is a perennial problem for the professional academicians of our society. Each generation is plagued by the need to dispose of him. And each generation in turn sees him survive to present a problem for the next generation.
Leff’s book is a product of one of the present array of critics of Marx. It is easily readable, well and carefully argued and sympathetic to left values. But like so many of the same genre it fails miserably. The underlying fault this time is that basic facts about the history of the development of Marxist thought are ignored. In fact, although the author does not know it, the book is not about Marxism at all. It is an intelligent criticism of the distorted dogma that Stalin and his theoretical henchmen created out of Marxism. As such the author has little difficulty in winning arguments. The ‘dialectics’ of Stalin or even of the young Lenin for instance, are easily disposed of. But such treatment does not begin to wrestle with the problems with which Marx or the Lenin of the Philosophical Notebooks were concerned.
Some criticisms of Marxism are essential reading for any Marxist. This is not one. No work which mentions Stalin fifteen times in the index and Gramsci, Trotsky, Luxemburg, Korsch or Marcuse not once, could be.
Sartre’s work is in an entirely different category. The title itself is witness to this. There is a concern with genuine problems; the aim is not merely to effect another ritual burial.
Sartre’s aim is firstly to justify the development of existentialism as a philosophical position independently of and in opposition to Marxism, and secondly to develop an expanded Marxist method in which the insights of existentialism are absorbed. In particular he is concerned with the dehumanising elements in Marxism that have enabled existentialism to outlive the abstract Hegelianism against which it initially rebelled.
He argues that this situation can only be transcended if Marxists employ a method that relates individual suffering and action to the social structure. He claims that the fault of existent Marxism is that it ignores the processes by which individual actions are transmuted into social forces. Instead it accepts social forces as forces in themselves, and the reification that this involves.
The fault with Sartre’s own exposition of this problem is that he himself never succeeds in explaining how we are to comprehend these processes of transformation. At times it seems that these social forces are to be accepted as an objective environment in which individuals act and suffer only to reproduce them; at others as if we could only come to a knowledge of them by an arithmetic summation of individual social acts.
For the most part this does not matter. Sartre’s chief concern is with the use of Marxism for purely intellectual analysis (e.g. of Flaubert). Here the lack of illumination on how to construct a total model of society does not matter. The totality can be presumed. But when he tries to apply this to problems of political analysis the fault in the method is revealed. Sartre argues that attempts to, say, see the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 as a fascist counter-revolution or as a workers’ rejection of bureaucracy are wrong. Why? Because both – equally – mean an underestimation of the historical novelty and uniqueness of the uprising as a fact. But this points to a fundamental methodological error on Sartre’s part. He is in fact arguing that judgement on the fact, that is any attempt to relate it to a total view of society, must be suspended. But for Marxists the whole point of such judgements is their utility in changing the world. And this praxis alone can test the validity of the total view. This means that the one thing we cannot do is to suspend judgements.
Sartre’s method in no way indicates how we are to comprehend the totality. He offers no alternative to the Marxist emphasis on conscious praxis. But this he implicitly rejects. The result is that he alternates between implicit acceptance of an already constructed totality, and rejection (again implicitly) of any totality. Most of the time his concern seems to be to fit the particular fact with which he is concerned into a total view that he accepts, more or less uncritically, in an intellectually honest and convincing way.
It is worth emphasising here that the totality which Sartre accepts is that held to by liberal Stalinists. Although particular acts of the ‘socialist’ states can be criticised, it is accepted that they are ‘unconsciously’ moving towards socialism. In a recent edition of Temps Moderne Sartre wrote a piece on Togliatti. Even Michael Foot’s biography of Bevan was not written in such sycophantic terms. Togliatti’s support for Kadar and his ilk was seen as being of only minor significance; his role in restoring capitalism in Italy ignored. Perhaps this provides an apt commentary on Sartre’s book. The intellectual inadequacies of Stalinism – its theoretical crudity, its bureaucratic manipulation of fact – are rejected. It is hard to see today how any self-respecting intellectual in bourgeois society could do otherwise. But its overriding claims are accepted. Sartre tries to find a new method transcending traditional Marxism. In doing so he says much that is interesting. But the end result of this labour is only to offer an existentialist conscience to the Stalinist hack.



Labouring Men
E.J. Hobsbawm
Weidenfield & Nicolson, 55s.
Collected together in this book are some of the most perceptive studies available on British working-class history. Some of the most important and interesting episodes in the development of the class are discussed and analysed without scholarship being sacrificed to sympathy. It would be difficult to find a single one among the eighteen studies that is without relevance to an understanding of the present situation of the labour movement.
The essays deal with a very mixed bag of topics. The early essays can be seen either as prolegomena for or as footnotes to Thompson’s Making of the English Working Class. The later are in the main concerned with the development of trade unionism – particularly General Unionism – and of the various political trends in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The mode of presentation is just as heterogeneous. This is inevitable, as the essays originally appeared in journals as diverse as The New Statesman and the Economic History Review.
Many of Hobsbawm’s judgements cannot, of course, be uncritically accepted. For instance he seems completely to miss the point about Fabianism. He argues – probably correctly – that the Society had less influence on the development of the Labour movement than, say, did the Social Democratic Federation, or even Engels’ small group. The real problem, however, is not the influence of the Fabians themselves, but the ability of Fabianism to provide an ideological basis for the pragmatic reformism of trade-union leaders after 1926 and the parliamentary party after 1931. Further the closer to the present one gets, the more the analysis is marred by the author’s optimistic evaluation of the British Communist Party. Certainly it seems that his residual Stalinism might make him – for example – overestimate the calibre of the leadership that the BSP passed on to the CP.
But these are minor faults in a book as important as this. Parts of it at least are essential reading for anyone wanting to understand the crucial features in British Labour history.



Introduction
The weekly paper Tribune occupies a unique position inside the British Labour movement: for twenty-eight years it has been the focus of the official opposition. Although it is questionable whether Tribune has ever led movements to the Left in the party as a whole, or even all of the periodic retreats to the Right, its attitudes have generally provided a fair measure of the degree of opposition to the leadership within the Labour Party. When Tribune has been in revolt against the shot-gun marriage of block vote and public-school accent, a substantial portion of the party has shared its revulsion; when Tribune has embraced established authority, the rest of the ‘Left’ has not usually been overhesitant in doing likewise.
But a methodological caution is needed here. Tribune’s relation to inner-party dissent has not been that of a party organ to a party – recognition of this is fundamental to any understanding of the politics of Tribune. Its particular policies have been determined by the small number of individuals in control of it at any given time. As there have been frequent and not always smooth changes of editor and in the managing board, one would not expect it to have remained an unchanging entity. Yet what emerges from a study of Tribune is just this unexpected continuity in politics – if not in specific attitudes at least in the way in which attitudes change and develop. In part this can be explained through the overlapping influences of certain key individuals en the paper. But the full explanation lies in the constancy of its relation to the Left as a whole. The Left is in a permanently ambiguous position in British political life. It is at the same time both an integral part of official society, although a peripheral one, and dependent for its support upon the tabooed reaches beyond. The permanent features in Tribune’s politics – in particular the periodic oscillations in attitude to the parliamentary leadership – are an expression of this. The history of Tribune is the history of the Left – and of the Labour Movement – as seen from a certain vantage point. This point is a mechanism which relates the parliamentary opposition to extra-parliamentary dissent – functioning to prevent the former ever becoming fully integrated into official society and to prevent the latter developing into anything more than dissent.
 
1. The Left in the early thirties
The first Tribune was the response of the Labour Left to isolation and impotence at a time when Left solutions seemed the only alternative to the sweep of fascism across Europe. This dilemma was symbolised by the urgency of the situation in Spain on the one hand and the quietism of the Labour leadership on the other. Despite the undoubted justice of the Left case, and despite years of Left-wing organisation and agitation, the Edinburgh conference of the Labour Party in 1936 had supported the NEC and ‘non-intervention’ in Spain by 1,836,000 votes to 519,000. [1] Immediately following this a group of Left MPs and intellectuals, prominent among whom were Cripps, Strauss, Bevan, Mellor and Laski, met together to discuss ways of strengthening the Left. Tribune was the result of these deliberations.
Those initially behind Tribune were a heterogeneous group. Mellor had been in and out of the Communist Party in its very early days, had edited the Daily Herald and had been with the Independent Labour Party (ILP) until it disaffiliated from the Labour Party. Cripps had been a Minister in the 1929-31 Labour Government and had swung violently to what his critics described as a ‘rather crude’ Marxism on its collapse. Bevan had his origins in the militant struggles of the miners in the twenties, but even in the thirties his attitudes were tinged with a limited ‘respect’ for Parliament. Even before the events of 1931 there had been a strong opposition within the party. But since the collapse of the Minority Movement in the trade unions after its heyday before 1926, this opposition had been virtually confined to the ILP, whose importance to the party was anyway declining with the rise of the constituency party organisations.
During the period of the 1929 Labour Government its failure to take radical action did provoke some discontent. The ILP took an increasingly hard line. But within the party itself the main reflection of discontent was the formation of what has been referred to as the ‘loyal grousers’ [2] – the Society for Socialist Enquiry and Propaganda. This group, initiated by Cole with members such as Bevin, Cripps, Attlee and Gaitskell never aspired to be more than a slightly Left Fabian Society.
‘Cole had always desired that this body should engage in research and propaganda without formulating the full alternative programme and strategy which would bring it into general disfavour with the official leadership.’ [3]
Radicalised by the 1931 fiasco, the group did however merge with a dissident section from the ILP that favoured continued links with the Labour Party, to give birth to the Socialist League; it did attempt to formulate ‘the full alternative programme and strategy’ – not, however, without the loss of some of its more moderate members, including Bevin. Most of those who were to play a leading part in the production of Tribune were together in the Socialist League. Not however Bevan, who, although sympathising with its aims, did not play a leading role. He felt that he could not commit himself too much in advance, as he desired that when the time for action came
‘... he could be free to choose his own line of action ... How reluctant he was to play the rebel if the role could honourably be avoided.’ [4]
At first the activities of the League enjoyed some success. The impact of 1931 was to produce a swing to the Left – in terminology at least – throughout the party. Even Clynes could declare at the 1931 Conference that socialism had to be affirmed more than ever in opposition to the ‘crushing burdens of capitalism’. [5] Defeats and defections had reduced the Parliamentary Party to a small group directed by the ‘Left’ triumvirate of Lansbury, Attlee and Cripps. But the radicalisation was more apparent than real. Verbal utterances inside the Palace of Westminster were not accompanied by action outside. The real isolation of the Socialist League was shown at the Labour Party Conference at Southport in 1935 when all its 75 amendments to the official NEC policy document were rejected by the massed union vote.
To the members of the Left at this time it seemed that the trade-union leaders stood between them and a mass following. While the situation – particularly the recurrent successes of fascism abroad – demanded radical agitation, the trade unions were sunk in complacency. Citrine was arguing that extremism on the Right was a response to extremism on the Left. The moral was clear. Even the smashing of the non-aggressive Austrian Left did not seem to shake it. Inside the Labour Party and outside it, for the Socialist League and for the ILP, the situation seemed desperate. The activities of the Left throughout this period are best understood as attempts to evade, tear aside or at least be heard through the cloak of trade-union leadership. It is easy, from a distance to see that this cloak only hid the weakness of organisation and the low level of consciousness of the majority of the working class. But there was an important element of truth in the Left’s case. The upswing in trade of the mid-thirties did offer an alternative to the negotiated retreats which had come to be the essence of trade unionism for many leaders; the growth of fascism did produce a crystalisation of political issues that Fabian Labour leaders could not grasp. This element of truth did not however prevent a gross distortion of perspective, which was to prevent the correct things the Left did do from leaving any genuine residue to be built upon in the future.
The aim of various campaigns and activities that the Left participated in was to bring the ferment of the rank-and-file members of the working-class organisations to the boil. The lengths to which they were prepared to go to do this were, however, only one other indication of their actual isolation. Various lines of advance were tested. Bevan, for instance, at one time even formed a ‘Workers Defence Group’ in South Wales, which was inspired by the Austrian ‘Schutzbund’. [6] However, instead of military drill there were long hikes over the mountains. But the central point in Left strategy at this time was the demand for a ‘united front’ with the Communist Party (CP) and the ILP.
 
2. The United Front
As early as 1934 the Left was participating in ad hoc groupings with the ILP and the CP. These seemed to provide a basis for agitation among the rank and file regardless of trade-union leaders. Certainly on some issues, such as unemployment, any agitation in opposition to the CP would have been impossible. The aim at this time was not formal unity, but a growth in ‘fighting spirit’. The NEC responded to this by declaring anew ‘that united action with Communists ... is incompatible with membership of the Labour Party’.
The Spanish Civil War gave birth to renewed calls for unity.
‘Spain cut the knot of emotional and intellectual contradictions in which the Left had been entangled ever since Hitler came to power. Suddenly the claims of international law, class solidarity and desire to win the Soviet Union as an ally fitted into the same strategy.’ [7]
The demand now was for formal unity, not just for the right of ad hoc association. A joint manifesto was produced and joint meetings arranged to propagate the message. Tribune (with a capital of £20,000 [8] supplied by Strauss and Cripps) began publication in January 1937. It was the embodiment of the United Front Campaign. So concerned was the paper to identify itself with the movement that despite the qualms of a large minority of the Left [9] the ferment of ideas and activities that the Front was supposed to produce had a somewhat monolithic appearance.
But it would be wrong to see this monolithic front as a Stalinist one. It was rather a strange blending together of Marxist, Stalinist and Fabian elements. Labour illusions joined hands with Stalinist pretensions, but there was also a concern with the role of class as a determinate of policy that was missing from the stereotypes of both Stalinism and Labourism. The weakness was that those most concerned with this reality were those in the movement who had fewest practical links with the working class – as was most clearly brought out on questions of foreign policy. The position of Bevan, Cripps and Mellor at this time was summed up by Bevan in 1934: ‘What weapon has the working class but the General Strike (against war)?’ Cripps wrote that protection for British workers could only be attained by a ‘workers’ government’, [10] and not by the League of Nations, which Cripps named the ‘International Burglars’ Union’. [11] Since Russia had entered the League in 1935 this hardly seemed compatible with continued belief in the revolutionary nature of the Stalinist regime. Yet support for the USSR and a belief in it that had an almost religious intensity, as well as practical activity in the United Front with the CP, demanded that this contradiction should not be faced. It could be overcome only by a short-term pragmatism which was able to oppose the policies and interests of capitalist Britain because it identified these with the interests of the Fascist powers. The Unity Manifesto demanded ‘implacable opposition to rearmament and the recruiting programme of the National Government, for that Government uses armaments only in support of Fascism, of Imperialist War, and of Colonial suppression’. In a similar vein Tribune wrote later in the year, ‘The murderers are in Berlin, Rome, Tokyo; the accomplices are in Downing Street.’ [12] This provided that basis for short-term unity, but not for any long-term movement against British Capitalism, if this were ever to form an alliance with the Soviet Union or go to war against the Fascist powers – both of which things it was eventually to do, in its own interests.
If the United Front had been a purely tactical alliance for the Labour Left, this would not have mattered. But the minimum programme was more than the maximum area of consensus over tactics with the ILP and the CP – it was also the maximum area of mutual compatibility of the beliefs and illusions of the Labour Left.
As if to compensate for this lack of theoretical coherence – which must at least have been reflected in private dispute – Tribune maintained a position in which unity overrode all other considerations. This unity included unity in thought. When one recalls that this meant uncritical support for the Soviet Union at the height of the Moscow Trials one can appreciate the degree of credulity demanded. Adler’s pamphlet The Witch-craft Trials in Moscow was criticised for not coming within the definition of ‘criticism indispensable’ for the development of the Soviet Union ‘towards the establishment of the rights and liberties of the people’. [13] The Webbs’ book on Russia was praised as a ‘brilliant estimate of the significance of Soviet civilisation by two of the most scientific observers who ever visited the USSR’. [14]
‘It is a mistake to suppose that the ideal of justice is banished from its (the Soviet criminal code) processes.’ [15]
If by the end of 1937 the tone was more reasoned, the conclusions were effectively the same: ‘To us the theory of Stalin as a modern Napoleon is simply unbelievable. It does not fit the the case ...’ [16] Mellor could write of Trotsky:
’one senses a very egotistical and cantankerous spirit at work.’ ... ‘I confess my attitude towards the Russian trials and towards Trotsky more nearly expressed in the Webbs’ postscript to their new edition of Soviet Communism.’ [17]
Pat Sloan was considered the person most qualified to review The Revolution Betrayed. During this period the usual adornment of almost any article would be smiling Russian children. A whole page in five successive issues was devoted to Women in the Soviet Union. If events forced some contributors to rethink a little, fundamental positions were not altered:
‘Many socialists may be horrified by the suppression of those in Soviet Russia who are critical of the regime. But who can believe that the transformation of old Russia into a socialist society could proceed without severity or without error?’ [18]
But this credulity was not yet matched by a serious distortion in policy. The centre of struggle over foreign policy remained the class struggle at home. An editorial on 10 September 1937 could attack the National Council of Labour for not mentioning socialism or the working class in relation to international policy. The conclusions drawn were clear: ‘Workers use your strength in the factories to get power yourself.’ [19]
But if the fight against fascism was really to be a class fight, those who understood this had to be in contact with the working class. Those who were producing Tribune had few direct links. Even if they had influence with many individual workers, they were detached from collective organs of struggle. They could only make contact with these through the mediation of either the Labour Party and trade unions or the CP. But the need for the Left agitation arose because of the quietism of the former; it was in order to benefit from ties with the latter that the United Front was formed. But the CP leaders, in forming the Front, were prepared to utilise the Labour Left, but were not prepared to be utilised by it – and they were organised to resist. Cripps, Bevan and Mellor might have been more able journalistically and even sounder theoretically than the CP leaders, but the latter, with an organisation built up over twenty years, were better able to utilise a smaller following. Above all it was they that led the rank-and-file struggles – among the busmen and the unemployed – which the Tribunites depended upon to undermine the power bases of the Citrines and Bevins. Failing a succssful campaign in alliance with the CP, they would be forced back to accommodating themselves aligning themselves to the trade-union Right.
When the policies of the CP conflicted with the naive but honest Marxism of the Tribunites, it was the latter that suffered. One indication of this was the lack of any serious critique of the French Popular Front. Another was the reaction to the bourgeois democratic policy of the CP in Spain. Although at this time adamant against the Popular Front at home, Tribune could support it in Spain. In part this was done by ignoring the distinction between the Popular Front with bourgeois groupings and the United Front of workers’ parties. When the Poumists and anarchists were shot down by Stalinists for trying to implement just that policy which Tribune demanded in Britain, it could write:
‘There has been no doubt that since the liquidation of the Catalonian rising Republican Spain has not become weaker, but definitely stronger.’ [20]
The most significant thing about Tribune in this period was not, however, that it was effectively the shadow of the CP, but that when Transport House demanded it, it ceased to be this shadow.
The Unity Campaign had started with an overflowing meeting in the Free Trade Hall, Manchester. This had been followed by meetings throughout the country. ‘To people on the Left it seemed to penetrate almost everywhere, only to lap in vain against the closed doors of Transport House.’ [21] Yet when the leaders of the NEC made their demands the Left complied. In March, the Socialist League, after being disaffiliated, was proscribed. At its Whitsun conference it dissolved itself. Later in the year in response to official pressure the Unity Campaign became a campaign for unity from separate party platforms and finally came to an abrupt end. The 1937 Conference of the Labour Party supported the NEC on this by 2,116,000 votes to 310,000.
This demise of the United Front was not all Transport House’s doing. ‘In truth there was another wound nearer the heart sapping the strength of the Unity Campaign.’ The Russian Show Trials and the suppression of the POUM were responsible for this.
‘Cripps, Mellor and Bevan did their best to prevent these events splitting the whole British Left into sectarian fragments, but they could not counter the numbing effects of the inconvenient horror on their followers, nor suppress the anguish in their own hearts.’ [22]
But they could try, and did – by omitting the truth from the pages of Tribune.
The failure to attempt to understand why their illusions were under strain could only further make the facade of unity a pretence. There was nothing concrete upon which to base an opposition to the battalions of the Right. An uneasy conscience does not form a firm basis on which to build links with the working class.
Yet there was more than this to the submission of Tribune. The political influence of its founders was derived not from any delegation from the class, but from their position in parliamentary politics. Insofar as they were linked with the working class and responsible to it, they were so in exactly the same way as the most reactionary of Labour MPs. The qualities that made them shine where so many of their contemporaries did not were parliamentary brilliance and journalistic skill. It was these that brought them into the public eye, not the potency of their ideas or their ability to fight for the class. To have broken with the Labour Party leadership decisively would have meant rejecting precisely those elements in the situation that gave them personal prominence. Within the context of parliamentary action and of struggles between alternate sets of Labour Party leaders a real break did not make sense. For the movement outside, parliament only seemed relevant insofar as it affected the parliamentary scene.
Tribune was the extra-parliamentary arm of an opposition group within the parliamentary party. The United Front had been meant to provide a base for this opposition group to fight the influence of trade-union leaders within the party. When this failed there was no alternative but to return to friendship with the nominees of these leaders. By the beginning of 1938 Tribune had virtually ceased to attack the Labour leadership. Attlee even wrote for the paper.
 
3. The Popular Front
The Labour leadership had not changed, and, in truth, Tribune knew it. Attlee could write in Tribune,
‘The government is actuated by what it holds to be the interests of the capitalist class. It is vitally necessary to convince the electorate that Labour’s policy of Socialism and Peace is the only way to prevent another world catastrophe.’
The party eventually came out against ‘non-intervention’ in Spain. But its underlying unwillingness to take the sort of action that the situation demanded remained. The same ultra-cautious trade-union leaders continued to hold the purse strings. The Bournemouth conference of 1937 had taken a ‘Left-wing’ line over Spain. But the implementation of this by the NEC meant, outside parliament, one meeting in the Albert Hall.
The Labour Left searched desperately for some means of producing the popular upheaval that would remove it from the dead-end: and discovered the Popular Front. A Popular Front had been suggested before. In 1937 G.D.H. Cole had published a book in favour of it. But Tribune and its co-thinkers had rejected it. Indeed, at that time those elements in Tribunite thought that analysed international events in class terms made such a rejection inevitable. But there were other elements in contradiction to these. Bevan had been able to argue that it was vital for Britain (no nonsense about whose Britain) to intervene in Spain because, ‘Should Spain become Fascist, then Britain’s undoubted power in the Mediterranean is gone.’ [23] The demand was for a ‘close alliance of a Britain controlled by a Socialist Government with the Soviet Union and with a France where Labour dominates.’ If the demands of ‘collective security’ and the League of Nations had previously been rejected on class grounds, they now began to be revived. Once rejected as the epitome of capitalist international organisation, they were now seen as ‘incompatible with the individualistic basis of our society ... (Collective Security) means a danger to the capitalist basis of our society.’ [24]
By April of 1938 the Popular Front was being called for by both the News Chronicle and Reynold’s News. It was clear that Tribune would have to commit itself. Cripps made public his own change of position:
‘The real question to be decided is whether the chance of altering the foreign policy of the country and of calling a halt to foreign aggression within a practical period of time is worth the abandonment for the time being of the hope of working class control.’ [25]
‘Any real hope of Socialism will have to be put aside for the present though a number of reformist measures of the Labour Party may be accepted.’ [26]
Only a year before he had supported the Unity Manifesto which declared that it was ‘no time for defeatism or breakaways; no time for retreat or for the abandonment of working-class unity in favour of class-collaboration.’ Bevan was also changing his attitude as ‘fleeting hope was giving way to despair’. [27]
Tribune did not initially support the proposal very strongly. Although it stressed the need for a ‘wider alignment of forces in the battle against the national government’ [28] and called for a special Party Conference to discuss this, when the NEC called upon party members ‘not to compromise our socialist convictions’, the editor opposed pressing the issue as ‘Party conditions are clearly not here, and if quarrelling and “heresy hunts” break out anew no one will benefit.’ The campaign lost momentum in mid-1938 and so the issue was not pressed. But there was another reason for Tribune’s hesitation. The editor Mellor was in disagreement with Cripps and Bevan. He was much less inclined than they to trust the CP and was opposed to unity with non-party ‘progressives’. This was only resolved when Cripps sacked Mellor. [29] Significantly nothing of the disagreement was revealed in Tribune at the time. A change in politics was disguised as a change in format. [30] The new editor. Hartshorn, was more or less an uncritical fellow-traveller. The editorial line changed distinctly. After Munich all attempts at a class analysis of international affairs disappeared:
‘Today we have a government of national capitulation; we must replace it with a government of national regeneration.’ [31]
At home Tribune began to support independent ‘progressive’ candidates, like A.D. Lindsay in the Oxford by-election. There was however no consensus as to what this entailed. Gollancz argued that while a Labour Government would be the best thing, an Eden Government would make a good second best. [32] Cripps on the other hand was still writing,
‘I cannot myself share the view that a Tory Democrat Government may in the circumstances of today be the best protection against fascism.The line between fascism and democracy in the capitalist parties is too narrow.’ [33]
He was however in private urging upon Dalton the need to approach the anti-Chamberlain Conservative MPs. [34] This change in the analysis of events and in tactics could not be accomplished without a corresponding change in and moderation of demands. The former opposition to any rearmament under the National Government disappeared, leaving hardly a trace. Instead there was a specific opposition to unconditional Labour support for recruitment campaigns. Bevan argued that support should only be given in return for

a guarantee of trade-union rights,
support for Spain,
an Anglo-Soviet Pact, and
nationalisation of the arms industry. [35]

Tribune’s general position had been that Chamberlain would not fight for peace, but might for profits. Its own impotence was increasingly forcing it to support him if it came to this. The main enemy was now not capitalism at home, but fascism abroad; only the British Government was in a position to fight this. The central task ceased to be that of fighting the class war, and became one of convincing British capitalism that its interests were in opposition to those of German Nazism. If there was distrust of anti-Chamberlain Conservatives, the demands of realpolitik called for its suspension. Opposition to support for recruitment campaigns was one tactic that could be used with others to persuade Conservatives of their real interests. Insofar as working-class demands remained they could no longer be expressed with the revolutionary fervour of previous years:
‘Supporting the normal defense needs of the country is one thing. Incorporating the Labour Movement into the recruiting machinery of the state is another.’ [36]
The Popular Front campaign, revived towards the end of 1938, became the centre of Left activity for several months. It appeared to offer a way of breaking the isolation of the Left. Whereas previous campaigns had failed even to shake Transport House, the success of ‘Progressive Unity’ candidates in a series of by-elections seemed likely to rock the Chamberlain Government.
The peak of agitation came after Cripps published a Memorandum that he had presented to the NEC in January 1939. He was expelled from the party almost immediately. At first sight the situation that followed seems like a strange reversal of roles. The NEC claimed to be the defender of socialist purity, and the Left the upholder of opportunism. But on both sides the argument was based mainly upon electoral considerations. The NEC as much as the Left had by their participation in discussions with anti-Chamberlain Tories shown their willingness to compromise what faith they had. At least the Left was trying to do something. Quietism and bureaucratic inertia were more important than principle in determining the position of the Right.
After all it was quite willing to support the recruiting campaigns of the Chamberlain Government. If anything the Left’s position was less dominated by purely electoral considerations than that of the Right. It could have been a break with the class traditions of Labourism, but it could also be a call for working-class organisations to take a lead in rallying discontented elements from the Liberal and even the Conservative Party. [37]
Unfortunately the Left was not clear as to which it wanted. If verbally it repudiated Churchillian Conservatism, the logic of its position led it to support. This was not a result of just a mistaken understanding of reality. The fact was that if it had the audience – through Tribune and through the Left Book Club – to influence it did not control any working-class organisation that could take the initiative and lead such a Front. The initiative for the formation of the Front came from individuals who stood politically between the various tendencies participating. It was upon these and upon the CP that the leadership of any Popular Front would have to depend. But such a leadership could never attain any practical or theoretical clarity. Even its terminology was dictated from the Right, in terms derived from traditional liberalism. The Cripps Memorandum saw its basic demand as being ‘the protection of the democratic rights, liberties and freedom of the British people from internal and external attack’ – phrases that Chamberlain Conservatives could agree with. In foreign policy it looked back to the League of Nations: ‘a positive policy of peace, by collective action with France, Russia, the United States of America and other democratic (sic) countries for the strengthening of democracy against aggression ...’
With a programme that in no way went beyond that of the Labour leaders, once again the Left failed to disturb the apathy upon which Labour’s power was based. Even in the period immediately after Munich, the percentage of voters in by-elections did not top 50%. At the 1939 Labour Party Conference, while Cripps only received 420,000 votes on the question of his expulsion, the NEC received 2,100,000. [38] The Left’s defeat over the question of the Popular Front was even greater. Cripps held discussions with Churchill over the possibility of forming an ‘all-in’ government. When these came to nothing, he gave up the fight: [39] ‘As far as we are concerned, this must mean the end of the Popular Front Campaign.’ [40] As with the United Front before it, all that was needed was a few harsh words from the NEC to turn a triumphant beginning into a headlong dash for oblivion.
 
4. An end of fellow-travelling
Through the period of the struggle for a Popular Front and immediately after, the central plank in Tribune’s foreign policy was that the government should establish a genuine alliance with France and Russia. This demand was not argued on purely rational grounds: in part it tried to imply that it was in capitalist Britain’s own interest to ally itself in this way, but it was also infused with an emotionalism derived from the traditional Left support for the Soviet Union. The alliance with the Soviet Union could not be just a means to an end, but was also a good in itself.
Attempts to analyse international affairs were usually accompanied by revelations as to what Russia’s real motives were. One way of doing this was to reproduce speeches by Russian leaders and take them at their face value. For instance: ‘Stalin Speaks ... The capitalist press either suppressed or wholely distorted this vital speech.’ [41] A typical article was called The Ally that awaits us in the East. [42] ‘Peace has always been the aim of Soviet Policy’, wrote Konni Zilliacus. In the same issue speeches delivered by Stalin at the 18th Congress of the CPSU were described as proving ‘beyond doubt that Socialism works’. [43]
The few criticisms of the USSR that had appeared in 1938 (for instance when a well-known member of the CPGB, Rose Cohen, was arrested while in the Soviet Union), were no longer to be seen. A key role in this cult was played by the book-page. ‘This is the book of the hour ... I doubt whether Tribune readers have ever had the chance of such a valuable eighteen-pence worth’ one reviewer could write of that unreadable collection of falsifications and slanders, the History of the CPSU(B). [44] Predictably Trotsky is described as ‘the madman in Mexico’. [45] At other times and in other circumstances all this would not have mattered. It would perhaps always have been detrimental to the domestic struggle in that it gave illusions of strength abroad. But in the situation that existed in mid-1939 such convictions could hardly fail to result in experiences best described as traumatic.
The immediate cause of the clash between illusion and reality was the Russo-German pact. But its effects were not uniform throughout the Left. For some it was just another change of party line to be followed blindly. For others it was explicable in terms of existing beliefs – for a time at least. And for yet others it precipitated a startling change in political attitudes and direction. Tribune reflected this shattering of the monolith of Left thought acutely. Its editor remained attached to the party line. But those who controlled the Board of Management and financed the paper increasingly broke with it as previously existing moral attitudes developed into alternative perspectives. The initial editorial reaction was that ‘Soviet Peace Move exposes Chamberlain ... A Pact of Non-aggression between Russia and Germany will be a great reinforcement for peace in Eastern Europe.’ [46] The pact was seen as a recognition by Hitler of Russian strength. Further ‘the fascist aggression axis (was) smashed into ruins by one decisive Soviet stroke’. [47]
The USSR had shown that ‘they know how to conquer the Fascists by diplomatic means’. But the very aggressiveness of the argument betrayed a defensive posture. Zilliacus indicated this when he admitted to reservations, although he agreed that ‘(the USSR) have a powerful case, based on realities’.
The very development of the pact was to refute many of the arguments used in its support. For instance, the argument that the Soviet Union was giving Germany a free hand in Poland was called a slander – within weeks Russia and Germany had participated in joint conquest of the country. On 18 September an article discussed why Russian troops were massing on the Polish border. But the reason revealed a week later – to invade Poland – was not even considered. After the event the invasion could however be justified. ‘Why Blame Stalin?’ asked Cripps. A cartoonist showed Stalin rapping Hitler’s knuckles. But if the traumatic experience of the Stalin-Hitler pact could be absorbed, its reinforcement by a war in which Stalin gave considerable non-military aid to Germany could not. A behind-the-scenes struggle for control of Tribune began.
Although the war was formally supported, this support was blunted by demands for a treaty with Russia and, when Russia and Germany suggested it, for peace negotiations. Copious articles and quotations justifying the Russian position still appeared. It took the third trauma of the Russo-Finnish war to remove these and, with them, the editor.
By 8 March the paper was able to admit that ‘The former policy of the Left – building up a peace bloc composed of the USSR and the Western Democracies to resist fascist aggression – now lacks almost any basis in reality.’ When on 15 March, Postgate replaced Hartshorn as editor, the Stalinist shell within which Tribune had operated for about two years was finally shaken off. But there was continuity with the past – in particular the failure to discuss and argue out differences in theory and tactics. Typically it was to be two years before the reasons for the sacking of Hartshorn were revealed. Once again a change in format was the cover for a change in politics.
 
5. The war years
If the new Tribune of mid-1940 broke with its past illusions about Russia, there was continuity in some aspects of policy. In 1937 the paper had opposed all rearmament under a capitalist government. In 1938 it conceded the right to arm, but demanded policy concessions for the Labour Movement. In 1939 the war was supported, but the right of the working class to resist conscription, dilution, etc, maintained. In 1940 the apparent inconsistency in this position was removed when complete support was given to the Government once some Labour ministers had joined it.
Tribune could justify its support of the government on the grounds that it was now resisting fascist aggression as Tribune had urged years earlier. But this must not conceal the basic point that it had failed to develop a working-class strategy that would realise the true content of its demands. It had demanded – and was still demanding to some extent – a socialist, working-class struggle against fascism. It was now supporting a struggle against some of the fascist powers by all the leaders of British capitalism. This was not affected – as the outcome of the war was to indicate – by the inclusion of some Labour ministers in the Government, or by public rhetoric adopting some mildly reformist terms.
We have argued above that this failure cannot be solely ascribed to the ideas of tactics of the Left leaders. They were isolated men. Their contacts with the class for whom they were trying to design a strategy were few, and mainly of an intermittent, parliamentary electoral kind. Their main aim was to increase these contacts. But instead of trying to make contact with the workers by attacking the illusions that the existing leaders of their organisations spread, they rather tried to do it through the mediation of these leaders. Instead of weakening the ideological inadequacy of the class, they strengthened it. If they were unable to form the sorts of organisations of the working class (of say the Schutzbund sort) that could have enabled it to fight Nazism independently of Churchill – even if in short term co-operation with him – they could have carried on agitation for these. This would at least have strengthened hegemonic tendencies within the working-class organisations, while maintaining the ideological identity and the organisational cohesion of the Left. Instead the Left emerged from the thirties weak and disorganised. The inheritance it received from the ‘entrist’ group of the ILP was squandered. What survived through the war was not to be the independent Marxism (however crude and unrefined) of the ILP and Socialist League, but a cadre of Stalinist Labourites that by their predominance divided and confused the Left through to the middle fifties and even beyond.
For a short time the new Tribune followed the same central line of attack as the old – the major target was still the Chamberlain Government. But it was no longer any imperialist or fascist tendencies that made it unfit to govern. It was rather that ‘Chamberlain is losing the war’. [48] ‘This is a gloves off fight with Fascism with Britain weakened by catastrophically bad leadership.’ [49] By this time the CP was also being criticised for playing the same role as the POUM in Spain. [50]
When Labour ministers were taken into the Cabinet, Tribune was almost bound to support their acceptance of positions. ‘May we never find that our trust has been misplaced,’ wrote Ellen Wilkinson, and ‘If we start carping and criticising, then this government will be weak where it should be strong.’ But this did not prevent Tribune criticising the composition of the government.
The presence of Labour ministers was bound to change the political environment in which Tribune operated. Although its ideas were as far as ever from being adopted, it at least seemed to be closer to the centre of power. If it was still an opposition group inside the Labour Party, the party itself was no longer in opposition and the tenor of official society seemed to be moving leftwards – if only in a demagogic, rhetorical manner. After the entry of Russia into the war this quasi-leftism was further intensified.
This period is often presented as being the heroic period of Tribune and of Bevan. There is a certain truth in this. The pressures to move with the current were resisted. The general sycophancy for Churchill that spread from the far Right to the Labour leadership and the CP was condemned. Nor did Tribune participate in the renewed bout of Stalin worship. If Laski referred to Russia as a ‘socialist commonwealth’ [51] and Cole suggested that ‘the best solution for Germany might be incorporation’ in an enlarged USSR’ [52], Tribune was by no means uncritical of Soviet policies.
But Tribune’s attitude still lacked those elements of a total critique of capitalism it had possessed at its inception. Instead the criticism tended to be of specific government actions treated in isolation. These were no longer seen as reflecting (however crudely) the economic dynamics of a system. Condemnation of a measure was in terms of its being against the national interest or the desire of the people. The major sin of the ruling class was not exploitation, but ineptitude. Capitalist leaders were not representatives of a system that drives towards war, but products of a system incapable of waging it. Criticisms of Churchill were criticisms not of his role as a defender of ruling-class power, but criticisms over questions of tactics, efficiency, etc. Significantly Michael Foot in his book on Bevan defends this position on the grounds that the criticisms were similar to those that Churchill’s allies and Generals made. If his class background was mentioned, it was seen solely as diverting him from following the ‘national interest’. The Churchill criticised in the war was only marginally related to the Churchill of Tonypandy and the General Strike.
Class issues remained. But these were no longer presented in a class-based theoretical and agitational framework. Freedom for India was demanded to ‘Make India an ally’. [53] Government control of the mines and nationalisation of the railways was to increase the efficiency of the war effort. [54] In a similar vein Bevan called for the closure of the public schools during the war, [55] and attacked the ‘rats’ who made a great profit from the war.
In this identification of capitalism and weakness in the war effort there was a strong element of truth. Any total Marxist critique at that time would have had to take into account the similarities in outlook, attitude and interest of the leaders of British capitalism and their fascist opponents, and of the way in which these must impede the fight against fascism. If a Marxist argued that the working class did have an interest in the defeat of the fascist powers, even by other capitalist powers, he would also have to admit the imperialist roots of the war and their effects on the method of waging it. In fact the various Marxist groups in existence did not differ so greatly in their practical demands from Tribune. But for Tribune the elements of short-term compromise involved in giving some support for an imperialist war had to be developed into a theoretical framework. So socialist demands that criticised the imperialist war against fascism as inadequate had to be partial criticisms within this overall compromise theoretical framework. The real danger of this method was that it left the central feature of capitalism untouched. The attacks Tribune wished to make went further than their method allowed, producing rationalisation. Superficial and unconvincing criticisms from the point of view of bourgeois goals would be made, where the fundamental criticism was at a much deeper level. This disguising of socialist criticism led to an inconsistency in action: any action that weakened the system had to be deplored – even if taken to rectify a long-term fundamental weakness. The Tribunites, caught between accepting this argument and rejecting it, were never able to resolve their problem.
Given the parliamentary base on which Tribune continued to be erected this was almost inevitable. Bevan, the leading Tribunite at the time, and editor from 1942 to 1945, derived his prominence almost entirely from his position in parliament. Here he could not only be heard by the nation, but, if he used the right arguments, could convince his opponents. And often this seemed more important than rallying extra-parliamentary support. Bevan accepted the logic of this situation when he used parliamentary privilege and the inaccessibility of members to those who elect them to prevent the Miners Federation from trying to influence his actions. [56]
This parliamentarianism did not prevent Tribune from taking principled stands. When benefits for injured miners seemed likely to be small and despicable in 1943 Bevan threatened, ‘... I would stamp the coalfields and get the men out on strike in a fortnight.’ [57] He risked expulsion from the Labour Party by his action in voting against Regulation 1A(a) – a measure directed against Trotskyists who had been agitating among the miners. [58] But these stands appeared isolated and in many ways inconsistent with the position taken on other issues. Tribune’s particular policies in the war were made up of a few major themes. The first was the demand for an alliance between the major powers that would both win the war and shape the peace; an alliance between the Western democracies and the Soviet planned economy offered the possibility of ‘constructing a society that is sane and free’. [59] The four allies (Britain, US, USSR, China) were referred to as the ‘four pillars of the Earth’ [60], without discussing how such an alliance was to provide the fusion of ‘principle’ requisite for ‘sane and just’ peace. Practical proposals were usually a tribute to credulity:
‘An agreement in the near future between the only two surviving workers’ parties with any influence in world affairs, namely our own Labour Party ... and the Soviet Communist Party, would be a tremendous weapon in winning this war and a tremendous lever for overturning the old order and putting International Socialism in its place.’ [61]
But this first theme was modified by a second. This emphasised the importance of a revolutionary war against fascism. Those who talked of ‘unconditional surrender’ or the war guilt of the German nation were criticised not only for being wrong, but also for making victory more difficult. Consequently when the allies began to fall out over the division of the spoils from 1943 onwards, Tribune had to denounce them. If a general class analysis of international relations was no longer utilised, the existence of class antagonisms on an international scale could not be ignored. Tribune had in fact seen from the beginning of the war that the British Government would not hesitate to oppose popular liberation movements. For this reason it had made the publication of war aims one of its principal demands. When the Soviet Union was to support the British Government in its actions, Tribune did not hesitate to criticise it as well in similar terms. Their actions were ‘mistakes’ rather than crimes. When Russia suggested that part of Germany be given to Poland after the war Tribune wrote that ‘Peace with indemnities ... will not be peace’, although Soviet intentions were still basically good:
‘The Red Army has vindicated the Russian Revolution after an ordeal surely without parallel in recorded history. But it would be wrong for it to enforce its form of socialism on liberated areas.’ [62]
Russia’s actions on its frontiers were criticised but ‘their fears’ understood.
By 1944 Tribune was writing that ‘She (Russia) has travelled a long way from the enlightened principles of Lenin to the recent pronouncements of Molotov.’ [63] In the same issue Labour ministers were criticised for accepting a fascist-appointed government as ‘constitutional’. In March, 63 Labour MPs who put down a Commons motion opposed to annexations of German territory were supported. [64] Naturally Claude Cockburn of the CP linked this with a fascist plot. A week later, after the recognition by Russia of the Badoglio Government (deriving its authority from a Council of State appointed by Mussolini) Tribune wrote: ‘The Commissariat of Foreign Affairs has unequivocally aligned itself with and not against Wall Street and the City.’
In the light of this enforced recognition of reality earlier talk about ‘the four pillars of the Earth’ was modified. The future was still seen in some sort of synthesis of Russian ‘Socialism’ and American ‘democracy’ – but this synthesis was no longer to be achieved through international treaties, but by the revolutionary outcome of the war. Bevan said only a unified Europe, led by Labour, could prevent the US and USSR arguing over zones of influence. But even here the moral was not unconditional opposition to the rulers of all the major powers. An element of the previous line of ‘Both Washington and Moscow’ remained, but it was modified. The need to associate smaller powers with the Big Three in the United Nations was stressed. A third theme of importance in determining Tribune’s wartime policies was the continued campaign for Labour demands at home. While the official policies of increased productivity, a suspension of restrictive practices, and opposition to the use of the strike weapon were supported, a clash of interest between ruling class and workers was still recognised. Tribune would support workers’ demands, if it would not encourage them to strike in support of them. It opposed the political truce (although not a short-term coalition) and urged the Labour Party to prepare a postwar programme.
But if Tribune supported the miners’ demands in 1944 and pressed the need for Labour independence, it did not participate in the rank-and-file agitation that brought the miners’ grievances to light or in the electoral activities that forced the Labour Party to prepare to end the political truce. The most important organisation involved in the latter – Commonwealth – was different in origin and attitude from the Labour Left (its most prominent figure – Acland – was an ex-Liberal MP).
This is not to say that Tribune did not do a great deal to prevent the assimilation of the Labour Party into a new postwar ‘National Government’, something which was certainly possible (after all groups as diverse as the Churchill Tories and the CP, as well as some Labour ministers, were for it). Tribune must also have been quite important in the current of opinion within the Labour Party that forced support for extensive nationalisation at the party conference in 1944. But it gave no organisational form to this current that would sustain it and enable it really to force the Labour leaders to act. When it came to the organisation of popular pressure Tribune was as dependent upon the other groupings as it had been during the United and Popular Front periods. Despite its influence and correctness on many issues, Tribune did nothing during the war that would enable it to act with independence and influence when the peace came. And without these prerequisites its prewar habit of shadowing either the Stalinoid ‘Left’ or the trade-union Right – and sometimes even both at once – must return.
 
6. Brave New World
The themes outlined above laid the basis for Tribune’s post-war policies. The attitude on any particular issue blended these elements – often in contradiction to one another – to produce a formulation that at least seemed to correspond to the problem. A strand might be relegated to a less important position as reality overtook it, but would never be entirely forgotten. Hence the strangely consistent blending of continuity and discontinuity in Tribune’s politics.
The wartime criticism of power politics and secret diplomacy continued after the war. When the antagonisms of the allies began to emerge with the occupation of Europe, Tribune spoke of ‘the bitter fruits’ of the division of spheres of influence. It did not – as did so many others – see this as being merely the result of misunderstandings.
‘Faced with this situation it is nonsense to assume that all will be well if only Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill get together once more in yet another secret conclave.’ [65]
But the alternative was still seen as one of changing ‘principles’ – as though these existed apart from structures of interest and power. Tribune’s alternative to the ‘secret conclave’ was to ‘educate people about the sane approach’ and to call for a conference of the long moribund Second International. When Russia put ex-Horthy supporters into the Hungarian government they were criticised but when they claimed to be establishing political freedom in East Germany they were believed. Similarly the moral drawn from discord among the ‘United Nations’ was that it should be supplemented by non-governmental organisations. [66] The role of a socialist Britain was not that of exposing the farce of capitalist peace pretensions, but of providing a country that both sides could co-operate with peacefully. [67]
But illusions as. to the possibilities that are actually present can only exist in a vacuum apart from concrete political action. Two events occurred in mid-1945 to bring Tribune down to earth. Unfortunately the destruction of illusions led to their replacement by, on the one hand, an uncritical approach to reality in which possibilities of transcendance were ignored, on the other by an even less critical acceptance of Utopian aims. The first of these events was the election of a Labour Government and the entry into the cabinet of Bevan, until then editor of Tribune, and G.R. Strauss, a member of the editorial board. The second was the A-bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Greater possibilities of a certain type of political action were given to individuals closely connected with Tribune, while the urgent need for action was demonstrated in a striking and terrifying manner.
However, instead of questioning the possibility of peaceful collaboration between capitalist governments, Hiroshima prompted Tribune to drop its hesitation about the feasibility of such collaboration. Talk about the Second International no longer appeared as a panacea. Instead the ‘Security Council’ (the ‘secret conclave’ of only a few months before) ought to take over all uranium deposits and, with the veto removed from its members, carry out international inspection. Having previously opposed the zoning of Big Power influence, by March 1946 Tribune was deploring the breakdown of the ‘Potsdam spirit’. Ironically this conversion to the wartime system of division of influence occurred just as that system was breaking down. What Tribune did not realise – although it ought to have, on the basis of its earlier pronouncements – wds that conversion to the wartime system would entail conversion to its eventual breakdown. The wartime alliance had been based upon cooperation between the major powers in defeating Germany and in sharing the spoils of victory. The United Nations was intended to be the embodiment of this cooperation. The breakdown of the alliance followed inevitably from its exploitative nature. The division of spoils was bound to result in arguments over the sharing of the loot.
Tribune tried to resist the logic of this situation by reaffirming its premises. When the breakdown proved complete, the only position left to Tribune was to take one side or the other in the ensuing conflict, despite its attempts to resist this outcome. Of central importance here was the demand for a social-democratic ‘third force’ led by Britain and France, to influence world affairs not by its revolutionary opposition to the major powers, but by mediating between them. This presumed of course that the differences between the powers arose from an inability to comprehend each other’s situation. Typical of this approach was the demand that the British Government point out to the Americans their ‘error’ in keeping a monopoly of the atom bomb.
But the central mistake in this argument was that there was not even an independent socialist Britain willing or able to participate in such a third force. At first Tribune managed to persuade themselves that this was not the case:
‘Ernest Bevin’s speech in the Commons last week marked a turning point which future historians might well describe as the moment at which Britain broke the continuity of her foreign policy.’ [68]
Such beliefs might have arisen from an excess of faith or from bad faith; they did at least accord with Tribune’s attitudes towards the Labour Government’s home policies. What was remarkable was that Tribune hardly questioned Government policies for the first three years – and has hardly questioned the policies of these years since. The Tribune view was summed up in October 1945: ‘Mr: Dalton has opened a new chapter in the economic history of this country – a chapter full of promise to the common man.’ [69] Crippsian Austerity was supported as the only answer. Devaluation was opposed, not because of its effects upon living standards, but because ‘Socialists don’t default’. [70]
This lack of criticism of domestic policy is understandable. From the point of view of reformism – even Left reformism – the nationalisation measures taken by the Labour Government constituted steps towards socialism. Other policy acts could be seen as subordinate to these. There was to be no rumbling from the Left over home policy at all until 1947 when the Cabinet hesitated briefly over the question of steel nationalisation.
In foreign affairs however there was much more clarity about government departures from a Left policy. It upheld a reactionary regime in Greece, failed to oppose Franco’s hold on Spain, broke promises in Palestine, and delayed giving independence to India.
But a critique of Government foreign policies without a corresponding critique of its home policies was bound to be fragmentary and weak. It could not be rooted in the government’s involvement in the running of an imperialism. Instead it tended to be based upon the criticism of one individual – Bevin. He was above all blamed for accepting the arguments of Churchill’s Fulton speech and participating in an alliance against the USSR. That such decisions were taken by the whole Cabinet, and were in fact inescapable for a government with a reformist home policy, did not occur to Tribune. Its failure to recognise this permitted it – albeit reluctantly – to follow the same policies within a few years.
The early post-war years were bound to be trying and disillusioning for anyone attempting to work out a social democratic foreign policy. The inherent aggressive and expansive nature of capital was again revealed and the antagonisms between nation-blocs necessarily increased. The Left however was traditionally opposed to those forces making for national antagonism, and could not accept capital expansion per se as a good thing (except possibly in the case of the USSR). But because this opposition was seen as having to be ‘realistic’ – ie, opposition that would have an effect immediately, without waiting for the destruction of capitalism – misery and violence could never be traced to their roots in the class structure.
When the cold war developed the European Left was unable to support it —or at least its extreme manifestations – yet unable to argue for revolutionary opposition to the forces producing it. The British Left in particular found itself in a difficult situation, since it supported the continued operation of a capitalism – to give, of course, maximum possible benefits to the workers. This was only possible if this capitalism was growing and was protected from the consequences of international instability. But it was precisely the attempt by each bloc to obtain optimum conditions of capital growth and protection of investments that was the cause of the cold war. Reformism at a national level was reaping its fruits at an international level.
The dilemma was focussed by two complementary series of events. The first was the expansion of the Soviet Empire. As Russian domination of the satellites became more open, the likelihood of a clash with the US grew, while it became more and more difficult to believe in the ‘socialism’ of Eastern Europe. This extension of Russian power occurred while Europe was still gripped by an economic breakdown that threatened even those few reforms already won by British workers. Loans from the US alone kept the economy stable enough to continue to provide these. Only a major revival of economic activity on the continent could provide a basis for long-term optimism, and it was to the US that the Left had to look for the impetus for this. Marshall Aid and extensive American investment produced the industrial revival that made safe the gains of the Welfare State. But these were part of the process of capitalist competition on an international scale that constituted the Cold War.
In this situation the reformist Left, for the sake of its reforms, had no choice but to choose sides. Its history for the next few years was the history of its deciding. Although, ‘the revolutionary spring of the European revolution (was) over’, [71] for a time the idea of the third force enabled the Left to evade choosing sides. When in 1946 several Labour MPs revolted against the government it was on this issue. But it must already have been clear to them how impracticable this ‘practical’ reformist policy was. When it came to the vote, despite the government’s huge majority, none of the rebels opposed the official line. [72] As the demand for a ‘third force’ became less and less realistic, the process of taking sides began. A division within the Left occurred – never formalised as a complete rupture – with Tribune coming down critically but firmly on the Western side, and the New Statesman coming down neither so critically nor so firmly on the Russian side. The ground between the two was occupied by pacifists such as Emrys Hughes.
As might be expected from the history of the Left in Britain this split did not take place at one particular moment, nor was it ever finalised. It was not a case of two world views facing one another and fighting it out, but rather of two disparate groups made up from the themes that had emerged during the war. Much overlapping in both personnel and argument occurred. Tribune talked distastefully about ‘crypto-communists’ but it still employed many of their arguments. In particular the two groups shared a belief in the need for more international collaboration. The United Nations provided a screen with which the two could from time to time hide from themselves their basic disagreements.
But the basic disagreement continued. The first clear expression of this was in 1947, when opposition arose within the parliamentary party over the question of conscription. One group affirmed its complete opposition to the government’s foreign policy by voting against any conscription. For the most part this group was made up of fellow travellers, although some pacifists and a few traditional Liberals joined them. The other group, led by Foot, Grossman and Wigg, supported conscription, but wanted it to be 12 months not 18.
In 1947 a pamphlet was produced by the New Statesman, in which members of both groups participated. This is worth discussing at some length, for it was the last advance of the ‘third force’ idea in the forties, and laid the basis for Left arguments through the fifties and beyond. The main authors of Keep Left were Foot, Mikardo and Grossman, but other supporters were Bing, Bruce, Harold Davies, Hale, Fred Lee, Benn Levy, Mackay, J.P.W. Mallalieu, Millington, Swingler, Wigg and Woodrow Wyatt. The argument of the pamphlet, that more socialism, not less, was needed, was justified chiefly in terms of Britain’s economic needs if both unemployment and complete dependence upon the US were to be avoided. At home this implied more planning to cut the costs of production and prevent the export drive from failing. The basis of a world economy in which ‘export drives’ matter was not questioned. Instead the emphasis was on producing ‘socialist measures’ (such as differential wages and negative direction of labour) that would enable British exporters to undercut their competitors. Central to the pamphlet was its demand for a curtailing of military expenditure. The length of military service was criticised ‘for keeping far more men under arms than we could afford’ – Britain’s commitments (i.e., the defense of her colonies) could be maintained with a much reduced army.
But much of these forces would not be needed; war was unlikely, ‘collective security’ against communism unnecessary: ‘The USSR has no similar economic motive (to Hitler) for expansion.’ But the building up of a defensive alliance would make them ‘assume the worst’ and rearm. Besides, it was argued – as if it was an argument in its own right – this policy made it ‘a mockery of the United Nations’.
‘The task of British Socialism must be, wherever possible to heal the breach between the USA and the USSR. But we cannot do this if we take sides with either a Communist bloc or an anti-Bolshevik axis.’
The real way forward lay in a third force. In reaction against Molotov’s ‘diplomatic folly’ in 1945 (’including a blatant attempt to exploit Persian politics in order to disrupt our hold on the Anglo-Iranian oil field’ [my emphasis]) Bevin had formed a defensive alliance with America. This had to be replaced by an Anglo-French alliance as the basis of a ‘European security pact’.
The basic arguments of this document were to dominate the Left for years to come. But its short-term effect was small. At the Labour Party Conference of 1947 the policies it demanded were heavily defeated by the trade-union vote. And within a year its authors were quarrelling among themselves. The immediate occasion for opposed Left interpretations was the US offer of ‘Marshall Aid’ to the European economies. Tribune, accepting the need for building up the economy, ‘paying our way’ and getting welfare benefits, supported acceptance, although warning that it was not being given for altruistic reasons. The New Statesman opposed the Marshall Plan. But this still did not mean complete disaccord. Support for a ‘third
force’ remained common property.
The Prague coup of 1948, when the Stalinists seized power in Czechoslovakia provided the breaking point. While Tribune condemned it, Grossman in the New Statesman warned against seeing this as an expression of Russian foreign policy (as did Driberg and Wigg in Reynold’s News). [73] Again, when Platt-Mills MP was expelled from the Labour Party for sending a telegram supporting the Nenni Socialists after Morgan Phillips had written for the NEC in support of the ‘Italian List of Socialist Unity’ dissidents led by Saragat, Tribune supported the expulsion, while the rest of the Left, such as New Statesman, Forward, and Reynold’s News opposed it.
This basic division within the Left continued throughout the early years of the cold war. Tribune eventually came round to supporting the Western position on most things. It supported the Western stand in Berlin and by spring of 1949 had come round to supporting the Atlantic Pact. But the attempt to find alternatives continued. It dropped the demand for a ‘third force’ reluctantly, and still continued to call for fresh Great Power discussions. When it did come out in favour of NATO it was unable to do so without dissension on its own Editorial Board. Ian Mikardo resigned. [74]
By the time the Korean war broke out in 1950 the division within the Left was such as virtually to rob the term of any utility. To many at the time it must have seemed that Tribunism as a separate current of opinion was finished. The contradictory attitudes previously united behind the concept of the ‘third force’ were now in open opposition to one another. When a successor to Keep Left was published many of the supporters of Keep Left no longer backed it and it received scarcely a mention in Tribune. If the fellow travellers were to appear increasingly as mere shadows of Moscow, the metamorphosis of the wartime radicals into shadows of Washington also seemed near completion.

Footnotes
1. Miliband, R., Parliamentary Socialism, Allen & Unwin, 1961, p.245.
2. Foot, M., Aneurin Bevan, MacGibbon & Kee, 1962, p.134.
3. Ibid., p.153.
4. Ibid., p.154.
5. Estorick, E., Stafford Cripps, p.101.
6. Foot, M., Op. cit., p.165.
7. Ibid., p.218.
8. Ibid., p.245.
9. The Socialist League supported the United Front by only 56 to 38 with 23 abstentions at its Conference.
10. Cripps in Tribune, 12 March 1937.
11. Cripps, quoted in Krug M., Aneurin Bevan, Thomas Yoseloff, 1962, p.52.
12. Tribune, 27 August 1937.
13. Ibid., 1 January 1937.
14. Ibid., 8 January 1937.
15. Ibid., 5 February 1937.
16. Ibid., 18 June 1937.
17. Mellor in Tribune, 12 November 1937.
18. Mellor in Tribune, 18 February 1938.
19. Cripps, quoted in Tribune, 19 March 1937.
20. Tribune, 21 May 1937.
21. Foot, M., Op. cit.
22. Ibid., p.264.
23. Ibid., p.219.
24. Laski in Tribune, 10 September 1937.
25. Cripps in Tribune, 10 April 1938.
26. Cripps, quoted in a letter to Tribune, 22 April 1938.
27. Foot, M., Op. cit., p.282.
28. Tribune editorial, 22 April 1938.
29. Foot, M., Op. cit., p.279.
30. See Tribune, 16 September 1938.
31. Tribune, 23 September 1938.
32. Ibid., 11 November 1938.
33. Ibid., 6 January 1939.
34. Miliband, R., Op. cit., p.262.
35. Tribune, 9 December 1938.
36. Bevan in Tribune, 9 December 1938.
37. The best general discussion of the Popular Front is probably that in Trotsky, L.D., Whither France?, Lanka Sama Samaj Party, Ceylon, 1961.
38. Labour Party Annual Conference, Report, 1939, p.236.
39. Miliband, R., Op. cit., p.267.
40. Cripps in Tribune, 9 June 1939.
41. Tribune, 17 March 1939.
42. A double page spread by Strachey, Tribune, 6 April 1939.
43. Tribune, 14 March 1939.
44. John Morris in Tribune, 24 April 1939.
45. Tribune, 24 February 1939.
46. Ibid., 25 August 1939.
47. Ibid., 1 September 1939.
48. Ibid., 10 April 1940.
49. Ellen Wilkinson in Tribune, 10 April 1940.
50. Ibid.
51. Tribune, 1 August 1941.
52. Cole, G.D.H., Europe, Russia and the Future, Gollancz, 1941.
53. Tribune, 17 October 1941.
54. Krug, M., Op. cit., p.63.
55. Ibid., p.66.
56. Foot, M., Op. cit., p.462.
57. Quoted in Krug, Op. cit., p.70.
58. Foot, M., Op. cit., p.457.
59. Tribune, 11 July 1941.
60. Ibid., 2 January 1942.
61. Diplomatic Correspondent, Tribune, 19 June 1942.
62. Tribune, 7 January 1944.
63. Ibid., 17 March 1944.
64. Ibid., 24 March 1944.
65. Ibid., 5 January 1945.
66. Ibid., 6 April 1945.
67. Ibid., 4 May 1945.
68. Ibid., 30 November 1945.
69. Ibid., 26 October 1945.
70. Ibid., 23 November 1945.
71. Ibid., 7 June 1946.
72. Meehan, The Left and Foreign Policy, Ph.D. Thesis, London School of Economics, p.199.
73. Meehan, Op. cit.
74. Tribune, 20 May 1949.



James Larkin
Emmet Larkin
Routledge, 50s.
The Irish Question
Nicholas Mansergh
Allen & Unwin, 42s.
James Larkin founded and led Ireland’s largest union, was active in the IWW, was involved in the formation of the American Communist Party (to the extent of being imprisoned for his activities) and was a member of the Executive Committee of the Comintern. Any biography of him could hardly fail to be of interest and Emmet Larkin’s is no exception. It traces in detail Larkin’s career of agitation and organisation. The forms this took give an insight not only into Larkin’s own extraordinary personality, but also into the texture of the Labour movement itself in a certain stage in its development. Larkin was that rare, and, for us today, virtually inconceivable figure – the revolutionary trade-union leader. On the one hand he was committed – and increasingly so as time passed–to a world revolutionary perspective and to agitation on behalf of this, on the other to building up a union which was as hierarchically organised as any other, and in which the ability to distribute welfare benefits was to become as important as the ability to run strikes. There is a contradiction here which although temporarily masked in many unions during periods of rapid growth – when even the most conservative of union bureaucrats welcome the sort of agitational flair and organisational drive that only the politically committed possess – must, given the political stability of capitalism, reveal itself. In Larkin’s case it did, both in the lack of cohesion between some of his ideas and in the development of the union itself. Eventually the secondary leaders were to come to see Larkin’s uncompromising class warfare as a menace to their sort of trade unionism, and force him out of office. This book is useful because it gives the material which enables one to begin to understand the ambiguities of Larkin’s position and of the position of any Marxist active in trade unionism as such. But it does not provide this understanding itself.
The Irish Question is a series of essays on the political and social background of the Irish revolution. Few of them even begin to penetrate beneath the superficial aspects of the subject matter. The discussion on the Marxist view of the Irish question is particularly disappointing. Only the essay on Ulster is really worth reading, and even this does little more than present in a coherent and readable form facts that are already known.



Alienation and Freedom
Robert Blauner
University of Chicago Press, 56s.
A Protest Movement Becalmed
Leo Zakuta
University of Toronto Press, 48s.
Life for the factory worker can be hell. Blauner’s book could perhaps be best described as a study in degrees of hell. He analyses it, attempts to define its origin and to discover factors conducive to its mitigation. An impressive array of material on production conditions is combined with the results of attitude surveys. Despite this however, hopes aroused on reading the title are disappointed on reading the book. The author is concerned to give empirical reference to Marx’s concept of alienation. But he takes it in too narrow a sense. As a result his book never says much that is not obvious. Its merit is that it is sometimes useful to have the obvious clearly set out and well documented.
The problem of alienation at the point of production is not one of the favourite preoccupations of sociologists. The study of various sorts of protest movements is. Zakuta’s book is in many ways typical of these. It is about an unsuccessful social-democratic movement – the Co-operative Commonwealth Movement of Canada. As such is could be of enormous interest and importance. Any book on such a subject could scarcely fail to be of some interest. Zakuta fails to make the most of his opportunity. There is no attempt to explain the successes that reformist Social-Democracy has generally had, nor to explain the particular failure of the CCF. Instead, the author concentrates on the internal changes effected on the CCF by its changing environment. But the environment is purely electoral. Any class forces that voting figures register are ignored. What one gets are descriptions of internal changes in the organisation. These never acquire real significance because the author’s chief concern is with the formal characteristics of the organisation only. The aim – as with so much American sociology – is to arrive at a paradigm of organisational development which ignores the specific content of each organisation. The chief effect is to produce abstract historical discussion of every concrete, historically situated phenomenon. In this case the result is a book that contains some – but not enough – interesting information, but is theoretically barren.



Modern Capitalism and Revolution
Paul Cardan
Solidarity, 197 Kings Cross Road London WC1, 3s 6d
One of the dispiriting things revolutionary socialists have to tolerate is the existence of individuals and groups possessing many of the attitudes we sympathise with, but with nothing to say in relation to theory and a tendency to say it at great length. Typical of these is Paul Cardan, at least as seen in his latest book. If he differs from the others it is only because there are few so slipshod in their approach, fruitless in their conclusions, pretentious in weir claims and acrimonious towards the rest of us.
Cardan’s first concern is to point out the faults of ‘traditional Marxism’, a category in which he lumps together virtually every socialist theorist who wrote between 1845 and the advent of Paul Cardan. Marx and Lassalle, Luxemburg and Kautsky, Trotsky and Stalin are all the same to him. The faults of any one of these thinkers is for him self-evidently the fault of any of the others.
Yet although the case depends for its efficacy upon the ‘amalgam’ technique pioneered by the hatchet-men of Stalin in their struggles against the Left, it would be wrong to accuse Cardan of bad faith for using it. It is evident from his criticism of Marx that he has no inkling of the way in which Marx’s theories are fundamentally different from those of his ‘official’ perverters in Moscow. Not only does he ascribe to Marx views which he explicity repudiated – for instance the Lassallean ‘Iron Law of Wages’ – but also, together with the theoretical heirs of Stalin, he demonstrates the same incapacity to understand what Capital is about. For him it has the same aims as any other work of economics: to find quasi-natural laws which determine the development of society. And ‘economic’ is interpreted to have the same narrow meaning that bourgeois economists assign to it For Cardan the only concern of economics is with statistical prediction. Thus, when he examines Marx’s ‘law’ of the declining rate of profit he is able to show that nothing in the technical process of production itself (for Cardan the social context of production is irrelevant here) makes it hold. But more fundamentally he argues that the whole attempt to see society as economically determined is wrong because it ignores ‘the actions of men, social groups and classes’.
Unfortunately for Cardan the view of economics as something separate from the actions of ‘men, social groups and classes’ is one of those ideological elements in bourgeois thought that Marxism must repudiate. Marx in Capital did not attempt to understand the development of society apart from the interaction of men. Rather economic facts and institutions are shown to be expressions of the historical development of human interaction. If Mr Cardan doubts this he should read the section in Capital on the fetishism of commodities. Of course Marx asserts that this development cannot be understood apart from the reproduction of human existence at each stage through material production of the prerequisites of life, but this does not make Marx into the ‘economic’ determinist Cardan sees him to be.
The formula for the determination of the rate of profit that Marx arrives at in Volume III of Capital will not, after the fashion of Cardan, yield immediate empirical predictions – although if correctly and carefully employed it might. What it does attempt to elucidate are the relationships between individuals that arise around a particular level of material production organised according to certain property relations. In this situation it shows what must be the relationships between accumulated labour, the labour necessary to sustain the labourer and the surplus labour – i.e. how the actions and needs of workers and capitalists impinge upon one another. When this is understood it can be seen that Cardan rejects the formula because he does not even understand its purpose. Far from the formula denying the relevance of human action, it is concerned with how this occurs in context and how only decisive class action can break this context.
All this is not to deny that Marx’s formulations of the problem are not open to correction – sometimes possibly even a fundamental correction. But any reformulation should be concerned with increasing understanding of the forces that bring men into relationship with one another, not, as in Cardan’s case, with denying the possibility of such an understanding.
After the ferocity of the attack upon ‘traditional Marxism’ one might expect Cardan to present an alternative total view of modern society. He does not, but rather gives a general, and not always accurate or convincing, description of certain facets of society. We are told that ‘the gradual increase in living standards is irreversible’ – the reason being, apparently, that without it, ‘Capital accumulation would be impossible’. Similarly, ‘The essential function of trade unions has become the maintenance of peace in industry’ – a statement that might express the desires of union leaders and bosses, but surely cannot sum up all union activities. Again, ‘Few union members are interested in union affairs’; ‘Depressions of the pre-war type are virtually excluded’ – here one would like to ask why, and also why only ‘virtually’ (it sounds like an attempt to guarantee irrefutability to the statement). But Cardan not only accepts so much of the glib liberal view of modern society but also fails to explain how it comes to have the features it has. The various aspects are not integrated into a total picture. Instead it is postulated that capitalism has no objective contradictions, and that its faults lie in a completely different sphere.
For Cardan the cardinal feature of modern capitalism is bureaucratisation, seen as everywhere growing in both extent and intensity, to make production more ‘rational’ and efficient – an impossible task because in a class society it has to exclude the workers from decision making in production. But nowhere does he show why the bureaucracy has continually to accumulate capital, make production more efficient, extend its own sphere of influence. Cardan assumes that something inherent in bureaucratic structures makes them drive to rationalisation of production, a proposition for which there is little historical evidence. Rather, if bureaucracies do drive to rationalisation, it is because they are subject to exigencies – ‘objective laws’ or not – beyond their control. If this is so the key to understanding the development of society lies in understanding the dynamic behind these exigencies – a task which Cardan condemns out of hand. The only alternative is to see the processes of bureaucratic rationalisation as dependent only upon the attitudes of the bureaucrats themselves.
In fact Cardan oscillates between seeing bureaucracy as a response to a situation (the existence of which he has previously denied) and seeing it as the consequence of a developing capitalist spirit. This theoretical inconsistency is matched in the discussion on practical activity. Cardan in places demonstrates a real concern with revolutionary working-class activity and organisation, but this is continually vitiated by his idealistic mode of analysis into mere moralising (’consumption’, for instance, is castigated in a manner that would do credit to a Christian ascetic). In this sense Cardan’s ‘revision’ of Marxism is nothing but a return to the elitist utopianism that preceded Marx.



Beliefs in Society
Nigel Harris
Watts, 15s
This book really requires two reviews – one of which would be full of praise, the other cold and indifferent. For its contents divide neatly into chunks of juicy red meat of concrete analysis and stodgy layers of methodological discussion.
The sections of concrete analysis are important and interesting. Further they are readable, lively and thought provoking. Titled Conservatism in the West, Conservatism in the East and Nationalism and the South, they analyse the major ideological developments of the Western (notably the British) and the Stalinist ruling classes and of the newly developing state capitalist regimes (chiefly Maoism, but also references to Sukarno, Nkrumah, Ben Bella and the various other faded heroes of the early sixties). Much of the material has appeared in the author’s articles in back issues of IS but is more fully developed here. This permits a clearer and more factually based exposition of points that were elliptical and obscure in the IS articles. One’s only regret is that more is not contained from the very fine analysis of India in IS 17 and 18.
Unfortunately, with rare exceptions, the rest of the book is not nearly so good. In part this may be due to bad writing – at points phrase is piled on phrase, sentence on sentence, example on example as if just to fill out wordage. But more importantly there is no real feeling that the author is clear as to what he is trying to say and to whom. Is he writing a general introduction to the sociology of ideas for undergraduates? Or a simple introduction to Marxism? Or to present a sophisticated justification of Marxism as the embodiment of the partial truths of other ideologies?
Unclear as to his purpose he falls between all three stools. Much of interest is said but never fully articulated. Many discussions are begun, but few consummated. For instance towards the end of the book there is a dialectical twist, by which the uncertainties and relativism of competing ideologies are transmuted in Marxist science. But it is not clear how this necessary step is taken. Is it because only Marxism incorporates a ‘faith’ in the relevance of praxis? Or is it because Marxism alone of world views can make a sense of previous views as essential components of human history, can contain in itself the partial truths which they express while also explaining why their partialness leads them into falsity, and can therefore make sense of and interrelate the various forms of practice which men engage in anyway? If the latter is the case then commitment to Marxism is not (as with Goldmann) an ‘act of faith’ but rather a commitment to understand and take seriously an involvement in the world which one cannot evade – even the isolated and self-obsessed existentialist describes his obsessions in a conceptual discourse that is social by its very nature. The issue cannot be argued here. One of the problems with Harris’s book is that he does not argue it either – giving an appearance of arbitrariness to his conclusions. Still, even the abstract portions of this book can be worth reading. And if you cannot face these, there are the three very worthwhile chapters that are a must.
 
Top of the page

Chris Harman Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15.1.2008





The Czech events have now revealed all the features of the classical crisis of bureaucratic state capitalism, as revealed in the events of Poland and Hungary in 1956. There have been differences of emphasis; time and national conditions have produced peculiarities of casting, but the mould has retained the same contours. The forces shaping history have been similar, following from the dynamics of the same system.
As with the convulsion of 1956 the Czechoslovak crisis had its origin in problems of the economy. But these in turn had their basis in the very nature of bureaucratic state capitalism: the contradictory combination of ruling class control of society through a bureaucratic machine backed up by a relentless terror apparatus that fixes social and political relations with a seemingly immutable rigidity, on the one hand, with the capitalist goals of that class – incessant development of productive forces through accumulation of the means of production – on the other.
For fifteen years Czechoslovakia had been among the most stable of the state-capitalist regimes. There was a local semi-insurrection in Pilsen in 1953, but otherwise the convulsions that swept the Stalinist bloc after Stalin’s death and the Twentieth Party Congress left it untouched. Czech industry grew. The industrialising regimes throughout the rest of Eastern Europe provided a seemingly insatiable demand for its products in the 1950’s without demanding any improvement in quality or technological development. Externally the Czech bureaucracy happily accepted a position of subordination to the Russians; internally deviationists and potential deviationists were eliminated without any weakening of the regime. Relatively crude methods were successfully employed to carry through a continual expansion of production. On the factory floor simple piece rate incentives on the one hand, physical threats on the other, led to the production of a large surplus. Crude physical threats could again be used to prevent lower level bureaucrats either diverting this surplus for their own use or succumbing to pressures from the working class below. Even government ministers could be threatened with arrest on trumped up charges, gaol, torture or execution. At all levels the political police successfully prevented any formulation of alternative policies and the self-organisation of any social stratum.
But such methods could only work to expand production while production techniques were relatively simple. They are not compatible with improved, sophisticated techniques. These demand greater initiative from the workers and do. not permit the same degree of police or managerial surveillance of production. Those on the shop floor can more easily engage in forms of passive resistance to the system without detection (producing shoddy products, increasing the wear and tear on machines, etc). Control through crude repression no longer guarantees increased production.
For a period this problem could be evaded by the bureaucracy. But given its need to survive in a world where the productive forces were continually growing, a point was bound to be reached where evasion was no longer possible. In the early 1960 s the contradiction between the forces of production and the relations of production revealed itself to the Czech bureaucracy in the classical capitalist form; through an inability to sell goods on the world market. As the other East European countries industrialised they became less dependent on Czech products. They reached the point where they could produce goods of a similar standard themselves. At the same time the decline in the Cold War enabled them to buy sophisticated products from the West that could not be efficiently made under Czech conditions. Whereas the Czech national income had risen by an average of 8.2 per cent between 1953 and 1963, in 1963 it fell 3.7 per cent and industrial production fell by 0.7 per cent.
The impact on the bureaucracy was immediate. It split down the middle. A section began to press, ever more vigorously, for fundamental changes in the organisation of industry in order to streamline production and recapture markets. Despite its talk of ‘socialism with a human face’ the aim of the ‘liberal bureaucracy’ was not to pass control and initiative to the base of society. Rather it argued for relaxation of certain sorts of bureaucratic controls over middle managers and their replacement by -market controls. In the long term Czech industry would compete on the world market not as one single unit but section by section. Reforms in managerial methods were not to give power to workers, but to increase their feeling of ‘participation.’ Workers would not ‘assume any managerial functions. These would rest with the management.’ [1]
After five years of bureaucratic infighting, the ‘liberals’, by forming alliances both with other sections of the bureaucracy – notably the Slovaks – and increasingly with extra-bureaucratic groups were able to neutralise the state forces at the disposal of the old guard and take over control last year. But this was only the beginning of the problems that faced them.
Throughout 1968 the Dubcek group had to fight a battle on two fronts. On the one hand it had to deal definitively with the remnants, at every level of the bureaucracy, of the Novotny regime; whole hosts of administrators attached to an antiquated organisation of production had to be eliminated. On the other hand it increasingly had to worry about forces it itself had unleashed; in the factories and universities independent and democratic mass organisations were appearing for the first time for twenty years. Trade Unions were being rebuilt on a democratic basis. Journalists and radio and television personnel who had been freed from censorship in order to criticise the Novotnyites were in danger of discussing the policies of the new rulers.
Even prior to the Russian invasion this flowering of free discussion was of some concern to the Dubcek group. Ministers began to refer to the dangers of ‘anarchy’ and of ‘anti-socialist’ forces.
The economic situation continued to deteriorate. The economic reforms (involving the closing down of numerous plants, wage cuts and ‘redeployment’) were incompatible both to the existence of whole strata of old style bureaucrats and the existence of independent workers’ organisations. Investment decisions continued to be irrational and to lead to the production of unwanted goods and increased stock piles. The workers used their new found strength to force wage increases. Continual inflation resulted.
All this time the state machine was becoming less and less effective as a means of imposing governmental decisions. The control of the Dubcek group above all rested on its ideological hegemony. Any attempt to impose the economic reforms in all their austerity might have undermined this.
A foreign hard currency loan could have eased these difficulties. It would have enabled the buying of machinery from the West to modernise industry. The obvious suppliers were the Russians. Not only had these been treating the Czechs in a typically imperialist manner for years (buying below market prices and selling above [2]) but they also had had a trade deficit with the Czechs for several years, which was paid for by crediting the Czechs with funds in the Comecon bank in Moscow amounting to several milliards of crowns. [3] The Russians however, refused to supply the Czechs with hard currencies and insisted that the Czech trade surplus be invested on a long term basis in Russian industry – as for instance with 500 million dollars, invested in 1966 in Siberian Oil which was not to be reimbursed for ten years. [4] All this served, even prior to the Russian invasion and even among sections of the bureaucracy, to focus attention upon relations with Russia.
The immediate effect of the Russian invasion in August was to stabilise the position of the reforming bureaucracy. The whole population united behind it. Even the conservative sections of the party did not dare form a puppet government for the Russians. Dubcek, balancing between the Russians and the mass of Czech people, seemed to be raised higher than either. Western journalists referred to an amazing triumph of ‘dignified non-violence’. Those aspects of Dubcek’s policy that might separate him off from the mass of Czech workers were cloaked by the Russian presence.
But over the months it became clear that there were huge differences between the demand of the Russians and those of the mass of Czechs that even Dubcek could not resolve. The more that Dubcek and the section of the bureaucracy behind him were bound to try to implement policies demanded by the Russians, the more the Czechoslovak population began to organise to take action independently of the Communist Party.
When the students occupied the universities at the end of the last year they found they had immense support from workers in the factories. The trade unions, in which government-appointed officials had been replaced by democratic elections, began to demand control over the factories by workers’ councils elected from the shop floor.
Above all there was the growth of intense hostility to the Russian occupation at the base of society. This found its fullest and most clear-cut expression in the half a million strong demonstrations that followed the defeat of the Russians in an ice hockey match. In every town people poured on to the streets. Every wall in Prague had the score scrawled on it. The Russians had invaded Czechoslovakia in order to curtail free debate. Yet that debate was now involving more people than ever before. One Russian newspaper complained that the situation was even worse than before the invasion.
As the two planks upon which it was resting moved further and further apart, the ‘progressive’ section of the bureaucracy around Dubcek became more and more unsure of itself. It had to ‘keep order’ for the Russians, but the moment it tried to do seriously it would lose its popularity with the Czechs. Meanwhile the forces of the state – particularly the army – were becoming more and more demoralised. At the top, a few generals were threatening a coup against the government. At the bottom, the rank and file shared the sentiments of the masses. For instance, when the soldiers were sent out to patrol the streets with the police, few seemed to take the task seriously.
The very basis of the independent existence of the Czech ruling bureaucracy was being undermined. In the factories the mass meetings of workers were a growing power. The trade unions increasingly operated like an opposition political party.
The ‘progressive’ bureaucrats continued to resent the Russian intrusion. But they also became more dependent on the Russian threats to preserve their own position. The continuing demoralisation of their own state machine and their urgent need to put into effect unpopular reforms made them fear ‘anarchy’ more than the embrace of the Russians. They might hate the Russian domination, but that road at least promised them a minimum of security for their class rule. Better to be a subordinate bureaucrat than no bureaucrat at all.
With the sacking of Dubcek, without serious bureaucrat opposition (even Dubcek does not seem to have seriously tried to oppose it) the Czech ruling class has jumped off the fence. It has shown it is prepared to put down the workers and students in the interests of the Russians. From now on the lines of the class struggle inside Czechoslovakia and of the national struggle against the Russians will be more and more identical.
This will have a two sided consequence. On the one hand an increasing bitterness against the bureaucracy as a whole among the masses of workers, students and other oppressed groups. On the other a continued articulation of this class consciousness in national terms that prevent it becoming fully self-conscious. A sort of ‘Sinn Fein’ stance can be expected which will identify class enemies, but never be fully clear why, nor of long term alternatives to them.
Distressing as it may be to western socialists (who still think it is better to be pro-Russian in the West than pro-American in the East) this class consciousness may well be masked by all sorts of pro-western ideologies. But the increased repression and censorship will make the organised articulation of genuinely revolutionary alternatives well nigh impossible.
For the time being the reconciliation between the Czech bureaucracy and the Russian imperialists will protect the rule of both. Although possibilities of some sort of spontaneous uprising cannot be ruled out – the bureaucracy with memories of the ice hockey match felt it prudent to abandon May Day celebrations – the threat of Russian intervention has reduced the political opposition to impotence. To this extent the ‘progressive’ bureaucracy has successfully followed the path of Kadar and Gomulka.
In the long term, however, its prospects are not nearly as optimistic. Gomulka was able to stay in power through a judicious combination of huge increases in living standards, Russian threats and a popular nationalist ideology. He only needed to employ physical force after nearly a year in power, with the banning of Po Prostu and the use of armed force against demonstrations. Kadar was put into power by Russian troops, but over time was at least able to build himself some sort of indigenous base by raising living standards and continuing certain aspects of the ‘liberalisation’. In both cases what was central was that there were economic resources available that could be utilised to improve the standard of life. This was because the economic crisis had been a crisis of growth, not of stagnation (in both cases the most intractable problems were not in industry but in agriculture).
The Czech bureaucracy has no such resources. It needs to depress living standards, not raise them. And even then its problems might not be capable of solution without a hard currency loan. After 1956 the Russians were willing to stabilise the Kadar regime by easing up on their exploitation of Hungary and giving some sort of aid to it. They seem much less willing to aid Husak and his friends. (After all, the Russian economy is not expanding at its old speed either.) Anyway, such a loan would not obviate the need to depress living standards. The Russian threats will have restored bureaucratic monolithism and have frozen existing relations of production. But they cannot do away with the opposition between this freezing and the needs of developing productive forces.
Looking at Czechoslovakia in isolation the picture can only be a pessimistic one. What seemed like spring was in fact an Indian summer. The ‘human face of socialism’ turned out to be a grimacing death mask. The crisis cannot, however, be confined to Czechoslovakia in the long run. In the other ‘advanced’ Eastern countries the same contradictions are there, albeit still latent. The Polish bureaucracy, with memories of ’56 and of the riots of last year dare not reform the economy because it dare not reform itself. There and elsewhere the greater economic growth is, the greater the irrationalities and distortions to it. The more they feel their internal limitation the more the different bureaucracies compose and jostle with each other internationally. Even those who participated in the invasion of Czechoslavakia can resent Moscow’s economic domination through Comecon. It is not only the Czechs who, for instance, object to complete dependence on Russian oil or to the Russian bureaucracy’s aim of being the major producer of technological goods in the bloc.
But it is in Moscow and Leningrad that the liberation of Czechoslovakia can really lie. For the Russian bureaucracy does not always sleep so easily. Declining growth rates have cut the overall resources at its command. It attempts to placate a massive working class by raising living standards. At the same time rt has to devote an even greater proportion of national resources than the Western powers to arms expenditure. The very repressiveness of its methods makes it difficult to raise labour productivity. For ten years or more the Russian bureaucracy has avoided coming to terms with the roots of its own economic problems. If it attempts to solve these it will have to undergo a ‘Czech development’ of its own. If it does not discontent that will develop at the base of society will eventually erupt. In either case there will be no foreign army to bale it out.
 
Top of the page
 
Notes
1. Professor Sik on 20th May 1968. Quoted in Economist Intelligence Unit, Quarterly Report, East Europe North, 1968, No.3.
2. The following facts about Czechoslovakia’s trade relations with the USSR were extracted from Vnechniaia Torgovlia SSSR za 1966 (Moscow 1967) by the Neue Zürcher Zeitung (6th October 1968). They were reproduced in Analyses et Documents (6th March 1969) The mean price of Czech exports to the USSR is 35 per cent below the mean price of the same articles exported to the USSR from the West. The prices of exports from the USSR to Czechoslovakia are almost always higher than those to the western countries. The weighted difference of price shows that Czechoslovakia buys from Russia goods that cost 13 per cent more than if they came from the West.



To Czechoslovakia


To the West




     50.2  


     32.0    




     56.8  


     66.1    




   123     


     65.6    




     68.4  


     40.9    




   130     


   122       




   132     


     70.6    




       0.12


       0.016




   398     


   222       




   380     


   128       




2,060     


1,540       




1,920     


1,883       




1,954     


   324       




3,100     


2,380       







USSR: Imports




 


From
Czechoslovakia


From
the West




Electric transformers (Kva)


  1.19


  4.68




Calcium Carbonate (ton)


72.5  


77.5  




Woollen cloth (meter)


18.5  


31.2  







Estimated overall effect of trade distortions
for Czechoslovakia 1966
(in millions of DM)




 


Exports


Imports


Sum




At actual prices


3,863


3,675


      8




At non-discriminatory prices


7,838


2,227


5,611




Commercial advantage to the USSR


4,155


1,448


5,603



In 1965 the Czechoslovak national income was 50.6 thousand million DM. Without the commercial practices of the USSR it would therefore have been 11 per cent higher.
But this is not all. Even at actual prices, the total value of Czech exports to the USSR is higher than the total value of imports.



Trade balance favourable
to Czechoslovakia
(in millions of DM)




1960


  81




1961


173




1962


216




1963


409




1964


272




1965


440




1966


    8



In the seven years between 1960 and 1966 Czechoslovakia delivered to the USSR goods worth 500 million dollars more tha those she received as imports.
Over the years this difference in value has been bridged by a cumulation of Czech credits in the Comecon bank in Moscow; Being in roubles these are only of use to the Czechs for trade transactions with Russia. The total of such Czech investments in Eastern bloc countries is estimated at 14 billion crowns – equal to Czechoslovakia’s annual trade turnover. At the same time the Russians have been refusing the Czechs a hard currency loan’.
3. Declaration of Czech Minister of Finance, 19th April 1968
4. It is worth noting that the US would not consider a loan. ‘Washington, on the eve of a possible diplomatic rapprochement with Russia is unwilling to grant a loan that might be construed by Moscow as a massive economic and political intervention in Eastern Europe.’ Economist Intelligence Unit, op. cit.
 
Top of the page

Chris Harman Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 16.1.2008





Any attempt to ‘examine the economic basis of the theories of International Socialism’ and to ‘demonstrate ... in fact the Menshevik theories of International Socialism lead to a very bad political practice’ would merit attention in this journal. When the author of such an attempt has been considered for many years the leading theoretician of the ‘Fourth International’ and has also acquired a reputation in certain circles as a ‘Marxist economist’, a serious assessment of his arguments can not only enable us to clarify our arguments, but also to see to what extent his reputation is deserved.
There are, however, two practical difficulties in an overall assessment of Mandel’s pamphlet. [1] The first is that the range of points covered is so great as to prevent us attempting to deal with other than the major ones. The second is that his critique is not of ‘the theories of the International Socialism group as a whole’. It is a critique of one short presentation of these theories in a review by Mike Kidron; the books and articles by Cliff, Kidron and others where our arguments are put fully are only mentioned a couple of times in passing in Mandel’s pamphlet.
However, by looking at the major points on which Mandel takes dispute with us, the basic untenability of his position can be shown, together with the extent to which he is forced into inconsistencies, distortions and simple misunderstandings in order to defend it, and the overall shallowness of his critique.
 
The nature of capitalism
The first central point in Mandel’s criticism concerns the nature of capitalism. He argues that
‘Capitalism is a mode of production in which generalised commodity production unleashes a historic process of accumulation of capital, which is in turn a constant (if discontinuous) growth of commodity production, of production of exchange values and of reinvestment of surplus value’. [2]
‘The rationale of capitalism can be understood only under conditions of constantly expanding commodity production, of a constantly expanding and insecure market, and of firms, of producing units, facing that anonymous market independently from each other and competing for larger and more profitable shares of the. market ... But if we assume generalised and constantly expanding commodity production we assume also the absolute need to realise the surplus value of these commodities, in order to accumulate capital.’
The argument is developed at some length and the central idea is repeated, in different forms, several times. As far as it goes it is a fair summary of a part of Marx’s conception of the nature of capitalism. [3] But there is an odd omission. Nowhere in the whole section of the pamphlet dealing with this question is there a single mention of the working class or a single reference to the wage labour/capital relationship. Now this is curious. For it was not Michael Kidron but Karl Marx who wrote
‘The relation between wage labour and capital determines the entire character of the mode of production’.
And this is not an accidental aside. Marx’s original starting point was alienated labour, the situation in which the products of man’s labour appear as independent forces, constraints on his activity. In its developed form this implies the separation of the worker from control of the means of production, expropriation of the actual producers, the creation of a proletariat.
The significance of this omission will become apparent later. For the moment, however, let us look at the conclusion Mandel thinks can be drawn from his definition. He sees it as meaning that commodities produced have to be transformed into money, and that therefore that ‘capital accumulation’, ‘the final money form of capital’ and ‘the capitalists thirst for profits’ are ‘exactly identical expressions’. But this is plain unadulterated nonsense. Thirst for profits is not ‘synonymous’ with ‘the basic economic compulsion determined by the structure of capitalist society’. Thirst for profits existed, for instance, among usurers in the slave society of Roman antiquity or in Chinese oriental despotism. So did the ‘final money form of capital’. In neither case did they produce systematic ‘capital accumulation’. What Mandel is trying to say is that in capitalism as Marx describes it they are different elements in an integrated ongoing system. But if that is the case, it is difficult to see the particular sin in describing them as social and psychological mechanisms that make the system function. Yet it is for this that Kidron is subjected to attack. What really matters, of course, is whether they are the only such mechanisms that produce the peculiar features of that system as opposed to other historically existing modes of production.
This leads us to the central argument: whether the capitalist mode of production is to be defined by a system involving the ‘thirst for profit’ and ‘commodity production’ for a ‘constantly expanding and insecure market’, or by something else of which these are but manifestations. Kidron argues that this something else is the competition between rival owners of means of production that forces each to try and resist the inroads of the other by continually expanding the means of production. This establishes a relationship between the different accumulations of alienated labour making up the competing means of production that defines each as capital, and their owners as capitalists. It also determines the dynamic of interaction of capitalists with each other and with those who produce the means of production so as to continually reproduce on an enlarged scale, the competition.
Mandel’s argument is that this cannot be a definition of capitalism because:

The primacy of growth ‘is not only true for capitalism’. He instances the ‘tremendous process of growth’ of the fourth millenium BC arid ‘the tremendous economic growth’ that would occur under socialism. Yet, in fact, neither of these actually refers to a situation in which there was a ‘primacy of growth’ in Kidron’s terms, that is, a system in which growth is compulsive. Rather each refers, even according to Mandel, to growth that occurs as a result of historically contingent factors. In fact, even Mandel is unimpressed by his own argument here. For 12 pages later he writes: ‘this urge (to accumulate capital) is typical only for the capitalist class under the concrete conditions of the capitalist mode of production’. [4]
More importantly, he argues that competition alone cannot be the definition of capitalism, because in the past there have been societies competing with each other (e.g. Rome and Carthage, Venice and Byzantium) that have not been capitalist. Therefore, what counts is only competition on the basis of ‘generalised commodity production’.

The trouble with this definition is that it leaves the concept of ‘commodity’ as unproblematic. This might not matter if one were dealing with small-scale capitalist production with many competing firms exchanging all their produce on the market. With modern capitalism of the Western sort, let alone with that which dominates in countries like Egypt or Syria, this raises immediate problems. For instance, what happens when the capitalist produces for the state? According to Lenin:
‘When capitalists work for defence, i.e. for the government treasury, it is obviously no more “pure” capitalism, but a special form of national economy. Pure capitalism means commodity production. Commodity production means working for an unknown and free market. But the capitalist “working” for defence does not “work” for the market at all.’ [5]
Or again, in a monopoly when the capitalist has a degree of control over his own prices? As Hilferding has put it:
‘The realisation of the Marxian theory of concentration – the monopoly merger – seems to lead to the invalidation of the Marxian law of Value’. [6]
 
The Commodity
Unfortunately Mandel does not even begin to discuss these points. He continually refers to ‘generalised commodity production’ as essential to capitalism, but does not begin to analyse what it means. He is so concerned to try to show Kidron as deviating from the picture of capitalism that Marx paints that he does not see any problems arising as capitalism itself begins to deviate from Marx’s picture. But precisely in order to understand how the system we live under is the same as that analysed by Marx, one had to go beyond mere surface definitions, so as to see how the form of commodity production may undergo profound changes, become hardly recognisable, but the content remains the same. In other words, what is needed is a clear analysis of what commodity production is, the analysis that Mandel does not even refer to in his critique of Kidron.
Despite Mandel’s claim that he is only repeating what Marx wrote – ‘We only say: Marx truly said this’ [7] – he does not in fact take up a point central to Marx’s whole analysis of commodity production: which is precisely that the commodity cannot be taken at face value, that ‘its analysis shows that it is in reality a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties’. [8] One of the most important sections of Capital is after all called ‘the fetishism of commodities’. The commodity is not just a good whose character is clearly visible from the fact that it exchanges with another good. It is a reflection of a more deep-rooted characteristic of social production. As society develops, what is manifested on the surface is the exchange of commodities. But through this one recognises what is beyond: the economic relations of production. [9] Marx’s conclusion is quite clear.
‘The reason why the products of labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses’ is ‘because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between the products of their labour.’
‘As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because they are products of the labour of private individuals or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently of each other. The sum total of the labour of these individuals forms the aggregate labour of society. Since the producers do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the specific social character of each producer’s labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange. In other words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society, only by the relations which the act of exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirectly through them, between the producers.’ [10]
Marx argues that this process forces the labour of the individual labourer to have a two-fold character: on the one hand it is concrete, useful labour of a particular sort; on the other hand it represents a portion of the total labour of the whole of society.
‘The different kinds of private labour, which are being carried on independently of each other ... are continually being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society requires them ...’
What is central for Marx’s analysis of commodity production then is that through it the labour of individuals is related in a quantitative fashion to the labour of all other individuals with whom they enter into social relations, not consciously, but rather through the relations that come to exist between the products of their labour. This in turn means that the production process itself is determined by factors outside of it, that is, by the relation of its costs to that of production taking place elsewhere. There is
‘regulation of mutual production by the costs of production ... the product is related to itself as a realisation of a determined quantity of general labour, of social labour time.’ [11]
For the particular commodity producer this means that his methods of production – his particular relationship with nature and other men in the production process – has continually to be changed as there are unplanned and anarchic changes in the methods of production of all other producers. This commodity production becomes capitalist production when labour power, the capacity for performing labour, as well as the products of labour, becomes a commodity, the price of which (i.e. wages) is determined by the unplanned social interaction between its exploiters that continually forces them to pay for it no more than an historically and culturally determined minimum.
We can sum up what we have been saying up to this point: yes, capitalism is, as Mandel argues, competition on the basis of commodity production. But to fully understand it one has to go further and see that what makes man-produced objects – and above all labour power – into a commodity is precisely competition between producing units that has advanced to the point where each is compelled to continually rationalise and rearrange its internal productive processes so as to relate them to the productive process of the others.
Now if one examines why, say, the competition between Rome and Carthage was not capitalist, the reason is not just the tautological one that it was not based upon ‘commodity production’, but rather that the labour processes which the citizens (and slaves) of Rome were engaged in were not being continually transformed and rationalised so as to keep pace with such changes in Carthage and vice-versa. The ‘social relation’ between the Roman and the Carthaginian citizen established by the competition did not continually intrude upon the actual act of production in this way.
On the other hand, one is now able to see why, and in what sense, production where commodities as defined by common-sense (and Mandel) do not exist can be ‘commodity production’. In monopolies both the goods produced at each stage in the production process and the labour power employed are ‘commodities’ because in the long run the internal organisation of the labour process – i.e., the number of goods produced, the exchange relations between different goods, the percentage of the total social labour time employed in producing them, the price paid for labour power – is determined by its relationship to production taking place in society outside the monopoly. Similarly, with arms production for the government; because there exist complex and unplanned relationships between the process of arms production (albeit not ones arising from competition between commodities on the free market) and the production processes for other goods in society, commodity production can be considered to take place. In both cases, the ‘law of value’ – the complete determination of production by its unplanned market relation to production taking place elsewhere, is negated in a certain sense. But at the same time, it alone provides a necessary basis for understanding how the production process is in fact regulated. An object falling freely through the atmosphere certainly does not fall at 32 feet per second per second; but to understand how it falls one has to begin from the law of gravity.
In an advanced capitalist society most production is not pure commodity production; but one can begin to understand its dynamic through the law of value. There is a partial negation of the law of value, but on the basis of the law of value itself.
 
The Stalinist States
The argument about the nature of capitalism in general is a necessary preparation for the discussion about Russia and the other Stalinist states. For Mandel it is settled in advance that these cannot be capitalist states of any sort because a producing unit is, as argued previously, only capitalist when its products ‘have to be sold on the market’.
‘It is absurd to assume that capitalist production was somehow re-introduced because of “competition on the world market” (i.e., that the tail of 1 per cent of output imported from and exported to the advanced capitalist countries is wagging the dog of the Russian economy).’
Mandel does not, however, stop at this point. He feels the need to go on and argue his case in more depth. Rather than take time to point to some of the limitations of his argument here – for instance, the crude empiricism implied in a mere quantitative estimation of the role of foreign trade, without any examination of whether at certain points the qualitative significance of commodities obtained by foreign trade might have been much greater than 1 per cent [12] (after all, Magdoff has argued persuasively that the very low proportion of US trade with the third world is of central importance to the US economy) merits some of the absurd conclusions that must follow (which if Mandel does not accept, other ‘Trotskyists’ do), that Cuba, say, with the major portion of its productive resources devoted in the next five-year period, as in the last one, to attempting to produce 10 million tons of sugar a year to sell on the world market in competition with other sugar producers, is engaged in commodity production and is therefore capitalist, while Russia is not – we will analyse his arguments further.
Not only is it not true, argues Mandel, that there is commodity production in Russia, neither is there an urge to accumulate capital.
‘As we have said above, it is simply not true that all ruling layers in history have had an urge to pump more and more surplus product out of their producers. And it is even less true that they all have an urge to “accumulate capital”. This “urge” is typical only for the capitalist class under the concrete conditions of the capitalist mode of production (universal commodity production and private property of the means of production, i.e., the existence of several capitals, i.e., competition). Now the Soviet bureaucracy is not a capitalist class. It does not manage factories under conditions of universal commodity production. It is not in the process of competition .with other capitalists. So it is under no economic compulsion to maximise output and under even less economic compulsion to optimise resource allocation‘ (Mandel’s emphasis).
One can only thank Mandel for putting the logic of his argument so clearly. There are two premises and an irrefutable conclusion: only under capitalism is there an ‘urge’, to accumulate capital, Russia is not by Mandel’s definition capitalist, and therefore the Soviet bureaucracy is under ‘no economic compulsion to maximise output ... and to optimise resource allocation’. Clearly if we can disprove this conclusion, we can seriously question (to say the least) Mandel’s whole position. It would seem that we should devote considerable effort to doing so. We do not, however, intend to. For Mandel himself saves us the effort. Only one sentence later he writes that ‘the inner logic of a planned economy calls for maximising output and optimising deployment of resources’ and a paragraph later that the ‘Soviet economy needed urgently to grow from extensive to intensive industrialisation, with much more calculated use of resources than before’.
But Mandel himself has just argued that there can be no such ‘inner logic’, no such need ‘urgently to grow from extensive into intensive industrialisation’, or as he put it earlier no ‘urge to accumulate’ in a non-capitalist society. In a non-capitalist society the consumption needs of the ruling class determine the dynamic of production. A ‘plan’ is merely the organisation of production to fulfil these needs. A ‘plan’ has no ‘inner logic’ to accumulate. The ruling class (or bureaucracy) may want to accumulate and plan accordingly – or it may not and plan otherwise.
 
Reifying the Plan
In talking of the ‘need’ of the plan to accumulate, Mandel is making precisely the mistake that Marx castigates again and again of ascribing human properties to things, of accepting reified appearances, of worshipping the commodity fetish. The only ‘need’ plans in general have is that of ensuring a proportionate division of inputs to produce the desired outputs – people – whether consciously or unconsciously through their unplanned interaction – not ‘plans’ determine whether this output should be large or small, and for that matter whether it be the result of an ‘optimal utilisation of resources’ of otherwise. Rosa Luxemburg, at least, was very clear that one sort of ‘plan’ would be subject to no such reified pressures:
‘The aim of socialism is not accumulation but the satisfaction of humanity’s wants by developing the productive resources of the entire globe’ [13]
But why does Mandel, who has certainly read Marx’s strictures against reification and fetishism, so readily fall into this trap himself? The reason is not difficult to find. Clearly something other than the ‘consumption needs of the bureaucracy’ [14] is behind the forced development of the economy. It was obviously not the privileges of the bureaucracy that determined the need for hundreds of millions of tons of iron and steel in the thirties and forties. Nor was it these that produced the collectivisation of agriculture and the near stagnation of consumer good production after 1929. Nor, for that matter, could it have been the consumption needs of other sections of the population. The bureaucracy itself implemented the plans (there were no long term plans before 1928-9) yet according to Mandel it was only motivated in its ‘economic management’, by its ‘consumption desires’. Therefore, something else has to be responsible for all the rest. Given Mandel’s premises it must have been the plan. (What an argument for ‘planning’, that its ‘logic’ entails subordination of consumption to accumulation!) In real life something other than the ‘consumption desires of the bureaucracy’ did determine the dynamic of economic development in Russia, something that makes possible the ‘reification’ of the plan. There can be a ‘tug of war’ between the plan and the desires of individual bureaucrats precisely because the plan is determined by something outside itself other than these desires (and not by some metaphysical ‘logic of the planned economy’). There is only one thing this something else, in contradiction to the desires of individual bureaucrats, can be: the pressures of rival ruling classes outside Russia. It is these that continually determine the pace and direction of economic processes inside Russia. If Mandel is not clear about this, he only reveals that he is more myopic even than Stalin was.
‘The environment in which we are placed ... at home and abroad ... compels us to adopt a rapid rate of growth of our industry.’ (Stalin, 19.11.29) [15]
Or again:
To slacken the pace of industrialisation would mean to lag behind; those who lag behind are beaten ... We are fifty years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this lag in 10 years. Either we do it or they crush us.’ [16]
It was this continual pressure from world capitalism that was responsible for the development of the Russian economy from 1929 onwards. It was this, not the ‘needs of the plan’ or the ‘desires of the bureaucracy’ that produced an accumulation of means of production devoted to further accumulating means of production. Only on such a basis was it possible for the bureaucracy (once its interests had made it abandon a perspective of revolution abroad) to develop the material base to defend its control over Russian society from the intrusions of foreign ruling classes. And, it is worth adding, this is still what determines both the structure of the plan and the degree of fulfillment of its different sectors. Again, the Russian bureaucrats are more aware of this than the ‘Marxist’ Mandel:
‘Owing to the international situation it has not been possible to allocate as many resources as intended to agricultural investment and whilst the 1969 figure exceeds that for 1968 it is below that envisaged in Directives for 1966-70 ...’ [17]
It is worth adding that Mandel is quite prepared to concede the importance of ‘continued expansion of arms production’ due to competition with the non-capitalist economy in the Soviet Union’ in determining economic development in the West. But apparently, this ‘competition’ does not play the same role in relation to Russia.
If, on the other hand, this competition does determine the whole development of the Russian economy, then the anarchic and unplanned relations between the products of their labour with that of producers outside Russia (comparisons of levels of arms production and of the development of heavy industry generally) will determine the conditions under which Russian workers will produce and live. Because the price of labour power in the West is continually being forced down to a historically determined minimum in the long run, so will the price they receive (i.e., their real wages). Every change in production processes in the West will force changes in production processes in Russia, and vice-versa. Accumulation in the West will force accumulation in Russia (and again, vice-versa). In other words, a total system of reified relations is set up in which the anarchic and unplanned interaction of the products of labour determines the labour process, in which dead labour dominates living labour, in which every concrete act of labour is related to abstract labour - on a world scale – in which although there may be many partial negations of the law of value these are on the basis of the law of value.
 
Encroachment and Transformation
Of course, it is ‘methodologically wrong to assume a mechanical and automatic identity between the fact of a country being submitted to “encroachments” of foreign capital and the fact of the country becoming capitalist. Only when these encroachments change the internal mode of production do they lead to the introduction (or reintroduction) of capitalism’. In this at least we wholeheartedly agree with Mandel. That is why Russia in the 10 years after 1917, although continually threatened by foreign capitalism, was not itself capitalist. Until the inauguration of the first five-year plan it was certainly not the needs of competing against foreign capital that determined the inner structure of the production process in Russia. It is clear (both from old sources like Cliff’s Russia and newer ones like the most recent volume of E.H. Carr) that the differing levels of real wages, the consumption level of the peasants, the relative sizes of heavy and light industry, were until 1928 the result of differing pressures of different social groups on the state. There was growth, but no ‘urge to accumulate’. Until 1924 not economic and military competition with the West, but spreading of the revolution was seen as the basis for establishing socialism in Russia. Even after the proclamation of ‘socialism in one country’ in 1925 the bureaucracy did not accept the programme of competing with the West. Rather, it tried to ignore the power of world capitalism in a quite utopian fashion (as Mandel, incidentally, still does).
But it is also the case that in 1928 reality did overtake the bureaucracy and force it to industrialise. In doing so it did bring about changes that are on such a scale quantitatively and qualitatively as to bear description as a ‘change in the mode of production’. Firstly, pressures of world capitalism led to a rapid change in the mode of production in agriculture on an unprecedented scale. Tens of millions of individual peasant farms were collectivised. The Stalinist bureaucracy brought more of the economy into state ownership than the great October revolution had. This was necessitated not by the arbitrary ‘desires’ of the bureaucracy, still less by the ‘logic of the plan’ but by the pressures to build up heavy industry on a scale that could not be sustained without a forcible pumping of surplus agricultural produce out of the countryside. [18]
Secondly, in industry there was also a change in the mode of production. In a matter of months changes were carried through that were to endure for decades: wages were cut, the rate of production speeded up, piecework introduced, the elementary rights of workers to defend themselves done away with, the independence of the trade unions abolished, the labour camps expanded on a massive scale. These measures were all symptomatic of a change in the whole mode of operation of the economy. Building up of heavy industry in competition with the West was on the basis of such measures. It was that which brought them about. In other words, production and the conditions of production were no longer determined by the needs of .people, ie, by the production of use values, but by the ‘needs’ of competition, the production of exchange values. In other words, through the mediation of arms production, the allocation of resources between consumption and accumulation, between living and dead labour, was determined by (and in turn determined) the allocation operating outside of the Russian economy, in the capitalist world. A leap from ‘freedom to necessity’ had been imposed.
There is no way of rationally understanding the dynamic of development of Russia either in the thirties or today if one denies that a change in the mode of production was forced through by the bureaucracy when it decided to defend itself against capitalism by imitating capitalism. Only this can make sense of Mandel’s own talk of a ‘logic’ to the plan that is different from the desires of individual bureaucrats. But this does not mean that acceptance of this logic of competition with the West was either ‘mechanical’ or automatic – it was in fact resisted in 1928-9 both by a substantial section of the bureaucracy around Bukharin, and by a section of the left opposition who, despite ambiguities, wanted to defend Russia against capitalism by revolutionary means, not by an internal imitation of capitalist exploitation. But it is a matter of fact, unfortunately or otherwise, that these lost out in the struggle and that the Stalinist transformation of the economy took place.
It is worth adding here that with the development of the newer Stalinist-type regimes, it is no longer merely competition with private capitalist states that imposes its laws upon them. It is also the needs of competition with other state capitalist ones (e.g. with orientation of the Russian economy to defence against China and vice-versa). Nor is it only or necessarily military competition. The general crisis confronting the Czechoslovak regime from the mid-1960’s on arose from an inability to sell the produce of its economy on the world market (including to other Stalinist regimes) – that is, from a classical inability for the state capitalist bureaucracy to realise its surplus value.
 
The analysis of modern capitalism
Mandel’s criticism of Kidron’s analysis of modern capitalism can be more quickly dealt with than the analysis of the Stalinist states, because the issues involved are less profound. Mandel begins by apparently quoting Kidron’s view of Marx’s model of capitalism and of why it should mean that there is a tendency for labour power to decline in absolute terms under capitalism; that “booms become progressively less profitable, and shorter; slumps more lasting and severe”.’ Incidentally, Mandel claims that Kidron ‘will have a hard time finding any evidence in Marx’s Capital‘ for these assumptions. One can only suggest that Mandel refers to pp.630-635 of Capital (vol.1). Thus Mandel quotes Kidron:
‘The model is a closed system, in which all output flows back as inputs in the form of investment goods or of wage goods. There are no leaks. ‘Yet in principle a leak could insulate the compulsion to grow from its most important consequences. ... If “capital intensive” goods were drawn off, the rise would be slower and – depending on the volume and composition of the leak – could even stop or be reversed. In such a case there would be no decline in the average rate of profit, no reason to expect increasingly severe slumps, and so on.
‘Capitalism has never formed a closed system in practice. Wars and slumps have destroyed vast quantities of output. Capital exports have diverted and frozen other quantities for long stretches of time.
‘A lot since World War II, filtered out in the production of arms. Each of these leaks has acted to slow the rise in the overall organic composition of capital and the fall in the rate of profit.’
According to Mandel what is involved in this account is ‘a vulgar theory of overproduction, according to which it is a glut of physical goods which is at the basis of all capitalism’s evil’, which depends for its plausibility on ‘a truly remarkable confusion between use-values and exchange-values ... worthy of inclusion in a textbook simply to show what a lack of understanding of the dual nature of the commodity necessarily leads to’.
What is amazing is that Mandel feels capable of writing this criticism down without mentioning what is central to Kidron’s stress on leaks: their affect on the organic composition of capital and the rate of profit. Kidron never once refers to an ‘overproduction’ of either use values or exchange values in the passage referred to, unlike Mandel who earlier writes that ‘unpredictable developments under capitalism arise from an overproduction of exchange-values ... (which most of the time are caused by ... an increase in the production of use-values).’ [19] The ‘rise’ Kidron is concerned with is a rise in the organic composition of capital (Mandel judiciously omits one sentence from Kidron making this clear in his long quotations, so the reader might well not be aware of this). Further, his ‘closed model’ is precisely a model of the circulation of exchange values: given that all value produced is transformed either into consumer goods or capital goods, and that the value of labour power does not rise, then there will be an overproduction of values than can only be disposed of either by an overproduction of consumer goods, leading to a crisis, or an increase in ratio of constant capital to variable capital in new investment (leading to a fall in the rate of profit, to less investment and therefore to crisis); the only alternative is for there to be a leak whereby values can be drawn from the system. At no point in this argument can there be, given its very form, the confusion of ‘use-values’ and ‘exchange-values’ invented by Mandel.
It is only because he ignores the actual model presented by Kidron, that Mandel is then able to pretend that ‘leaks’ from the system which occur through war, foreign investment, slumps, etc., involve the physical destruction of goods. For instance, Kidron’s whole point is that wars cause possibilities of growth for the system by destroying value that would otherwise have to be transformed into constant capital. This certainly does not mean that wars have to destroy physical means of production in order to counteract the contradictions of the system: indeed, in arguing in this way it is actually Mandel, not Kidron, who confuses capital as accumulated value (the Marxian definition) with a given accumulation of particular use values (‘to destroy capital ... they must destroy industrial equipment to a larger degree than is newly built’ [20]). Similarly, Kidron’s whole point is not that slumps destroy goods, but that they result in a devaluation of goods, i.e., value is destroyed or ‘leaks’ from the closed system, so as to permit new capital investment at a lower organic composition than would otherwise be the case.
One can put Kidron’s argument another way. It deals with the circulation of value in the system as a whole. For the individual entrepreneur it there are no leaks in this total system, there is an ever-growing, abundance of capital available. This means that the possibilities of expanding and cheapening production always exist for the individual. Indeed, if he does not seize them by utilising a greater portion of constant capital, then his competitors will, his costs of production will be relatively too high, and he will be forced out of business. Enlarged constant capital means an overall (throughout the system) fall in the rate of profit. But if there are leaks whereby value is taken out of the total system, the opportunities for each individual capitalist obtaining value to transform into constant capital will be less, and therefore the constraints on each capitalist to expand his means of production will lessen. The immediate pressures to expand constant capital (and therefore of production) will diminish, the overall rate of profit will fall less, and therefore there will exist the basis for a longer term steady expansion based upon a lower average organic composition of capital. This will be true whatever the form the value that leaks from the system takes, providing its creation employs relatively more dead labour than living labour.
 
Mandel’s analysis of modern capitalism
Mandel’s own analysis of the nature of the ‘key difficulty facing monopoly capital’ is that this difficulty is not that of ‘disposing of surplus goods ‘but the difficulty of disposing of surplus capital’. Here Mandel makes the mistake he accuses Kidron of, of distinguishing capital and goods as different use-values, without seeing that as values they are; equivalent (i.e., if you can dispose of surplus goods profitably, then you can dispose of surplus capital). Mandel goes on to distinguish between the effect of ‘the economic function of arms production’ – ‘to provide additional fields for investment for surplus capital’ – and any reduction ‘in the tendency of the increase in the organic composition of. capital and/or the decline in the rate of profit’. But on the classical Marxist model precisely such a distinction is impossible, because only if the rate of profit is prevented from falling too drastically is any long term, steady growth of investment possible. To put it another way; there are always opportunities for capital investment, arms expenditure or no arms expenditure, but these are only seized if the rate of profit is high enough.
Even more fascinating, however, is Mandel’s excuse for not treating ‘in a systematic way the problem of the sharp rise in the rate of growth of the capitalist economy after World War Two’, in his book Marxist Economic Theory. This is apparently because most of it ‘was written in the late fifties, i.e., more than 10 years ago, when most post-war trends were not yet clear’. This statement is nothing short of preposterous. One does not have to go back to the early post-war period, when already in 1946 and 1947 there was an argument by Marxists such as Tony Cliff [20a] against Mandel’s views then that ‘there is no reason to believe that we are facing a new epoch of capitalist stabilisation and development’. [21] Mistakes at that time were quite natural, given the short duration of peacetime conditions. But by 1950 the post-war expansion was already pronounced enough, despite many Marxist predictions, for writers such as Vance (in the New International) to be attempting theoretical explanations of it. Fully five years before Mandel began writing his book, Cliff and Kidron had substantially developed (in Socialist Review) explanations of ‘post-war trends’ that five years later, according to Mandel ‘were not yet clear’.
Yet even stranger is Mandel’s analysis, developed since, of the reasons for this post-war growth. Apparently, it is because capitalism is undergoing a third ‘industrial revolution’. This has’ been possible because ‘during the “long period” of stagnation of the capitalist world economy (1913-1940) a great “reserve” of scientific and technological inventions had been built up, whose large-scale productive application was delayed as a result of unfavourable economic circumstances prevailing during that period’. The argument, however, is simply contradictory. One moment these innovations are responsible for the economic expansion; the next they were allowed to accumulate for 30 years because there was no economic expansion. In that case, something other than the innovations must be responsible for their present employment – otherwise why did they not cause expansion in the thirties? Mandel seems as incapable now as when he wrote his book 10 years ago of identifying what this other cause might be.
 
Permanent Revolution
At this point we have dealt with Mandel’s arguments of substance. But there are a few others worth referring to. There is the claim that the ‘working class has overthrown capitalism ... in Yugoslavia, China, Cuba, North Vietnam and is doing so now in South Vietnam’. One wonders when the ‘working class’ actually did ‘overthrow capitalism’ in, say, Yugoslavia. In 1944-45? If so one wonders not just how (through what institutions of mass self-activity and struggle) and led by what revolutionary party, but also why Marxists at the time did not notice this monumental fact. For three years afterwards Mandel certainly did not regard Tito’s regime as any sort of workers’ state. It was, he and his colleagues argued, an ‘extreme form of Bonapartist dictatorship’. In particular relation to Yugoslavia and Albania he himself wrote that the Stalinists had constructed ‘a new bourgeois state apparatus’. [22] And when someone argued otherwise, they were not merely wrong, but carrying through ‘a complete petty bourgeois revision of the Marxist-Leninist concept both of the state and of the proletarian revolution’. [23] Again, one wonders when the overthrow took place in North Vietnam. With the establishment of the first Vietminh government in 1945? But those who took power then were described without equivocation by Mandel’s organisation as ‘the Stalinists who themselves long ago abandoned the Communist banner of Lenin and Trotsky ...’ [24] Far from what was taking place in Hanoi being described as a socialist revolution, Ho Chi Minh, like Soekharno, was said to have been ‘logically brought to betray and sabotage the national emancipation’. [25]
Now, of course, Mandel can change his mind. But one would like to hear his reasons for doing so, to see what evidence there is of workers’ power in Yugoslavia or Vietnam now that was not available previously. It would also be interesting to see Mandel justify his own claimed commitment to the theory of permanent revolution in the light of the avowed policy of the Chinese before taking power and of the NLF today being the ‘bloc of the four classes’.
Instead of doing any of this, Mandel merely asserts that these countries have seen workers’ revolutions, and that to deny this is to assert that ‘capitalism today is stronger than it ever was’ and ‘has ushered in new and sensational phase of development of the productive forces, above all in backward countries’ so that ‘Trotsky was deadly wrong with his theory of permanent revolution’. Such according to Mandel is what Kidron does, and such is ‘Menshevism’. [26]
Perhaps Mandel reads different editions of Trotsky to the rest of us. The theory of permanent revolution according to Trotsky I know asserts quite unequivocally that the tasks of the bourgeois revolution in the underdeveloped countries can only be solved by the working class, led by a class-conscious revolutionary party. It is not ‘Menshevism’ to assert that as a matter of fact not only has no such party yet led the working class to the taking of power in Vietnam, or China or Cuba, but those that did take power executed (in Vietnam and China) or imprisoned (in Cuba) those trying to build such parties. Neither Mao’s party nor Ho Chi Minh’s party were workers’ parties in anything other than name. Their membership and leadership were not workers, nor was their theory that of proletarian revolution (it was that of classical, unrepentent Stalinism). [27]
Nor for that matter have the regimes in China, Vietnam or Cuba carried through all the tasks of the national bourgeois revolution. It is mere apologetics to pretend that they have solved the problem of industrial development. The ‘cultural revolution’ in China occurred precisely because the Maoist regime cannot. (Here again Mandel shows his ignorance by asking what would our attitude be if ‘tomorrow most of the decisions of the cultural revolution were reversed’ – in reality most of these ‘decisions’ were reversed two years ago with the setting up of the ‘three-in-one’ revolutionary committees.) In Cuba, despite desperate attempts to overcome the dependence on the world market by diversifying agriculture, the road to development is now seen as lying through the production of more and more sugar to sell in competition with other sellers on the world market. Finally, in Vietnam, the Stalinist leadership has twice already shown itself incapable or unwilling to solve the most elementary of bourgeois national tasks – that of national unity – when opportunities to do so were at hand (in 1945 and in 1954).
It is Mandel who is actually the modern Menshevik, tailing behind a petty bourgeoisie trying to transform itself into a state capitalist class with varying degrees of success in Yugoslavia, in Algeria, in Vietnam and in China. He does so, moreover, at a time when in the largest of these, the Shanghai general strike of January 1967 and the emergence of groups like the Sheng Wu Lien, has revealed new forces challenging completely the pretensions of the bureaucracy.
The theory of permanent revolution cannot be applied in our epoch without certain important modifications. [28] But its most important conclusions – that the problems of the backward countries can only be solved by proletarian revolutions and even then not without the revolution spreading – become more and more apposite as the successes of the petty bourgeoisie in a few countries prove increasingly limited and transitory. But it is us who draw these conclusions, not Mandel.
Finally, it is worth noting that in order to try and justify himself Mandel pretends complete ignorance of the Marxist position on the national question. ‘All the inconsistencies of the theory of “state capitalism” are revealed quite nakedly’ because we are able to support ‘North Vietnam and the National Liberation Front’, even though we believe their present leaders are ‘the nucleus of a “bureaucratic class” that is going to extract tomorrow the last drop of surplus-value from the South Vietnamese labourers’. One wonders at the inconsistencies both we and Mandel’s organisation have fallen into in the past without him noticing – supporting say, the Kenyan struggle against colonialism, although its leaders ‘were the nucleus’ of an African capitalist class, or the Cypriot struggle led by the cleric Makarios and the fascist Grivas. In fact we found no contradiction whatsoever in giving wholehearted support to these struggles against imperialism, without believing their leaders to be socialists; we have no such problems in the case of Vietnam either. ‘All the inconsistencies of the theory’ we adhere to must lie in the fact that, unlike Mandel, we hold that the fundamental problems facing the populations of these countries cannot and will not be solved until these struggles are led by a real, not a mythical, working class with a revolutionary Marxist party committed to an explicit programme of socialist revolution on an international scale.
In his pamphlet Mandel has set out to ‘reveal most of the contradictions into which adherents of the theory of “state capitalism” enmesh themselves’. Unfortunately, all that he has done is to show himself as ignorant, both about these theories and about quite fundamental questions in Marxism (such as the analysis of the commodity, the relationship between capitalist production and commodity production, and the relationship between use and exchange value); as self-contradictory (over the questions of the dynamic of the Russian economy and of the unprecedented expansion of capitalism in the post-war period); and as dishonest (in making omissions when quoting Kidron so as to distort his argument). I say ‘unfortunately’ because it is only through serious and scientific debate that Marxist analysis can develop. Mandel has made no contribution to this in his pamphlet.
 
Top of the page
 
Notes
1. E. Mandel, The Inconsistencies of State Capitalism, IMG, 4s.
2. Ibid., p.2.
3. Which is not to say that the details are beyond criticism.
4. Ibid., p.13.
5. Lenin, Works (Russian), vol.XXV p.51, quoted in T. Cliff, Russia: A Marxist Analysis, London, n.d., p.153.
6. R. Hilferding, Das Finanzkapital, Vienna 1910, p.286.
7. Mandel, op. cit., p.4.
8. Capital, vol.1, p.71.
9. K. Marx, Fondements de la Critique de 1’economie politique (French translation of the Grundrisse), Paris 1967, p.169.
10. Capital, 1, p.78.
11. K Marx, Fondements de la Critique, op. cit., p.147.
12. In fact foreign trade has played a crucial role at certain points in the history of Stalinist Russia – particularly in the early thirties when Stalin expected to be able to buy foreign machinery for industrialisation. In order to pay for this he had to be able to sell agricultural produce. But ‘the violent fall in the terms of trade associated with the world depression greatly increased the cost of imported machinery in terms of Soviet primary exports’. (M. Kaser, Comecon, London 1967, p.19) In order to pay for the machinery, more primary produce had to be obtained from the peasantry, hence increasing the pressures for collectivisation.
13. Rosa Luxemburg, The Accumulation of Capital, London 1963, p.467.
14. E. Mandel, op. cit., p.14.
15. Quoted in E.H. Carr and R.W. Davies, Foundations of the Planned Economy 1926-29, London 1969, p.327.
16. Stalin, quoted in Deutscher, Stalin, p.328.
17. Finansy SSR 28/69.
18. For the direct relationship between threats to Russia from the West and the decision to build up heavy industry see, for instance, E.H. Carr and R.W. Davies, op. cit., p.295.
19. E. Mandel, op. cit., p.2.
20. Ibid., p.5.
20a. See, for example, Tony Cliff, All that glitters is not gold, London 1947. Incidentally, at another point, Mandel finds it possible to blame Cliff for ‘not foreseeing’ the need for reforms in Russia in his writings of the ‘fifties’ such as The Nature of Stalinist Russia But that work was not written in the 1950s at all, but in the early months of 1948. And it certainly does point out the major contradiction that the bureaucracy has attempted to solve (unsuccessfully) since:
‘The historic task of the bureaucracy is to raise the productivity of labour. In doing this the bureaucracy enters into deep contradictions. In order to raise the productivity of labour above a certain point, the standard of living of the masses must rise, as workers who are undernourished, badly housed and uneducated, are not capable of good production ... But workers, besides having hands, have heads. The raising of the standard of living of the masses means to raise their self-confidence, increase their appetite, their impatience at the lack of democratic rights arid personal security and their impatience with the bureaucracy that preserves these burdens. On the other hand, not to raise the standard of living of the masses means to endanger the productivity of labour which is fatal for the bureaucracy in its present international relations, and sooner or later drive the masses to revolts of despair.’
For a full description of the reasons me reforms in Russia have not worked one has only to add this, not Mandel’s ‘tug of war’ ‘between the plan and the bureaucrats administering the units of production’ between ‘factory managers’ and the ‘planners’, but

the existence of certain groups in the bureaucracy with a vested interest in resisting changes that would be beneficial to the bureaucracy as a whole – not just ‘planners’ as a group or ‘factory managers’, but rather those associated with the police apparatus and with certain sorts of planning mechanisms together with ‘factory managers’ in heavy industry;
the continuing short-term pressure of world capitalism that prevents the allocation of resources to agriculture and light industry needed if labour productivity is to be raised to a level competitive in the long term.

21. Quoted in Hallas, Building the Leadership, IS 40.
22. Soviet Union After the War, September 1946.
23. Ibid.
24. Resolution of Fourth International, in IVème Internationale, 1946.
25. Editorial in IVème Internationale, December 1946. This same journal also published an interesting description of events in Saigon during 1945-6 in its issue of September/October 1947. Finally Mandel’s organisation also published a pamphlet by Ahn-Van and Roussel, where they write that:
‘The direction of the Vietminh profited by its influence to block the revolution and ... to fulfil its counter-revolutionary role. That is why it decreed in November 1945 the dissolution of the CP ... That is why it forbade the confiscation and division of the land, satisfying itself with decreeing the taking, of “collaborators’” lands; that is why it maintained and legalised the usury system, merely pleading for a lowering of interest rates ... The Stalinist direction sought a compromise with French imperialism and struck at the avant-guard: the Trotskyist leaders Ta Thu Thau, Tran Van Trac and numerous others were assassinated in February 1946 so as to prepare the way for the accords of March 6.’
26. It is not only Kidron who, according to Mandel’s argument must thus be “Menshevik”, but also such lifelong revolutionaries as the late Natalia Sedova Trotsky (see for instance her letter breaking off relations with the Fourth International in Socialist Review, 1950) and the late Alfred Rosmer, Zimmerwaldist, founder member of the French CP and founder member of the Fourth International.
27. For example, the programme of the Vietminh addressed itself to ‘Rich people, soldiers, workers, intellectuals, employers, traders, youth, women ...’ Today, the worker content of the Vietnamese Communist Party ‘is only 18.5 per cent and the higher the party echelon the lower the worker stock’ (Le Duc Tho, quoted in Sunday Times, 7.9.69).
28. For attempts at this, see T. Cliff, Deflected Permanent Revolution in IS 12 and N. Harris, Perspectives for the third world in IS Internal Bulletin, December 1969.
 
Top of the page

Chris Harman Archive   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 19.1.2008






In the first part of this article, which appeared in our last
issue, Chris Harman rescued Gramsci’s thought from the
distortions it has suffered at the hands of the Eurocommunists. In
the second and final part he critically examines Gramsci’s
strategy for revolution in Western Europe.

Eurocommunist distortions of Gramsci’s thought base
themselves on the following argument:
Gramsci is said to show that Western societies are quite different
from Tsarist Russia. The power of the ruling class in the West rests
mainly, not on physical control through the military-police
apparatus, but on its ideological domination exercised through a
network of voluntary institutions that pervade everyday life (‘civil
society’) – the political parties, the trade unions, the
churches, the mass media. The repressive state apparatus is only one
among many defences of capitalist society.
It follows that the key struggle for revolutionaries is not a
direct assault on state power, but the struggle for ideological
dominance, for what Gramsci calls ‘hegemony’. Hegemony is
won by a long drawn out process that takes many years and demands
infinite patience and sacrifice on the part of the working class. In
particular, the working class can only become ‘counter-hegemonic’
by winning over the main sections of the intellectuals and the
classes they represent, because of the crucial role they play in
manning the apparatus of ideological domination. The working class
has to be prepared to sacrifice its own short-term economic interests
in order to do this. And until it has achieved this task, has become
the ‘hegemonic’ class, attempts to seize state power can
only end in defeat. [1]
Justification for this position is claimed to rest on the
distinction Gramsci makes in the Prison Notebooks between two types
of war:

War of manoeuvre, which involves rapid movement by the rival
	armies, with thrusts forwards and backwards as each tries to
	outflank the other and its cities;
War of position, a long drawn out struggle in which the two
	armies are deadlocked in battle, each hardly able to move forward,
	like the trench warfare of 1914-18.


‘Military experts maintain that in wars among the
more industrially and socially advanced states the war of manoeuvre
must be considered as reduced to more of a tactical than a strategic
function ...
‘The same reduction must take place in the art and
science of politics, at least in the case of the most advanced
states, where ‘civil society’ has become a very complex
structure and one which is resistant to the catastrophic ‘incursions’
of the immediate economic elements (crises, depressions, etc.)’.
[2]
The last successful example of war of manoeuvre applied i.e.
frontal assault on the state – was the October revolution in
1917:
‘It seems to me that Ilitch (i.e., Lenin –
CH) understood that change was necessary from the war of
manoeuvre applied victoriously in the East in 1917, to a war of
position that was the only form possible in the West.’ [3]
The basis for this switch in strategy lay in the different social
structures of Tsarist Russia and Western Europe:
‘In Russia the State was everything, civil society
was primordial and gelatinous; in the West ... when the State
trembled a sturdy structure of civil society was at once revealed.
The State was only an outer ditch, behind which there stood a
powerful system of fortresses and earthworks’. [4]
The formula of permanent revolution “belongs to a historical
period in which the great mass political parties and the great
economic trade unions did not yet exist, and society was still, so to
speak, in a state of fluidity from many points of view ... In the
period after 1870 ... the internal and international organisational
relations of the State became more complex and massive, and the Forty
Eightist formula of the ‘Permanent Revolution’ (Marx
adopted this slogan after the 1848 revolution – CH) is
expanded and transcended in political science by the formula of
‘civil hegemony’.” [5]
Gramsci’s formulations should not be accepted uncritically,
as I shall show below. But first it must be made clear that they do
not permit the Eurocommunists’ conclusions.
In the first place, war of position is a war. It is not
class collaboration of the sort pursued by the PCI today.
Gramsci’s contempt for the reformists who preached class
collaboration did not alter one whit in prison. He compared their
passivity in the face of the fascists to ‘the beaver (who),
pursued by trappers who want his testicles from which medicinal drugs
can be extracted, to save his life tears off his own testicles’
[6] (so much for that old friend of the CPGB – Jack Jones).
In the second place, it is not a startling revelation to claim
that revolutionary politics is devoted for much of its time to ‘war
of position’. After all, Lenin and Trotsky had argued at the
Third Congress of the Communist International in 1921 on the basis
of the Russian Bolsheviks’ experience for united fronts
with reformist parties in order to win a majority of the working
class to communism. They fought bitterly against the ultra-left
‘theory of the offensive’ then much in vogue particularly
in the German Communist Party – the view that the Communist
Parties could simply storm forward to the seizure of power without
the support of the majority of the class through repeated
insurrectionary adventures. Gramsci acknowledged Trotsky’s role
in turning the Comintern toward the tactic of united fronts. [7] And
he explicitly identifies the ‘war of position’ with ‘the
formula of the United Front.’ [8]
In the Lyons Theses Gramsci sought to apply the united
front tactic to Italy. The adoption of this tactic (which he had
previously followed Bordiga in opposing) did not represent any
slackening of Gramsci’s hostility towards the reformists. He
wrote: ‘The tactic of the united front is a political tactic
designed to smash self-styled revolutionary and proletarian parties
and groups with a mass base.’ The tactic is adopted towards
‘intermediate formations that the Communist Party sees as an
obstacle to the revolutionary preparation of the working class’.
In the third place, the battle for hegemony is not simply as
ideological battle. It is true that Gramsci continually rejects the
belief that the deterioration of workers’ economic conditions
leads automatically to revolutionary consciousness. He stresses this
point because in the Prison Notebooks he is concerned to
refute the then current Stalinist ‘third period’ thesis
that the world crisis on its own would lead to world revolution. He
bends the stick in order to deal with this mechanistic deviation from
Marxism.
But Gramsci never denies the determining role of the economy in
political life. So while ‘it may be ruled out that immediate
economic crises of themselves produce fundamental historic events’,
‘they can simply create a terrain more favourable to the
dissemination of certain modes of thought, and certain ways of posing
and resolving questions involving the entire subsequent development
of national life.’ [9] He formulated the relation between the
economy and ideology in these terms: ‘mass ideological factors
always lag behind mass economic phenomena’ and so ‘at
certain moments, the automatic thrust due to the economic factor is
slowed down, obstructed or even momentarily broken by traditional
ideological elements.’ It was precisely because of this lagging
of ideology behind the economy that the intervention of the
revolutionary party in the economic struggles of workers was
necessary to win them from the reformists.
‘Hence ... there must be a conscious, planned
struggle to ensure that the exigencies of the economic position of
the masses, which may conflict with the traditional leadership’s
policies, are un¬derstood. An appropriate political initiative is
always necessary to liberate the economic thrust from the dead weight
of traditional policies.’ [10]
And in one of the central passages of the Prison Notebooks
Gramsci returned to the experience of the Turin factory councils
movement of 1919-20 in order to contrast the convergence of Marxist
theory and spontaneous workers’ struggles that took place there
with both narrow, sectional, ‘corporatist’, economic
struggles and a purely intellectual and ‘voluntaristic’
approach that preached politics to workers from the outside:
‘The Turin movement was accused simultaneously of
being “spontaneist” and “voluntarist” ...
This contradictory accusation, if one analyses it, only testifies to
the fact that the leadership was not “abstract”; it
neither consisted in mechanically repeating scientific or theoretical
formulae, nor did it confuse politics, real action, with theoretical
disquisition. It applied itself to real men, formed in specific
historical relations, with specific feelings, outlooks, fragmentary
conceptions of the world, etc., which were the result of
“spontaneous” combinations of a given situation of
material production with the “fortuitous” agglomeration
within it of disparate social elements. This element of “spontaneity”
was not neglected and even less despised. It was educated,
directed, purged of extraneous determinations; the aim was to bring
it in line with modern theory (i.e. Marxism – CH) –
but in a living and historically effective manner. The leaders
themselves spoke of the “spontaneity” of the movement,
and rightly so. The assertion was a stimulus, a tonic, an element of
unification in depth; above all, it denied that the movement was
arbitrary, a cooked-up venture, and stressed its historical
necessity. It gave the masses a “theoretical”
consciousness of being creators of historical and
institutional values, of being founders of a State. This unity
between “spontaneity” and “conscious leadership”
of “discipline” is precisely the real political action of
the subaltern classes.’ [11]
In the fourth place, the struggle to win over other oppressed
classes (or for that matter the more backward layers of the working
class) does not mean the abandonment by the proletariat of the fight
for its own interests. When Gramsci contrasted the ‘corporatist’
with the ‘hegemonic’ approach [12], he was contrasting
those who merely defend their own interests within capitalist
society, as reformist trade unionists do, with those who project
their struggle as holding the key to the liberation of all oppressed
groups.
In Italy in the 1920s and 1930s the hegemonic approach implied a
break with the old reformist strategy of trying to gain concessions
for the workers of the North by acquiescing in the impoverishment of
the landlord-and-priest-ridden South. [13] Instead the working class
had, as well as fighting for improvement in its own situation, to
offer land to the peasants and the prospect of a more worthwhile
society to the intelligentsia.
As in the struggle for working class consciousness, the key to
winning the peasantry was to be found in the linking of political
questions to practical demands. Again and again, Gramsci criticises
the extreme radicals (the Action Party) in the struggle to unify
Italy in the nineteenth century (and by implication the reformist
socialists in the 20th century) for failing to take the only action
that would break the hold of reaction and Catholicism in the South –
the fight to divide the big estates among the peasants. Because it
saw the struggle for hegemony as a purely intellectual
struggle, the Action Party missed out. ‘The failure to solve
the agrarian problem led to the near impossibility of solving the
problem of clericalism.’ [14]
The working class might have to make ‘certain sacrifices of
an economic-corporative kind’ in order to gain the support of
other classes.
‘But there is also no doubt that such sacrifices
and such a compromise cannot touch the essential; for though hegemony
is ethical-political, it must also be economic, must necessarily be
based on the decisive function exercised by the leading group (the
working class – CH) in the decisive nucleus of economic
activity.’ [15]
There is no indication whatsoever that Gramsci had in the Prison
Notebooks abandoned his position in the Lyons Theses,
according to which the workers had to go out of their way to win over
the peasants, but this could only be done by building workers’
committees based on the economic position of workers in the factories
and using these committees to stimulate the formation of peasants’
committees. Interestingly, although Gramsci spoke of ‘ruling
blocs’ and although he stressed the need of the working class
to win the peasantry, he did not use the then fashionable Stalinist
jargon about ‘worker-peasant blocs’. Still less did
he conceive of the middle-class intellectuals as an ally on the level
of equality with the working class. They could only be won to follow
its lead in the course of struggle. [1*]
In the fifth and final place, Gramsci never suggests in the
Prison Notebooks that the struggle for hegemony can by itself
solve the problem of state power. Even in a period when the ‘war
of position’ plays a predominant part, Gramsci speaks of a
‘“partial” element of movement’ [16], of ‘the
war of manouevre’ playing ‘more a tactical than a
strategic function’. [17]
To put it another way: most of the time revolutionaries are
involved in ideological struggle, using the tactics of the united
front in partial struggles to win leadership from the reformists.
Nonetheless, there are periodic moments of violent confrontation,
when one side or other tries to break through the other’s
trenches by frontal assault. Armed insurrection remained for Gramsci,
as he made clear in his prison conversations, ‘the decisive
moment of struggle’.
The stress on ‘war of position’ in the Prison
Notebooks must be set in its historical context. It is a metaphor
designed to hammer home a concrete political point – the
revolutionary will of a few thousand revolutionaries at a time of
crisis does not create the preconditions for a successful
insurrection. These preconditions have to be prepared by a long
process of political intervention and ideological struggle. To think
otherwise, as did Togliatti and other ‘third period’
Stalinists in the early 1930s, was sheer madness. In the
circumstances, Gramsci was less concerned to argue for the necessity
of armed insurrection – after all, the Stalinists were at the
time hell-bent on organising armed uprisings however hopeless –
but to stress, as Lenin had in July 1917, and again in the case of
Germany in 1921, that an insurrection can only succeed with the
active support of the majority of the working class.
It is therefore misleading to apply the metaphor as if it were of
universal validity independent of its historic context. After all,
even in purely military terms, static ‘war of position’
is not always appropriate – as the French general staff
discovered to its cost when the German tanks bypassed the Maginot
line in 1940. 
Ambiguities in Gramsci’s Formulations
ANY metaphor as liable to misinterpretation as Gramsci’s
‘war of position’, ‘war of manoeuvre’
distinction must itself be open to criticism. Perry Anderson has
pointed out in an interesting article that Gramsci’s metaphors
involve a number of ambiguities and contradictions, a conceptual
‘slippage’ capable of being used by reformists to distort
the revolutionary essence of Gramsci’s work. [18]
Certainly, Gramsci’s contrast between ‘war of
manouevre’ and ‘war of position’ is rather vague.
At one point the transition from the political ‘war of
position’ takes place after 1871; yet at another it is shifted
to the post-stabilisation of the world capitalist economy in the
early 1920s. This confusion over timing is important because it
leaves unsettled whether ‘war of position’ is an eternal
strategy or one appropriate only in certain periods. Some of
Gramsci’s formulations suggest the former interpretation. But
it must be ruled out by his repeated insistence on the interaction
between the revolutionary party and the ‘spontaneous struggles’
of the class, and belief in the necessity of armed insurrection.
A second confusion lies in the contrast between Russia and the
West. The contrast involves a misrepresentation of the history of the
Russian revolutionary movement. In fact, the first attempt at a ‘war
of manouevre’ – the armed attacks on the Tsarist regime
by the Decembrists in the 1820s and the Populists who succeeded in
assassinating the Tsar in 1881 – failed. Subsequent generations
of revolutionaries had to adopt a different strategy. The
overthrow of the autocracy required a prolonged ‘war of
position’ – ten years of Marxist discussion circles and
another ten years of ‘economistic’ agitation before the
mass party could emerge in 1905, and then 12 years of recuperation of
forces. This ‘war of position’ was necessary to prepare
the ground for the ‘war of manouevre’ in 1905-6 and 1917.
To extend Gramsci’s metaphor: the military war of position
becomes obsolete and dangerous with the discovery of a new weapon
that can break through the other side’s defences, as the tank
could at the end of World War I (although it was not used to real
advantage) and at the beginning of World War II. The political
equivalent of the tank is the sudden, spontaneous revolutionary
‘thrust from below’ (in Gramsci’s words) of the
masses, that took even Lenin by surprise in February 1917.
Revolutionaries cannot adapt to these sudden changes without a rapid
switch from a defensive posture to one that relates to the new
‘war of manouevre’, attempting to guide and influence the
forward surge. Lenin’s greatness, as Tony Cliff has shown, lay
in his ability to grasp when the strategic switch from ‘war of
position’ to ‘war of manouevre’ must be made.
What Lenin (and Trotsky and Rosa Luxemburg) grasped was that the
long drawn out struggle for hegemony, for an organisation and
consolidation of one’s own forces, is necessary at certain
stages in the history of the revolutionary movement. But it contains
within it a danger – the very success of organisation at one
stage in the struggle leads to conservatism when there is a shift in
the mood of the masses.
After all, the archetype of the party waging the ‘war of
position’ in pre-World War I Europe was the German Social
Democratic Party (SPD). It built up a huge network of
‘fortifications’ within bourgeois society –
hundreds of papers, hundreds of thousands of party members, local
co-ops and clubs, a woman’s movement, a powerful trade union
machine, even a theoretical journal capable of attracting admiration
from some sections of established intellectuals. Its attempt to
maintain these ‘positions’ when the World War broke out
led to it moving from opposition to class collaboration.
(Interestingly, the very metaphor of the ‘war of positions and
manoeuvre’ was employed in terms very close to Gramsci’s
by Kautsky against attacks by Rosa Luxemburg on the SPD’s
reformist leadership in 1912 [19]). 
Russia, Italy and the West
ITALY is taken by Gramsci as the prototype of the society in which
‘the war of position’ is necessary. Yet Italy in the
1920s and 1930s was far from being a typical advanced capitalist
society. The things Gramsci regards as characteristic of ‘civil
society’ – the church, urban political and cultural
association, the plethora of bourgeois and petty bourgeois parties,
the influence of ‘functional intellectuals’ like
teachers, lawyers and priests – seem today to be a transient
historical phenomenon, symptomatic of Italy’s backwardness
in the 1920s and 1930s, the numerical preponderance of the peasantry,
the lumpenproletariat and the petty bourgeoisie. Even urban-based
political and cultural societies tend to decline in importance in
truly advanced capitalist societies.
In Britain, and the same is true of the other advanced capitalist
countries, the post-war period has been characterised by the
phenomenon of ‘apathy’ – a falling away of mass
participation in political and cultural associations like the Labour
Party and the WEA, the decline in the political influence of the
Orange Lodges in Liverpool and Glasgow, a halving in the number of
active church members in ten years. The ‘functional
intellectuals’ – the lawyers, teachers, priests, doctors
– no longer play a key role in local opinion formation.
Advanced capitalism leads to a centralisation of
ideological power, to the atomisation of the masses – with the
crucial exception of workplace-based union organisation – and
to a weakening of old political and cultural organisations.
On the one hand the intensification of the labour process has
played a role – shift work makes the organisation of local
political or cultural associations difficult; on the other hand, the
commer¬cialisation of social life, the advent of radio and
television, and the concentration of control over the mass media has
weakened the attractiveness of other ‘leisure’
activities. The number of effective structures of ‘civil
society’ between the individual and the state has fallen. More
and more the means of mass communication provide a direct
intermediary. At the same time, the significance of workplace-based
trade union organisation has grown dramatically; to become the one
institution of’ civil society’ not subverted by the
atomisation.
In the circumstances, the ‘defensive network of trenches’
available to the ruling class in a time of crisis becomes very weak
indeed once workers really move into action. Indeed, the bourgeoisie
becomes critically dependent upon the trade union bureaucracy, and to
a lesser extent upon the reformist political organisations, to hold
back the working class. But over time this leads to an erosion of
faith in the reformist leaders and to spontaneous eruptions by
workers that even they cannot control. Under such circumstances a
real ‘war of manouevre’ can develop, in which workers,
despite their lack of revolutionary consciousness, find themselves in
direct conflict with the capitalist state.
As Tony Cliff pointed out in a very important article in 1968,
advanced capitalism creates ‘privatisation’ and ‘apathy’.
But ‘the concept of apathy is not a static one. When the path
of individual reform is closed apathy can transform itself into its
opposite, direct, mass action. Workers who have lost their loyalty to
the traditional organisations are forced into extreme, explosive
struggles on their own.’ [20]
Gramsci’s metaphors were used 45 years ago to deal with
concrete problems of strategy. His epigones attempt to deploy them in
a crude way to block off discussion today, without noticing that in
the years since society has changed in certain crucial ways. That is
a piece of dogmatism no different to the treatment Marx, Lenin or
Trotsky have suffered on so many occasions. 
Gramsci’s Weaknesses
THE conditions in which Gramsci lived and wrote imposed certain
built-in limitations to his thought. In the case of the Prison
Notebooks these limitations provide the basis for the distortions
to which his ideas have been subjected.
The first and most obvious limitation was that the fascist state
was looking over Gramsci’s shoulder, reading every word he
wrote. To avoid the prison censorship he had to be vague when
referring to some of the most pointed concepts of Marxism. He had to
use an ambiguous Aesopian language that concealed his real thoughts,
not only from his gaolers, but also from his Marxist readers and
sometimes, one suspects, from himself.
To take a crucial point, Gramsci often uses the bourgeois struggle
for power against feudalism as a metaphor for the workers’
struggle for power against capitalism. But the comparison is
dangerously misleading. Because capitalist relations of production
have as their starting point commodity production, which can develop
within feudal society, the bourgeoisie can use their growing economic
dominance to build up their ideological position within the framework
of feudalism before seizing power. However, the working class can
become economically dominant only through taking collective control
of the means of production, which requires the armed seizure of
political power. It is only then that they will gain control of the
printing presses, universities, etc, where the capitalists could buy
these up long before becoming politically dominant. Gramsci
necessarily had to seem ambiguous on this point. But today the
ambiguity provides an excuse for would-be intellectuals who want to
pretend they are fighting the class struggle through ‘a
theoretical practice’, ‘a struggle for intellectual
hegemony’, when in fact they are only advancing their own
academic careers.
Moreover, Gramsci could not write openly about armed insurrection.
This gap in the Prison Notebooks has enabled his epigones to
ignore the harsh reality of the state power that held Gramsci in its
grip.
But there were other, non-physical limitations on Gramsci. He went
to gaol just as Stalin was tightening his hold on Russia. His failure
to come to terms with this process marked his thought more deeply
than may at first be apparent.
Gramsci declared his support for the Stalin-Bukharin bloc formed
in 1925. He seems to have accepted as part of an international ‘war
of position’ the attempt to build ‘socialism in one
country’ through making concessions to the peasants. So he
identified Trotsky’s opposition to socialism in one country
with an ultra-left rejection of the united front – even though
he knew perfectly well that Trotsky was one of the main authors of
the tactic of the united front.
Gramsci, as we have seen, was very aware and very critical of the
suffocating bureaucratism of Stalinism. But his acceptance of the
Bukharin-Stalin version (1925-28) of ‘socialism in one country’
prevented him analysing what had gone wrong in Russia.
He writes, in the Prison Notebooks,
‘The war of position demands enormous sacrifices by
infinite masses of people. So an unprecedented concentration of
hegemony is necessary, and hence a more “interventionist”
government which will take the offensive against the oppositionists
...’ [21]
Yet this half-apology for totalitarian trends is followed by a
warning quotation from Marx,
‘A resistance too long prolonged in a besieged camp
is demoralising in itself. It implies suffering, fatigue, loss of
rest, illness and continual pressure, not of the acute danger which
tempers, but of the chronic danger which destroys’.
Gramsci seems to want to both criticise this state of affairs, and
to say that it is based upon a correct strategy. This contradiction
cannot fail to have debilitating effects on other aspects of his
theory.
In 1919-20 he grasped as no-one else in Western Europe the
interrelation of the struggle in the factory and the creation of the
elements of a workers state. He also came to see the dialectical
interplay between the development of workers’ democracy and its
propellant, the revolutionary party. This understanding remains in
much of the work Prison Notebooks – but at points it is
corroded by the tendency to see the Stalinist ‘socialism in one
country’ as providing a method for waging the ‘war of
positions’ to be copied elsewhere.
Gramsci was not unique in failing to come to terms with Stalinism.
At the time he was imprisoned and lost contact with the international
movement the full horrors of Stalinism were a thing of the future.
Revolutionaries as varied as Andreas Nin and James P. Cannon still
supported Stalin against Trotsky at that time. But in Gramsci’s
case the failing left an element of confusion in his theory that is
seized on by those trying to justify reformist policies today.
There is one final more fundamental weakness in Gramsci. Although
he provides a correct abstract account of the relation between
economics and politics, Gramsci is alone among the great Marxists in
not integrating a concrete economic dimension into his
political writings. This produces arbitrariness in his writings that
does not exist in Marx, Engels, Lenin, Luxemburg or Trotsky. For
instance in 1925 he thought fascism was about to collapse. Yet in the
Prison Notebooks, a few years later, he wrote as if it faced a
long life. Again, he talks of the dangers of a ‘corporate’
integration of the working class into the system, without discussing
the economic conditions that could make this possible.
In general, there is a failure to show the real interrelation
between a particular economic situation and political and ideological
struggles of individuals it affects. In the years 1918-26 he was able
to fill this gap to some extent by relying on his direct experience
of the class struggle. So his best writings are those where, mixing
with the workers and trying to guide them, he is grappling with
central problems of current struggles.
But in 1926 the fascist state snatched him away from any contact
with the masses. Gramsci was only too aware of what this meant:
‘Books and magazines contain generalized notions
and only sketch the course of events in the world as best they can:
they never let you have an immediate direct, animated sense of the
lives of Tom, Dick and Harry. If you are not able to understand real
individuals, you are not able to understand what is universal and
general.’ (Letter to Tatiana, November 1928, quoted in
Boggs p.62)
This was true of Gramsci, who was unable, without direct personal
experience, to grasp the concrete interrelation between the economic
situation and the political reaction to it of individuals. But it was
not true, say, of the Marx who from exile could write the 18th
Brumaire, or the Trotsky who from confinement in Turkey could
write profoundly about daily developments in Berlin.
The Prison Notebooks suffer above all from this inability
to move from abstract concepts to concrete analyses of concrete
situations. It is this, of course, that appeals to those bureaucrats
and academics who want a reformist ‘Marxism’ divorced
from the mass struggles of workers.
If such a project runs counter to the main thrust of Gramsci’s
life and thought, we should not ignore the weakness in the Notebooks
that arises from their lack of concreteness. Whatever their insights
they do not have the greatness of the finest works of Marx, Lenin or
Trotsky.
The fascist prosecutor at Gramsci’s trial demanded his
imprisonment ‘to stop this brain working for 20 years’.
The fascists did not succeed in this attempt. But, by cutting Gramsci
off from direct involvement in the class struggle, they did succeed
in preventing his Marxism from fully realising the potential
displayed in L’Ordine Nuovo and the Lyons Theses.
 



AS USUAL, Mike Kidron’s article combines three things – immensely useful insights into the development of capitalism; a way of presenting these insights which is abstract in the extreme and which obscures much of what is said; and practical conclusions that do not by any means follow from the analysis and which, if taken seriously, could be very dangerous.
The great strength and the great weakness of the article is contained in its basic precept – that the world today is dominated by a system of fully integrated state capitals, in which the freedom of operation for the old private capitals has been reduced to a minimum.
From this follows Mike’s stress on the growing international anarchy of the system – its drive into a new period of crisis as ‘military-competitive’ and ‘economic-competitive’ functions are merged and as the workers’ life outside as well as inside the factory is integrated into the system.
The practical conclusion (if practical conclusion it be) also follows from this precept. Trade unions arose from a struggle within private capitalism, seeking to overcome the effects of its anarchic operation on workers; under state capitalism, the struggle of nationally based trade unions against ‘anarchy’ can only be captured by the state capitalists intent on strengthening the competitive power of their individual, national components of the system. The fight for reforms ceases, according to Kidron, to be a potentially revolutionary fight against capitalism. Instead it becomes a fight to integrate a minority of workers into the state, the main element of the system itself.
There are many positive aspects to this account. It stresses the vital proposition that the state is king in the modern world, not the old-style private firm, still less the individual entrepreneur. As such it is a powerful counterblast to the multitude of reformists of the Stuart Holland stripe who want us to line up against what they claim to be ‘the main enemy’ – whether it is the textile industry of some Third World country, the international banks, the multinational corporation or the ‘unpatriotic’ capitalist who will not invest in Britain. By the same token it is also a powerful counterblast to the latter-day revisionists, who prattle on about what Marx has to say about capitalism without noticing that the world has changed profoundly since Marx died.
Finally, it protects us from those like Poulantzas who would restrict the working class to the ‘real workers’ who produce surplus-value, excluding those workers who do not create surplus-value but who are employed by capital (often in the garb of the state) to perform labour that is necessary for the system – teachers, hospital workers, dustmen, social workers.
But the account suffers from one great fault. It is an abstraction that projects present trends into the future – a future that could not come into being without many crises and conflicts, and perhaps not even then.
 
State capitalism and the multinationals
LET US begin by looking at how the analysis hooks onto capitalism today, not some hypothetical future capitalism. Despite the trend to statification, inside every national capitalism (at least, every national Western capitalism – the extent to which it is also true of the Eastern state capitalisms is an interesting but unresolved question) there remains a variety of differing, competing capitalist interests. Of course, regardless of the espousal by some sections of the national capital of anti-statist ideologies, in the last resort all of them depend on the national state to defend their interests. But it does not follow that

the conflicts with each national capital are not crucial in shaping political life, or
the particular sections of the national capital are captives of the state.

Nor do these conflicts arise from a last-ditch battle by residual interests, medium-size capitals left over from a previous era. The conflicts are built into the way in which capitalism operates today.
To take the most obvious example. In Britain there is a dominant coalition of interests (ranging from the British and foreign, mainly American, multinationals to City-based money capital on the other). These interests are quite prepared to co-operate with the state and to leech off it. But they have at the same time resisted all the advances of the ‘state capitalists’, of those who want to integrate them into the state to safeguard the interests of ‘British capital’ through compulsory planning agreements, the NEB, direction of investment and the like. The apologists for ‘British capital’ (of whom Tony Benn and the ‘left’ of the trade union bureaucracy are prominent representatives) found themselves very isolated when it came to the argument over the Common Market – even though they had plenty of purely economic arguments to prove that the bulk of British capital (i.e., those sections without an international dimension) should keep out of Europe.
This example brings out the essential weakness of the overstatement in Kidron’s argument. The trend is towards state capitalism, towards the complete merger of individual capitals in each country with the national state. But the trend is also to the internationalisation of production: the most modern techniques are developed on an international scale; the resources for participation in key industries like chemicals, aerospace, computers, and, increasingly, motors can be obtained by pooling the resources of more than one country.
These two trends – towards state capitalism and towards internationalisation of production – are both complementary and contradictory. A modern aerospace industry not at least partially integrated into the national state is a pipedream; but so too is a modern aerospace industry that cannot find some way of straddling national frontiers.
For the most advanced countries this means nationally based industries that have a vital multinational component. The future of Lockheed is linked to the future of US capitalism, but also, to a lesser extent, to the future of Rolls Royce. The future of Ford depends both on US capitalism and on Ford Europe. IBM’s activities, although skewed in favour of the American home base, form an integrated, international operation.
What is true of American capitalism, which has the largest national base, is even more true of smaller capitals like Britain. Here some of the leading industries have reached a point where their overseas investments are in the same league as their domestic investments.
This means that even in the advanced capitalist countries, cross-cutting the ‘state capitalist’ trend is another trend – towards dependence on firms which see their interests as differing from the interests of the national capital. Of course, they have a home base. Of course, they depend upon a national state to bail them out when it comes to the crunch. But that is not the same as saying that they will willingly subordinate themselves to the national state. Consider the bitter divisions within the US ruling class over the role of the oil companies during and after the oil crisis of 1973-4.
Kidron also omits from his picture another major trend. The internationalisation of the system has given birth to a new form of finance capital. Traditional finance capital of 1914 – the fusion of banking and industrial capital – was based on the fact that the banks could develop a national status while industry was still very much locally based. Once industrial capital acquired a national scope, the independent role of banking capital was very much circumscribed. Now, however, as Nigel Harris shows elsewhere in this journal, the Western, and particularly American banks, are exercising growing economic power on an international scale. Once again, the banks have a lead over sections of industry; much of industry is still nationally based; the banks are able to exploit the existence of a world market to deploy resources on an international scale, to move funds across national frontiers and back again, leaving national governments helpless and bemused.
The result is that even the biggest capitalisms are not self-contained entities, only relating to each other externally. They are not monads without windows. They are more like sieves – and the more the national state plugs up one hole, the more other holes appear.
National capital is not homogeneous. It is made up of discrete, although interlinked parts, each with its own relations to external capital. Indeed, the merger of the national state with capital can, in extreme cases, amount to little more than the merger of the state with one section of capital (complete with its own external links) as opposed to others – or even the internal disintegration of the national state into different agencies, each tied in with a different sector of national and foreign capital.
When you talk about the smaller national capitalisms (and virtually every capitalism is small when compared to the three or four giants) then you are talking about capitals which are as much disintegrated as integrated by the trend of development. It is not lack of patriotism that has caused the capitalist classes in relatively advanced countries like Argentina or Spain to abandon the dream of national capitalism for new integration with the multinationals and the international (i.e., American) banks in the advanced industries. Only the multinationals can marshal the techniques and the capital necessary for participation in these industries. But once entangled in this way, the national capital has lost its independence in vital areas.
It is this which explains another interesting phenomenon, hardly present in Kidron’s overview. The pressure for economic reform in the Eastern bloc (where, pace Kidron, there is a significant difference with the West – the state overrode the individual capitals many years ago) is in part a pressure to decentralise the national capital – so as to permit its components to find a route to the international mobilisation of resources needed for technological efficiency and modernisation by collaboration with sections of Western capital (loans, foreign investment, etc.)
What is lacking in Mike’s analysis is the old concept of uneven and combined development. He smoothes out the complexity of the world economy into a abstract, homogenised schematism that omits the dynamics of many developments. East and West.
 
Marx’s Capital and the permanent arms economy
THE SAME tendency is present in Mike’s arguments against the theory of the permanent arms economy, which he himself helped pioneer as an analysis of the post-war boom.
What he argues is this. Our basic mistake was that ‘we were working with a model of private capitalism in a period of consolidating state capitalism’. We did so, because we simply followed Marx’s example in Capital, which assumed ‘the continued, though declining existence, of non-capitalist modes of production. In such a system the tendency is for productive spending or accumulation to be undertaken by capitals, and waste, albeit necessary, spending to be undertaken by the non-capitalist society, either directly or through the state’.
However,
‘in the pure model of state capitalism non-capitalist modes of production do not exist; in it, non-productive expenditure essential to the system has to be borne by capitals directly ... It is no longer reasonable to treat a transfer of resources from ... (the productive to the non-productive sector – CH) as a diminution in surplus; such a transfer needs to be treated as an increase in constant capital, which amounts to saying that capital’s value-structure (the organic composition of capital in the era of private capitalism) becomes heavier (rises) and the rate of growth of the system (the rate of profit) falls.’
In other words, in a state capitalist system, where all expenditures, productive or non-productive are undertaken by capital, the diversion of surplus-value to waste production in the arms industry does not, as we had believed, slow down the rate of accumulation and thus offset the tendency of the rate of profit to fall; on the contrary, it will simply add to the problems of the system by increasing the total capital relative to the workforce and causing the rate of profit to fall.
In order to show why this argument is wrong, it is worth starting with Capital. Contrary to Mike’s claim, Marx does not assume that all unproductive expenditure is undertaken by the non-capitalist sector. In Volume II of Capital Marx distinguishes between productive capital on the one hand and commodity-and money-capital on the other. The basis for the distinction is that productive capital is invested in the process of production itself and results in the creation of surplus-value; money- and commodity-capital, by ensuring the circulation of capital, perform tasks that are necessary for the reproduction of capital; however, they do not add to the total surplus-value. The profits of these capitalists in these sectors and the wages of the workers they employ are claims on the surplus-value created elsewhere, in the process of production.
Capital invested in waste production in the arms industries is analogous to money and commodity capital. The main difference is that workers in these industries produce commodities; they create value and surplus-value. However, these commodities are not consumed by workers or used in further production. A Chieftain tank will sit somewhere in central Germany for a few years until it becomes obsolescent and is replaced by a new generation tank. It is as if a large portion of the total output has been destroyed once produced. Yet the workers and capitalists in the arms sector bring their claims onto the market for a share of the goods produced in the other, productive sectors of the economy – consumer goods, new plant and equipment, etc. It is in this sense that capital in the arms industry is unproductive – it does not add to the total number of commodities embodying value and surplus-value on the market. Like commodity-and money capital it represents a claim on the total surplus-value produced elsewhere.
Now capital invested in arms like money- and commodity-capital, has two aspects. On the one hand, it increases the total level of investment in society. On the other hand, it slows down the rate of accumulation of productive capital. When Mike says of investment in the arms industry, ‘such expenditure must work towards stagnation’, he is concentrating on the first aspect while ignoring the second.
It is true that arms expenditure, by retarding the rate of accumulation, also slows down the rate of growth of the system. It is a fact that not only in the 1970s, but in the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s, the expansion of the system was not as fast as it had been during the booms of pre-war capitalism.
But, far from being a disadvantage to the system this was, to a certain extent, an advantage. The central problem for the capitalist system is the over-accumulation of productive capital. Competition between the individual capitals encourages them to increase their investment in means of production (plant and equipment) faster than the growth of the source of surplus-value (labour-power) in order to undercut each other’s prices.
Investment in the arms industry has the effect of slowing down the rate of accumulation of productive capital, and so offsets the tendency of the organic composition of capital (the value-ratio of means of production to labour-power) to rise and of the rate of profit to fall. Surplus-value that would otherwise become productive capital is diverted into the production of commodities which, from the point of view of the system as a whole, are destroyed. [1]
It was this that produced the most marked feature of the post-war period – not a rate of growth higher than ever before in capitalist history, but the ability to sustain a rather lower rate of growth/or a much greater length of time. There were booms, but not, until the 1970s, real slumps.
There is a valid criticism of this argument which Mike may be trying to make. He could argue that, while the permanent arms economy explains the lack of crises and the slow rise in the organic composition of capital after the war, other factors need to be invoked to account for the extent of the boom in the 1950s and 1960s. He might be right – but this would not invalidate the theory of the permanent arms economy.
One could put the argument another way. Every national capital in the modern world is two dimensional: it relates to other capitals not just through economic competition, through the competitive drive to jack up productivity and output faster than its rivals, so as to outsell them, but also through the development and production of means of destruction that enables it to defend itself against other capitals and perhaps to absorb them. Each national capital competes both economically and militarily. [2]
What is lacking from Mike’s article is any sense of how the two dimensions of military and economic competition conflict. So for him the crisis is primarily one of stagnation caused by growing waste production arising from the unproductive employment of capital. The result is that he omits a very important aspect of the crisis – that it is a classical crisis of over-accumulation.
The capital necessary to undertake new, large-scale investments is available on a world scale. However, there is no guarantee that if the capital were invested it would bring an adequate return. Throughout the Western capitalist bloc investment is at very low levels – not because of the lack of capital, but because of the lack of any guarantee that investment will be profitable. [3]
Even in the Eastern bloc, (which fits Mike’s picture of fully integrated state capitalism best), we see the beginnings of a crisis of over-accumulation. The rulers of these countries want to invest on a scale dictated by the pressures of world competition. The problem they face is that they cannot guarantee a return to their investments, once interest has been paid to the Western bankers and the demands of rising workers’ militancy has been bought off. Rather than risk a loss on some of their key investments, they may prefer to postpone them – even if the result is a recession and a loss of potential production.
The world crisis combines both stagnation produced by waste production and recession produced by over-accumulation.
We can see here how the two dimensions of military and economic competition contradict each other today. An increased level in military spending would permit investable funds to find an outlet in non-productive investments and would end the recession. But it would do so by putting a strain on the resources available for the civilian economy (as the last upsurge in military expenditure during the Vietnam war did) and produce further inflationary pressures. If, as is likely, the increased spending took place within certain national capitals but not others, the former would provide increased markets for any rivals who would be left with greater resources for economic competition. The result would be a competitive disadvantage for the big arms spenders, producing pressures for them to cut back their arms spending again.
By contrast, a reduction in arms spending would release investable sums for the rest of the economy. In the right circumstances it might even do so in such a way as to create a short-lived investment boom. But this would simply lead to the over-accumulation of capital, to the rising organic composition of capital, to increased internationalisation of production, and to a further crisis of profitability. Growth rates would rise, but so would inflation and the general instability of the system.
Why labour these points? Because Mike’s claim that ‘it is hard to sustain the view that it was the permanent arms economy that fuelled the long boom’ plays into the hands of those like Ernest Mandel who argue that the 25-year boom after the war was an accident of history – the product of a fortuitous rationalisation of capitalism and increased rate of exploitation of workers, along with a co-incidental ‘wave of innovations’. The return of crises in the 1970s is equally miraculous. For all they tell us, another accident may permit capitalism to resume its upward spiral. While the thrust of Mike’s argument is opposed to this empiricist reformism, his conclusions can play into their hands. [4]
 
Implications for practice
BUT IF Mike’s theory leaves the door open for a brand of reformism, his own inclination seems to be towards blatant ultra-leftism.
‘In the private capitalist system workers safeguarded a modicum of independence and strength in their relations with each capital by forming unions that spanned several capitals ... Within each state capital, workers newly brought into large employing units do join trade union type organisations, only to find that the organisations face their members on behalf of the capital rather than the other way round.’
So what else is new? Of course, trade union leaders try to use the unions to forward their own role as a bureaucratic layer seeking respectability and privilege within the system. But this nothing new or specific to state capitalism. It is virtually as old as the trade unions themselves. Kidron invites us to indulge in nostalgia about a golden past when trade unions played the ‘role of independent representatives of working-class interests’. But it looked rather different to those who lived in the good old days. The Webbs (of all people) described at the end of the 19th century how the trade union leaders would identify themselves more with the employers than with workers. Daniel de Leon called them ‘labour lieutenants of capital’. Anything Jones or Scanlon could do, Clynes, Thomas or Bevin could do better.
Kidron treats as if it were a new development a feature inherent in trade unionism under capitalism – the tendency for there to emerge within the trade unions a conservative bureaucracy of full-time officials which, while it bases itself upon the workers’ movement, represents the pressure of the bourgeoisie upon that movement.
If Mike stopped there it would be bad enough. But he goes on to say that
‘the trade unions as we know them increasingly reflect the interests of a privileged sector of the working class – the natives, male-dominated, skilled, white manual workers who ... use them to buttress their own relative position within the larger, more diverse working class of state capitalism.’
Where has Mike been for the last few years? Has he not noticed the phenomenal growth of public sector unions like NUPE, a high proportion of whose members are women and black? You would hardly think that we were living through a period in which there has been an expansion of militant trade unionism into previously unorganised or only half-organised sectors of lower paid workers, many of them black (blacks, despite Kidron, have a higher than average membership of trade unions) and women – pulling the whole focus of the trade union movement away from traditional craft unions to what are in effect industrial unions or ‘general unions’ (even if, like the AUEW and the EETPU, their leaders try to treat them like craft organisations).
In any case, what is the mechanism that enables the unions to extract privileges for ‘the elite of the trade union world’? Over the last few years trade union bureaucrats like Scanlon, Jones and Chapple have been trying to devise such a mechanism in order to avoid a struggle over their members’ living standards. They have failed so far.
The crisis leaves very little room for manoeuvre open to the trade union bureacracy. Any substantial concessions it obtains for any substantial section of workers threaten to deepen the crisis of the national capital within which the bureaucracy works.
For things to be different, there would have to be a mechanism that enabled some sections of workers to live off the exploitation of others. A number of would-be theorists have attempted to show that such a mechanism exists what they call ‘unequal exchange’. Mike has produced the most persuasive critique of this position – surely he cannot be reverting to that position now?
What Mike is pointing to is not a mechanism, but a vain hope of the trade union bureaucracy’s. Every section of the bureaucracy wants to avoid confrontation by finding the escape clause that will marginally protect the workers it claims to represent. Those who represent the traditional core of the working class (Mike’s ‘native, male-dominated, skilled, white manual workers’) do speak of differentials, productivity deals, incentive schemes, etc. But they have not succeeded in finding the cash to buy off their members. The long-term trend over the last 100 years has been for differentials to decline. A few months ago Hugh Scanlon was shouted down by 3,000 white, male, skilled toolroom workers because he could not deliver a single penny.
The bureaucrats representing these sections have also tried to buy time by offering to trade acquiescence in the cuts in public spending in exchange for greater leeway on wages – a policy which, if successful, would mean economic advantages for industrial workers at the expense of public sector workers. But it is not a policy that can be said to be in the interests of the industrial workers themselves (as Mike seems to imply) since they benefit from the social services provided by hospital workers, teachers, etc. That is why unity of trade unionists in industry with those in the social services is no idle dream.
There are obstacles to this unity, above all the divisive, class collaborationist policies of the bureaucracy. However, we are far closer to this goal than we ever were in the days of ‘private capitalism’. The great moments of the first period of mass trade unionism, culminating in the general strike of 1926, left virtually untouched vast numbers of workers – not just white-collar workers, but also those in hospitals, hotels, cleansing departments, shops.
So what does Mike’s argument amount to? What underlies his vague harking back to the Marcusean positions of the 1960s, which counterposed the ‘privileged worker’ to the ‘revolutionary lumpenproletariat’ or even the ‘student-youth vanguard’?
There seems to be one argument of substance, although Mike does not bother to spell it out. The unions are nationally based organisations. Therefore they only organise the workers within the province of one capital (the national state capital). Their attempt to counterpose some rationality to the anarchy of capitalism becomes merely a demand for more power for the national state. They can counterpose no wider rationality, no demand that undermines the competition between national capitals, because to do so would involve transcending national boundaries.
The trouble with this argument is that it presupposes that we have already have a fully formed state capitalist world system. It is therefore open to the objections to this assumption which we have already made.
In a world where the trends towards statification and the internationalisation of production contradict as well as complement each other, the boundaries of union organisation are still wider than the boundaries of the majority of capitals (although narrower than the boundaries of others, particularly the multinations). The unions still provide a potential basis for workers’ unity in opposition to much of the anarchy and waste of the system.
The union bureaucrats certainly recognise this. In every major redundancy struggle they do their utmost to avoid raising the question of planning production even on a national scale. Instead, they prefer to persuade the workers involved to line up with the existing company against other firms, even where this means, as in the case of Chrysler, lining up with American multinational capital against British capital.
‘Occupy, nationalise, fight for the right to work’ is still a demand far too explosive for the bureaucrats to countenance it. It raises the question of overriding the particular sections of capital, their parasitism, their irrationality, their waste, in the interests of a nationally united workforce.
Of course, revolutionaries look beyond purely national solutions. Socialism in one country is still a reactionary Utopia. A struggle that ended merely in a ‘planned’ national state capitalism (the outcome advocated by Benn and the CP right wing) would not end the crisis. But a struggle that begins with the defence of workers’ organisations, based upon the existing traditions of union organisation, and which goes on to demand an end to the waste ‘and anarchy of the system, does not have to end there. Look at Portugal. Those who posed a state capitalist solution like Goncalves and the PCP were unable to defeat the entrenched private and multinational interests. Why? Because to do so they would have had to mobilise the workers in a struggle that would have gone beyond the limits of state capitalism.
In the circumstances, it is a cop-out to counterpose international political organisation to existing workers’ struggles. A revolutionary international will emerge from struggles which involve a fight by workers to control and use the forms of organisation they have looked to in the past – the trade unions. Indeed, in many countries the struggle takes the form of a battle for free trade unions – for example, in countries like Poland which most fully fit Kidron’s schema of fully integrated state capitalism.
Mike’s arguments are not as new as he would like us to think. In reaction to the treachery of the reformist trade union leaders during the first world war many revolutionaries concluded that the unions were no longer an arena for genuine workers’ struggle. Theirs was a cloudy ‘Council Communism’ which expected Soviets to supplant the trade unions miraculously, without any struggle by revolutionaries within the existing mass organisations of the class.
More recently, in the post-war period many ‘leftist’ theorists, often basing themselves on an analysis of global capitalism, have rejected trade union struggles for ‘wider’, ‘less economistic’, ‘spontaneous’ struggles. The strength ot the old ‘insights’ into the permanent arms economy, now abandoned by Kidron, was that it pointed to the limits of the possible incorporation of trade union struggles into the system.
Once these ‘insights’ are abandoned, it can be very arbitrary what replaces them. The advocates of wage controls inside the Communist Party would justify their stance with much the same distaste for the ‘principled irresponsibility towards the ends and means of the work given us’ on the part of ‘the elite of the trade union world’ as Mike displays. Of course, he would have nothing but contempt for the politics of the CP right, but then it is worth recalling the cautionary tale of Bukharin.
Bukharin was the first theorist to produce a model of global state capitalism. In doing so he provided very important insights into the dynamics of the system. But so abstract was the model, that it left optional the conclusions to be drawn from it. As a result, Bukharin had no difficulty moving from ‘Left Communism’ to the right wing of the Bolshevik party.
 



‘DURING the lifetime of great revolutionaries the
oppressing classes constantly hounded them, received their theories
with savage malice, the most furious hatred and the most unscrupulous
campaigns of lies and slander. After their death attempts are made to
convert them into harmless icons, to canonise them, to hallow their
names ... while at the same time robbing the revolutionary theory of
its substance, blunting its revolutionary edge and vulgarising it ...
The bourgeoisie and the opportunists within the labour movement
concur in this doctoring ... They omit, obscure or distort the
revolutionary side the theory, its revolutionary soul. They push to
the foreground and extol what is or seems acceptable to the
bourgeoisie.’ V.I. Lenin, The State and Revolution
ANTONIO Gramsci died forty years ago, on April 27 1937. His death
was brought on by years of ill-treatment in Mussolini’s gaols.
Yet in some ways, he has suffered more misfortune since his death
from the distortion of his ideas by those who have nothing in common
with his revolutionary principles.
Gramsci was a professional revolutionary from 1916 until his
death. Throughout this period he was insistent on the need for a
revolutionary transformation of society through the overthrow of the
capitalist state.
It was this that put him as a journalist in various socialist
papers in the front rank of those demanding revolutionary action from
the Italian Socialist Party in the fight against capitalism and war
in the years 1916-1918. It was this that led him to the centre of the
Turin factory councils’ movement in 1919 and 1920. It was this
that led him to take part in the split from the reformist Socialist
Party in 1921 to set up a genuinely revolutionary Communist Party. It
was this that led him to take charge of that party in 1924-6. It was
this, finally, that led him into Mussolini’s prisons, where he
tried in note form – the famous Prison Notebooks –
to develop his own ideas about Italian society, the strategy and
tactics of the struggle for state power, the building of the
revolutionary party, the revolutionary press. He hoped that these
notes would provide some help to others who had the same
revolutionary goal as himself. Yet his writings have been seized upon
by those who want to turn Marxism into an academic and
non-revolutionary area of study. This has been made possible by the
systematic distortion of Gramsci’s ideas by the Italian
Communist Party (PCI). 
The First Period of Distortion
THE first period of this distortion began as soon as Gramsci died.
The Stalinist leader of the PCI Palmiro Togliatti, had the Prison
Notebooks in his hands within weeks. He left them unpublished for
ten years.
When the Notebooks finally began to appear in 1947, it was
in a truncated, censored form. Salvatore Sechi has shown what forms
the censorship of Gramsci’s letters from prison took:

To remove references to various Marxists – Bordiga,
	Trotsky and even Rosa Luxemburg – who were being portrayed as
	‘fascists’ by Togliatti at the time;
To conceal the fact that Gramsci had broken with the CP’s
	political line in 1931;
To portray Gramsci’s private life as based on an
	idealised marriage, ‘a useful myth for making people believe,
	on the basis of a concrete example, in Communist loyalism with
	respect to the unity of the nuclear family, an instrument of the
	collaboration with the Catholics that the Communist Party followed
	in the post-war period’;
To suppress the fact that Gramsci had tried repeatedly to get
	hold of books that would give him access to Trotsky’s thought
	after his expulsion from Russia in 1929. [1]

The aim of such distortions was to present Gramsci as the loyal
Stalinist par excellence. As such Gramsci could provide an
extremely useful weapon for an ideology that inspired virtually no
social thinkers of note itself – a weapon that could be used to
impress other Italian intellectuals with the rich theoretical
heritage of the PCI and to conceal the intellectual poverty of the
Kremlin and its followers, a weapon also to use against the left, to
show that the PCI which governed jointly with the Christian Democrats
after 1945, was the same party that split with even the extreme left
reformist Maximalists of the Socialist Party in 1921.
The censorship and distortion of his thought was necessary because
Gramsci in reality did not fit the Stalinist myth. His last letter
before entering prison had been a protest to Togliatti about the
bureaucratic treatment given to the Left Opposition inside Russia by
Stalin. Togliatti tore the letter up. [2]
In 1931 Gramsci’s brother visited him in prison. Gramsci
told him that he rejected completely the Stalinist ‘third
period’ policy which Togliatti was implementing. (Togliatti had
expelled three central committee members for opposing the line, and,
under the pseudonym Ercoli, was himself in the forefront of those
defending the line against Trotsky’s criticisms.) His brother
was too afraid to transmit the news to Togliatti – he knew it
would mean the party abandoning his brother’s defence.
Gramsci gave up his attempts to hold discussions with the other
Communist prisoners because some of them, faithfully parroting
Togliatti, denounced Gramsci as a ‘social-democrat’ (the
line at the time ruled out all collaboration with reformists because
they were ‘social-fascists’). One of the last political
statements Gramsci made to his friends before his death expressed
disbelief in the evidence against Zinoviev at the Moscow trials.
Togliatti, of course, was in Moscow applauding the trials. [3]
After Gramsci’s death Togliatti tried to present himself as
his lifelong political confidant. However, although they worked
together closely in 1919-20 and again in 1925-6, they were often far
apart over questions of revolutionary strategy and tactics in the
intervening years. And there was no contact at all between them after
Gramsci’s imprisonment in 1926. 
The ‘Eurocommunist’ Period of Distortion
YET in the end it was Togliatti who allowed the truth about the
previous distortions to come to light by releasing Gramsci’s
uncensored letters and notebooks for publication. In part this was
because he was forced, as other old Communists began to spill the
beans about what Gramsci really thought. In part this was because the
passing of time made Gramsci a distant and less dangerous figure.
But, above all, the aim was to inaugurate a new period in the
distortion of Gramsci’s ideas.
In the early 1960s the PCI began to draw away from Moscow. Its
leaders dreamed of being readmitted to the Italian bourgeois
government from which they had been kicked out in 1947. To achieve
this goal they tried to show the bourgeois parties that they were no
longer dependent on the Kremlin. Togliatti, one of Stalin’s
chief collaborators in the 1930s, became one of his main critics
after 1956.
The switch in line led to bitter disputes with the defenders of
Stalin internationally and with Stalinist loyalists within the PCI
itself. It was a battle on two fronts – to assert the party’s
independence from Stalin’s heirs in the Kremlin and to prove
that a government that included the PCI would not mean a drastic
change in the state machine. Gramsci’s previously censored
criticism of Stalin became a weapon on the first front. And a
distortion of Gramsci’s ideas on the state was useful on the
second.
Gramsci, previously the patron saint of Italian Stalinism, became
the patron saint of what is now called Eurocommunism. It is in this
form, that Gramsci has been taken up by the intellectual right wing
within the Communist Party of Great Britain. He has become the
apologist for the ‘historic compromise’ and the PCI’s
‘benevolent neutrality’ towards the Andreotti
government’s policy of wage controls and spending cuts. He is
called upon by one of the CPGB’s would-be young intellectuals,
David Purdy, to defend the view that the breakdown of the Social
Contract would be reactionary – because of the harm to the
Labour lefts’ ‘alternative economic strategy’. [4]
It is no coincidence that the new draft of the CPGB programme, The
British Road to Socialism, is full of phrases torn out of
Gramsci’s Prison Notebooks.
Yet there are few Marxist thinkers whose spirit was further
removed from Eurocommunism than Gramsci’s. His ideas were based
on notions today’s Eurocommunists castigate as
‘insurrectionist’, ‘workerist’,
‘spontaneist’, and ‘rank and filist’. 
‘Insurrectionism’
FROM HIS FIRST involvement in the socialist movement Gramsci had a
bitter contempt for parliamentarians. He likened them in May 1918 to
‘a swarm of coachman flies on hunt for a bowl of blancmange in
which they get stuck and perish ingloriously’. In words that
could be applied to Italy today he argued:
‘The political decadence which class collaboration
brings is due to the spasmodic expansion of a bourgeois party which
is not satisfied with merely clinging to the state, but also makes
use of the party which is antagonistic to the state (i.e., the
Socialist Party – CH).’ [5]
The emphasis by Gramsci on the building of factory councils in
1919 arose from his conviction that only with new, non-parliamentary
institutions could the working class carry through its revolution:
‘The socialists have simply accepted the historical
reality produced by capitalist initiative. They believe in the
perpetuity and fundamental of the institutions of democratic state.
In their view the form of these democratic institutions can be
corrected, touched up here and there, but in fundamentals must be
respected.
‘We on the other hand remain convinced that the
socialist state cannot be embodied in the institutions of the
capitalist state ... The socialist state must be a fundamentally new
creation’. [6]
Gramsci’s hostility to reformism was to increase still more
in the following years. This hostility was aimed not only at the
right-wing social democrats around Turati but also at the extreme
left social-democrats led by Serrati – the so-called
Maximalists, who mouthed a terminology that would send shivers down
Eric Heffer’s spine. These reformists first stood back and
allowed the workers of Turin to be isolated and defeated by the
employers in a great strike of April 1920. Then they refused to give
revolutionary leadership to the vast upsurge in militancy that
produced in September 1920 the occupation of the factories throughout
northern Italy. These betrayals led Gramsci to join those who split
from the Socialist Party and founded the Communist Party of Italy in
1921.
Gramsci’s hostility to left and right reformists alike was
not a sign of ‘political immaturity’, which he later
outgrew as Betty Matthews of the CPGB would have us believe. [7] It
remained an emphatic note in his last major effort for the Communist
Party, before his imprisonment the Theses presented to the
Lyon Congress of the PCI in 1926.
The Lyons Theses were the most mature of Gramsci’s
published writings. And they were directed mainly against the
ultra-left Bordiga group, which had hitherto dominated the PCI. The
main point of disagreement was Gramsci’s insistence on exposing
the reformist leaders by proposing to them united fronts on specific
issues. But at the same time he was adamant that
‘The social-democratic party must be regarded, in
respect of its ideology and political function, as the left wing of
the bourgeoisie and not the right wing of the workers’
movement, despite its social base, to a very large extent in the
working class.’ [8]
This is very close to Lenin’s definition of the reformist
parties as ‘bourgeois workers’ parties’.
It is not surprising that, although they are among the best
analyses Gramsci made, the Lyons Theses were among the last of
his writings to become widely available (they are still not
translated into English and are barely mentioned in the main
biographies). Gramsci’s hostility to reformism was matched by a
clear understanding of the necessity of armed insurrection. As the
Lyons Theses put it:
‘The defeat of the working class (in 1919-20 –
CH) was due to the political, organisational, tactical and
strategic deficiency of the party of the workers. As a result of this
the proletariat did not succeed in putting itself at the head of the
insurrection of the great majority of the population.’ (my
emphasis – CH)
Hence the need for a – Communist Party, whose tasks include
‘putting to the proletariat and its allies the problem of the
insurrection against the bourgeois state’. Moreover, ‘the
Communist Party has to demonstrate the impossibility of the regime
installed by fascism being transformed in a “liberal” and
“democratic” sense without a mass struggle that must
inexorably develop into civil war.’ (my emphasis – CH)
So much for the ‘negotiated break’ with fascism preached
by the Eurocommunist Spanish CP!
Of course, there is no open mention of armed insurrection in the
Prison Notebooks, written under the watchful eyes of fascist
jailers. But Gramsci showed in one of the few conversations he had in
prison that he had not dropped his ‘immature’ insistence
on insurrection:
‘The violent conquest of power necessitates the
creation by the party of the working class of an organisation of the
military type, pervasively planted in every branch of the bourgeois
state apparatus, and capable of wounding and inflicting grave blows
on it at the decisive moment of struggle.’ [9] 
‘Workerism’
THE key to the fight for power for Gramsci was the working class -
– the flesh and blood workers who toiled in the Turin
factories, not the mythical, idealised workers of Stalinist and
Maoist vintage. ‘Capitalist concentration’, he wrote in
1919, ‘produces a corresponding concentration of working human
masses. This is the fact that underlies all the revolutionary theses
of Marxism.’ [10]
This stress on the central role of the working class underlay
Gramsci’s involvement in the Turin factory councils in 1919 and
1920 and is to be found in the Lyons Theses. ‘The
party’, he insists repeatedly, ‘must be based on the
place of production.’ It is ‘the party of a single class,
the working class’. ‘All the objections to the principle
of basing the party on the place of production arise from conceptions
that are foreign to the proletariat ... They are the expression of
petty bourgeois intellectuals who don’t see the workers as the
conscious and intelligent agents of revolution.’ The party must
have intellectuals and peasants in it, but ‘it must fight
energetically as counter-revolutionary every conception that makes
the party a “synthesis” of heterogeneous elements’.
The reason is simple – it is the working class that is the
decisive revolutionary force:
‘The practice of the movement of the factories
(1919-20 – CH) has shown that only an organisation fixed
in the place and system of production can permit the stabilisation of
contact between the different strata of the labouring mass.’
Gramsci was far from denying the vital importance of winning the
landless agricultural labourers and peasants to the revolution. He
also saw great advantage to the working class in winning over
sections of the middle class. But this meant for him the working
class giving a lead, not hiding its socialist aims. The
revolutionaries around had to be prepared fight alongside
non-revolutionaries around slogans that stopped far short of
socialism, like the demand for a Constituent Assembly. But it had to
be clear that:
‘There does not exist in Italy the possibility of a
revolution that would not foe a socialist revolution. In the
capitalist countries the only class that can bring about a real and
profound social transformation is the working class.’
It was on this basis that even after he had broken with Bordiga’s
ultraleftism, Gramsci remained bitterly opposed to the right current
in the CP led by Tasca (whose politics would put them way to the left
of today’s Eurocommunists). Gramsci insisted that it was
‘pessimism’ and a ‘deviation’ to believe that
‘the working class is not capable of overthrowing
the regime, that the better tactic would be a bourgeois-democratic
bloc ... This programme is presented by the formula of the Communist
Party as the ‘left wing’ of the opposition of all forces
that conspires to bring down fascism.’
The Communist Party had to put forward the some of the same
democratic slogans as the bourgeois opposition – but in order
to ‘unmask’ the bourgeois parties.
No doubt if Gramsci were alive today his would-be admirers in the
PCI and the CPGB would insult him, as they insult us, for not
understanding the need for a ‘broad democratic alliance’
of all ‘anti-monopoly’ forces. 
‘Spontaneism’
THE most developed single area of Gramsci’s thought concerns
the fight to develop a revolutionary working-class consciousness.
He begins from the insistence that the working class cannot be
trained mechanically for the struggle, like an army. Its discipline
depends on its consciousness. And this in turn grows in relation to
practical experience of struggle.
Gramsci’s ideas on this issue grew out of a polemic against
the three other main currents on the left in Italy in the first year
after World War One.
The largest, led by Serrati, saw the Socialist Party as the
embodiment of class consciousness. The dictatorship of the
proletariat would be the ‘dictatorship of the Socialist Party’,
as he put it. For him class consciousness was identified with the
slow, methodical task of building up the party. The second current,
the ultra-left revolutionaries around Bordiga, did not believe that
Serrati’s party would ever dare to take power. But they also
saw consciousness as embodied in a party, the Communist Party,
conceived as a small elite group of highly trained and disciplined
cadres. Only after it had taken power for the class would Soviets be
formed. [11] The third current, the right wing of the CP led by Tasca,
stressed teaching the workers on the one hand, agreements with the
‘left’ trade union leaders on the other. All three
groups, despite their other differences, shared the notion that class
consciousness was thrown down by the party leaders to the workers,
like crumbs to sparrows.
For Gramsci, by contrast, the character and the lead given to the
spontaneously developing struggles and institutions of workers
determined the growth of their consciousness. For him, as for Lenin
and Trotsky, the Soviet was not an abstraction to be set up by the
party at the right moment, but something born as an organ of workers’
struggle in the factory, perhaps initially around an apparently
insignificant issue – the semi-insurrectionary occupation of
the factories in September 1920 was sparked off by the breakdown of
union-management negotiations over the engineer¬ing national wage
agreement. [12] The Soviet had to develop out of an organisation that
bound workers together, regardless of their craft, regardless of
their union, regardless of whether they were even in unions, around
the point of production, an organisation that united their struggles
with those other workers linked to them in the productive process, an
organisation that could express their growing awareness of their
unity, strength and ability to control production. [13]
The workers’ councils in Turin did not emerge out of thin
air. They began life as ‘internal commissions’ in the
factories with similar functions in many ways to those of shop
stewards’ committees in Britain. Gramsci saw the role of
himself and his comrades on L’Ordine Nuovo, the paper
they produced in Milan as being to foster this spontaneous
development, to generalise the internal commissions, to broaden their
base, to encourage them to take over more and more powers from
management, and to link up. As Gramsci wrote: 

‘The problem of the development of the internal
commissions became the central problem, the idea of L’Ordine
Nuovo. It came to be seen as the fundamental problem of the
workers’ revolution: it was the problem of proletarian
“liberty”. For ourselves and our followers, L’Ordine
Nuovo became the “journal of the Factory Councils”.
The workers loved L’Ordine Nuovo and why did they love
it? Because in its articles they discovered part, the best part, of
themselves. Because they felt its articles were pervaded by the same
spirit of inner searching that they experienced: “How can we
become free? How can we become ourselves?” Because its articles
were not cold, intellectual structures, but sprang from our
discussions with the best workers: they elaborated the actual
sentiments, goals and passions of the Turin working class, that we
ourselves had provoked and tested. Because its articles were virtual
a “taking note” of actual events, seen as moments in a
process of inner liberation and self-expression on the part of the
working class. That is why the workers loved L’Ordine Nuovo
and how its idea came to be “formed”.’ [14]
When he wrote these lines in 1920 Gramsci was still a member of
the Socialist Party. It was only later in the same year, after the
defeat of the occupations, that he saw the need to break with left
reformism and to form a homogeneous revolutionary party. His writings
on factory councils therefore lack any explicit discussion of the
notion of how a revolutionary party is to work in them. But these
writings do emphasise how individual revolutionaries, and the
revolutionary paper, should operate to seize on the embryonic
elements of communist organisation and consciousness as they emerge
spontaneously, to generalise and co-ordinate them, to make workers
aware of them.
Gramsci returned to the same questions in 1923, when he criticised
his own willingness for three years to bury his views beneath
Bordiga’s dogmatism:
‘We have not thought of the party as the result of
a dialectical process in which the spontaneous movement of the
revolutionary masses and the organisational and directive will of the
centre converge, but only as something floating in the air, which
develops in and for itself, and which the masses will reach when
their situation is favourable and the revolutionary wave has reached
its height.’ [15]
Building the revolutionary party is not a matter of inculcating
ideas into the masses through abstract propaganda. Nor is it a matter
of waiting until the masses act, stirred on by the effects of
economic crisis. It is a question of relating to every spontaneous,
partial struggle and attempting to generalise from this. Gramsci took
up exactly the same theme again expressed in the more abstract
terminology of the Prison Notebooks.
He writes that the job of a party has to be to draw out the
elements of ‘theory’ implicit in the collective struggles
of a class, and to counterpose this ‘theory’ with all the
other backward, preexisting ‘theories’ in the workers’
heads. To ‘construct a determined practice a theory that,
coinciding with and being identified with the decisive elements of
the same practice, accelerates the historical process in act, by
making the practice more homogenous, coherent and efficacious ...’
[15a]
This is a far cry from the reformist vision of Eurocommunism –
the struggle for socialism as a slow, purely ideological process of
education that leads workers to vote in ever greater numbers for the
correct combination of MPs and trade union officials. 
‘Rank and Filism’
GRAMSCI had nothing but contempt for reformist politicians who
sought to restrict the development of the class struggle to narrow
preconceived channels, ‘to obstruct its clear course,
arbitrarily, by pre-established syntheses’ (e.g., the historic
compromise – CH). [16] In 1919 he began to analyse the
source of this obstruction, locating it in the Socialist Party
parliamentarians and the trade union bureaucracy. He stressed the
alienation many workers felt from their own unions and went onto
analyse the origins of this phenomenon in the fact that trade unions
operate to gain reforms within capitalism, and are staffed and
structured accordingly.
The unions, Gramsci explained,
‘are all types of proletarian organisations
specific to the period of history dominated by capital ... In this
period, when individuals are valued only to the extent that they own
commodities and trade their property, the workers too have become
traders too in the only property they possess, their labour-power ...
They have created these enormous apparatuses for concentrating living
labour, and have set prices and hours and disciplined the market The
trade union has an essentially competitive, not communist character.
It cannot be the instrument for a radical renovation of society.’
[17]
‘Thus a veritable caste of trade union officials
and journalists came into existence, with a group psychology of their
own completely at odds with that of the workers.’ [18]
This analysis and the experience of the Turin factory councils led
Gramsci progressively to come to see the trade union bureaucracy as
an active saboteur of the class struggle: ‘The trade union
official sees industrial legality as a permanent state of affairs.
Too often he defends the same perspective as the proprietor.’
[19] After the betrayal of 1920 Gramsci became fully aware of the
counter-revolutionary role of the trade union leadership:
‘The Turin and Piedmont general strike clashed head
on with the sabotage and resistance of the trade union organisations
... It highlighted the urgent need to combat the whole bureaucratic
mechanism of the trade union organs, which form the most solid
bulwark for the opportunist activities of the parliamentarists and
reformists who aim to stifle every revolutionary initiative on the
part of the working masses.’ [20]
He could write in the Lyons Theses that ‘the group
that leads the Confederation of Labour must be considered as a
vehicle for the dissolving influence of another class upon the
working class’.
Nor did the Gramsci of the Prison Notebooks abandon these
‘immature’, ‘workerist’ and ‘rank and
filist’ positions. He wrote in 1930:
‘Neglecting, or worse still despising, so-called
‘spon¬taneous movements, i.e., failing to give them a
conscious leadership or to raise them to a higher plane by inserting
them into politics, may often have extremely serious consequences.’
He related the defeat of 1920, which paved the way for Mussolini’s
coup in 1922, to the failure of Serrati, Bordiga and Tasca alike to
offer such leadership to the spontaneous movements of workers and
peasants:
‘It is almost always the case that a ‘spontaneous’
movement of the subaltern classes (i.e., working people – CH)
is accompanied by a reactionary movement of the right wing of the
ruling class for concomitant reasons. An economic crisis, for
instance, engenders on the one hand discontent among the subaltern
classes and spontaneous movements, and on the other conspiracies
among the reactionary groups, who take advantage of the objective
weakening of the government in order to attempt coups d’etat.
Among the effective causes of the coups must be included the failure
of the responsible groups (i.e., the Socialist Party – CH)
to give any conscious leadership to the spontaneous revolts or to
make them into a positive political factor.’ (my emphasis –
CH) [21]
Of course, Gramsci was not a ‘workerist’, a
‘spontaneist’, a ‘rank and filist’ in the
real sense of the words, in the sense of devaluing the
interventionist role of Marxists in the class struggle. Quite the
contrary. His own activity in 1919-20 and 1924-26 was a shining
(although not, of course, perfect) example of such intervention.
 



Franco and the Politics of Spain
Edouard de Blaye
Penguin £1.50
Spain in Crisis
edited by Paul Preston
Harvester Press £6.50
Franco’s Political Legacy
Jose Amodia
£9.00
SPANISH politics today must be particularly confusing to many people on the left. Elections are due soon, the Communist-backed opposition has issued joint statements with the Francoists who still run the government, the press is able to print statements from virtually any political standpoint. Yet in the wake of the killing of five labour lawyers by the extreme right, the government gave carte blanche for the police to carry through arrests of hundreds of left wingers.
These three books about the last years of Franco should help provide an understanding of these apparently contradictory processes. After all, it was Franco who personally designed the institutions that now preside over the ‘democratisation’ of Spain. And it was the struggle, particularly the underground workers’ struggle, which caused the ruling class to see they had no choice but to ‘reform’ the regime in order to protect it.
The first people to see this were the ideologues. Hence the strange spectacle of the head of fascist propaganda in the civil war and the fascist minister of education in the 1950’s going over to the ‘liberal’ opposition. Hence too the shift in theattitude of the church. Faced with the transformation of millions of superstitious peasants into anti-clerical workers (a poll in 1958 showed 89.8 per cent of workers to be anti-clerical and 41.3 per cent anti-religious) the priests had to choose between losing their congregations or pretending to sympathise with workers’ struggles.
But the bourgeosie proper were not far behind. The more the workers’ struggle rose, the more they felt the need for a Spanish Jack Jones to control the struggles. There were candidates enough for this job. The Communist Party had been preaching the gospel of ‘national reconciliation’ since the mid 1950s. It did not need much pressure to persuade Carrillo and Camacho to add to this the demand for a ‘social pact’ – or even a ‘social contract’. And if they could not be quite relied on, then there were the even more overt social democrats with finance from Jack Jones himself. On only one thing have the bourgeoisie insisted. In the change from ‘fascism’ to ‘western democracy’ there must be no dismantling of the Francoist state machine. The whole of big business, from the unreconstructed fascists of the Madrid banks through to the ‘liberal’ factory owners of Barcelona, have depended upon the 100,000 paramilitary police and the thousands of secret police and informers, to intimidate workers. So they have demanded that ‘reform’ of the system stops short at a ‘break’ (ruptura) which might unleash uncontrollable forces.
By continuing to negotiate with the government while it uses the institutions of Francoism against the left, the opposition – and the Communist Party – have shown their acceptance of this condition. They have done more. They have agreed to the division of the workers movement into rival trade union federations – something the CIA only achieved after great effort and expense in post-war Italy and France.
It is such acts which have earned the apostles of Eurocommunism so much praise in the ‘liberal’ papers of the west.
Unfortunately, none of these books provides a full account of the processes that have brought these changes about. Edouard de Blaye’s book is a typical piece of journalism: readable, full of nice stories, dotted with interesting facts, but unreliable and ignorant of the dynamo of the whole process, the working-class movement.
Jose Amodia used to be a lawyer – and his book reads like it. Although there are not blatant inaccuracies as in de Blaye, the focus is on the institutional mechanisms of Francoism (complete with a reprint of the constitution), and the struggle hardly gets a look in.
By far the best of the three books is the collection of essays edited by Paul Preston. The writers are hardly Marxists, but they tend to be honest and accurate. They do not fully understand the workers’ movement, and are almost completely ignorant of the revolutionary left. But if you read this book you will be a little nearer understanding Spain today.
 



The first part of this article appeared in International Socialism 93.

Poland from 1970 to 1976
The crisis of December 1970 took the leaders of the Polish bureaucracy completely by surprise. But Kuron and Modzelewski had predicted five years earlier:
‘The investment programme means a further increase of 20 per cent in the share of investment in the national income ... We know from experience that the realization of the investment programme will require much higher investments than planned. It means that the “inflation barrier” will be crossed so that real wages will be pushed below the minimum level socially necessary ...’ [1]
It was this that led to their conclusion: ‘revolution is inevitable’.
In December 1970 in order to try and continue with vast investments already under way, Gomulka pushed up meat and other prices by 20 per cent. Even after workers strikes and uprisings in the Baltic ports had caused the removal of Gomulka himself his successor Gierek tried to justify continuing with the price increases. He told strikers,
‘We voted (at the party congresses) for increasing living standards. These were ignored because it was not wished to annul certain decisions on investments which were very drawn out and had to be completed.’ [2]
Kuron and Modzelewski insisted that in one respect the next crisis would differ from previous ones. In 1957 the bureaucracy had been able to increase wages and buy off discontent because it had certain ‘reserves’; in the next crisis, they said, these reserves would not exist and the crisis would be insoluble. Again, when the crisis broke out Gierek admitted as much:
‘Whether you believe me or not is your affair, but we have lot the least reserves which would allow us to carry through a more rapid increase in the standard of living.’ [3]
In the years immediately following 1970 it seemed both that Gierek was lying and that Kuron and Modzelewski were mistaken. Under pressure from strike action Gierek finally agreed to cancel the price increases and allow real wages to rise quite substantially.
Average net earnings in industry grew from 2,389 zlotys a month in 1970 to 2,873 zlotys in 1973 – an increase of 448 zlotys compared to an increase of only 368 zlotys in the five years prior to 1970 (and in those five years prices rose by nine per cent, while they were officially frozen from 1970 onwards). [4] It is claimed that personal consumption rose by 7 per cent in 1971, by 9 per cent in 1972 and by 11 per cent in 1973.
These figures have to be taken with a big grain of salt, since the alleged growth of total personal consumption of 29 per cent during 1970-3 was not matched by a corresponding growth in the consumption of the most important items for the standard of living. [5] But there is no doubt that a limited increase in living standards did take place. How is this to be explained?
Not by any increase in the proportion of the national income going to the workers.
Despite the rise in real wages, the ‘gains of the Enterprises’ – the surplus value accruing to the enterprises – grew more rapidly than wages. The rate of capital accumulation also increased.
Net fixed capital formation grew from 21.8 per cent of the national income in 1970 to 26.9 per cent in 1973. Wages could only grow because the Polish economy entered a boom in the early 1970s of an intensity that was completely unexpected – above all by the Polish Bureaucracy.






Distribution of National Income




 


 


Wages


‘Gains of
enterprise’


Income of
peasants




1970


32.8%


16.9%


16.6%




1971


31.6%


22.5%


17.1%




1972


31.7%


22.8%


17.9%







Growth Rate (at constant prices)




 


National
Income


Industry




1971


8%


8%




1972


10%


10%




1973


11%


12%







IMPORTS
(million zlotys)




 


1970


1971


1972


1973




Comecon


9,488


10,372


11,419


12,902




Developed Western Countries


3,721


  4,407


  6,680


11,597







EXPORTS
to Developed Western Countries
(million zlotys)




1970


1971


1972


1973




4,028


4,622


5,515


7,303






The ‘plan’ for 1971-5 was not finally agreed until 14 July 1972 (when it was already supposed to have been in operation for 18 months). What happened to the economy had little to do with the plan targets. The national income growth of 59 per cent from 1971-5 was half as much again as the planned growth of 40 per cent. Investment grew at roughly twice the planned rate. The bureaucracy, frightened out of its wits by the uprisings and strikes of 1970-71 was prepared to try to buy off workers with real wage increases – providing accumulation could expand as well.
This upsurge in the Polish economy more or less coincided with an upsurge in the economies of the other East European countries. (For instance in Hungary the rate of economic growth in 1973 was nearly 7 per cent – half as much again as the targeted figure). Significantly, it also took place at the same time as the most rapid burst of economic growth known in the Western states since the Korean war – the short-lived but very rapid boom of 1971-3.
It seems that the Polish bureaucrats behaved very like every other capitalist in the world in these years – they saw the global expansion of production and markets that was taking place, and decided that they could solve their own internal problems if they expanded their own output so as to take advantage of the boom. They let the investment take place at a very high rate throughout the economy, at the same time as letting money wages increase. They took on extra workers in the factories. And they scoured the world for the raw materials and manufactured components that industry needed. They assumed that they would be able to cover their increased wage and materials costs by selling more goods – as did the western capitalists who participated in the world boom.
In the first full year of the boom – 1972 – imports from the west rose by a full 50 per cent. In the next year they rose by even more – by 80 per cent, until they were three times the level they had been in 1970.
By 1975 55 per cent of Poland’s trade was with non-Comecon countries. In short, the high growth rates of these years were based upon a complete transformation of Poland’s pattern of trade, with a massive integration into the booming western ‘world’ market.
But something else of great significance also happened. The growth of exports to the west did not by any means keep up with the growth of imports.
Exports to the west nearly doubled in three years but meanwhile imports had increased more than three-fold.
This was no more ‘planned’ than the size of the boom itself. The 1971-5 ‘plan’ targeted an increase in foreign trade of 55 per cent over five years. This figure had already been surpassed by the end of the second year of the plan. The total increase in foreign trade between 1971-5 was more than 250 per cent (five times the alleged target of the planning mechanism).
The behaviour of Poland’s bureaucrats was identical to that of the capitalists throughout the world in the years of the boom. They believed that if they only expanded at the fastest possible rate everything else would take care of itself. As a Financial Times correspondent wrote of Gierek:
To give Poland the strongest possible push, he deliberately ignored the cost, calculating that once the economy had achieved a certain momentum it would start paying its bills automatically.’ (FT, 5 December 1975)
In this period the same blind optimism that characterised western apologists for the capitalist system (witness Peter Walker’s claim in November 1973 that Britain was entering an era of ‘unprecedented prosperity’) characterised the statements of the Polish authorities. Thus
‘Mr Dlugosz, deputy minister for foreign trade, stated that inflation in the west was not resulting in inflation being imported into Poland.’ [6]
To pay for this expansion – again like the western capitalists – they had to resort to borrowing on a massive scale. A trade deficit which reached 677 million pounds in 1974 could only be bridged by turning to sources of credit in the west.
‘Poland is financing its investment programme through comparatively cheap credits from Western countries.’ [7]
But it was the fact capitalists everywhere were buying up raw materials as quickly as possible, using up all available skilled labour, and borrowing massively from the banks that forced up international commodity prices and interest rates through 1973. The last straw of course was the tripling of the price of oil in November 1973. The immediate occasion for this was the Middle-East war; but OPEC could only increase its price because the oil-consuming nations had increased their consumption during the boom at a much greater rate than the increase in global oil production.
The biggest world boom since the Korean war rapidly gave way to the biggest recession for 35 years. In the main western countries investment and employment fell and markets were reduced, while the rate of inflation remained at a very high level.
The combination of inflation plus recession had devastating consequences for the Polish bureaucracy. They were in the same position as western firms which had borrowed heavily in the boom on the assumption that they would be able to pay off their debts through increased sales.
 
Inflation
THE cost of Poland’s imports of raw materials and manufactured components rose as world prices did. This pressure became even worse when the Russians began raising the price of their oil to catch up with the world market price by stages. A United Nations survey told how ‘prices between the Soviet Union and its allies rose at an unprecedented rate in 1975. It cited oil up 130 per cent.’ [8]
According to the West Berlin based German Institute for Economic Research,
‘price rises of Soviet exports in the main raw materials this year cost Comecon countries such as Hungary, East Germany and Czechoslovakia one third of their planned growth in the national income.’ [9]
Prices inside Poland were put up as a result, despite the freeze on food prices. In 1974 the prices of petrol products, alcohol, and canteen meals were put up by the state. The prices of fruit and vegetables sold by the peasants on the free market also began to rise. The result was a rise in the official price index of 4.7 per cent in that year and 5 per cent last year.
Supporters of the Polish regime now admit to ‘the growth of inflation. But they speak of it as ‘imported’ from the west. But as we have seen the Polish economy has endemic inflationary tendencies of its own. What is more its uncontrolled growth contributed to the world boom and to the international inflation that this produced.
Just to take one example. Poland – along with the other Eastern European States – increased the amount of oil it bought on the world market in the months before October-November 1973 (when OPEC put the price up) just as did the various western countries; Poland’s oil imports rose by 50 per cent from 1970-73. Poland was not just a victim of the world inflation; it helped to create it.
 
Recession
If it has been hit on one side by the worldwide inflation, the Polish bureaucracy has been hit also by the other by-product of the world boom in 1971-3 – the recession in the advanced western countries.
‘The Western recession has damaged Poland’s terms of trade; the value of exports has not kept pace with the inflated cost of imports; and the prospects for sales in the West have not been the best.’ [10]
Not that the Polish bureaucracy responded to the recession initially by cutting back production. They allowed the bureaucrats who run particular industries to expand both production and investment. They seem to have assumed that despite the world recession they would be able to sell this increases production abroad. But despite the fact that Poland is one of the largest coal producers in Europe and could expect to gain from the oil crisis through increased coal sales, its imports have continued to be much greater than its exports. [11]
The total trade deficit in 1974 was 7,198 million zlotys; for the first nine months of 1975 it was more than twice that at 18,000 million zlotys. The accumulated deficit to the western countries is now immense; it stands at 4,200 million dollars – a figure greater than Poland’s export earnings for a single year. Polish spokesmen admit that servicing this debt now eats up 20-22 per cent of export earnings. [12]
By the time the five-year plan for 1976-80 was formulated last year Poland’s rulers could no longer ignore the stark reality of their trade deficit and their indebtedness. The plan targets stress the need to cut imports below exports. They claim that in 1976 imports will only grow by 9.4 per cent; exports by 15.5 percent. But exports cannot be increased at will, as British capitalism has long learned to its cost. Gierek is no more a miracle worker than Callaghan. In the first three months of this year exports rose by only 3.7 per cent – not nearly enough to meet the target.
Imports have been equally intractable. There are still a great many investment projects remaining unfinished from the last plan. To complete them, managers have to buy materials and components from abroad. Imports in the first three months of 1976 grew by 19 per cent. The trade deficit with the western states for the three months was 772 million dollars – half as big again as in the corresponding period last year. No wonder Eduard Gierek explicitly compared his dilemma to that of the western capitalists:
‘Every nation which proceeds with large investments has market troubles.’
 
Responses to the Crisis
The crisis-riven state of the Polish economy leaves the Polish bureaucracy with three options:


Expand still further its borrowing abroad arid integrate the economy still more with the western economies.
Make the workers pay for the crisis by slashing living standards.
Make sections of the workers and sections of the bureaucracy itself pay for the crisis by cutting back production in certain areas of the economy, closing factories and sacking workers. [13]


The first response, as we have seen, of the Polish authorities in 1974 and 1975 was to turn to massive foreign borrowing. They have continued to try using this expedient. They have turned to individual western banks to finance particular projects (like the expansion of the Ursus factory – financed by Barclays and undertaken by Massey Ferguson), to the Eurodollar market (where East European borrowing rose by a massive 5.4 billion dollars in the first nine months of 1975 [14]) to finance coal equipment and a PVC plant, and even to the Shah of Iran for 250 million dollars for food and paper plants.
But, as the Labour government in Britain found at the end of its first year in office there are limits to which it is possible to avoid the effects of the international crisis by borrowing internationally. The western banks are getting more and more wary about lending Poland money. As the Financial Times has noted:
‘By 1975 Poland had acquired the reputation of being one of Comecon’s less good risks.’ [15]
Under the circumstances the loans which Poland gets are more and more tied to particular projects, which mean not only Polish dependence on western credits, but also a direct connection between sections of Polish industry and the market operations of particular western firms. So for instance one of the Fiat-built plants that has just come into production in Silesia provides components for the Fiat factories in Milan. The Financial Times reports:
‘A consortium of German companies led by Krupp is expected to land orders worth £565 million for two coal gasification plants, a plant to extract various other chemicals from coal, and equipment for a large new mining operation in Upper Silesia ... The Poles are interested in setting up a joint marketing operation with Krupp to sell the various projects abroad. A consortium of West German banks is working on the financing of the new deal ...’ (1 June 1976)
The centrepiece of the next five-year plan is the expansion of Polish copper production through a massive £250 million investment. This is to be provided by a consortium of western banks. But these have demanded as a condition for the loan detailed information about the copper deposits, and the power to ‘demand changes in copper export strategy as necessary.’ [16]
The foreign loans provided a breathing space for the bureaucracy to overcome the crisis of 1970; they also enabled it to ignore the world recession for two years. But they present it with immense long-term problems.
The loans will have to be repaid at some point, if more and more of the Polish economy is not to be devoted to raising interest for Western money lenders. Indeed the Western money lenders will withdraw even the loan facilities they have so far made available if repayments do not take place as expected. And most of the repayments fall due around 1980. Further; the more the bureaucracy depends upon exports to service previous loans as well as its imports, the more the whole functioning of the economy depends on the ups and downs of the western economy.
Already it is possible for the bureaucrats of one East European state (Hungary) to recognise that the success of their own ‘planning’ depends upon the hope of a western boom. They believed, a Financial Times correspondent wrote in July
‘The signs of a new upswing, coupled with growing personal consumption and the build up of stocks provide more favourable circumstances for fulfilment of Hungary’s “planned” targets.’ [17]
The Polish bureaucracy is relying on being able to export, for instance, 70,000 Polski Fiats a year. Whether it can do so or not depends upon there being a boom in the West. The same applies to its ability to sell other Fiat components to Milan (if Fiat cannot sell its cars, Poland won’t be able to sell components), to sell coal, PVC and so on. Few commodities fluctuate more in price than copper. The success of the biggest single investment in the next five years depends not on the ‘planners’, but on the world market for copper on the one hand, and on the western banks who have the power to control Poland’s sales of the metal, on the other.
The point is crucial. In the past Poland’s internal economic dynamic has been determined by a drive to accumulate arising from its relationship with the world system. But at the same time the monolithic control exercised over industry by a single bureaucratic group has enabled this group to isolate the internal cycle of crisis in Poland from the international boom-recession cycle. Over the last six years, the fluctuations inside Poland and in the world at large have more and more interacted, with Poland booming as part of the 1971-73 world boom. In order to evade the consequences of this the Polish bureaucracy tried to prolong its own boom longer than either the world boom or than any other previous spell of high growth inside Poland, by turning to the international banks. But this has been a short-term expedient that now makes Poland’s ability or otherwise to conquer the world markets a life and death matter. Polish industry’s future is mortgaged to the hope that the west will enter into a real boom. But even if, by some miracle, this materialises, the relief for the Polish bureaucracy will be short-lived.
As in the last boom, Poland will contribute to all the classical features of the upturn – rising world commodity prices, shortages of materials internationally, increased borrowing and higher interest rates. But by doing so the Polish bureaucracy will also be contributing to the forces which make the world economy increasingly unstable.
 
An Internal Recession?
The second alternative open to the bureaucracy is that of solving the foreign trade gap by closing inefficient factories, cutting back production in other sectors of industry, and sacking workers. Effectively this would mean cutting back the pace of economic activity until it was regulated by what could be sold in the world market – in short, responding to the western recession by imposing an internal recession within Poland.
There is nothing intrinsic to the bureaucratically controlled economy that prevents such a response. As we have seen, Yugoslavia has cut production and forced up unemployment on several occasions. Over the last year, industrial production has fallen to a mere 95.7 per cent of the previous year’s figures, partly because ‘internal and foreign demand has been weak for all categories of goods’. [18] Unemployment has grown from 315,000 in 1972 to 537,000 in 1975 – (10.1 per cent of the labour force) [19].
However, the bureaucrats are usually loath to resort to such an approach, for a number of reasons.


It means abandoning, at least temporarily, the pretentions to catch up with their more economically advanced rivals.
In an economy dominated by only one employer unemployment becomes a political question more rapidly than where several employers can blame each other for it. A policy of deliberate unemployment would create very powerful social tensions. (In Yugoslavia resentment at unemployment and economically enforced emigration has been a very powerful factor feeding the national antagonisms between Croats, Serbs, Macedonians, etc that have seemed to threaten the unity of the country.)
Closing down sections of industry so as to restore the balance of trade may not work even in purely economic terms. Even in the west the state has usually stepped in in recent years to prevent any of the major firms from going out of business because of the havoc this would create in the rest of the economy, (destroying demand for other firms’ output, cutting exports ‘at a stroke’ etc.) – hence the state support for or take-over of firms like British Leyland, Chrysler UK, UCS, Rolls Royce, etc. [20]


In the Eastern European states, to allow any major component of the economy to be forced out of business because it was proved inefficient in relation to world market forces would cause even more havoc. Although the national economies are smaller than most of the advanced western countries, the average size of industrial enterprises is bigger. The average number of workers employed per enterprise is as great as in the US (despite the much smaller size of the economies) and is much greater than in economies of comparable size (e.g. Italy). [21]
So until now the Polish bureaucrats have preferred to borrow abroad. But, in all likelihood, by the time of the next world recession, Polish industry will be so interlocked with western markets as to leave the bureaucracy with little choice but to shut down plant and lay off workers. When Fiat, Milan, stops heeding components from Silesia will the Polish bureaucracy keep producing them? What will it do with its own Polski Fiats when the world market for cars declines again?
The renewed world crisis will not only affect the Polish economy – it is also likely to hit it in very much the same way as it hits many western economies.
In any case, the course of the Polish economy over the next five years is going to be very different to that of the last five years. The ‘plan’ for 1976-80 talks of a much lower growth rate than that achieved in 1971-76.
The national income is targetted to rise by 55 per cent, as against 62 per cent claimed for the last five years, with consumer incomes rising by only 18 per cent, compared with a claimed 40 per cent.
But even these limited goals do not seem at all realistic. For they are expected to be attained with an increase in the level of investment of only 40 per cent, compared with a 90 per cent increase in the last period.
In the last five year period, it took a 2.25 per cent increase in investment, to get a rise of 1 per cent in the national income. They are claiming that over the next five years the same 1 per cent increase in the national income will be got by a mere 0.75 per cent increase in investment. It seems that the long years of more or less peaceful coexistence with the hierarchy of the Catholic Church have made the Polish bureaucracy believe in miracles.
They will soon discover the real world will confront them with two grim alternatives.
Either the pattern will be as in the last few months. Investment will be much higher than it has been ‘planned’ (as it has been in the first few months of the ‘plan’), causing a much more than targetted increase in exports and a massive trade deficit.
Or the growth rate of the National Income will be cut right back. This will lead to a fall in investment, rising unemployment and even factory closures. If past form is anything to go by, Polish bureaucrats will put their faith in the western boom for as long as possible. But this will only mean that they will be still more severely hit as the boom collapses – even being forced to cut back production and employment so as to restore their finances.
 
Wage Cuts
In the mythology of vulgar bourgeois economics there was always an alternative to increased unemployment in a crisis. This was for the workers to allow their wages to fall so as to keep accumulation profitable for the capitalists.
This is the ‘alternative’ which the Polish bureaucracy has been trying to resort to, in addition to foreign borrowing.
The first proposal of the government was to increase food prices to between 50 and 100 per cent, thus effectively reducing both real wages to a level less than in 1970, and the value of workers’ accumulated savings.
The strikes in June forced them to retreat on this proposal. They then spoke of delayed price increases of 30-40 per cent.
In preparation for this, they have unleashed a massive wave of repression against the workers. Reports in the French revolutionary daily, Rouge, speak of hundreds of arrests and thousands of sackings. In factories like Ursus the bureaucrats have taken a leaf out of the book of Spanish capitalists and have been victimising literally hundreds of workers (in Ursus a fifth of the workforce). The Open Letter from Jacek Kuron to the Italian Communist Party speaks of ‘an anti-worker terror’.
Clearly the regime feels compelled by the pressing needs of capital accumulation to deal more viciously with workers than has been the case in the last five years. The response of the working class to this mass victimisation is not yet known. But the bureaucracy are now saying the food price increases will be delayed at least for a year. At the same time, however, it is cutting living standards by other means – sugar is rationed, meat and sausage are in such short supply that workers are having to do without and there are warnings of power cuts. If the workers are intimidated into accepting the cuts in living standards, then it is possible that the bureaucracy will ride the crisis. But only temporarily.
For wage cutting does not provide an ultimate answer to capitalist crisis. And it cannot provide an answer for the bureaucratic states that participate in the world capitalist system.


It cannot overcome one of their major weaknesses – the low productivity of labour. For instance, in the Fiat Polski works in Warsaw, productivity has been found to be 15 per cent less than in an identical plant in Turin. The gap could only be bridged if some way could be found to overcome the extreme alienation which Polish workers feel from the productive process. That means not cutting living standards, but raising them to the Italian level.
At the same time as leading to a low level of productivity even in the most advanced areas of industry wage cutting encourages the less efficient sections of industry to remain in operation (and prevents the updating of inefficient and obsolescent sections of industry and therefore, in the long term impedes precisely the capital accumulation it is meant to aid.
Finally, cutting living standards can only contribute to the global instability of the wo,rld system. An individual capitalist or an individual state capitalist country can solve its problems to a degree by cutting wages, underselling its competitors and increasing the surplus value at its disposal. But all capitalists or state capitalists cannot do that without increasing the contradictions of the system. They add to the discrepancy between the scale of production and the narrow powers of consumption of the masses. [22]


This is bound in time to express itself in a new crisis, of ‘over-production’ of capital and commodities.
 
The Next Crisis
The Polish bureaucracy may ride the present crisis. It may be able to borrow more from the western banks, to persuade the workers to accept substantial cuts in their real wages, and to increase its exports on the tide of the developing world boom (or boomlet). But its next crisis is already in view before this one is over.
The world boom needed to help exports would definitely put up the price of imports.
It would also cause the cost of servicing Poland’s accumulated debt to rise still more.
‘The biggest drawback of a (world) boom would be a sharp rise in the cost of finance on which Poland continues to depend, and a drop in export credits from western governments no longer concerned at exporting at any cost.’ [23]
Finally, it would ensure continued full employment, and therefore continued confidence for Poland’s workers, even if they are intimidated into accepting wage cuts in the short term.
The enhanced inflation will also most certainly be reflected in renewed pressure on wages, just as internal inflationary pressures against attempting a too ambitious rate of growth come to the fore.
The result in 1978-9 could be catastrophic for the Polish bureaucracy, (even if they survive the next few months, without more strikes and uprisings). Many of their foreign loans will fall due just as internal inflationary pressures peak and world markets shrink. Then they will have to either turn on the workers still more viciously, risking a repetition of 1956 and 1970, or suffer a full blown recession (which they might also see as a way of weakening the bargaining power of workers). [24]
Awareness of this has produced a deep crisis of confidence within the ranks of the bureaucracy itself, with the possibility of the sorts of open splits that preceded the Hungarian revolution of 1956 and the Czechoslovak upheaval of 1968. And the Financial Times can report that
‘East Germany is now worried that the widespread Polish discontent over the deteriorating food situation could build up to another outburst such as June’s riots.’ (September 1976)
 
Conclusion
This analysis has focussed on Poland, since that is the Eastern European state where the class struggle has been most acute. But its conclusions are applicable to a greater or lesser extent to the other so-called Communist countries.
They too face falling growth rates and have attempted to deal with these by raising their imports, particularly their imports of modern technological equipment (and food). They too have resorted to foreign credits to deal with their trade gaps. They too are now worried about world interest rates and the trend of world trade.
In Hungary, for instance,
‘Only 75 per cent of the added growth of the GNP will be used for consumption and investment during the current five year plan. The rest will be directly and indirectly channelled into the promotion of exports. During the forthcoming difficult period the gap must be bridged through foreign credits. Reports talk of accumulated hard currency debts of 2.3 billion dollars. Debt servicing oscillates between 10 and 15 per cent of export earnings.’ [25]
In Czechoslovakia,
‘The main problem is foreign trade, where the worsening trends of the last two years are taking a heavy toll.
‘The drop in the demand for industrial products, weak raw material prices and the sharp rise in energy costs have, according to Prague bankers, exhausted foreign currency reserves.’ [26]
The North Korean five year plan has been completely disrupted by the inability to pay back foreign credits and the consequent difficulty of getting more credits. And even in China the debate within the bureaucracy upon the extent of the need to buy plant abroad is related to the difficulty of finding the funds to do so.
In the case of Russia the growth of foreign trade and foreign credits has been relatively less pronounced than in the case of Poland or Hungary. The grandiose schemes of a few years ago to develop the vast untapped mineral resources of Siberia with US and Japanese credits were vitually abandoned.
Nevertheless, there has been a continual and substantial increase in the dependence of the USSR both on the world market and on foreign credits.
‘West Germany companies exported 3.6 billion dollars more in heavy machinery and plant to the USSR last year than they bought in return.’ [27]
The USSR had a trade deficit with the West off 1,688 billion in the first 6 months of 1976 – 25 per cent higher than a year ago. And, of course, the disasterous harvest last year, means that the Russian bureaucracy is having to sell gold to buy grain abroad.
Yet the main pont that emerges from an examination of the Russian economy in this respect is a negative one: because the bureaucracy has been loath to increase its dependence on its military rivals, it has not expanded trade as much as satellites – and it has fallen behind them in terms of economic growth. The Vienna based Institute for International Economic Comparisons reports that in the last five year plan period,
‘the overall economic performance of the Comecon countries, excluding the Soviet Union, was considerably better than the Soviet Union itself.’ [28]
While Poland (with its massive expansion of imports) had a claimed growth rate of 9.8 per cent a year, that of the USSR fell to 5.5 per cent. [29] Most of the targets of the last five year plan were not achieved, even after they had been modified downwards in the course of the plan itself. This followed on a failure to achieve the original targets of the 1966-70 plan.
The plan for the next five years predicts the lowest growth rates since the 1920s, with consumer goods production due to increase hardly more than the increase in the population. Even if by a rare accident, this portion of the plan is achieved, Russian workers’ real wages will hardly rise at all!
A crude conclusion is possible from the Russians’ performance: opting out of massive increases in trade does not allow you to opt out of the pressures of the growing forces of production at an international level. Not buying modern technology on the scale of the Poles, the Russian economy grows much less quickly. But it still has to pay for an arms effort comparable to that of the biggest western state, the US. The Russian bureaucracy can only respond by holding down wages, hoping that the outcome is not a Russian version of the Polish strikes and uprisings.
But it is not only to the so-called Communist countries that the analysis has relevance. It also shows how their situation is very similar to the other state capitalisms we referred to earlier, to the ‘developing countries’ where the state has endeavoured to supplement, or even substitute itself, for a low rate of private investment.
Our description of Poland trying to expand its way through the world recession by a combination of massive foreign borrowing and increased exports based upon low wages, could almost apply to Brazil, for example. And the results have also been similar – internal inflation so as to distribute national income away from the workers, increased dependence of the national ruling class upon international capital, a faltering growth rate.
‘Brazil is experiencing the same difficulties in maintaining a satisfactory external balance as several non-Opec developing countries, such as Mexico, Columbia, Singapore and Turkey’ [30] – and we might add, Poland, Hungary and North Korea.
The Polish crisis is an expression of something much greater. The era in which the state could protect national capitalism from the direct impact of world crisis is drawing to an end. Discussion on ‘state capitalism’ needs to give way to discussion of the world system of state capitalism.
The national capitalist class – whether in Poland or Brazil, Argentina or Britain, the USSR or France – can only keep up in world competition (in trade or arms production) if it has access to productive resources wider than those of the national state and if it has
access to technological advances taking place on a wider scale, usually in the biggest firms of the most advanced countries. It cannot get access to these without increase dependence upon international trade, the international capital market, and the multinational firms. Yet, at the international level there are no institutions comparable to the national state capable of imposing order. Each national state capitalism is more and more sucked into a chaotic, disorganised, world system where the only order is that which is provided by the crises and destruc-tiveness of the world market itself.
 



THE LAST issue of IS journal was excellent. But you make one small mistake in your briefing How Special is the British crisis, which seemed to put the responsibility for the low level of productivity in British industry on to the workers organisations alone. You write,
‘The strength of shop floor organisation in Britain is at least part of the reason for low productivity.’
You then go on to quote figures that show that
‘compared with the US labour productivity in the USA is over 50 per cent higher, in Germany it is over a third higher, in France over a quarter higher’.
The danger is that from such figures it is possible to draw the social-democratic conclusion (although I’m sure your writers did not intend it to be drawn) that if only British workers had been less concerned with their conditions over the last 25 years, then today they would be enjoying the higher living standards to be found in the US, Germany and so on. But a study into labour productivity in multinational companies (Labour productivity differential within International companies, by C.F. Pratten, Cambridge University Press, quoted in Financial Times, 10 August 1976) comes to a different conclusion. See table:



Productivity lead over UK




Cause


North
America
%


 
Germany
%


 
France
%




Output and length of production runs


20.5


  5.5


  1.5




Plant and machinery


6 


  5   


  5   




Other, including difference in
product mix and capacity use


6 


  2   


  2   




Strikes and restrictive practices


5 


  3½


  0   




Manning and efficiency


6 


  8.5


  5.5




Average lead


50   


27   


15   



As can be seen, in no case is the strength of working-class organisation the major cause of differences in labour productivity, although it is clearly important in the case of Germany. More significant are factors you would expect to be associated with a low level of investment over many years—the plant and machinery themselves, output and production runs (due to relying on diversified old plant rather than on concentrated production from newer plant), and capacity use. As the study pointed out,
‘... there is a vicious circle where shorter production runs, lower wages and less capital equipment reinforce one another’ (quoted Financial Times, 10 August).
If the workers had heeded all the invections of social democrats and union leaders to work harder and to tighten their belts, this vicious cycle could not have been reversed. That does not mean there is any way out of the crisis as the would-be-more-radical social democrats of the Benn school pretend, merely by increased investment now. The crisis is not a ‘special British crisis’ precisely because throughout the world any increased investment is in labour-saving equipment which means both more unemployment and a higher organic composition of capital leading to a falling return on investment.
The refusal of workers to labour as hard as in other capitalist countries is not the cause of the crisis. But for British capitalism, the only way to ease the effects of the crisis is massive speed-up. And here your articles figures for factory accidents are very relevant. They show that to reduce manning to make the 8.5 per cent productivity gap due to this cause between Britain and Germany would involve a horrendous increase in the death toll due to accidents. To try to bridge all productivity gap (regardless of its cause) by speed up would mean wholesale butchery.






Review article of Santiago Carrillo’s “Eurocommunism” and the State, whose English translation is due to be published by Lawrence and Wishart in October.
The phenomenon of Eurocommunism has caught the eye of the media, as a number of Western European Communist Parties have criticised repression in the Eastern bloc and offered their services to bail out the capitalist governments of their own countries. Santiago Carrillo, leader of the Spanish Communist Party, received special attention when his book, “Eurocommunism” and the State, was attacked by the Soviet leadership. Chris Harman examines the ideas of the Eurocommunists as expressed in this book.




“Eurocommunism” and the State is an attempt by the Secretary of the Spanish Communist Party (PCE) to justify theoretically the tenets of “Eurocommunism”, the new ideology propagated by the West European (and Japanese) Communist parties. According to these parties, socialism can be introduced without a revolutionary break with existing institutions, whether through the establishment of workers’ councils or through the imposition of a Stalinist dictatorship. The book has been a cause celebré since it was attacked in the Moscow journal New Times.
According to Carrillo, his aim is to “elaborate a solid conception of the possibility of democratising the apparatus of the capitalist state, transforming it into a valid tool for constructing a socialist society, without needing to destroy it radically by force”. This task is to be achieved without becoming “identified with social-democracy”. [1]
The problem lies in the tail: how to carry out this justification of a peaceful, parliamentary road to socialism without falling into the positions of the social-democratic parties from which the Communists split nearly sixty years ago?
So Carrillo continues to insist that “the state continues to be an instrument of class domination”; yet this capitalist class state, he believes, can be “democratised” and transformed into an instrument of working-class power without civil war. In other words, Carrillo wants to square the circle.
 
Revolutionary socialism and scientific technical revolution
CARRILLO’s argument is that in their time Marx and Lenin were quite right to insist on the necessity of smashing the state machine. The state was then quite a simple institution, made up almost entirely of “bodies of armed men”, cut off from the rest of society, dominated by those integrated into the ruling class and obsessed by the requirements of waging imperialist war. At the same time, the state was backed up by powerful means of ideological control which supported capitalist society uncritically – the church in particular, but also the professions, the universities, and so on.
But today things are changing fast, because of the spectacular development of the forces of production caused by the “Scientific technical revolution”:
“The law of human progress is breaking, by one means or another, the restraints of the capitalist system.”
As a result, the balance of forces inside society has been changed. The economy is increasingly monopolised by a few powerful interests, forcing other groups in society, “including part of the bourgeoisie”, into conflict with the monopolists controlling the state. One such group cutting itself a drift from the system is “the middle bourgeoisie, shaken between the social character of the organisation of the enterprises they manage, and the contradictions that grow between that character and the fact that their objective is capitalist profit”.
The same developments have thrown “the ideological apparatus” into crisis. “The advance of science and technique, and the extension of culture to wide masses, have destroyed a number of dogmas”, and caused a crisis in the church, within which anti-capitalist tendencies are developing. Similarly, the scientific revolution introduced by post-war capitalism involved massive educational expansion. “Higher education is deprived by this of its character as an aristocratic privilege” and the universities are transformed into “a mirror of the conflicts existing in society”.
The family, too, “is in a period of profound transformation. This process ... began as the result of the increasing dehumanisatiori of life in the developed capitalist system”. The family is ‘no longer the cell that automatically reproduces traditional social relations.’
These changes in the universities and the family have had repercussions elsewhere. Already in France, Spain and Italy there are groups of junior judges and magistrates who campaign in defence of the independence of the judiciary, “an idea that in practice brings about a conflict between justice and the existing type of state power”.
These crises in the apparatus of ideological control create an entirely new situation for the revolutionary left. In the past, it was not possible to talk of taking ideological control over society, of winning “hegemony”, before state power had been taken. Now the sequence can be reversed. The left can, by winning over the “middle strata” who dominate many of the means of ideological control, create a “hegemonic block of the forces of labour and culture”.
The formation of this block will undermine the ruling class’s monopoly of force: “When the ideological apparatuses enter into crisis, the same crisis affects also the coercive state apparatus”. The starting point for the “democratisation of the state” resides “precisely in achieving the loss of hegemony by bougeois ideology over the ideological apparatus”.
But for this “democratisation” to be successful, the left will have to change many of its traditional attitudes. No longer should revolutionaries be negative towards the armed forces: they should attempt to relate to “the new sense of identity that is developing among the military”.
Carrillo spells out what he means. There has to be “an open fight for a type of army capable of taking on national defence ... Also necessary is a national industrial development that, in case of war, can assure the means of defence”. “The socialist and democratic forces have to pose a military policy ... more rational, more national, more attractive than that of the monopolistic oligarchic state”. Then a left-wing government can “win to itself the professional soldiers and ensure that the majority of them loyally support the new state power”.
A number of other things will have to be dropped on Carrillo’s strategy.
“This conception of the state and of the fight for democracy presupposes a renunciation of the idea, in its classic from, of a workers’ and peasants’ state; that is of a state created on a new plan, bringing to its offices the workers in the factories and the peasants working the land and sending to take their place the officials that until then worked in the offices”.
And if the Stalinist conception of a one-party state goes out of the window, so does the dictatorship of the proletariat, an idea that was valid in the past when the working class was a minority of the population, but not today when “the forces of labour and culture” are the overwhelming majority and can take power peacefully.
Complete State control of the economy is also rejected. According to Carrillo,
“the democratic road to socialism supposes a process of economic transformation distinct from what we consider the classic model. That is to say, it supposes the coexistence of public and private forms of property for a long period. In this phase ... of political and economic democracy ... which is not yet socialism, which is not either the domination of the state by monopoly capital, there is preserved the maximum of productive forces and social services already created, recognising the role represented by private initiative”.
There will be room in Carrillo’s socialism not only for private capitalism, but for the multinationals;
“A democratic and socialist Spain will have to take account of the realities ... of the internationalisation of the forces of production, of foreign investment and the multinationals ... and utilise them to facilitate the development of those sectors that are in the national interest”.
Finally, Carrillo makes it clear that “a democratic and socialist Spain” would do nothing to antagonise US imperialism, let alone side with the Russian bloc:
“We are not concerned with destabilising the present world equilibrium of forces, of passing from American influence to Soviet influence”.
 
The inevitability of civil war
Carrillo thus goes far further in his willingness to compromise with capitalism than does the Communist Party of Great Britain in the new draft of The British Road to Socialism. However Carrillo and the authors of the new draft share the same assumption – the necessity of a “left government” representing a “democratic stage” short of socialism. The difference lies in the detail in which Carrillo draws out from this assumption the logic of managing a capitalist “mixed economy” – the Common Market, the arms industry, the development of the armed forces, the preservation of private medicine, agreements with the multinationals.
However, while our British Eurocommunists follow Carrillo in laying great stress on “the ideological apparatuses”, they do so from quite a different standpoint. Carrillo argues that capitalist control over these apparatuses is being undermined as a result of economic developments. Indeed, the emphasis he places on “the law of human progress” and “the development of the forces of production and technology” is that of a crude, mechanical materialism – given the development of the material base everything else will fall into place, he seems to say.
By contrast, his British co-thinkers treat any discussion of the effects of the economic crisis upon workers’ struggles and consciousness as “economism”. For them the apparatus of ideological control has a life of its own, divorced from the economic and social forces at work in society.
One can speculate concerning the causes of this difference. Carrillo is the leader of a party which he believes can play a major role in bourgeois politics in Spain, so he stresses how the mechanical development of history is driving his way. The British Eurocommunists are members of a small, very unsuccessful reformist party, so they paint a picture of society totally dominated by bourgeois ideology, in which the left cannot hope to achieve many results. The difference is between two sorts of parliamentary cretinism, one optimistic, the other pessimistic.
The starting point of Carrillo’s analysis is far from completely wrong. Thirty years of capitalist boom have caused profound changes in the traditional means of ideological control. Many of the changes he chronicles have indeed taken place – the decline in the church, the expansion of higher education, the proletarianisation of many professionals and white-collar workers, the erosion of patriarchal ideology in the family. In the right circumstances, these changes can contribute to undermining the hold of the established ideology on sections of the army and the police. Carrillo is right to take note of these phenomena and his British co-thinkers are wrong to ignore them.
But it does not follow that the means of ideological control can be turned against the bourgeoisie, as Carrillo claims.
In the first place, the ideological apparatuses – teaching, the churches, the media, etc. – are organised along hierarchical lines, and controlled by small, highly privileged groups at the top which identify closely with the ruling class. So, while individual sections of these apparatuses may escape from ruling-class control from time to time, the main sections remain intact.
Moreover, Carrillo completely ignores a vital new development. The erosion of traditional means of ideological control like the church has been accompanied by, and is partly due to, the rise of new ideological apparatuses – the cinema, radio and, above all, television.
These new media tend to be organised along very tight and hierarchical lines – just look at the BBC. This does not prevent sections occasionally getting out of control (although usually the “highbrow” sections). But control of these apparatuses as a whole will remain firmly in the hands of the ruling class – unless and until there is real fight for power by rank-and-file workers within them.
The importance of the mass media for the ruling class explains the bitterness and tenacity with which the Portuguese bourgeoisie fought to regain control of radio and television when the fall of fascism seemed, briefly, to deliver these media into the hands of the left. In Chile, the ruling class continued to control the majority of the radio and television channels and the big newspaper combines under Popular Unity, and the media proved to be a vital weapon the struggle to overthrow the Allende government.
There is only one way in which the working class will win control of the Daily Express and the BBC, and that is for revolutionaries to lead rank-and-file media workers in a physical fight to take over these media. Workers’ control of the media will be opposed not merely by the proprietors and the top highly privileged ranks of media personnel, but by the capitalist state – the police, the courts and, if necessary, the army. Carrillo caught in a contradiction – He says the state apparatus can be won over once the left control the BBC and the Daily Express. But to control the BBC and the Daily Express it will first be necessary to neutralise the courts and the repressive foces of the state.
If Carrillo ignores the mechanisms by which the ruling class control the “ideological apparatuses”, the problem is even more serious when he comes to deal with “the coercive state apparatus”. The armed forces and the police in every advanced capitalist country are organised along lines which seek to ensure the acceptance of ruling-class ideas not only by the officer corps but also even by the rank and file of elite units like the SAS, the paratroops and the Special Patrol Group. The methods of control are increasingly sophisticated, with enormous efforts being put into the ideological preparation of recruits to positions enjoying even limited control over firepower.
It does not follow that the police and the armed forces will be left untouched by any deep social crisis. But some sections will be much less affected by the resulting ideological turmoil than others. While whole sections of the rank and file and even some officers will identify with “the process of transformation”, the majority of officers and considerable groups of the rank and file, especially in elite units, will be increasingly hostile.
Carrillo goes halfway towards recognising this fact when he writes that “a correct policy can win for democracy an important part of the forces of public order” (my emphasis – CH). If you win over only part of the armed forces, then presumably another part is not won over and is therefore hostile.
But Carrillo refuses to consider the conclusion which follows from recognition of this fact. The armed forces are, by definition, armed. They are also based on the principle of the lower ranks giving unquestioning obedience to their superiors, who are in turn integrated into the ruling class. The “part” of the armed forces which has not been “won over to democracy” will deal with the “part” that has, the moment the balance offered allows it. Such a moment will be one where a downturn in the struggle leaves the working-class movement exposed to the reactionary sections of the armed forces. Such a moment occurred in Chile in the autumn of 1973: the forces of the right, which had not felt strong enough to act when the Popular Unity came to power in 1970, sensed that support was falling away from the left, however temporarily and that they could take to the offensive. They took care to deal with those elements within the ranks of the armed forces that supported Popular Unity, like the sailors in Valparaiso, before they moved against the government.
A split within the armed forces, in which “part” comes over to the working class is not an alternative to armed struggle: it is the precipitating factor which makes armed struggle inevitable. Ideological struggle must raise the question of whose ideas command a monopoly of armed force. And that is a question which can be settled only by the sword, not the pen.
One soldier who goes over to the workers will be disciplined, even shot, by his superiors. If the majority of the soldiers and some of their officers go over to the workers, they must be prepared to use force to stop themselves being disciplined by the rest of the armed forces, which remains loyal to the ruling class.
That is why every successful revolutionary in history has had to come to the conclusion that civil war is inevitable. The only way to ensure a relatively peaceful seizure of power is to be prepared to prosecute that civil war with the utmost determination, so as to throw the enemy onto the defensive and to disarm them before they have time to mobilise fully. To repeat: it is no good “winning over” part of the armed forces, unless you use that part, in conjunction with armed workers, to wage civil war in order to disarm the rest.
To use the Portuguese example again: the forces used by the ruling class to regain control of the army and the media on November 25 1975 were much inferior in men and firepower to the forces at the disposal of the left. But most of the ‘left’ regiments, in particular those controlled by the Communist Party remained in their barracks until they were disarmed and their officers arrested.
 
Workers’ democracy and bourgeois democracy
WHETHER the left has a majority of seats in Parliament does not alter this situation in the slightest. Not only is it extremely dangerous to assume that this would prevent the top officers from staging a coup – Carrillo, who experienced Franco’s rising against the democratically elected Popular Front government in 1936 ought to know this better than most – but it distorts the way in which revolutionary consciousness develops.
Carrillo argues as if winning a general election in the course of a mass upsurge of the workers’ movement were a necessary condition for the transition to socialism. But the essence of Marxism is the understanding that it is through activity and conflict that workers’ ideas become open to change. It is not the superiority of the means of propaganda at our disposal that makes us believe that we can win a majority of workers to socialism – it is the fact that workers do, if only occasionally, become involved in immense struggles that begin to unite the class in practice. When this happens, workers go through practical experiences which knit in with Marxist ideas: they begin to feel that they collectively, as a class, can take control of their futures. The only hope for Marxists lies in building on these experiences.
But you cannot build on them if you tell workers to abandon their mass struggles for a form of politics that is based on passivity, removal from struggle and fragmentation of the class. Yet this is precisely the form of politics involved in bourgois democracy.
It is well-know that in strikes the employers always prefer workers to vote in secret postal ballots at home rather than at mass meetings. At home each worker is cut off from his or her fellow workers, subject to the maximum pressure from the media, most likely to regard himself or herself as an individual citizen, not part of a collectivity struggling for control over the means of livelihood.
The parliamentary system is the secret ballot writ large. It weakens and dilutes the class consciousness that develops in the course of mass struggles. The logic of Carrillo’s position is to tell workers who are seizing control of industry, fighting to control the content of the media, beginning to organise joint armed committees with the rank and file of the armed forces, to abandon all these efforts and wait for an election to “legitimise” the socialist transformation. Such a course is fatal.
In the great French revolution, the Jacobins insisted that delay in attacking the reactionary forces would be fatal; only “audacity, audacity and still more audacity” could guarantee victory. Marx considered the greatest mistake of the Paris Commune of 1871 to be its failure to march on the reactionary forces in gathering in Versailles while elections were organised in Paris. In September 1917 Lenin insisted that if the Bolsheviks waited for elections to the Constituent Assembly before seizing power the revolution would be drowned in blood.
Why? Because a revolution is also a war. When the turning point comes in a battle any further delay will lead to a defeat. Delay sows demoralisation in your own forces, and encourages wavering elements to side with the enemy, while sharpening resolve within the ranks of the enemy. Delaying the seizure of power until it can be legitimated by elections will give the reactionary forces time to reimpose their hegemony.
 
Stalinism and Anti-Stalinism
THERE is nothing terribly original about Carrillo’s ideas. Social-democratic theoreticians having been producing much the same arguments for many years. And indeed Carrillo indicates his hopes for the fusion of the Communist and social-democratic parties. But he is well aware that reconciliation with the social democrats is impossible unless the Communists renounce their past allegiance to Moscow. This leads him to devote a section of his book to ideas which, according to some, represent a break with Stalinism. Not surprisingly, it is this section that seems to have caused the most anger in the Russian bureaucracy.
Indeed, at one level, Carrillo’s critique of the Eastern European states is extremely radical. He begins by insisting that the state that exists in Russia today is quite different from the workers’ state described in Lenin’s The State and Revolution. It has a “bureaucracy with greater privileges than a worker’s wage which has made itself virtually as irremoveable as the functionaries of a capitalist state”. This state is “evidently not a bourgeois state, but neither is it yet the working class organised as a ruling class, it is not yet an authentic workers’ democracy”.
Indeed, Carrillo says that Stalinism possessed some of the “formal” characteristics “similar to those of a fascist dictatorship ... although the essence of the Soviet social regime was fundamentally opposed to fascism”. Moreover, Krushchev did not succeed in “transforming the state apparatus created under Stalin”.
Carrillo defines the Soviet state as “intermediate between the capitalist state and the authentic socialist state in the same way that the centralised monarchies were between feudal society and modern capitalist parliamentary democracies”. He even suggests that this state may not be open to peaceful reform:
“the question that arises today is whether the very structures of this state have not converted themselves, at least in part, into an obstacle to the evolution of socialism, whether the state as it exists is not a brake on the development of an authentic workers’ democracy and the material development of the country”.
All this makes one wonder if this veteran anti-Trotskyist had taken his ideas from Trotsky’s The Revolution Betrayed. In one respect, indeed, Carrillo’s analysis is superior to Trotsky’s. He does not locate the origins of Stalinism in the unequal distribution of wealth after the civil war, as Trotsky does, but in the enforced accumulation of the means of production “because of capitalist encirclement”. Moreover, today “the arms race acts objectively to accentuate the element offered in the Soviet state”. This proves “the impossibility of constructing full socialism in one country unless this regime also triumphs in a series of advanced countries”.
But Carrillo does not draw revolutionary conclusions from this radical analysis of the Soviet bloc. Instead, he uses it to justify his moderation. His insistence, against Stalin, that it is impossible to cut off a single country from the capitalist world economy is used to justify his acceptance of the multinationals in Spain. The impossibility of completing the construction of socialism in one country is an excuse to put off indefinitely the establishment of a socialist regime that will begin that construction and seek to spread the revolution other to other countries.
Trotsky was a revolutionary critic of Stalinism who still believed, wrongly, that the Russian bureaucracy was the heir to the October revolution. Carrillo is a reformist, social-democratic critic of Stalinism who wishes to repudiate the lessons of October, for which Trotsky fought. The difference between them emerges in their practical conclusions. Even though the his critique of Stalinism was less radical that Carrillo’s, Trotsky called for a revolution to overthrow the bureaucracy. Forty years later, despite the experiences of Berlin, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland, Carrillo still believes that change will be initiated by the ruling parties in the eastern bloc. Even his anti-Stalinism is reformist.
The right-wing motivation of Carrillo’s critique of Stalinism is revealed most clearly by his discussion of the Spanish civil war. In order to allay any fears that the Spanish Communist Party has any intention of infringing bourgeois-democratic norms, Carrillo admits some of its past errors – especially of the accusation in the 1930s and 1940s that Trotskyists were fascists and the justification of the murder in 1937 of Andres Nin, leader of the anti-Stalinist POUM.
Having washed the blood off his hands, Carrillo then goes on to justify the policies that caused it to be spilt in the first place. He boasts of the moderation of the Spanish Communist Party during the civil war. To do this he has to repeat some of the old lies. For instance, he claims that the “press was free”, although this freedom, extended to the bourgeois papers but not to the proletarian papers run by the POUM and the Anarchists, which were censored. Moreover, he claims that the repression of the POUM and the Anarchists in 1937 was necessary because they had attempted a “putsch” against the government of Largo Caballero. Yet he omits to mention that the repression was only introduced fully after Caballero along with the left Socialists and Anarchists had been driven from office for opposing the repression.
The standard liberal history of the civil war describes a cabinet meeting on May 13 1937 at which the Communist ministers
“proposed the punishment of those responsible for the May Days [clashes in Barcelona between the Communist-controlled police and the Anarchist and POUM militias during May 1937 – CH], the POUM and the CNT [the Anarchist trade unions – CH] ... Largo Caballero called the communists “liars and calumniators” and said that he was above all, a worker, who would not dissolve a brotherhood of workers, unless there were proofs against them.” [2]
The following day the government fell, to be replaced by a coalition of the Communists, the right-wing Socialists and the bourgeois republicans which proceeded to wipe out the POUM as an organised force. Contrary to Carrillo’s claim, the repression was not carried through by “legal tribunals”. When those POUM leaders who had not been murdered by Stalin’s secret police in prison were finally brought to trial in October 1938,
“the case against them collapsed ... The judgement found the POUM to be true socialists, and absolved them of treason and espionage.” [3]
So much for Carrillo’s alleged willingness to criticise his party’s past. Compare this sorry attempt to justify the crimes committed during the civil war with these words of Fernando Claudin, another leader of the Spanish Communist Party, whom Carrillo expelled in 1965:
“For my part I will only add that the repression of the POUM and especially the vile murder of Andres Nin, constitute the blackest page in the history of the PCE, which acted as accomplice in a crime committed by Stalin’s secret service. We Spanish Communists were undoubtedly put out of our right minds, like all the world’s Communists at this time and for a long time after, by the monstrous lies that were fabricated in Moscow. This, however, does not rid us of our historical responsibility.” [4]
Carrillo’s anti-Stalinism is skin-deep, a pose adopted to ingratiate himself to Western liberals and social-democrats. It reflects nothing but his desire to prove the moderation of the social-democratic road to socialism charted in this book.
 
Notes
1. All quotations are from S. Carrillo, “Eurocommunismo” e il Estado, Madrid 1977.
2. H. Thomas, The Spanish Civil War (revised edition), Harmondsworth 1977, pp.663-4.
3. Ibid., pp. 865-6.
4. F. Claudin, The Communist Movement: From Comintern to Cominform, Harmondsworth 1975, p.711.



THE PORTUGUESE bourgeoisie has learnt over the last six months that it is one thing to get rid of a government that no longer accords with your needs. It is another to ensure the substitution of a stable alternative.
The coup which overthrew the Caetano regime in April was the work of the Armed Forces Movement (MFA), constituted by 400 middle ranking officers. But its success depended on the feeling within the most powerful sections of business and among the upper ranks in the forces that Caetano’s government was too inflexible to deal with the main problems facing Portuguese capitalism. When it came to the crunch, no substantial section of society was willing to side with the old regime.
The most important problem was that of the African colonies. Portugal’s army was facing defeat in Guinea and was bogged down in endless wars in Mozambique and Angola. The cost was eating up nearly half the government budget. Yet for the most advanced sections of big business Guinea and Mozambique at least were a declining asset. In the last ten years the proportion of Portugal’s exports bought by the colonies had declined from 25 per cent to 11.3 per cent, while Portuguese sales to Europe had increased from 49 per cent to 65 per cent. It was hardly surprising that people in high places began to ask themselves whether they could not replace colonial rule by indigenous rule, while keeping in their own hands the main economic wealth of these countries – as Britain had in Zambia, Kenya, Nigeria and so on.
Further tipping the balance against Caetano was the economic condition of Portugal itself. The most backward capitalism in Europe was likely to be hardest hit by the developing world crisis. Inflation was already greater than anywhere else apart from Greece: estimates suggest it had reached 30 per cent a year by March. The inevitable by-product was continual unrest in industry which the crudest repression could not stop.
But the destruction of the old regime required more than the replacement of one or two men at the top. Throughout the bureaucracy of the state, the armed forces and the police were individuals who owed their advancement to the methods of Caetano and his predecessor, Salazar. The officers of the Armed Forces Movement feared that unless these were purged, they would regroup and reverse the coup. The officers might then find themselves on the receiving end of the torture of which the secret police were notorious practitioners.
The moment the purging began, however, it took on a life of its own. The repressive bonds that had tied down the rest of Portuguese society for nearly fifty years snapped. In the factories, in the media, on the streets, workers began to turn against those who had inflicted so many injuries on them in the past. The army was forced to take secret policemen into protective custody before they were lynched. Army officers were called to the factories to negotiate an end to strikes for the dismissal of fascist managers. In virtually every industry there were struggles for massive wage increases.
The bourgeouisie found that a movement aimed initially to rationalise its rule had got out of hand. From singing about ‘freedon’ and ‘unity’ in May it began to scream about anarchy, until a significant sector of it backed the abortive right wing coup in September. The failure of the coup and the fall of Spinola has, however, aggravated its problems, and ensured that the months ahead in Portugal will be very stormy indeed.
 
The Provisional Government
SPINOLA was the man who above all represented the interest of big business in the April events. His book advocating a neo-colonialist solution to the African wars was published by the biggest of the monopolies, CUF, and his first government was closely linked to such interests. The first prime minister, Palma Carlos, was well known for his ties with the main sections of big business.
However, it was clear that a government of the ‘centre’ alone – that is of those bourgeois politicians who had only moved into opposition to Caetano a year or two before the coup – would not work. The main popular opposition to the Salazar and Caetano regimes had been led by the Communist Party and, to a lesser extent by the individuals who made up the Socialist Party. The destruction of the right wing organisations after the coup left these in a very powerful position. If they gave their support to the growing wave of industrial unrest, the situation for the ruling class would be grave indeed. The Portuguese bourgeoisie decided it was better to put them in the government so as to be able to use them to hold in check the strike movement.
The situation was made even more complex by the fact that the armed forces were very much divided among themselves. The senior officers who ran the Junta had, by and large, risen to their present positions by currying favour with the Salazar and Caetano regimes. Spinola himself had identified sufficiently with Salazar’s fascist goals to fight for Franco in the Spanish civil war and for Hitler on the Russian front.
But the Junta had not made the coup d’etat. It had only benefitted from its outcome. The main force in carrying through the coup had been the middle rank officers of the Armed Forces Movement. Their attitudes and goals were by no means identical to those of the generals.
Among the junior officers, a large number were conscripts. In the Portuguese armed forces, anyone who is conscripted after being a student is enrolled as an officer (unless he has committed some political or criminal offence). Most of the ex-students resented being dragged off to fight in a futile war in Africa and many continued to retain some of the left wing ideas picked up in their student days.
More significant, however, was the development of discontent among career officers. These too came to dislike tour of duty after tour of duty in remote parts of the colonies, fighting an unwinnable war, as they saw it, on behalf of privileged groups of white settlers who had much higher living standards than themselves. Their resentment led to organisation against the regime when it became clear that the war was threatening their own career prospects. The turning point for many was a proposal about a year ago to change the training programme for officers which they saw as threatening the established career structure through ‘dilution’.
The middle rank officers on the co-ordinating committee of the Armed Forced Movement found that their goal of breaking the hold of the old political elite and ending the African wars could not be guaranteed merely by relying on the generals of the Junta. They maintained their own organisation, the co-ordinating committee of the MFA, to act as a watchdog on the Junta, to ensure that the supporters of Caetano were removed from positions of power in industry, the media and the state bureaucracy, and to prevent any reversion to Caetano’s policies in Africa.
The overall result was that Portugal emerged from the coup with at least three centres of power: the Junta, the Provisional government and the co-ordinating committee of the MFA.
Spinola tried to reconcile these different forces by the establishment of a new organ, the Council of State, made up of equal numbers of representatives of the Junta, the MFA and civilians appointed by Spinola. This was given the power of having to approve all governmental decrees and new laws.
However, the new arrangement never worked perfectly. The attempts by the generals to restrict the scope of the purge of the old regime led to clashes with the MFA. In one incident, for instance, the generals arrested an officer who refused to stop examining secret files on the connection between the PIDE (the fascist secret police) and the CIA; representatives of the MFA went to the barracks and released him.
The tensions within the regime were aggravated by the unwillingness of Spinola and the ‘centre’ politicians to countenance immediate evacuation from the colonies. They wanted to keep the wars going until they could impose terms for independence that would provide very strong safeguards for Portuguese business and settler interests. The negotiations over the future of Guinea – where the Portuguese army was already clearly defeated – dragged on for three months without any result, and no progress at all was made with dealing with the problems of Mozambique and Angola.
Furthermore, the symptons of economic crisis within Portugal itself grew worse. As a strike wave developed, encompassing virtually every group of workers, this posed more and more urgent questions. Those sections of big business who had backed the April coup now began to demand stringent measures to prevent ‘chaos’.
 
The First Government Crisis
EARLY IN JULY, the generals and the politicians of the ‘centre’ made their first attempt to stop things getting out of hand. Palma Carlos, the prime minister, resigned, complaining of ‘disorder in the streets, social indiscipline, agitation in the newspapers and the invasion of public buildings by government functionaries’. His aim was to precipitate a governmental crisis which would strengthen the hands of the generals and the ‘centre’. But the MFA was not prepared to tolerate such an outcome – particularly since the generals and the centre showed no signs of solving the African problem.
Instead, it was many of the representatives of the centre who left the government to be replaced by members of the MFA itself.
This outcome to the crisis was not ideal to Portuguese big business. But it did seem to have certain advantages. During the time span of the first Provisional government, the young officers had immense prestige and considerable power, but little responsibility for ensuring the efficient operation of Portuguese capitalism. It was felt that as a result, many of their actions – in purging former fascists or in forcing employers to settle strikes on terms fairly favourable to the workers – were damaging the long term prospects of the ruling class.
It was hoped that putting the leaders of the MFA in government would make them change their ways. They were put in a similar situation to that which has faced generations of Social Democratic leaders: finding that capitalism can only be run efficiently by increasing repression against workers.
The second Provisional government did begin to fulfil some of the hopes of the ruling class. It replaced the long drawn out negotiations over the future of Guinea by a grant of immediate independence and moved swiftly towards the formation of a Frelimo dominated government in Mozambique. Portuguese capitalism may not have been overjoyed at the speed of change in the colonies, which weakened the chances of a neo-colonialist outcome, but it recognised that ending the African war was the only way to overcome the split in the army between the generals and the middle ranking officers. It seemed prepared to sacrifice Guinea and Mozambique if that was the price of keeping Portugal.
In Portugal itself, the new government showed itself willing to endorse measures aimed at restoring order and business confidence. It backed a press law which banned ‘ideological aggression’ against the armed forces and which led to fines on a number of papers, the suspending of issues of the Lisbon evening papers and the banning of the Maoist paper Luta Popular.
The Labour Law which it accepted was even more repressive. Despite the claim that it legalised strikes for the first time for 40 years, it actually put restrictions on them which were much more severe than those in the Industrial Relations Act of the British Tory government. The law bans strikes before a collective contract has run out; when a strike by a small section of a firm can close the rest; unless 30 days of negotiations have taken place after the submission of the claim; unless the strike is either officially backed by the union or voted for by 50 per cent of the workers of the whole firm in a secret ballot. It also bans occupations and provides for fines of up to £170 for individuals who organise strike meetings without complying with its terms.
The preparedness of the MFA to support the economic interests of the ruling class was shown in another way as well. It was a special section of the army, set up by the MFA, to defend its interests, the Continental Operations Command (Copcon), which moved against the postal workers’ strike at the end of June and more recently against strikes in the Portuguese airline, TAP, the Jornal do Comercio and the demonstrations of shipyard workers from the huge Lisnave yards.
The commander of Copcon, Saraiva de Carvalho, has expressed the attitude of the leaders of the MFA:
‘One case in which the intervention of Copcon was requested was that of the strike at the CTT (post office). The government felt itself powerless to resolve the situation ... We elaborated a plan that would permit the functioning of all machines of the CTT that were stopped ... We had no intention of repression ... We were going to isolate CTT buildings and ask the workers whether they would return to work and end a strike that was doing so much damage to the population. If the workers did not give up the strike, then we would intervene as best we could ...’
When two conscript officers, Marvao and Anjos, took a different view of their role and refused to have anything to do with breaking the strike, they were arrested and dragged away to the military prison of Trafaria, where they were locked up alongside the police thugs of the Caetano regime.
 
The Left Parties
DURING BOTH the first and the second provisional governments, the attempts of the bourgeoisie to stabilise its rule received support in practice from the main left wing parties, the Communist Party and the Socialist Party.
The leaders of the left parties argued vehemently with the workers that nothing should be done that might upset Portuguese capitalism. As the leader of the Communist Party said in a speech at Sacavem in June:
‘In the present political conditions, the demands put forward by the workers must be realistic, must not be at a level which cannot be born by the enterprises or by the national economy,’
The same line is put by the Intersindical (the Portuguese TUC) which it very much influences. Antero Martins, as the delegate of the Bank Workers’ Union expressed the majority view of the Intersindical:
‘In most cases the Intersindical takes action with the aim of avoiding big groups going on strike, while with groups that are already on strike it discusses the problem and, taking any opportunity, encourages a return to work.’
Such views have not been confined to words. They have repeatedly been translated into action. When the first big strikes took place after 25 April, the CP exerted all its efforts to get them called off.
In the weeks which followed every major industry was hit by strikes and occupations. The CP did not only order its own militants to argue against strike action: it went further and spread various slanders, arguing that strikes of bakers and transport workers in Lisbon were fermented by ‘fascists’. When 97 per cent of Portugal’s postal workers struck, the CP claimed that the right was once again behind the strike and that the committee running the strike was unrepresentative. It even went so far as to organise meetings on street corners and demonstrations outside the post offices against the strike.
The Lisbon committee of the Party issued a statement:
‘With regard to the strike of the CTT (the post office) the Portuguese Communist Party must alert the workers and the people of Portugal to the political and social implications of the event, in the context of the complex situation that our country is going through. The PCP feels equally that it must alert the workers of the CTT to the manoeuvres of those who, exploiting the just aspirations of the workers, put forward demagogic and unrealisable demands (such as that for the 35 hour week), incompatible with the actual condition of the national economy.’
Such propaganda by the CP was of course joined in by those who had always been opposed to strikes – whether under Caetano or under Spinola. The confusion produced was a necessary precondition for the use of troops against strikers.
More recently, the CP expressed disapproval of the long strike by the workers on the Lisbon daily, Jornal do Comercio. As one of the strikers told the weekly paper Expresso:
‘The CP does not condemn the aims of our strike, but the time set for the strike, maintaining that we should first exhaust all the other forms of struggle. But such advice is useless, because it displays an enormous ignorance of our struggle.’
When the other dailies in Lisbon struck for a day in sympathy, the CP opposed the action. And, again, the regime was able to use troops against the workers.
The other ‘left’ political party in the government is the Socialist Party. It is not as disciplined or monolithic as the CP. It only recently came into being and has been more a collection of leaders than an organisation. It contains within it at least one organised faction that is to the left of the CP. But the leadership is firmly along the reformist road, although prepared to tolerate the left factions if this enables it to build an electoral base for the party.
The best known leader of the Party, Mario Soares, addressed a NATO ministerial meeting in June:
‘We are here representing a Portugal that is fully integrated into the values that are fundamental to our alliance ... Our permanence in the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, our fidelity to the traditional alliances of Portugal is expressly reiterated by the high authorities of my country ...’.
In September he told the International Herald Tribune that he looked ‘to the United States for economic aid’ and ‘to help stabilise democracy in Portugal ... A majority of the people are for the United States.’ The socialist minister of information (in the first Provisional government) was responsible for imposing fines under the press law on a number of papers – including the one he had previously edited himself.
Such behaviour of the left parties, particularly the CP, had caused massive confusion among their followers. They do not understand why the Party which for years was the most militant in the economic struggle under Salazar and Caetano should now be abandoning the struggle, even though inflation is the highest in Europe and many of the same bosses are in charge. The Party is denouncing as ‘unrealistic’ the same minimum wage demand it itself raised when in opposition a year ago – when prices were 30 per cent lower.
The strike committees or delegates leading the different strikes repeatedly refer to those ‘who we would expect to support us but aren’t’. As members of the Timex committee told the paper Comercio do Funchal,
‘at the ministry of labour (the minister was then in the CP) we did not find the understanding we would have expected from an organisation that is supposed to look after the interests of the workers. On the contrary, we found that they are holding back the initiative of the workers and were helping the employing class.’
 
The Argument of the Left
THE COMMUNIST PARTY has tried to justify its stand by arguing that workers have to see the political struggle against ‘fascism’ as the first priority and not just press for money. To press for their claims in full, it argues, would be to produce economic pressures which many small firms could not afford, although the monopolies could. The small firms would be forced into mergers with the monopolies so as to avoid bankruptcy, the power of the monopolies would increase and unemployment would rise.
The argument is doubly wrong. It assumes that somehow the preservation of small scale firms, paying low wages is in workers’ interests. Yet there is no reason why any worker should prefer one boss rather than another. More importantly, it also assumes that there is no alternative to the monopolies buying up bankrupt firms and sacking workers. But there is, of course. It is for the workers themselves to struggle to prevent closure of factories, demanding that the government protects their jobs and wage levels.
The CP argument really amounts to saying that neither the workers nor the government (of which it is part) can prevent capitalism causing unemployment. Its conclusion seems virtually identical to that of James Callaghan when he told the TUC that the only alternative to the low wages embodied in the social contract was high unemployment.
The other argument used, that the fight should be against ‘fascism’, not over wages, is just as bad. The reason why a right wing regime like that of Salazar and Caetano could survive for so long was that, although sections of workers engaged in heroic struggles against it, others were inculcated with age old habits of submissiveness, and felt that it was beyond their power to change the status quo.
What shifts such workers from their lethargy is not the ‘political fight against fascism’ in the abstract. It is the very concrete demonstration that political changes can affect material conditions.
For the advanced workers of Portugal, 25 April was the realisation of a long awaited dream. For the relatively backward workers on the other hand, what mattered was not 25 April, but the economic gains that were possible as a result of the struggles it unleashed. Participation in these struggles, merely ‘economic’ as they might have been, represented the first step .towards the political awakening of the backward sections of the class. Any party which responds to such struggles by telling their participants to return to work and ‘fight fascism’ is telling them to stay asleep politically.
Yet when it comes to real physical battles left and right, the left needs the support of a much wider group of workers than those who normally take an interest in ‘politics’. Every single worker has to feel that he has a material stake in the outcome. The only way to ensure this is to encourage the economic class struggle as a complement to the political struggle, not as somehow opposed to it.
The proof of the pudding in Portugal has been in the eating. The first workers to demonstrate on the streets against the attempted rightist coup were those whose struggle have been criticised by the CP and attacked by the army in recent weeks: the Lisnave shipyard workers, the TAP maintenance staff, the Jornal do Comercio workers and the same postal workers who were alleged by the CP a few weeks ago to be led by ‘reactionaries’.
 
Prelude to the Putsch
YET DESPITE the support of the left parties and the willingness of the MFA to use limited repression, the Portuguese bourgoisie failed in its attempts to hold back the workers’ movement. After a lull in late July and early August, a new wave of strikes and occupations developed, with strikes in textiles, among agricultural workers, in the shipyards, at TAP, on the daily paper Jornal do Comercio. In the Lisbon area at least these strikes were much more political than previously. When the Lisnave workers demonstrated for the purging of fascists from their management, their slogans included ‘opposition to the labour law, support for the struggles at TAP, Jornal do Comercio, Siderurgia and Texmales, and support for the Armed Forces so long as they support the struggle of the oppressed and exploited classes against the oppressing and exploiting classes.’
What clearly was developing was a movement among workers which the Communist Party could no longer control. Workers might feel enormous respect for the role the CP had played in maintaining for decades virtually the only organised resistance to the Salazar regime. But they could also see with their own eyes the former fascists still in power in the factories and feel the effects of inflation on their own pockets.
Such a development itself was enough to worry the bourgeoisie. But there were other factors at work as well, which turned this worry into complete panic among sections of big business and certain generals.
One was the complete failure of the ‘centre’ to develop as a political force capable of resisting the growing strength of the workers’ organisations. While the CP could not prevent the development of independent working class activity to the left of it, it did predominate in large parts of the country compared with the political parties to the right of it. Big business began to feel that the only possible counterweight lay with those political forces it itself had dismissed only five months before – the former members of Caetano’s political apparatus.
Finally, there was the unresolved problem of Africa. The handing over of power to Frelimo produced fear within the ruling class that the government would allow a potentially very rich Angola to slip out of Portugal’s grasp.
Those industrialists like the Champalimaud family who had welcomed the coup in April, now began to denounce in the bitterest terms the provisional government. It was not a far cry from denounciation to organised opposition.
Spinola gave expression to this change of mood within the ruling class. He had invited Communists into his government in May so as to control the popular movement. Now he venomously criticised the representatives of the left parties in the privacy of the council of state and denounced unnamed ‘political forces’ in public. He hinted that he opposed the handing of Mozambique over to Frelimo and called for the ‘silent majority’ who opposed ‘anarchy’ to take action.
The organisation leading to the abortive putsch seems to have been crude in the extreme. Leading industrialists, such as representatives of Champalimaud, the Banco Spirito Santo and Mabor, met together with a few of the generals, including at least three who were in the Junta, and leading former supporters of Caetano. Spinola made his ‘silent majority’ speech and the industrialists and right wing politicians tried to mobilise behind it on the streets. Groups of fascists were supplied with arms.
The aim seems to have been to give the impression of mass popular opposition to the left, culminating in a pro-Spinola march which was intended to be 300,000 strong. The arms were not meant to enable the fascists themselves to take power, but to create such disorder as to give the generals an excuse to intervene, attacking the left and re-establishing ‘order’.
Yet despite the crudeness of the scheme, it was not as far-fetched as it might seem. In terms of the struggle between the rival factions within the state machine itself, the right nearly won.
The demonstration was called for Saturday 28 September. All that morning the leaders of the MFA begged Spinola to call it off. He ignored them and kept them in a state of virtual arrest in the presidential palace, from where they could not move their units of troops against the right. For several crucial hours Copcon was paralysed. Meanwhile, troops commanded by Spinola supporters were operating. The two ministries directly under the control of pro-Spinola officers, the defence ministry and the ministry of communications, prevented the appearance of all newspapers and put an armed guard on the radio stations.
However, the one thing missing from the calculations of the generals was the reaction of the mass of workers. No doubt they were lulled into a sense of false security by the willingness of the main workers’ parties to sacrifice themselves. But this time the future of the left parties themselves was at stake, and they knew from Spinola’s previous outbursts at the Council of State what he had in mind.
The evening before the rally was due to take place, a number of unions came out with calls for opposition to it. The Communist controlled Intersindical called upon the people to be ‘vigilant’. The railway union went further and instructed its members to refuse to man special trains carrying rightists to Lisbon and to search other trains for them. It called upon the coach drivers’ union to do the same, with the result that only two coach loads of demonstrators ever left for Lisbon.
The Popular Democratic Movement – the resistance organisation under Caetano that links the CP, the Socialist Party, one of the centre parties, the PPD, and the non-governmental Movement of the Socialist left – began to set up road blocks throughout the country.
At the same time, representatives of a number of small groups of the revolutionary left met together. They decided to assist in the organisation of road blocks and barricades and, more significantly, to call for a demonstration in the centre of Lisbon to clash with the rightist demonstration. Representatives of workers from the most militant plants in Lisbon – TAP, Lisnave, CTT (postal workers), Standard Electric, Jornal do Comercio – had decided on the same approach and the two demonstrations were merged. What began as a demonstration 10,000 strong soon grew until it was at least 40,000 strong.
Such a movement of workers did not fail to penetrate the barrack walls. Those officers backing the rightist line began to find themselves isolated. Soldiers began to join civilians on the barricades, despite broadcasts from Spinola’s supporters ordering removal of the road blocks.
The mass mobilisation on the streets shifted the balance within the army command from Spinola to the MFA. Spinola made one last desperate bid for the Council of State to grant him dictatorial power, and then called off the rally. The MFA forces moved into action at long last, taking control over the radio stations from the right and searching the city for anyone who might have been associated with the coup plans.
 
Prospects
IT WOULD be wrong to draw from the failure of the September coup the conclusion that the right wing in Portugal is finished. It is true that sections of the ruling class worked themselves up into such a state of frenzy that they did not make the most elementary calculations before moving into action. Fortified by its economic victories of recent months, the working class felt immensely strong. To break that strength did not require one demonstration, but a long drawn out war of attrition aimed at demoralising significant layers of the class. This is a war that has not yet been waged in Portugal.
Its miscalculations have weakened the bourgeoisie’s hold on the situation even more. The 200 people arrested for involvement in the putsch reads like a ‘Who’s Who’ of the Portuguese ruling class. But it still has considerable reserves of strength. One of these remains, despite everything, the armed forces themselves. The MFA has been able to win out in the confrontations so far. But it does not control by any means the majority of Portugal’s armed forces. It only has 400-700 members, out of a total number of career officers of more than 10,000. Its strength lies partly in the key positions it occupies and partly in the sympathy other officers feel for its ideas about ending the African wars. However, it does not dare put its military strength to the test. Significantly having removed Spinola it made one of his old friends, Costa Gomes, president so as to neutralise hostility to its power among sections of the army. It was Gomes, for instance, who went to the troops at Valdes do Rainha to prevent them marching on Lisbon in support of Spinola.
Yet Gomes is by no means a radical. He was a secretary of state for the army under Salazar a former commander of the National Republican Guard (one of the pillars of the Salazar and Caetano regimes) and commander in chief of Caetano’s forces in Angola. Since his accession to the presidency he has met privately with Spinola and has publicly expressed his admiration for his predecessor.
There is no doubt that in the period ahead Gomes will try and succeed where Spinola failed, in uniting the army behind the ruling class and stabilising bourgeois rule.
He will be aided by the fact that the Portuguese working class, which played the key role in countering the putsch, has still not developed independent class organs capable of giving permanent expression to its power. Significantly, the reaction of the Communist and Socialist Parties after the coup was to organise, in collaboration with Gomes and the confederation of industry, a ‘national day of labour’, as if the main problem is merely to produce more, not to fight over who controls production.
In the Lisbon area key groups of workers have moved beyond the reformism of the Communist and Socialist Parties, as was shown by their independent initiative during the coup. But it would be wrong to underestimate the continuing influence of the reformist parties throughout the country at large. And even in Lisbon links between the different groups of militant workers are at a most embryonic level.
In one locality only, Banheira, was a popular militia formed as workers disarmed the National Guard. Marines were sent to disarm the militia but refused to do so.
Within the armed forces, there was clearly rank and file action against reactionary officers during the putsch. But there too there seems to be no permanent organisation of the rank and file, as opposed to the MFA. And the officers of the MFA are still playing the conventional military game, seeing their powers as lying in the maintenance of the conventional military hierarchy in the lower ranks of the armed forces, if not at the very top.
The defeat of the putsch showed the power of Portugal’s workers. But it is worth recalling that in Chile, the right wing tried to overturn the Allende government three times before it finally achieved success. In Portugal, the splits in the armed forces and the freshness of the memory of fascism in the consciousness of the population will make its task more difficult. But it can succeed in Portugal too, eventually, unless the working class develops its own, independent forms of class wide organisation, led by a coherent revolutionary leadership.
 



Consciencism
Kwame Nkrumah
Heinemann, 12s 6d.
The subtitle of this book is Philosophy and ideology for decolonisation and development with particular reference to the African revolution. It is a conscious attempt to give a unified view of reality that is at the same time an ideology – a weapon in struggle. For this reason it moves from an emphasis on purely philosophical questions in the first few chapters to an attempted evaluation of the present situation of African society on the basis of this view of reality.
Unfortunately the purely philosophical questions are not so much answered as evaded. What purports to be an attempted evaluation of reality essential for the African liberation movement turns out to be a hotchpotch of convincing, but disconnected and elliptical, arguments on the one hand and dogmatic assertions on the other. It is not so much wrong as unilluminating. What is most worrying is that the author believes that what he is arguing for is some form of ‘dialectical materialism’. Many of his arguments are little more than common sense assertions, while others reduce themselves to statements of the sort that ‘materialism is egalitarian’. Perhaps the most pertinent comment on this sort of philosophy is that made by Gramsci (in criticism of Bukharin’s mechanical materialism) – that it confuses the struggle of ideas with military struggles. The method of the latter – to attack one’s weakest opponent at his weakest point – fails in ideological conflicts because it leaves the position of one’s important opponents untouched. It is doubtful whether this book will contribute to a loss of ideological self-confidence on the part of its author’s opponents or to a raising of the level of consciousness of his supporters.
The sources of these weaknesses become clear in the later parts of the book. Here an attempt is made to present a social philosophy. Many criticisms can be made of this. For instance, despite the materialistic claims of the author he sees the development from feudalism to capitalism as one of a combination of ‘continuity of fundamental principle with a tactical change in the manner of expression of the fundamental principle’. Slavery, Feudalism, Capitalism and Socialism are seen as ideals governing society. He identifies those material forces that affect the development of society with the form of property. This he sees as allowing him to claim some sort of affinity with Marxism. He argues that because they are both based upon the same principle – that of the absence of private property – African communalism and socialism are ‘fundamentally’ the same. For the former to develop into the latter what is needed is a development of the productive resources without the development of private wealth. All that is required to prevent this is close adherence to the materialistic ideology outlined in this book. Needless to say such an argument is far from Marxism. In particular it ignores what must be basic to any Marxist analysis – the developing human interaction with the world expressed in the division of labour. Possible effects of the changes in the division of labour (both in the internal economy and in relation to the external world economy) upon the communitarian societies are not examined. Marx himself showed, for Indian societies, that a complete change in the content of the social structure of primitive communist societies, without the development of private property, can result from a major change in the productive forces. This the author ignores.
With the development of the division of labour ignored – and with it any account of the interaction of human praxis and material forces – what remains? A method of analysis that is both mechanical and idealistic. The conclusions are idealistic insofar as the will of the party leadership is seen as the sole factor determining the development of reality. They are mechanical in so far as the only forces capable of transcending and changing the material environment – consciously organised classes – are ignored. The result is a methodology that enables the author to ignore the major determinants of social development while using pseudo-socialist terminology to hide this omission. The difficulty (from the author’s point of view) is that such an ideologically emptied ‘Marxism’ cannot present a unified and coherent view of the world. Its tedious eclecticism certainly is not the philosophy for the African revolution, even if it is a useful doctrine for the new rulers of Africa to inculcate.

