

The Hungarian Revolution broke out on October 23, 1956. The chronology of these world-shaking events is clear enough. During the revolution, radio stations in Hungary were taken over by the revolutionaries and broadcast to the outside world. Correspondents of every political point of view filed eye-witness accounts. And from these reports, it is possible to develop a fairly clear picture of what was going on during these amazing days.
October 21st. The students of the Polytechnique University assembled and voted a political program. They announced that they would demonstrate if their demands were not met. The student resolution, distributed in the streets of Budapest, called for: withdrawal of Russian troops; revision of economic treaties with Russia to grant real independence to Hungary; publication of trade and reparations agreements between Russia and Hungary; full information on Hungarian uranium resources and the concessions granted to the Russians; the election of a new leadership in the Communist Party; the installation of Imre Nagy as Premier; a public trial for Mihaly Farkas, organizer of the terror under Rakosi; secret, general elections with more than one party on the ballot; a reorganization of the entire economic plan; revision of workers’ norms; the right to strike; revision of the system of compulsory collective farm collections; equal rights for individual farmers and members of cooperatives; restoration of the Hungarian national flag; restoration of the Hungarian Army uniform; destruction of the statue of Stalin in Budapest; solidarity with the national movement in Poland.
At Gyor, the writer Gyula Hay demanded an end to Russian bases in Hungary. A crowd of two thousand applauded his declaration.
The Petofi Circle announced that they would issue a manifesto of solidarity with the Polish national movement on the following day.
The paper of the Young Communists, Irodalmi Ujzag, quoted Paul Laszlo, a Csepel worker, “Up ’til now, we have not said a word ... But do not be disturbed. For we shall speak up too.”
October 22nd. Meetings in Budapest continued. The students of Lorand University adopted a statement expressing “fraternal sympathy for our Polish comrades who are now struggling for sovereignty and liberalization.” The students and professors of the Military Academy, Miklos Zrinyi, announced that they adhered to the political program of the Polytechnic University.
October 23rd. Demonstrations began in the streets of Budapest. Workers, students and army men were in the march. At first, the Ministry of the Interior forbade the demonstrations, but this was changed almost immediately, and an authorization was granted.
The marchers carried huge portraits of Lenin. They sang the Marseillaise, and shouted slogans of “Out with the Russians,” “Nagy to power,” “Put Rakosi on trial.” After about three hours, the crowd began to disperse, and it appeared that the manifestation had taken place without violence. The people gathered again before the Budapest radio station, shouting “Down with Gero.” A delegation of three youths was selected to go in and speak with government authorities. They were immediately arrested by the Secret Police. The crowd attempted to force the door of the building, and the police fired, killing three people.
The revolution had begun.
The workers of Csepel went on the offensive. They went into army barracks and were given guns by the soldiers. With these, they attacked the arsenal and barracks at Hadick. Soldiers in Budapest began to join the workers and students. Two officers who offered to mediate the riot at the radio station were executed by the Secret Police.
On the night of the 23rd, Erno Gero broadcast a statement on the events of the day. He accused the demonstrators of seeking to establish a “bourgeois” regime, and announced:
“Our decision is definitely to abide by Socialist democracy. We must defend it. We are against those who want to misuse Hungarian youth for manifestations against socialism.”
That night he called for Russian tanks.
October 24th. The government was radically altered. Nagy was installed as Premier, but Gero retained his seat in the Politburo. Kadar was named Secretary of the Communist Party.
As soon as he was named Premier, Nagy announced his support of the plan to crush the revolution. “Our first task,” he broadcast, “is to restore discipline and peace.” He also made an offer of amnesty: “All those who give up the struggle by 2 P.M. in the interest of stopping bloodshed and surrender their arms will not be tried.” His political program called for the consumer-orientation which he had attempted to introduce in 1953. At the same time, Kadar accused the demonstrators of “trying to bring back capitalism.”
By the 24th, fighting had broken out in the industrial centers outside of Budapest. The first workers’ councils were established. At Miskolcz, in the industrial region of Borsod, The Workers Council of Borsod called for a new government “in the spirit of Bela Kun and Laszlo Rajk.”
October 25. Erno Gero was dismissed from his position of leadership in the Communist Party.
In Budapest, the people continued to fight against the Russian tanks. Russian troops went over to the side of the revolution. According to Noel Barber of the English Daily Mail, some Russian tank crews had torn the hammer and sickle from their flags and joined the rebels under a red banner.
Nagy announced a new amnesty.
“We promise clemency to all young people, civilians and servicemen who will give up the struggle immediately. The full weight of the law will strike only those who go on attacking.”
At the same time, he admitted that all of the political points contained in the program for the 23rd (substantially those drawn up on the 21st) were “justified.”
At Debreczen, Szeged, Pecs, Gyor, Sopron, Szolnok and Magyarovar, the general strike began. Kadar once again charged that the revolution aimed at capitalist restoration. Reports that the revolution controlled huge areas outside of Budapest began to come from Austria. Radio broadcasts from various revolutionary stations were heard.
October 26th. Workers Councils appeared in almost every industrial city in Hungary. At Magyarovar, the “Municipal Council” had 26 members, elected in the factories and at the National School of Agriculture. Members included Social Democrats, National Peasants, Small Holders and Communists. The President of the Council was Lugosy Gora, a worker and member of the Communist Party. The Council rejected emigrée leadership and called for free elections under the supervision of the UN. At Gyor, the Revolutionary Committee was composed of 20 members, elected by secret ballot in the factories. The Committee declared:
“We are categorically opposed to demagogic speeches about the possibility of a counter-revolutionary government emerging and thus giving a juridical basis for foreign intervention, transforming our country into a second Korea.”
The Council at Miskolc put forth a program calling for free elections, the right to strike, the retention of the Council movement in the political structure of the nation, and demanded a government of “Communists devoted to the principles of proletarian internationalism.”
In Budapest, fighting continued, and the Nagy Government went on with its efforts to halt the demonstrations.
October 27th. The Council of Miskolc proposed the unification of all Councils on the basis of a common political program: the creation of a free, independent, sovereign, democratic and socialist Hungary; free elections and universal suffrage; the immediate removal of Russian troops; a new Constitution; suppression of the Secret Police; total amnesty for all revolutionaries, and trials for Gero and his accomplices; free elections to be held in two months.
Russian troops in Budapest began to move out of the city. A ceasefire was proclaimed which was held in the capital, but did not effect the developments throughout the country.
October 28th. Nagy granted all of the demands of the revolutionaries. He proposed: a general amnesty; the withdrawal of Russian troops from Budapest; early negotiations with the Russians for removal of all of their troops from Hungary; higher pensions; consumer orientation in the economy as a whole; increased food production; a more liberal agricultural policy; workers councils on the Yugoslavian model; more housing. The Budapest radio broadcast:
“You have won. We must realize that a huge democratic movement has developed which includes the whole Hungarian nation. Please, please stop. You have won. Your demands will be fulfilled. Just stop the killing.”
Nagy also announced that members of political parties other than the Communist would be part of his new government. In the industrial towns, Workers Councils were jailing leaders of the Communist Party. Throughout the country, members of the Secret Police were being jailed or shot.
October 29th. Nagy recognized the Councils throughout the nation as organs of government. Szabad Nep, the official organ of the Communist Party, hailed the insurrection.
The Revolutionary Committee of Hungarian Intellectuals saluted the “complete victory” of the revolution, and thanked the Russian soldiers who “refused to fire upon our revolutionaries.” They published their political program: immediate removal of Russian troops; immediate cancellation of all commercial treaties unfavorable to Hungary; publication of all Hungarian-Russian treaties; free, secret elections; all mines and factories to be the property of the workers; revision of production norms and salaries; free unions; free agricultural organizations; direction of agricultural cooperatives by members, not by functionaries; compensation to farmers for past injustices; the proclamation of the 23rd of October as a National Holiday.
October 30th. Nagy formed a new government with the Communists in the minority. The Revolutionary Council of the Army sent its delegates to Budapest. Free elections were announced.
On the 30th, the Russians announced that they would withdraw their troops “as soon as this is recognized by the Hungarian Government to be necessary.” They also made a general statement, admitting past errors, offering to reconsider the whole question of Russian troops in Eastern Europe, and calling for a “commonwealth” of “socialist” nations.
Nagy then called upon the Russians to remove their troops from Budapest. The collective farm system was abolished. The participation of Smallholders, Peasant Party, Social Democrats and Communists in the new government was announced.
October 31st. The Russians announced that orders had been given to their troops to leave Hungary. The nation celebrated the victory of the Revolution.
Cardinal Mindszenty was freed and restored to his Palace in Budapest. He was guarded by forces from the Hungarian Army.
November 1st. Nagy announced that Hungary would break with the Warsaw Pact. He proclaimed Hungary a neutral nation. Negotiations were begun with the Russians to get them to take their troops back home.
The Councils recognized the Nagy Government. They called upon the workers to end the general strike. The Hungarian unions announced that they were quitting the World Federation of Trade Unions.
November 2nd. Russian troop movements are reported.
Nagy, Kadar, and Lukacsz leave the Communist Party and form a new party. The youth of Hungary proclaim that the aims of the revolution are socialist.
In this period, Bela Kovacs, a leader of the peasants, announced that “No one wants to go backward, to return to the world of the nobility, the bankers and the capitalists.”
November 3rd. Zoltan Tildy, head of the Smallholders Party, announced that Russian-Hungarian conversations on the removal of troops were continuing. He protested against the movement of Russian forces into Hungary. Tildy also told newspapermen that the government was united in its conviction that capitalism must not be restored in Hungary.
The composition of the new government was announced. It included Anna Kethly, Gyula Kelemen and Josef Fischer for the Social Democrats; Istvan Szabo for the Smallholders, and General Pal Maleter, a revolutionary commander, as a representative of the revolutionary forces.
Speculation that Cardinal Mindszenty would take a leading part in the new government continued in the bourgeois and Stalinist press outside of Hungary. There was no word from Budapest as to his political role, although even he had disavowed any intention of reintroducing the old regime.
November 4th. The Hungarian news agency, M.T.I., sent an urgent teletype message to Vienna: “Russian gangsters have betrayed us, they are opening fire on all of Budapest. The Russian troops suddenly attacked Budapest and the whole country. They opened fire on everybody in Hungary. It is a general attack. Janos Kadar, Gyoergy Marosan and Sandor Ronai formed a new government ... They are on the Russian’s side.”
On the night of the 3rd, the Russians had tricked Maleter, the revolutionary commander, into a rendezvous and arrested him. Then the attack began.
Nagy begged for outside help.
And the following declaration came from the revolutionaries:
“We do not have enough arms ... We have no heavy artillery. Our people throw grenades at the tanks. The Hungarians do not fear death ... Some attack the tanks with bare hands ...”
 
BY THE MIDDLE of the week of November 5th, the brutal Russian attack against the revolution had begun systematically to crush all centers of resistance. On the anniversary of the October Revolution, Radio Rakoczy broadcast to the troops who were drowning Hungary in blood:
“Soldiers. Your state has been created at the cost of bloody fighting in order that you shall have freedom. Today is the thirty-ninth anniversary of that revolution. Why do you want to crush our liberty? You can see that it is not the factory proprietors, not the landowners, not the bourgeoisie which has taken arms against you, but the Hungarian people fighting desperately for the same rights for which you fought in 1917.”
And still the revolution went on, though now the struggle became more of an act of massive resistance on the part of the Hungarian people, less of an armed struggle. By November 10th, Kadar’s puppet government was faced with a general strike. On the 11th, Kadar negotiated with Nagy in the Yugoslavian Embassy, but within a matter of days the leader of the first revolutionary government was arrested. By the 14th of November, all pretense of the government basing itself on a popular mandate was abandoned: word came that Hungarian youth were being deported to Russia. But, incredibly, the workers continued to fight back. They formed themselves into a network of Councils, and Kadar was forced to negotiate with their leaders.
According to the correspondent of the Austrian Arbeiter-Zeitung, organ of the Social Democracy in Vienna, there were two tendencies in the workers movement during this period. One group argued that the resistance could best be organized by returning to work, and thus gathering the forces into one place. The other demanded an immediate general strike. During November, this division was apparent in much of the activity in the Budapest Workers’ Councils, and yet the solid front of working-class opposition to the Russian troops and the Kadar Government was maintained. The Arbeiter-Zeitung reported that Kadar was even fearful of calling a meeting of the puppet Communist Party, for then, he was quoted as saying to a friend, “We will have to fight against the Russians.”
During November and December, reports on the struggle in Hungary became fragmentary. A “government” of Russian tanks attempted to destroy every vestige of independence in the nation. And yet, even the bits of information that came out of Hungary added up to one huge fact: that the massive, unanimous revolutionary opposition of the Hungarian people to Kadar and to the Russians continued, above all, that the Hungarian working class was still fighting for freedom. The Hungarian Revolution was far from over.
 



... distinctions should always be made between the material revolution in the economic conditions of production which can be determined with the precision of natural science, and the juridical, poetical, religious, aesthetic, or philosophic – in short, ideological forms – in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out. – The Preface to the Critique of Political Economy
*
This is where a Marxist critical theory must begin – with a warning that art is different, that it isn’t “just” an expression of society. We are dealing with a phenomenon which involves consciousness, in a particularly intricate way, and we shall understand it. not so much by assimilating it to that to which it is related, but by seeing it in its own distinct qualities. To distinguish art in this way from any exact correspondence to the dynamics of economic development floes not mean that we make it independent of society. Rather, we must look for a subtle inter-action of the creativeness of man’s consciousness and its social context.
Such an introduction may seem to be the simple repetition of ideas so fundamental that they are cliches. But, alas, these ideas have too often been reserved for the ceremonial occasion – a quote from a later Engels letter is produced to refute a charge of vulgar materialism and is then forgotten as soon as an actual critical problem arises. Because of this, reiteration is a necessity if the insights of Marxism are to be an instrument for understanding art.
 
>FIRST, THE BASIC principle of a Marxist criticism must be developed in some detail: that art stands in a unique relation to society.
In his famous letter to Conrad Schmidt, Engels describes the action of consciousness in the realm of ideology. He writes:
“I consider the ultimate supremacy of economic development established in these spheres (those of ideology) too, but it comes to pass within conditions imposed by the particular sphere itself; in philosophy, for instance, through the operation of economic influences (which again generally only act under political etc. disguises) upon the existing philosophic material handed down by predecessors. Here economy creates nothing absolutely new (a novo), but it determines the way in which the existing material of thought is altered and further developed, and that too for the most part indirectly, for it is the political, legal, and moral reflexes which exercise the greatest influences upon philosophy.” (My emphasis.)
This statement is fundamental to a Marxist critical theory. To begin with, it gives to consciousness – or more specifically, the history of consciousness – a weight of its own, a certain limited autonomy. Secondly, it warns that the relationship between art and a society will be subtle, devious, indirect. And finally, if we can analogize Engels’ comment on philosophy to aesthetics, it grants to this area of autonomy the “greatest direct influence” upon the development of art. Marx made an even more extreme statement of the same point when he wrote:
“It is well known that certain periods of the highest development of art stand in no direct connection with the general development of society, or with the material basis and the skeleton of its organization.”
And yet, paradoxically, it is precisely here, where Marx and Engels are most aware of the way in which art can be independent from a society, that they are basing themselves upon their most profound insight into the social nature of art. In 1844, Marx wrote:
“Only through the objectively unfolding richness of the human being is the richness of subjective human sensuousness, such as a musical ear, an eye for the beauty of form, in short, senses capable of human enjoyment and which prove to be essentially human powers, developed and partly created.”
The growth of society, social life, is the bedrock upon which the aesthetic builds: “The formation of the five senses is the work of the entire history of the world up to now.”
In the Political Economy, Marx went into this point in greater detail. Greek art, he remarks, can be accounted for as a product of Greek society – but how then do we explain our reaction to it? Why is Jupiter still significant in the age of the lightning rod? Marx’s answer is a curious one. He compares this experience to a man remembering his childhood, and locates it in a certain sense of nostalgia, a reaction to that which will never be again. But in the last resort, he is forced to posit an “eternal charm” for Greek art. In other words, the experience of art, as distinguished from an objective analysis of its causation, is not felt as being dependent on time and place. In this one area, man, his consciousness, is transcendent of history – this is the truly unique character of the aesthetic experience.
Thus, for Marx and Engels the role of consciousness in relation to art was dual: in one sense, it separates art from society, granting to it a certain autonomy of development; but in a deeper sense, the source of this autonomy is, exactly, social life, the historical development of the five senses. The latter point is important to a Marxist philosophy of art, the former to a critical theory. Given all of Engels qualifications, we can arrive at a sort of negative rule: that we cannot argue from the existence of a certain kind of society to the necessity for a certain artistic style or even content. We will always be faced with an empirical problem in which the economic influences, but does not determine, the aesthetic. As Arnold Hauser has remarked, “... the same style can be connected with very different social forms ... the same social system can be connected with the most various styles of art ...”
Two concrete cases should suggest the actual workings of this complicated relationship of art to society.
In Historical Materialism, Bukharin attempted to defend a fairly mechanistic theory of art and society, insisting that style is a social determinant. In doing this, he wrote:
“With the growth of the bourgeoisie, with the battle and victory, a new style was brought forth, the best representative of which is, in French painting, David. This style was the embodiment of the bourgeois virtues of the revolutionary bourgeois.”
But here is Plekhanov on the same point:
“The example of David shows better than anything else that French classicism at the end of the eighteenth century was conservative ... only in form. Its content was entirely steeped in the most revolutionary spirit.”
Thus, for Plekhanov, it is possible to have a conservative form contain a revolutionary content, and to do so in a period of ... social revolution.
Plekhanov’s description is more in accord with reality than Bukharin’s. As Hauser points out in his Social History of Art, David’s painting was supported before the revolution by both aristocracy and government. He also notes that bourgeois taste would seem to have been more logically impelled toward the sentimentalism of Greuze or the naturalism of Chardin. That this did not happen, he argues, was a function of the specific needs of the bourgeoisie at that time (the development of the heroic, “Roman” virtues). Thus, the complexity of the matter, Bukharin notwithstanding: an tin bourgeois form made the transition from ancient regime to revolution and in doing so was transformed in content so as to become the revolutionary expression of the bourgeois spirit.
To take a second example. In his Studies in Iconology, Erwin Panofsky writes.
“The Middle Ages were by no means blind to the visual value of classical art ... (but) classical motifs were not used for the representation of classic themes, and conversely, classical themes were not expressed by classical motifs.”
And, “It was the privilege of the Renaissance proper to reintegrate the classical themes with the classical motifs.” Here again, perhaps even more dramatically than in the case of David, we have the subtle role of the past in the relation of art to society. The classical consciousness persists in a distorted manner (form separated from content) in an age which was the very antithesis of the classical period. There is a reintegration in still another period in which the classical model is understood according to the needs of a non-classic age.
But does this then mean that artistic form, and even content, are completely independent of society in their development? Not at all. As Wylie Sypher observed in his Four Stages of Renaissance Style:
“If style is a mode of representation, yet the artist is bound to represent the world in which he lives, to which he belongs. Therefore not all kinds of style are available at any given time, since a style is modified by the artists’ own vision, and his vision in turn, by the world he inhabits.” (my emphasis)
In other words, there are certain broad limits. The development of art and Elizabethan society did not provide a basis for the novel, this was a fundamental limitation. Yet within this broad structure, it made it quite definitely possible for Shakespeare to be something much more complicated than an expression of “the dynamic force of individuality” (Caudwell’s phrase). One need only contrast Henry V with Lear to see the point.
Let me conclude this part of the discussion with an example of an excellent analysis of the massive and complex inter relationship of art and society. The quotation is from Panofsky's Meaning in the Visual Arts.
“In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, for instance ... the traditional type of the Nativity with the Virgin Mary reclining in bed or on a couch was frequently replaced by a new one which shows the Virgin kneeling before the Child in adoration. From a compositional point of view this change means, roughly speaking, the substitution of a triangular scheme for a rectangular one; from an iconographical point of view, it means the introduction of a new theme to be formulated in writing by such authors as Pseudo-Bonaventure and St. Bridget. But at the same time it reveals a new emotional attitude peculiar to the latter phases of the Middle Ages. A really exhaustive interpretation of the intrinsic meaning or content might even show that the technical procedures characteristic of a certain country, period or artist, for instance Michelangelo’s preference for sculpture in stone instead of in bronze ... are symptomatic of the same basic attitude that is discernible in all other specific qualities of his style.”
We could not predict the development which Panofsky describes, even in the broad sense that we can say that where there is capitalism, there is a free wage worker. We cannot formulate a precise term, “late feudal art,” simply by analyzing the social conditions of the period. But given the actual art of the time and its social context, we can see a maze of interrelationships, we can gain a new perspective – ultimately, we can see the art better. And that is the task of criticism.
 
>SO FAR WE HAVE BEEN discussing art as one type of ideology, whose development, like that of all ideology, differs from, and yet is related to, the development of society. But we must probe deeper. Some time ago, R.P. McKeon, the Chicago philosopher, summarized the current critical situation in Modern Philology. He wrote:
“The basic question among present day (critical) oppositions, perhaps, is whether one discusses art adequately by discussing something else, or by discussing art, for in the former case, other oppositions turn on what precise subject other than art should be discussed and, in the latter case, of what art itself is.”
How does a Marxist criticism address itself to this formulation? Is it simply a “reductive” theory which discusses art as something else? Does it have a conception of “art itself?” The crucial point is how the Marxist conceives art as apart from all other ideological forms, where he locates its specific difference, its particular quality. Once this is defined, we can return to McKeon’s opposition and place the Marxist theory in relation to contemporary criticism.
Once more, let Engels introduce the subject. In a letter to Minna Kautsky, he described successful didactic literature (citing Aeschylus, Aristophanes, Dante, Cervantes, the contemporary Russian and Norwegian novel) and then went on to say:
“I am by no means opposed to tendentious novels ... But I believe that the thesis must inhere in the situation and action, without being explicitly formulated, and that the author is under no obligation to provide the reader with the future solution to the historical conflict which he describes.”
In another letter, to Margaret Harkness on Balzac, he went even further, writing, “The more the opinions of the author remain hidden, the better the work of art.” Clearly, Engels is here making a sharp distinction between art and all other ideological forms. The relationship of a philosophy, or an economic analysis, to the solution of the historical conflict which produced it is an essential, if not the controlling, element in the Marxist evaluation of them. But here, the “situation and action,” posed in an almost Aristotelian sense, present a reality independent of even the author’s own intention and politics. We have then, at least from Engels’ point of view, a unique mode of communication.
The clearest instance in which this attitude operated was, of course, Marx and Engels’ admiration of Balzac. Balzac was pro-feudal, reactionary, legitimist, anti-working class ... and, in their opinion, the greatest novelist of his time. To be sure, Marx and Engels had a tendency to treat him as a social document rather than as a novelist (Engels said that he learned more about French social conditions from Balzac than anywhere else), but even then as a peculiar, special kind of social document. And this has a tremendous bearing on a Marxist critical theory.
It might be argued that just such a distinction is present whenever Marx discusses an ideology, for he sees every ideology as a truth upside down – as in a camera obscura, in Engels’ phrase. But the example of Balzac goes beyond that. In the case of other ideologies this fact is tolerated only so long as it is necessary. Religion is conceived as a legitimate, even a profound, expression of man’s cry of alienation only in pre-scientific times. In his own day, Marx saw it as a reactionary mystification. And yet, he also recognizes that a Greek art based on a hopelessly unscientific mythology retains its appeal – it is even a standard of excellence – in a scientific age. And Balzac is admired even though he is classically reactionary, a pro-feudalist in the era of the bourgeois revolution.
In this attitude toward Balzac and Greek art, in Engels’ letters to Minna Kautsky and Margaret Harkness, there is the basis of a fundamental generalization: that art communicates in a unique way; it is, in a sense, “beyond” politics, beyond other ideologies. This is not to imply that either Marx or Engels were New Critics. They were men of their time and place, and limited by the fact: their bias was toward a realism beyond politics. That particular bias must, I think, be recognized for what it is, as a limitation. But more important, the way in which they conceived art opens up broad possibilities for a Marxist critical theory.
Christopher Caudwell realized some of those possibilities. In his essay on bourgeois aesthetics in Further Studies in a Dying Culture, he saw that art was "not ‘just’ a social product,” that it had its own "peculiar quality.” This, he felt, derived from the fact that it dealt with affective material, that it “creates a mock world which calls into being a new affective attitude, a new emotional experience.” In a talmudic sense, one cannot justify this attitude in terms of what Marx and Engels actually wrote about art. But taking their suggestion from their attitude toward Greek art and Balzac, it is consistent with their general theoretical approach.
This is not to say that a total disjunction is made between the cognitive and the affective, with science on the one side and art on the other. That is a tendency which develops out of contemporary criticism’s penchant for making the dichotomy between the symbol (which refers only to itself, inwardly) and the sign (which simply designates an external referent) absolute. This attitude has deep social roots (which will be discussed in the next section), and it is on the critical high road that proceeds from Coleridge’s definition of poetry in the Biographia Litteraria. It must not be confused with a Marxist theory, for it makes art, this affective communication, totally autonomous, it fails to perceive the delicate inter-relation of form and meaning, of art and society.
One modern critic, Elisio Vivas, has however made a statement similar to Caudwell’s, and it is worth quoting. In Creation and Discovery, he wrote:
“... what poetry uniquely does is to reveal a world which is self- sufficient. It does not communicate in the ordinary sense of the term ... But by means of the self-sufficient world (it) reveals, we are able to grasp, as the poem lingers in memory as a redolence, the actual world in which we live.”
The crucial point here, as in Caudwell, is that art is saying something about the world, not so much directly, but in the way in which it changes our own perception: that we see differently because of it.
Take Balzac. At his best, he is not simply a documentor, he is an artist. Cousin Pons is a petty-bourgeois monomaniac, to be sure, but not simply that. He is also a uniquely presented human being, a tragic figure, there is something in his situation and action, a truth, which is beyond all these. Ideally, Pons sees the world for us, he changes us. Again, it must be said that this particular notion has no textual – and talmudic – justification in either Marx or Engels, yet it is, I think, a realization which can easily be contained within the framework of their general conception of art.
Now to apply this to cases. In his Studies in European Realism, George Lukacs wrote:
“... which of the two, Balzac or Flaubert, was the greatest novelist, the typical classic of the 19th century? ... The question arises whether it is the unity of the internal and external world or the separation between them which is the social basis of the greatness of the novel.”
To begin with, note an interesting equation: that the “greatest novelist” is the same as the author of the “typical classic.” But beyond that, is Lukacs’ generalization sound? If we take it as an attempt to derive artistic worth from an examination of the artists’ ideology, then the Marxist must answer, no. It can be true only if it means that other things – including genius – being equal, that a certain vision of the world makes it more possible to create a masterpiece. But if it is used as a way of evaluating the actual Balzac and the actual Flaubert, it amounts to an ideological criticism, and one which we must therefore reject.
Moreover, Lukacs attempts to hedge on Balzac – perhaps in order to pay his respects to his Stalinism. In dealing with Balzac’s reactionary politics, he writes:
“Only illusions motivated by the social environment depicted, i.e. illusions – often tragic illusions – which are historically necessary, do not prevent the writer from depicting social reality with objective truth.”
But what does this mean? If Lukacs is simply saying that Balzac’s illusions are historically necessary since they develop out of his class position, then all illusions are historically necessary. If he means only illusions which are necessary for progress, then he isn’t talking about Balzac.
But then, what of a Stalinist like Brecht? Or an anti-Semite like Pound? To a certain extent, their politics mar artistic value simply by being too loud and obnoxious (and this is often true of writers who have democratic politics). But at times, this does not happen. Brecht’s To Posterity or Pound’s 49th Canto are magnificent poetry. In both cases, they are not talking about their politics, they are on a more fundamental level of the affective apprehension of reality. And when this is true, we must say, just as we do with Balzac, that their politics are irrelevant to their art. (This is not to pass judgment on the public act of awarding the Bollingen Prize to Ezra Pound.)
To return now to McKeon’s opposition. A Marxist theory does not recognize “art in itself,” if by that is meant the independence of art from society and from meaning, “pure art,” the mysticism of art. Yet neither does it say that art is simply something else. It is a dualistic theory, granting a certain autonomy to the development of art, especially in terms of form, but relating it, however uniquely, to society, both as an influence and as an audience to which art has meaning. In McKeon’s terms, such an approach will emphasize the social, grant it a particular relevance, but it does not consider this as an exclusive mode of apprehension, i.e. it can legitimately concern itself with the formal, the psychological, and so on.
However, it must be made clear that McKeon is speaking from a position of critical pluralism. His distinction between art as something else and art in itself is not that of the New Critical disjunction between cognitive and affective, it is not a theory of pure art. Where such theories are proposed – Ransom, for instance – we can only answer as Christopher Caudwell did in Illusion and Reality:
“If anyone wishes to remain entirely in the province of aesthetics, then he should remain either a creator or an appreciator of art works. Only in this limited field is aesthetics ‘pure.’ As soon as one passes to the criticism of art, it is plain that we pass outside art ...”
Finally, the experiential nature of the aesthetic judgment must be underlined. Critical systems are either a preparation for, or a description of, the fact of the art work, but the actual judgment is existential. That the judgment may also be seen as socially (or psychologically) conditioned is true, but as an experience it escapes systemization. For a Marxist, the theoretical appreciation of this lies in Marx’s insight on Greek art: the “eternal charm” of art, its (in a limited sense) a-historical character,
I would conclude this section with a brilliant summary of the duality which confronts the social critic which Lionel Trilling made in The Liberal Imagination:
“What is proposed is not a treatment of art as a document, as a curiously unstatistical abstract, whereby all the power of the aesthetic organization of the material is disregarded in order to reach the paraphrasable content. Rather, it is to present the content in all of its achievement, its form, values, attitudes, emotions, necessarily paraphrased, yet deriving their particular kind of affective meaning from precisely their form.”
 
WHY SHOULD ONE BE a Marxist critic at all? If Marxism is not an exclusive method of aesthetic understanding, if it must be supplemented even by reference to the New Critics, isn’t it, then, just one approach among many which one chooses out of personal taste?
In one sense, the answer is yes, a Marxist criticism is simply one approach among many, it cannot be exhaustive of the work of art and it must make use of other critical methods. But in another sense, there is a particular relevance to a Marxist critical theory today which makes it, not merely a method among other methods, but rather the ground of a fundamental synthesis. This does not follow from any abstract speculation; it is a deduction from the fact of the crisis of modern art. For the actual relation of the social and aesthetic is, today, just as complicated as it has always been, yet it has an immediacy and importance that is new. The particular relevance of Marxism in this situation is that it gives a larger unity which deepens our comprehension of all the other critical approaches.
First, turn to contemporary aesthetic reality. Here are three generalizations about it, each on a different level of analysis (form, content, society). In them, we should see how one factor, the social, is the basis of the other two.
In a brilliant article, Spatial Form in Modern Art, Joseph Frank sketched the broad lines of development for current artistic form. Basing himself on Lessing, he begins with a distinction between spatial form, the natural form of the plastic arts in which there is an instantaneous juxtaposition of elements as in painting, and the consecutive form usually associated with narrative literature. Frank sees all of modern art – literary as well as plastic – moving toward spatial form. In Madame Bovary, for instance, there is the famous scene at the County Fair. In it, three levels continually inter relate: the voices of the crowd, the speeches on the platform, and the meeting of the lovers, Emma and Rudolphe. As a result, the scene does not unfold a sequence, its time is not the straight line of a narrative with beginning, middle and end. It is more a painting of a moment, a circle in which the various voices turn around a single instant, each completing the other. This is a case of spatial form in literature. Similar techniques can be found in Proust, Joyce, Faulkner, and so on.
Frank concludes his description of this tendency:
“The objective historical imagination, on which modern man has prided himself, and which he has cultivated so carefully since the Renaissance, is transformed in these writers into the mythical imagination for which historical time does not exist – the imagination that sees the actions and events of a particular time merely as the bodying forth of eternal prototypes.”
The most extreme instance of this would be, of course, Finnegans Wake, a book which begins on the last page and ends on the first and which can be begun in the middle.
A similar – though even broader – comment was made by Ortega y Gasset in his article, Point of View in the Arts. For him, what Frank calls “spatial form” in modern art is the culmination of a process which has been going on tn Western society ever since the Renaissance. The object (the theme), he argues, has been continuously dissolving into the subject, the thing seen has become the one who sees. Contemporary non-representationalism is a final moment in this development, the end product of a “progressive dis-realization of the world ...”
Finally, this is the description which Ralph Fox makes of this phenomenon in The Novel and the People:
“Man is no longer the individual will in conflict with other wills and personalities, for today all conflict must be overshadowed by the immense social conflicts shattering and transforming modern life, and so conflict also disappears from the novel, being replaced by subjective struggle, sexual intrigues or abstract discussion.”
This is the basic, underlying reality of at least one of the main traditions of modern art, indeed of the dominant tradition. In form, the spatial juxtaposition of painting; in content, a transition away from the object and toward the subject; in relation to society, the function of an overwhelming crisis. From Flaubert on (he wanted to write a novel without a subject), this tendency has been pervasive. To understand it – to understand modern art in its depth – it is necessary to see its relationship to the tumultuous history of a century. The movement which can be described by such a study is every bit as massive as the one which Panofsky found in the quatrocento.
In the Voices of Silence, Malraux describes how this entire process has made us see the past differently. Precisely because we live in a world in transition, he believes, we are all the more sensitive to the past, for the prejudices of a stable and ordered existence are not ours. An excellent case in point is the emergence of the critical term, “mannerism,” to designate a period of pessimism and introspection following upon the affirmation of the High Renaissance. Shakespeare’s dark plays, The Last Judgment, El Greco, all of these are put in a new perspective because of the present. In a sense, we see these works for the first time several centuries after they were created.
But this is all part of what we could call an aesthetic crisis. One of its chief symptoms is a change in the very way in which we define art itself. From Bohemia through Mallarme’s salon to Bloomsbury and the English poetic surrealism of the Forties, the practice of art has changed the theory of art. The artist is no longer the imitator, art is no longer mimesis. This does not mean only that representationalism has been rejected in some areas – mimetic theory need not be representational. It means that art has, in theory, wrenched itself out of the world. The artist is a god, art is a creation ex nihilo, a gratuitous event which is too often stripped of its essential human relevance. This phenomenon must be understood, and the first thing one must do if one is going to understand is to place it in its social context.
It would be impossible to develop this social relationship in such a short space. All that can be done is to give a general indication of the kind of factors which are involved. Let me suggest only a few of them, taking most of my material from Erich Auerbach’s brilliant study, Mimesis. He begins by noting a separation of artist and society which occurred in the nineteenth century.
“It can be safely said that, with few exceptions, the significant artists of the later nineteenth century encountered hostility, lack of comprehension or indifference on the part of the public ... This phenomenon was never so general and so extreme in the past.”
The case of this was the taste of the new bourgeois society, that middle class philistinism whose denunciation takes up so much space in the French novel from Balzac on. The result was two arts (“watertight compartments,” Malraux calls them), one for the bourgeois, one for the artist. Here is the beginning of modern art, an aristocratic art without an aristocracy.
In the twentieth century, another factor came into play. The opposition of the artist and bourgeois society was complicated by a period of gigantic social upheaval. Auerbach writes:
“The widening of man’s horizon, the increase of his experiences, knowledge, ideas, and possible forms of existence, which began in the sixteenth century, continued through the nineteenth at an even faster tempo – with such an acceleration since the beginning of the twentieth century that synthetic and objective attempts at interpretation are produced and demolished every instant.”
Consequently:
“At the time of the first World War and after – in a Europe unsure of itself, overflowing with unsettled ideologies and ways of life, and pregnant with disaster – certain writers distinguished by instinct and insight find a method which dissolves reality into multiple and multi-valent reflections of consciousness.”
Let these few brief quotations from Auerbach stand as an indication of an underlying reality. They are sufficient, I think, to provide the basis for arguing the particular relevance of a Marxist critical approach today. The very intensity of our social and cultural crisis has resulted in such a proliferation of form and disintegration of content that a prior act of the historical understanding is necessary if one is to appreciate either form or content and their achieved unity. Otherwise, modern art as a whole, and the individual works within it, will simply appear as gratuitous and fragmentary, and so will our new vision of the past.
The relation of art to society is complex, dialectic, special. To determine it, one must confront the actual work of art in all of its concreteness, its individuality, and in the web of a larger existence too. Genius, say of a Picasso, has its own autonomy, it is not merely the expression of social cataclysm – but it is also such an expression. This is particularly true today, thus the particular relevance of a Marxist critical theory, for, as never before, all things, and art among them, are now caught in history.
 



Civil Liberties and the Vinson Court
by C. Herman
Pritchett
University of Chicago, $5.00.
Obiter dicta almost completely dominates popular
understanding of the Supreme Court. Mr. Dooley, who remarked that the
court follows the election returns, is perhaps the chief lay
theoretician of the judicial process in the United States. Yet
brilliant as the aphoristic approach is – for instance, “The
Supreme Court is a permanent Constitutional Convention” –
it fails even to approach the more complex truth.
Viewed from a distance of decades and longer, judicial personality
and theory merge into a larger movement which is not only sensitive
to election returns and social change but even to the vogue of
specific philosophers like Herbert Spencer. But decisive events may
well take place in the short run. And here, the character of
individual justices and legalistic formalities are of great
importance. A catch phrase like “separate but equal” can
retard civil rights for years. The longevity of appointed judges,
like that of the Four Horsemen of the Thirties, cannot create new
social movements but it can act as a brake upon them, with very real
consequences.
This is made clear in a new book, Civil Liberties and the
Vinson Court, by C. Herman Pritchett. The period under
consideration is very short – Vinson was sworn in on June 24,
1946 and died last year – but in less than a decade civil
liberties were set back in epochal fashion.
Eleven justices, in all, sat on the Vinson Court between the 1946
and 1952 terms. Murphy and Rutledge died in 1949, and were replaced
by Minton and Clark. Pritchett breaks these eleven into broad blocs,
pro and anti civil liberties, on the basis of a statistical analysis
of non-unanimous decisions.
The libertarian group was composed by Murphy (who voted for civil
liberties in every case), Rutledge, Black, Douglas and
Frankfurter. The anti-libertarians included Jackson, Clark, Burton,
Minton, Vinson and Reed. With the deaths of Murphy and Rutledge, the
reactionary bloc gained unquestioned control of the court and they
retain it to this day.
The Vinson Court began with the inheritance of a fairly strong
theory of civil liberties from the “Roosevelt” Court. It
was stated by Rutledge in the 1945 case of Thomas v. Collins:
Any attempt to restrict those liberties must be justified
by clear public interest, threatened not doubtfully or remotely, but
by clear and present danger ... Only the gravest abuses, endangering
paramount interests, give occasion for permissible limitation.
Yet as soon as the new alignment emerged – the Vinson Court
– this position was subjected to attack, modification and
eventual destruction. In less than ten years, a constitutional
revolution took place in the field of civil liberties, and democratic
freedoms had been given an incredibly reactionary interpretation in
the highest judicial forum of the land.
Here are some examples:

Prior Censorship: in 1931, in Near v. Minnesota
it was in effect held that all prior censorship was
unconstitutional. By 1953, in the case of Poulos v. New
Hampshire, it was held: “Regulation and suppression are
not the same, either in purpose or result, and courts of justice can
tell the difference,” i.e., prior refusal of the right to
speak on the basis of licensing ordinances was upheld.
 
Picketing: in 1940, Justice Murphy stated, in the case
of Thornhill v. Alabama, that peaceful picketing was an
exercise of free speech and therefore under all protections of the
First Amendment. In International Brotherhood of Teamsters v.
Hanke, the Vinson Court, speaking through Frankfurter, upheld an
injunction against picketing for a legal objective on the grounds
that “if Wisconsin could permit such picketing as a matter of
policy it must have been equally free as a matter of policy to
choose not to permit it ...”
 
Free Speech: in one of the worst decisions of this
court, Vinson held that a Wallaceite whose speech had started a
riot, could be arrested for “incitement.” As Pritchett
points out, “The Feiner case, does, indeed, approve a formula
which can make police suppression of speech ridiculously simple. Any
group which wishes to silence a speaker can create a disturbance in
the audience, and that will justify police in requesting the speaker
to stop.”
 
Taft-Hartley: the chief civil liberties aspect of this
anti-labor law was Section 9 (h) which denied the protection of the
act for any labor organization unless its officers not only swore
that they were not Communist Party members but also that they “did
not believe in ... the overthrow of the United States
Government ...” This swearing as to belief is unprecedented.
Vinson upheld its constitutionality in a decision which permits
fantastic limitation and investigation of individual freedom.
 
Smith Act: in upholding the infamous provisions of
this statute, the court continued the trend begun in the
Taft-Hartley Section 9 (h) decision. The trial judge (Medina) had
held that the case turned on the intent of the defendants in
their discussion, teaching and advocacy. In destroying the clear and
present rule of the Gitlow case, the court upheld the intent test.
Douglas remarked, “The crime then depends not on what is
taught but on who the teacher is. That is to make freedom of speech
turn not on what is said but on the intent with which
it is said.”
 
Fifth Amendment: in the Rogers’ case
Vinson ruled that the defendant had “waived” her rights
by answering an initial question on party membership. Black,
Frankfurter and Douglas dissenting, noted that persons pleading the
Fifth Amendment “risk imprisonment for contempt by asserting
the privilege prematurely; on the other (hand), they might lose the
privilege if they answer a single question.”
 
Attorney General’s List: by confining itself to
narrow legalisms in the Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee
case, the Vinson Court managed to side step all constitutional
issues. The result has been the continued existence and use of a
totally arbitrary invasion of constitutional freedoms.
 
Immigration: Ignatz Mezei, an alien, has been held for
several years now on Ellis Island. He has never had a trial. He does
not know the full charges against him. The Supreme Court upheld
this. Jackson, dissenting, held that executive imprisonment
“considered oppressive and lawless since John at Runnymede,
pledged that no free man should be imprisoned, dispossessed,
outlawed, or exiled save by the judgment of his peers or by the law
of the land” has come to the United States.
 

This is just part of the record. Unfortunately, it is impressive.
It documents a broad pattern of new restrictions on American liberty.
It is fair to say that the Constitution in 1954 is far less of a
meaningful document than it was in 1946 before the Vinson Court took
over. In his book, Pritchett gives an excellent presentation of how
this was done, but he does not discuss why it was done. Yet
these are the opposite sides of a coin.
First, as to the question which Pritchett does not treat: why did
this ominous trend appear in the decisions of the United States
Supreme Court?
Part of the reason obviously lies in the development of the cold
war, in the social changes which took place within the period of the
Vinson Court. Confronted by the ideological and military
threat of Stalinism, American capitalism demonstrated its political
bankruptcy by replying in terms of military force and political
reaction. This was true with regard to the very real threat of
international Stalinism; it was also true with regard to the
diminishing threat of domestic Stalinism.
The court was obviously affected by this political shift within
the United States. In some cases, this is terribly obvious –
for example, the tragic and fantastic haste with which the execution
of the Rosenbergs was expedited.
Yet, I think it would be a great error to make a theoretical
construct in which this factor of shifting politics is the key to the
analysis of the Vinson Court. The United States Supreme Court is an
unrepresentative, appointive and life-time body. Of all the branches
of government it is the least directly susceptible to short-run
political change. If anything, it usually exhibits a cultural lag
rather than contemporaneousness. Within this context, the period of
the Vinson Court was too short to allow for the working of long range
factors, or to admit the hypothesis that its decisions are a
one-to-one corollary of the domestic and international reaction which
the United States represents in the post-war world.
Yet having said this, having admitted that political factors were
at work but denied that they were decisively so, why did this court
act as if it were an elective body, i.e., in complete keeping
with the reaction of the cold war? The answer, I am afraid, is
undramatic. It lies in the psychology of Harry Truman who used the
court as a place to reward friends and cronies.
But the how of the Vinson Court also relates to the problem
of the relation of the court to social change. The only coherent
debate that has taken place has been among three justices:
Frankfurter and, on the other side, Black and Douglas. The
antilibertarians simply have an empirical gift for the reactionary,
more or less devoid of consistent rationalization, but these three
justices have argued the social policy of the court’s functions
in regard to change.
Frankfurter belongs, by the skin of his teeth, to the libertarian
bloc. But this has not prevented him from making a number of striking
anti-libertarian decisions. What was the metamorphosis of this
“liberal” nominee to the Court?
Frankfurter’s change is bound up in his own personal brand
of pedantry. But more than that, it is bound up in his persistence
in precisely those attitudes which endeared him to the New Deal.
Frankfurter’s philosophy is one of “judicial restraint.”
He is conscious of the non-representative character of the court and
he feels that he should bend over backwards to allow “legislative
experiment.” His is the very antithesis of the conception of
the Four Horsemen who struck down so much Roosevelt legislation.
But when the “legislative experiment” shifted from
social programs to anti-libertarian legislation, Frankfurter did not
budge. He “restrained” himself to allow the Smith Act.
Black and Douglas, on the other hand, are moving in the direction
of a judicial theory which includes Frankfurters’ very sound
worry over the unrepresentative nature of the court, but which avoids
the pitfalls of his civil liberties position. Theirs is the
“preferred” theory which calls for judicial restraint on
all but matters of civil liberties. These they would argue,
are “preferred” by the court since they are the
preconditions of democracy. Therefore, in attacks on free speech, the
Fifth Amendment, etc., they would argue that the weight is in favor
of striking down questionable statutes and not of allowing
experiment.
This is far from solving the general problem of the judiciary in a
democracy, yet it is a theory which allows for social
experimentation, counseling only that it may not be experimentation
with basic freedoms.
As far as it goes, Pritchett’s book is brilliant, readable,
and will do much to destroy the aphoristic approach to the Supreme
Court. Yet one would wish that it had gone into the why of the
Vinson Court and explored the problems which can only be raised in a
short review such as this.
In the Vinson Court we face, to a limited extent, the close
workings of judiciary and politics. But to a more decisive extent, we
are in the presence of a tragedy which is not accounted for by
structural analysis, but far more by intangible qualities of
personality and historical accident. And above all, in the Vinson
Court, we face a coherent, consistent attack on the very basis of our
liberties, we live in a time which has, in the field of civil
liberties, a new Constitution, and one which is probably more
reactionary than any in the history of the United States.
 



The rise of De Gaulle is a clear indication that time has run out on the Fourth Republic. For years now, the constant coming and going of cabinets has produced commotion but not change, the facade of politics and the reality of immobilisme. The dramatic focus has been, of course, the question of French colonialism: the expenditure of blood and money in defense of the remnants of empire. But France’s malaise goes deeper than this one problem. North Africa is symptomatic of a bourgeoisie that is paralyzed, unable to control its own colonial wing; while the working class is split, a section of it committed to a Communist Party whose policies are determined by the needs of Russia, another section led by “socialists” who have betrayed their most fundamental principles.
Thus, for all of the talk about a strong executive and action, De Gaulle is the creature of a political vacuum and his policy has been tentative, not decisive. As a result, his regime has exhibited all kinds of contradictions – the announcement of a vaguely liberal Algerian solution on one day, a promotion for an insurrectionary General and a cabinet post for Soustelle on the next. As Giles Martinet noted in his report to the National Council of the Union de la Gauche Socialiste (UGS):
“... De Gaulle is not the ultra’s man, nor the Army’s, nor that of the technocratic bourgeoisie – he is the man who attempts to harmonize the partly contradictory interests of these three social groups upon which his government depends.”
But, then, how long can the situation be compromised in this way? The French colonists in Algeria are committed to a policy of “integration,” that is, of the continuing denial of the rights of the Algerian majority. On the other hand, a section of the bourgeoisie is willing to accept a “federalist” policy which will guarantee the rule of French capital in Algeria. Indeed, a section of the Algerian revolutionary movement itself, the National Liberation Front (FLN), has indicated some hope that De Gaulle might turn in their direction. Ferhat Abbas told a correspondent of France-Observateur that his organization “continues to hope that De Gaulle will make a new beginning ... We are always ready ... to negotiate with him.”
 
HOW DOES THIS RELATE to the threat of fascism in France? As has been pointed out by almost every observer, there is no mass fascist movement in that country. For one thing, the intensification of the Algerian struggle and the consequent crisis of the regime occurred within the context of a growing prosperity. There are some reports which even go so far as to predict that France is the country which will be least effected by the current European economic downturn. At any rate, the extreme social dislocation which has been historically associated with the rise of fascism – a desperate petty-bourgeoisie, a fundamental breakdown of the society as a whole, the polarization of political life – were not present.
On the other hand, some French writers have gone so far as to argue that fascism has “already arrived” in Algeria. But even in Algeria the “classic” features of fascism are not present. At the same time, it is clear that the insurrectionary colonists and their military accomplices are bent upon a reactionary dictatorship, war against the liberation movement to the bitter end, and an assault upon all democratic institutions in the metropolitan center.
While there is no immediate fascist threat in France, it is nevertheless clear that the problem of defending democracy is complicated by the apparent apathy of considerable sections of French society. Far from there being a threat of working class revolution in France, the socialist movement has never been so divided, misled and demoralized. A recent article in the British journal Universities and Left Review, vividly portrayed the indifference of workers at the Renault plant toward the events of May and June, an attitude based on their understanding that no real alternative was being offered to them. Indeed, the only union in France which adopted a militant and effective position toward DeGaulle was that of the teachers. The rest issued the proper manifestoes, often without much political content (as in the case of those sections of the CGT controlled by the Communists), and were unable to rally any sustained enthusiasm on the part of those they claim to lead.
The weight of all this leads toward the conclusion that even now, some months after the events, we must describe the situation as fluid, the crisis as unresolved. De Gaulle has moved in opposite directions, making some extravagant offers to the natives of the French colonies, but trying to keep his ties with the insurrectionary right wing at the same time. For that matter, one could record the strange course of this drama by contrasting the frenzied enthusiasm which Lacoste called forth in Algiers when he first proposed power for DeGaulle, the somewhat restrained reception De Gaulle himself received there a little later, and the open hostility which developed around his most recent visit.
The one thing that we can say is that the crisis is not over, and that a further assault from the right is almost inevitable. Either that, or De Gaulle will be completely captured by the right. And such a prognosis is hardly an optimistic one, for there seems to be little chance of the left coming forth with a dynamic alternative. In this context, the “classic” marks of fascism are certainly lacking in France today, and even in Algeria, but fascism cannot be ruled out as a real possibility in the future.
 
THUS IF DE GAULLE IS an element in the continuing crisis of French bourgeois democracy, his rise to power was also a dramatic demonstration of the crisis of the French working class movement.
During the crisis, the French Socialist Party’s leadership, and Guy Mollet in particular, were directly accessory to De Gaulle’s rise to power. This action was rightly characterized by Marceau Pivert just before his death as “treason” to the principles of socialism. Because of it, the anti-Mollet tendencies within the SFIO have been strengthened. But though Mollet was forced to postpone a Party meeting for fear of defeat he now seems to be regaining control. Andre Philip accurately stated the situation when he said that the outcome of this fight within the SFIO is of great moment for the future of socialism in France. A victory for the anti-Mollet forces could be a point of departure for a revitalization of French socialism. Their defeat threatens the Party with ineffectiveness at best and to neo-Gaullism at worst (Mollet, of course, is in De Gaulle’s cabinet).
The Communists did not fare much better. For once, they were apparently without a clear directive from Moscow. In the absence of it, they committed themselves to a double policy: support of the Pflimlin Government and the call for a Popular Front. On the first count, they were unable to mobilize any significant section of the working class in defense of bourgeois immobilisme (presuming that they had any intention of attempting to bring the masses into play). On the second count, they had to move in level, the slogan of the Popular Front was doomed. This is how Martinet put it at the Union Gauche Socialiste (UGS) National Council meeting:
For the overwhelming majority of workers who reason in terms of actual experience and not in those of hypothetical theories, the Popular Front has two different meanings: their betrayal through a policy of working class support to a section of the bourgeoisie (a support which is payed for by some reforms but which leads to political defeat); or, it is the prelude to a Communist conquest of power and the institution of a totalitarian regime. In short, the Popular Front means to them either France of 1936 or of 1945, or else Czechoslovakia in 1948.
 
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR an American to advocate a detailed policy for the regroupment of French socialism. That would necessitate a familiarity with the internal life of the various parties which distance denies us. At the same time, however, it is clear that we can comment upon the type of party that is required and the forces which must compose it.
To begin with specific and focal problems facing this regroupment should be noted; the two traditional parties of the French left, the CP and the SFIO. It should be obvious to almost anyone that organic unity with the French Communists, or even formal, negotiated cooperation is out of the question. The party of Thorez is one of the most Stalinized in the international Communist movement. In the past, it was willing to vote “special powers” to the Government for another direction. To press a Popular Front, there had to be the danger of fascism. This the Party produced in some of its appeals, and they substituted rhetorical anti-fascism (culminating in the failure of the strike on May 19) for any real action.
But, on an even more important carrying on the repression in Algeria, and this within the last two years. Although it has won the electoral allegiance of a majority of the French workers, and has enrolled a significant section of the working class in its ranks, it is not a Party of the left, but of the East, of Moscow.
However, excluding electoral pacts and formal cooperation does not mean that the French left can simply ignore the Communists. Where there is a strong democratic socialist leadership it may well be extremely important to involve the Communist ranks in joint, limited action. And in the event of a democratic socialist electoral bloc, it may be possible to force Communist support in the Assembly while rejecting completely any proposal for Communist inclusion in the Government. Both of these policies, for that matter, have an element in common: they might make it possible to win hundreds of thousands, even millions, away from the Communists through providing a real and democratic socialist alternative.
The problem of the SFIO is somewhat more complex. The events of the last two decades have proved that it is extremely difficult to create a new political tradition in France – the PSOP of Pivert and the RDR are cases in point. The Mollet leadership of the SFIO has, of course, become intolerable, anti-socialist. But, as Andre Philip wisely pointed out in the New Leader, the struggle within that Party is of extreme importance. If the SFIO could be won back to a program of democratic socialism, it could provide a rallying point for the regroupment of the left. Some socialists, for example those of the UGS, reject this view and feel that the SFIO must be abandoned to its present disgrace. With all of the qualifications imposed upon one speaking from a distance, it seems that Philip has a more constructive position. But if the fight within the SFIO goes against democratic socialism, that is, if Mollet wins, then it means that the French left must look to the arduous task of both regrouping and creating a new tradition. At such a point, no other alternative will remain open.
Given this view, it is most discouraging to note that some reports from France indicate that Mollet will be able to maintain his leadership. The July 10th issue of L’Express, a Mendesiste paper, found that his strength among the Provincial leadership and in Force Ouvrière, the pro-SFIO trade union federation, is considerable. These elements have apparently been won over by the sterile formula, either De Gaulle or a Popular Front. Since they correctly oppose a Popular Front, and wrongly are incapable of conceiving of an independent socialist policy, they have been reconciled to De Gaulle. Indeed, two members of the SFIO, Alduy and Juskiewenski, have helped in the formation of a center of “left” Gaullistes. The conclusion of the L’Express analysis is that “The Socialist Party has entered into hibernation.” This is certainly true if their judgment is an accurate one. At this point, we can only continue to hope for a development from the SFIO minority.
 
THUS, TIME HAS RUN OUT on the Fourth Republic and the question is, what form will succeed it. In the absence of the emergence of a democratic socialist alternative, the “solution” will move from the center to the right. It might be a continuation of immobilisme in an authoritarian, Gaullist manner; it might be the development of an authoritarian liberalism; it could even mean a more radical change in France and the appearance of a mass fascist movement. Clearly, any of these variants threatens the French people and the Algerians as well.
All this adds up to the fact that the most important task of socialists in France today is the creation of a truly democratic socialist party. The first, hesitant steps have already been taken, and they must be intensified. For it is only when the French people are offered a real chance to vote for Algerian independence and internal French social change that we can hope for a real solution to the crisis of the Fourth Republic. In this sense, after all the betrayals of a decade, socialism remains the one real hope.
 



The American Communist Party, A Critical History (1919–1957)
by Irving Howe and Lewis Coser
with the assistance of Julius Jacobson
IN THIS NEW BOOK ON THE American Communist Party, Irving Howe, Lewis Coser and Julius Jacobson have presented us with an excellent summary of an important political phenomenon. Their study is not as exhaustive as Draper’s brilliant Roots of American Communism, and indeed it makes no attempt to be so. Rather, it is a more general survey, and one which will become indispensable for the student who wants a substantial introduction to the subject.
There is not space here to take up the various interpretations of specific points offered in The American Communist Party. Suffice it to note that the book is political in the good sense of the word, that it relates the events which it describes to the larger context of social change. The section which demonstrates the relationship between the early days of the Party and the developments in American society and in the American labor movement is an excellent example of this kind of treatment.
And yet, even though we cannot review the specific points of this study (which covers a period of nearly forty years), we can go to the chapter, Towards a Theory of Stalinism, for a generalized statement of the political and methodological bent which informs the work as a whole. Much of this recapitulation will be a repetition to the readers of the New International (the theory of Stalinism put forward by the authors of The American Communist Party is substantially the same as the one developed by the independent socialists, often in the pages of this magazine), yet I think it is important in order to give a sense of the book’s basic perspective.
To begin with, the authors relate the development of the American Communist Party to the course of the Russian Revolution and the Stalinist counter-revolution. They view modern Russian society as bureaucratic collectivist (with a “new kind of ruling class that neither owned nor could own property, but instead controlled the state in whose legal custody property resided”), and they see the transformation of the parties of the Communist International into agencies of Russian policy as a function of the changes which took place in Russia. They note, of course, the peculiar characteristics of the American Communist Party which made it so susceptible to this process of Stalinization. And they cite the pitiful record of this Party which, even in its early days, was suspended by wires from Moscow.
Given this perspective, the authors reject the simplistic theory that Stalinism (and the Stalinist parties) “flow” from Leninism. They attempt to strike a balance between two polemical exaggerations: the notion that Lenin’s Russia was totally unrelated to Stalin’s, the rejection of the obvious evidence of anti-democratic practices which were (honestly) adopted as temporary and later cited as precedents for anti-democratic principles; the other extreme, the theory that there was a perfect continuity between Leninism and Stalinism. As the authors point out this latter conception must ignore ... a counter-revolution.
Further, The American Communist Party also tries to define the social roots of Stalinism and the Stalinist parties in general. The authors are right in referring this to the general crisis and breakdown of capitalist society, yet I think they would have gained by making the point a little more precise. For a third part of the equation – the failure of democratic socialism – must be carefully discussed if we are to develop an adequate theory of Stalinism. It is integral to the rise of Stalinism, it is decisive in terms of framing anti-Stalinist politics. It is obvious that the authors are aware of this point (they indicate it specifically), but one would wish that they had followed it out more rigorously.
But given this conception of Stalinism as a social movement, The American Communist Party is able to perform another service: to counter the exaggeration, most typically found in the writings of Sidney Hook, that the Communist Parties were simple “conspiracies.” They write with a good feel for the complexities:
A conspiracy – if that is the exact word for it – did and does exist in the form of an international espionage network maintained by the Russians. This network functioned within the Communist parties, though it probably did its most secretive and dangerous work outside the parties; it recruited agents from the parties, though it was capable of continuing to operate even when the parties were suddenly wiped out; but to identify the espionage system with the Stalinist movement as such, or to assume that party membership almost automatically transformed people into conspirators is an error as dangerous as it is facile.
This understanding leads to another important statement, this time concerning the character of the rank and file of the Communist parties. These people were often recruited to the Party on the basis of idealism, and they made great sacrifices because of their choice. Some, to be sure, were conspirators; some were drawn to the Party for psychological reasons; but many were men and women of truly socialist and humanist consciousness – and they were betrayed. This point is not an academic one; it becomes a practical issue for those who are not willing to see such people permanently “exiled” from democratic movements.
 
GIVEN THIS SUMMARY, I think it is possible to make a more extended comparison of The American Communist Party with Draper’s Roots of American Communism. In general, I think the two histories should be viewed as complementary.
Draper’s study is an excellent, meticulous account of the origins of the Communist Party. It spans but a few years, and its documentation for that period is more extensive han any other study (or, since there are few other books on the subject, it would be better to say that Draper achieves a comprehensiveness which it will be difficult to match in the future). In the Roots of American Communism, there is also a thesis which is central to understanding the Party in this country: the peculiar susceptibility of the American Communists to the process of Stalinization. This is both true and crucial, and Draper was wise to make it a central axis of his entire discussion.
On the whole, Draper’s study is “objective” in character – one could hardly tell that he is a former participant in the movement he discusses, nor does he have an obvious political framework. In one or two places, in some comments on Lenin in particular, there is the hint of a world view, but Draper’s main line of development is that of a judicious and careful recording of the facts.
Such an approach is, obviously, not that of the Marxist. And yet, it would be foolish to think that it is in opposition to a Marxist analysis. Clearly, this kind of hard digging, of accurate documentation, is absolutely essential to a study of any movement or section of history. In this sense, we are all in interpretation on a solid foundation of fact and scholarly judgment. In the independent socialist tendency, The Roots of American Communism has already stimulated Max Shachtman’s provocative article in the New International, and it unquestionably will figure in a continuing debate.
Howe, Coser and Jacobson’s research is by no means as extensive or profound as Draper’s. Their study is much more journalistic (and I do not use the word in a derogatory sense as Arnold Beichman did in his waspish review in the Christian Science Monitor) and also more political. There is no question that the authors are socialist, and that they write of the Communist movement in terms of their own commitment to democratic radicalism. (How and Coser, the main authors, are editors of Dissent; Jacobson, their principal assistant, is editor of the New International). The difference in approach can be seen in almost every incident which is treated in the two books. For the writers of The American Communist Party, social conditions in America during the Party’s formative years are an important element. For Draper, the same events are much more of a backdrop, the inner workings of the Party more central.
As I noted before, I do not think it necessary to “choose” between two such methods. Both elements – the extremely accurate account of events and personalities within the Party, the relation of these facts to social conditions and broader questions – are necessary. Ideally, they might be the stuff of a final and definitive study as a synthesis. As it is, they are present in two books which complement each other.
And yet, the very making of this point requires comment on what must be regarded as the major flaw of The American Communist Party. The authors, as noted before, are socialists, they are concerned to a considerable extent with political interpretation. And yet, there is no adequate discussion of a major theoretical question: what are the basic reasons for the absence of a mass socialist movement in the United States today and what does the history of American Communism indicate about the future of radicalism in America. I am not, of course, suggesting that this question should have been the heart of the book. But I do think, given the authors’ political views, that their study would have been enormously enhanced if they faced up to the question. As they indicate, the Communist Party itself is now shattered. Does that mean that with this obstacle to American radicalism eliminated there is now the possibility of creating a real and democratic socialist movement? This is not a plea for historians to enter into the “regroupment” discussion; but rather, a concern that socialist historians should deal with the pet intellectual anti-socialist theory now current – the view advanced by Bell that America, given its unique history and strength, leaves no room for a mass socialist movement.
 
BUT NO REVIEW OF this new study should end on a tone of criticism. There are deficiencies in The American Communist Party, to be sure. But there is no question that this work will immediately become the standard short history on the subject (even as Draper’s volume has taken a similar pre-eminence in its own sphere of more detailed and scholarly treatment), and that it belongs on the library shelf of every socialist. And particularly for the independent socialist, it is heartening to see that such an excellent theoretical analysis of the nature of the Communist Party, and of Stalinism, is now being made available to the general public.
 



The seizure of power by the Chinese Communists is one of the most important events of the twentieth century. For Communism has triumphed in a land populated by over 500 million people during an era of epochal colonial upheavals and, more than that, China offers the colonial world a disguised alternative to capitalist-imperialist exploitation – totalitarian industrialization.
What kind of a power is this that looms so large in our time? What are its prospects for the future?
On the one hand, there are those who distinguish sharply between Maoism and Stalinism, who believe that the Chinese path of totalitarianism will be less brutal, temporary and more democratic than the Russian. A recent study, The Political Economy of Growth by Paul A. Baran (Monthly Review Press, 1957; $5), can be taken as a comprehensive and serious statement of this point of view. And on the other hand, there is the attitude which maintains that the dynamic of totalitarian industrialization, with its emphasis on heavy industry and its restrictive control of the consumption of the masses, will lead toward a new form of class society. This view was recently argued in Yegael Gluckstein’s Mao’s China.
It is the thesis of this article that the latter analysis is correct, that China under Communism represents the bastion of bureaucratic collectivism in Asia, that it is one of the most powerful forces against socialism, against democracy, in the modern world. In order to document this, let us turn first to the way in which power was seized by the Chinese Communists and the resultant class relations, and then to the actual policy of the Government, the grim reality which contrasts so much with the statements of hope and of socialism.
 
IN 1932, LEON TROTSKY MADE a remarkable prediction – the full implications of which he himself did not understand. He wrote:
The absence of a strong revolutionary party and of mass organizations of the proletariat renders control over the commanding stratum virtually impossible. The commanders and commissars appear in the guise of absolute masters of the situation and upon occupying cities will be rather apt to look down from above upon the workers. [And] In old China every victorious peasant revolution was concluded by the creation of a new dynasty ... Under the present conditions, the peasant war by itself without the direct leadership of the proletarian vanguard can only pass on the power to a new massacre of the workers with the weapons of “democratic dictatorship.” [1]
Half of Trotsky’s prediction came true. The Chinese Communists did take power without the intervention of the urban working class and on the backs of the peasantry. After the disastrous Stalinist policies of the Twenties produced a crushing defeat of the revolution, the workers turned decisively away from the Communists and were not to come into contact with them until the late days of the Civil War in the Forties. [2] Indeed, even in the last stages of the rise to power, an observer quite sympathetic to the Communist cause wrote:
The Chinese Communists were quite weak in the cities; the Chinese proletariat did not represent a sufficiently strong force; and this is why a movement for the general strike could not provoke a rebellion in the army. [3]
But Trotsky was mistaken in his prediction that such a conquest of power would lead to the establishment of a bourgeois regime. This error followed, of course, from his general characterization of Stalinism as a “centrist” force with strong tendencies to capitulate to capitalism. In reality, as we shall see, the Communists, once they seized power, established themselves as a new class force, hostile to bourgeoisie, workers and peasants. The crucial point is that Chinese Communism came to power without any major intervention on the part of the working class. Its motor force was the action of the peasantry. And once in power, its policy conformed perfectly to Trotsky’s analysis in one basic respect: the commanders and commissars appeared in the guise of absolute masters of the situation and “looked down” upon the workers – or rather, established a repressive regime against the workers, against the entire nation.
In a very perceptive comment, Harold Isaacs characterized the Chinese Communist movement in this way:
During the decades following 1927. the CP had become a party of de-urbanized intellectuals and peasant leaders whose main strength lay in the military force which they created and with which they ultimately won power. Apart from its broadly agrarian character and preoccupation, this party and this military force had no consistent class base through the years ... it shifted from one section of the peasantry to another, now seeking the support of the lower strata, now of the upper strata, at times adapting itself without difficulty even to the landlords. It came as a force from the outside, bringing its program with it. [4] (Emphasis added)
And yet, when the Chinese Communist Party entered the cities, a certain prestige still adhered to it. It had, after all, led a victorious struggle against the hated Kuomintang; during various periods of its turn toward the lower peasantry, particularly after 1946, it had carried out a program of land reform. In the period immediately after the Communist conquest, there was activity on the part of the working class in some areas – up to the confiscation of factories in the case of the Liench’ang iron works in Tienstin. These revolutionary manifestations were, of course, immediately put down. In their place, the workers were given the “fight” to have “Factory Committees.” But, as the regulations made plain:
“If a decision passed by a majority of the Factory Committee shall be judged by the Head of the Factory (or the Manager) to be in conflict with said Factory’s best interests, or when the said decision shall be in conflict with the instructions of higher authority, the Manager or Head of the Factory is empowered to prohibit its implementation.” [5]
Thus it was that this “socialist” force maintained an “All China Federation of Trade Unions”, which defined its purpose in the following way: “to ensure and consolidate labor discipline, correctly organize labor, fully and rationally use working hours, raise labor productivity and turn out quality products.” Any reference to the defense of the rights of the workers was, of course, omitted. More recently, Chung Ming, chairman of the Shanghai Trade Union Council, told Walton Cole of Reuters that “the trade unions are organized to enable the workers to accomplish the state plans and observe the laws promulgated by the state.” [6]
Nevertheless, the camouflage of “workers’ rights” is still insisted upon by the Chinese Communists. At the eighth All-China Trade Union Congress held in Peiping in December 1957, Lai Jo-yu, President of the Federation, announced a wider basis for the shop committees. After outlining all the rights of “suggestion” enjoyed by the workers, he carefully stipulated that all this was to be “under conditions that the rights of the management given by the state in carrying out its work are not infringed upon.” [7] And on May 13, 1957, the People’s Daily, official organ of the regime, stated its horror at the fact that workers had ... gone on strike. This followed, by some two or three months, Mao’s affirmation of the right of the workers to strike.
In short, the Chinese Communists turned upon the workers as soon as they took power. They disarmed whatever revolutionary committees there were; they denied the right to strike; they established fraudulent unions whose real function was to maintain labor discipline and to increase productivity. In all of this, there is not the least shred of evidence to suggest that we are dealing with a state representative of the working class in any way.
The peasantry fared no better. The Chinese Communists had a long history of a zig-zag policy with regard to the peasants. In the period immediately after the destruction of the Revolution in the Twenties, there was the establishment of peasant “soviets.” But this experiment was short-lived. In the years that followed, the fundamental mechanism which determined Communist land policy was the course of the struggle with the Kuomintang. In Mao’s famous pronouncement on “New Democracy” in 1940, he stated that the new republic:
... will adopt certain necessary measures to confiscate the land of big landlords and distribute it among peasants ... This is not to build up socialist agriculture, but to turn the land into the private property of the peasants. The rich peasant economy will also be allowed to exist in the rural areas ...
And indeed, in the period of the final phase of the Civil War, the Communists were quite successful in appealing to the masses of the peasantry. After some hesitation, they announced a program for land reform in 1946, and it was this act (coupled with their previous work among the peasants) which secured them a wide basis of support. Thus, when power was taken in 1949, the standard line was that the task of the government was to carry out the bourgeois revolution as a stage on the way to socialism.
For that matter, during the period of consolidation of power (roughly 1949 to 1955), there were continued reaffirmations of the right of peasant property. On February 15, 1953, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party stated,
On the basis of present economic conditions, the individual economic system of the peasants will necessarily continue to exist and expand for a long time to come. It is even necessary to permit the continued development of the economic system of the wealthy peasant. Moreover, the Common Program states that the peasants’ ownership of land will be safeguarded wherever the agrarian reform is carried on. [8]
But this line of accommodation toward the peasantry lasted only until 1955 (and it was often contradicted before then). On July 31st of that year, Mao announced the massive swing toward collectivization. In his report, he emphasized that
socialist industrialization cannot be separated from the development of agricultural cooperatives, not be undertaken by itself. For one thing, everyone knows that in our country the production of marketable grain and of raw materials for industry is at present at a very low level, while the country’s needs in this respect are increasing every year ... During the period covered by the three Five Year Plans, we must manage to arrive at some radical solution of the problem of agricultural cooperatives. [9]
In other words, the determination of the regime to industrialize was the main factor forcing the decision to engage in large-scale collectivization. In Mao’s report, it was made clear that this was done against considerable opposition within the Party itself (which is, after all, overwhelmingly peasant in social composition).
The result of this policy was a massive flight from the land into the cities. [10] It resulted in such a crisis of the regime that Mao made his speech of February 1957, On Contradictions, in which he tried to mollify the opposition. This, as is well known, failed and was followed almost immediately by the violent campaign against the “rightists,” i.e., against anyone who raised his voice in minimal criticism of the regime. But of this development, more a little later on.
In summary, then, the Chinese Communist policy toward the peasant has been dedicated to a line of super-exploitation in order to obtain surpluses for investment purposes. This has been met by violent resistance, and has strengthened all the totalitarian aspects of the state power. For that matter, this totalitarianism is inherent to Communist China, since it is the only way in which such a program of forced industrialization can possibly be carried out. But even here, we must be careful not to simplify for the totalitarian power itself is, wracked by its own crises. Bureaucratic planning has resulted in enormous waste, and this has introduced an element of instability into the regime. In 1956, for example, a general overestimation on the part of the planners, coupled with a series of natural calamities, led to a lop-sided development. Consequently, 1957 was a year of cut-back and repression, and the “anti-rightist” campaign was inextricably linked with this fact. Nevertheless, the Communists have maintained their power, and done so, even with their disastrous mistakes, by fighting against the peasantry, by exploiting them through terror. In one brief period, over half a million peasants were rounded up in a single Chinese city and sent back to the countryside!
 
THE CHINESE BOURGEOISIE HAS, of course, been completely subjected to the power of the state apparatus. This has not, however, meant total control. In part, Mao’s policy toward the capitalists is historically conditioned. During the last days of the Civil War, the Kuomintang regime had become so corrupt and repressive that it had even alienated a good sector of bourgeois opinion. [11] Gluckstein quotes a leading capitalist weekly in Hong Kong on the eve of the Communist seizure of power:
The remaining foreigners in Shanghai are looking for an improvement when the Communist-appointed administration will assume control; as it has been for the last three-and-a-half years, life appeared to many as intolerable in chaotic Shanghai. [12]
But this policy of concessions toward the bourgeoisie, like the similar attitude taken toward private peasant property, was to be a temporary affair. Having established the regime and achieved some economic order, the Communists launched the “Five-Anti” campaign. Hundreds of thousands of private holdings were investigated, and the state announced that it had discovered illegal profits of over two and a half billion dollars. After this campaign, and the resultant fall in production, there were other attempts to conciliate the capitalists, but all within the context of tight state control. Moreover, the commanding heights of the economy are completely statified. As early as 1952, the regime announced that
nationalization extended to about 80 per cent of the heavy industry, and 40 per cent of the light industry; the government operated all of the railways and about 60 per cent of the steamships plying the home waters; it controlled 90 per cent of all loans and deposits through the People’s Bank; finally state companies were responsible for about 90 per cent of imports and exports, for about half the wholesale trade and for about 30 per cent of the retail trade. [13]
At the Eighth Congress of the Chinese Communist Party, a program of continuing statification was laid out. Typically, it was proposed that the old capitalist apparatus in a factory should be assimilated into the state management upon nationalization. [14] And even now, the “joint” state-private companies, and the state power of taxation and investigation (as in the “Five-Anti” Campaign) mean that bourgeois enterprise is on sufferance, that it has a temporary lease on life, and will be tolerated as long as it maintains a certain efficiency of production. To see in such a pattern (as some socialists do) a capitulation “to the right” is truly an incredible feat of theory.
In other words, the Communist regime of China has carried out a war against the three major and non-ruling classes of the nation: against the peasants, the workers and the bourgeoisie. Each class has, in its own way, felt the lash of state power. At the same time, the growing totalitarian might of the state has provided a position of privilege for the Communists themselves. These have not yet reached the level of the Russian bureaucrats – the wealth of the nation being exploited is not as great as that of Russia – but it is growing. Indeed, the path of privilege in China has been made easier because of the Russian experience. In 1952, the People’s Daily was able to editorialize on The Incompatibility of Socialism and Equalitarianism.
During the period of criticism which operated after Mao’s speech on letting “a hundred flowers bloom,” Chang Po-cheng, assistant director of the Teachers’ College Propaganda Department, and Hwang Chen-lu, editor of the college review, made a joint statement at the Teachers’ Training College of Shenyang. In part, they said:
The Communist Party having set itself up as a privileged class, we find worthless Communists at all the important posts ... Certain militant Communists are drawn to high salaried public offices like flies to a dish of honey, and these activists set up barbed wire fences and an iron curtain between the Communist Party and the people. [15]
All of this gives us a picture of the regime which emerged from Mao’s conquest of power in 1949. After winning a victory on the basis of peasant support, the Chinese Communists turned against the peasants; turned on the workers and bourgeoisie; embarked on a program of forced heavy industrialization; and began the work of creating a series of class privileges for the members of the Party. In short, we have a near classic case of bureaucratic collectivism, of the power of a bureaucratic class resting upon its control of statified industry.
 
OUR DISCUSSION, SO FAR, relates to Paul Baran’s recent book, The Political Economy of Growth. For Baran has developed an image of underdeveloped societies pursuing the path of totalitarian accumulation (and therefore, one would assume, of China above all) which is sharply at variance with the interpretation in the first section of this article. His study is a serious one (and by no means confined to this one subject), and deserves careful treatment and analysis. In dealing with it, we will initially be concerned with Baran’s generalizations and then relate them to the actual experiences of the Chinese Communists.
Technically, Baran’s book is not addressed to totalitarian regimes like China, but nations like India. And yet, the real heart and soul of this study is the author’s commitment to a Communist-type accumulation of capital. That, obviously, is the guiding principle of his theory which is much more than a simple economic critique of waste under capitalism; it is a program for Communism in Asia, a justification for it.
Here are the main points of Baran’s thesis:
... contrary to the commonly held view that receives a great deal of emphasis in Western writings on underdeveloped countries, the principal obstacle to their development is not shortage of capital. What is short in all of these countries is what we have termed actual economic surplus invested in the expansion of productive facilities. The potential economic surplus that could be made available for such investment is large in all of them. [16]
The principal obstacle to rapid economic growth in the backward countries is the way in which their potential economic surplus is utilized. [17]
And if Professor Mason ... objects to the “extraordinary rapid rate” of increase of national income that can be attained in a socialist society because it would depend on a “totalitarian regime exercising the weapons of terror (and) ... squeezing standards of living ... that no democratic state could possibly accomplish,” he does not note the fact that such terror as has taken place in the course of all social revolutions – frequently excessive, always painful and deplorable – represents the inevitable birth pains of a new society, and that such squeezing of living standards as has occurred has effected primarily, if not solely, the ruling class whose excess consumption, squandering of resources and capital flight had to be “sacrificed” to economic development. [18]
There can be doubt that such a revolutionary break with the centuries-old backwardness of the antediluvian Russian village could not have been achieved with the consent of the irrational, illiterate and ignorant peasantry ... What is decisive ... is whether the changes that do take place actually correspond to society’s objectivity extant and objectively ascertainable needs. [19]
From these representative quotations, it is clear that Baran stands for a totalitarian (if necessary) mobilization of the considerable resources of underdeveloped societies for the purpose of creating socialism. And the specific points which I would like to emphasize by way of analysis are: the extent, and the source of the economic surplus which Baran believes is available; the difficulties of even a totalitarian mobilization; the fact that such a technique cannot lead to socialism.
First, there is Baran’s confident assumption that a considerable surplus already exists in these societies – that they are not short of capital – and that the only problem is rational mobilization and investment of the existent surplus. On this point, we can do no better than to heed an analysis made by one who is in sympathy with Baran’s general friendliness toward Communist industrialization. The following quotation is from Number 3 of The New Reasoner (an English publication which is the organ of a group of ex-Communists, almost all of whom still regard Russia and China as some kind of a socialist formation), and was signed by “A Contributor.” It is a devastating critique, and, in its second paragraph, considerably more frank than anything in The Political Economy of Growth.
The chief criticism is that a rather facile view is taken of economic growth once the socialist revolution is accomplished. This appears to stem in part from Professor Baran’s own qualitative estimates, and from Dr. H. Oshima’s unpublished quantitative estimates, of the potential surplus available even at the current level of output of backward countries, but wasted by their present economic and social systems. According to Dr. Oshima’s estimates, which Professor Baran quotes, the wasted surplus was, in Malaya (1947) 23 per cent of gross national product, in Ceylon (1951) 20 per cent, in the Philippines (1948) 16 per cent, in India (undated) 10 per cent, and in Thailand (undated) 26 per cent. No indication is given as to how these estimates have been compiled. But if the same conceptual basis has been used as that adopted by Professor Baran, then they substantially overestimate the potential available for mobilization in the service of economic growth. In the first place, Professor Baran includes in the potential surplus all military expenditure. But the socialist revolution will not bring the backward countries into some hypothetical world united in a socialist commonwealth which will enable them to dispense with armies and armaments. Secondly, Professor Baran’s potential surplus involves some double counting. He includes not only the excess consumption of the upper income groups, but also of the output of workers engaged in manufacturing “luxury articles of all kinds, objects of conspicuous display and marks of social distinction.” But the latter are what the rich consume all over again.
The tremendously high rates of economic expansion in the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe have been achieved not merely by the mobilization of Professor Baran’s potential surplus, but also by freeing resources through an initial reduction in standards of living of the bulk of the population, which is excluded from Professor Baran’s concept. [20]
Clearly, I do not share the general political attitude of this critic, and his sympathies for Communism in particular. But this is exactly what makes his overall analysis the more telling – for he does agree with Baran.
Now, let us turn to the actual situation in China and attempt to give flesh to a more extended criticism of Baran’s statements. According to the Political Economy of Growth, we should expect to find in China:

that investment is obtained from the surpluses of the old 	ruling class and of imperialism;
 
that therefore there is no decrease in the consumption of the 	masses, or only a relatively small decrease.

To begin with, Chinese Communist sources themselves contradict Baran’s point of view. The major source of extracting surplus, if we are to credit Mao’s speech of July, 1955, is through the collectivization of agriculture, i.e. through the exploitation of the peasantry. This, as we shall show, does not simply mean the allocation of the old profits to social investment, but rather it is achieved through decreasing the share of the peasant (and the worker) in the increased productivity of the nation – that is, through the restriction of the consumption of the masses.
In terms of real wages, our problem is complicated by the difficulties attendant upon obtaining valid statistics. It is possible, for example, to make a favorable comparison between a post-1949 year and various years during the Civil War. By December of 1949, the inflation had reached such a level that, if the period of July 1936 to June 1937 is taken as the base of 1, prices were: food, 11,600; agricultural foodstuffs, 12,293; animal products, 10,089 and so on. [21]  Even making allowances for this situation, we can definitely establish that it is the peasants who have, in the main, paid for the new investment, and paid in living standards; and that the workers have also been tremendously constricted by the regime.
There is, for one thing, a “scissors” between countryside and city, that is, an economic mechanism which puts the peasant at an enormous disadvantage. Communist sources indicate that the prices of manufactured articles were increasing at a much faster rate than those of agricultural products. [22] And a year after the collectivization drive was begun by Mao, one correspondent reported that the People’s Daily
declared that the situation was not bad from the economic point of view, and that state control had resulted in increased productivity. But, it added that from the political and psychological point of view the situation was deplorable ... Indeed, the whole scheme had fallen down on one fundamental issue: the earnings of the peasant had not increased. [23]
Thus, contrary to Baran’s model, the source of surplus from investment was not simply a utilization of the old (monopolized by imperialism and the native ruling class) potential, but a result of the increased exploitation of the peasantry (using that term in its “classic” sense as designating the ratio between the paid and unpaid portions of the working day).
The situation of the workers is, of course, somewhat better than that of the peasantry. However, all government figures must be used quite critically, since they usually do not indicate the amount of wages that is “contributed” to one or another cause imposed by the regime, e.g. the Korean War. But even given these difficulties, Gluckstein’s conclusion, after balancing the available statistical information, was:
This rough calculation suggests that real wages expressed in dollars or pounds of constant value, have probably not changed much one way or the other since more than thirty years ago. [24]
Again, it must be emphasized that this is in the context of increased productivity, and that a stable level of wages thereby signifies an increase in exploitation.
But we need not stay on the ground of statistical speculation. There is, for example, this very interesting statement of the People’s Daily in September 1957. It is from an editorial entitled, We must Try to Reduce the Consumption of Cereals in the Town.
The standard of living in the towns having always been relatively high and the consumption of cereals fairly important, will not the townsfolk grumble at the Party and the government now that they are being asked to reduce their consumption? ... In order that town dwellers may actively support the slogans calling for reduced consumption, we need only explain to the people that the economies effected in the case of cereals are of great political and economic significance for the consolidation of the alliance between workers and peasants. [25]
This kind of evidence is sharply opposed to Baran’s thesis of an accumulation primarily derived from curtailing the profits of the old, parasitic classes. We have instead a picture involving two elements: the possibility of an absolute decrease in living standards (suggested by the People’s Daily editorial); and the certainty of a relative decrease, that is, of the increase of the surplus which is taken away from the producers. This is not to argue that there is a widespread immiseration as compared with the era of the Kuomintang. It is merely to document the question of who is paying for all those steel mills. Baran’s theory would suggest that the answer is the old profit-makers. The reality is to the contrary: never having been asked about it, the workers and peasants are paying.
It must be emphasized that none of this should be taken as a denial of the technological accomplishments of the Chinese Communists nor as a theory of galloping immiseration. Through the stabilization of currency, the creation of a unified economy and other actions of the Communists, there has been a rise in real wages in many sectors of the country. But even here, this fact must be seen in context. As the United Nations Economic Survey of Asia and the Far East, 1957, pointed out, the priority of capital over consumer goods has given rise to very real inflationary tendencies in China. [26] To counter this, the regime has employed two main measures. One is the direct restriction of consumption through rationing. The other is the standard Stalinist technique of siphoning off purchasing power (after the “real” wage figures have been trumpeted to the world) through demanding “voluntary” subscriptions to bond issues, contributions to campaigns, etc., and through forcing peasants to sell surplus grain at state prices rather than at the higher level of a local market. Thus, we must also take into account the various techniques of depriving the masses of at least part of their apparent gains.
Finally, a few other points about the source of investment surplus and living standards should be cleared up.
As was mentioned before, the regime itself is conscious of the locus of its surpluses. That is why Mao, in his speech of July 1955 argued for collectivization as a means of solving “contradictions between our requirements in marketable grain and industrial raw materials – which are increasing each year – and the present very low level of output of the principal agricultural products.” [27] Those who believe that this has been done by simultaneously raising the level of peasant living standards had better pay more attention to the Chinese Communist press. For some time now, and particularly since the collectivization drive, there have been regime reports of a “Blind, massive” flight of the peasantry to the towns. The most recent statement of this theme can be found in the dispatches to the New York Times from David Chipp of Reuters (who recently returned from China). [28]
Indeed, the most obvious sign of peasant discontent has been the introduction by the Communists of a system of internal passports – that hallowed technique of the most reactionary tyrannies. It is now impossible to move from one place to another without official permission. [29] This, most observers agree, was aimed at the peasant resistance and flight to the cities. It hardly corroborates the Baran thesis of the “easy” transition.
And then, we must take unemployment into account as another social cost of the heavy industry policy. According to a Hong Kong dispatch in 1957, it appears that the jobless now total “many millions” [30] in China. The root of this situation, admitted by the regime, is that the headlong emphasis on building up a lop-sided economy with a huge heavy industrial base has not kept pace with the population growth. (Incidentally, Baran is a classical “anti-Malthusian” which is a luxury which even Mao cannot afford. In 1956, the regime reversed its previous line and came out in favor birth control and changed the laws on abortion.)
Finally, another group paying a high price for industrialization are the students and intellectuals, particularly those who took the “hundred flowers” speech seriously. In the February 6, 1958 issue of France-Observateur, Francis Fejto reports the deportation of a million such people to the collective farms. This is one method of solving the manpower problem.
To summarize this criticism of Baran’s first proposition: the evidence does not indicate that the problem of China’s development has been one of mobilizing a potential surplus which had previously been dissipated by the ruling class. On the contrary, the exploitation of the workers and peasants has been the mainspring of accumulation; and this has been done without raising the living standard of the masses appreciably, indeed it has sometimes resulted in an absolute decrease in consumption. Thus, even with a totalitarian apparatus, there is no easy transition to industrialization in an underdeveloped country which relies primarily on its own resources. Baran’s view not only does not illuminate the actual facts of the situation – it leads to a political assumption of a degree of satisfaction and support for the regime on the part of the masses that is contradicted by everything we have learned from China in recent years.
 
THERE IS ANOTHER PROPOSITION in Baran’s thesis – more implicit than stated. Since he posits the primary problem as one of mobilizing actual potential, and in doing so contrasts the techniques of totalitarian industrialization to those of the state capitalist road (India), Baran is implicitly arguing in favor of the efficiency of totalitarian industrialization. For here, to be sure, we do have an enormous mobilization of resources. However, this factor – present, for example, in the great strides of Russian rocket research and production, or in the undeniable material advances made by the Chinese Communists in heavy industry – must be seen in a larger context, and that includes bureaucratic mismanagement, the inefficiencies of totalitarian planning.
The democratic socialist concept of social planning is based on the idea of policy control by the people themselves, and a constant exchange of information between central agencies and local groupings. But under conditions of totalitarianism, these checks on the errors of the planners are simply not present – and the conditions for appalling waste are created. Khrushchev’s speech on the decentralization of the ministries gave us a view of the fantastic situation prevailing in Russia up until two years ago (and there is every likelihood that the fundamental problem remains since only the structure of the Russian system was altered, and not its basic premise). And in China we can see similar situations developing. Indeed, there is evidence that the Chinese Communists are attempting to follow the Russian lead in a “decentralization” program. [31]
The case of the plow is the most recent, and illuminating example, indicating the problems of totalitarian planning. Recently, China has been in the midst of a severe agricultural crisis. The over-ambitious plans of 1956 ran into peasant opposition and severe natural calamities. And the 2,500,000-ton grain increase in 1957 was the smallest increment to be reported under a five year plan. [32] In December 1957, an agriculture ministry spokesman told a Reuters correspondent that it is an “open secret” that some peasants and cooperatives still “affected by old ideologies” are engaged in hoarding. [33] Moreover, since the new birth control campaign has not yet proved effective the regime is faced with the problem of finding food for an annual population increase of 13,000,000 consumers. [34]
In this context, it is obvious that the development of agriculture is of prime necessity for Mao. And yet, during the first half of 1956, the Communists manufactured 1,400,000 plows which were ... useless! [35] The plans were copied from a Russian model which had been designed for broad flat wheatlands – and were almost completely unsuited for the terraced, intensive agriculture of China. In addition, they were so heavy that one farmer could not drag one of them over the ridges between fields, and two water buffaloes sometimes balked at pulling them. And yet, according to the monthly Planned Economy of December 23, 1956 [36], the plows were sold to regional distributors by “various compulsory means.” Those farmers who received one called them “plows for hanging up purposes.”
This is what was behind those charming pictures of Mao turning a furrow himself. Such a ritual has long been associated with the Emperor; but more importantly, it was a cover up for a huge waste of resources.
In a very interesting article, Research and Freedom in Undeveloped Countries
[37], Stephen Dedijer summed up the effect of this bureaucratic waste on scientific research:
This danger is also present with respect to the role of industry in developing research. The primitive peasant agriculture and small industry – mostly extractive or manufacturing a narrow variety of goods by primitive factories for the local market – never had nor even felt the need for research. There may exist a danger that when the industry starts developing under the narrow policy of “economics is primary” it contributes little to the formation of a research policy. This can occur in the general atmosphere of a dictatorship when there is little incentive for the individual enterprises to develop new products or improve or produce more of the old. It can occur if there is too much planning and bureaucratic control and interference in the economy ... In a country that has failed to open up the channels of communication, there is grave danger that a hit-and-miss research policy based on unrealistic, purely political motives will be set up by inexperienced state bureaucrats.
The description fits China beautifully. How can we explain the fantastic case of 1,400,000 useless plows? Or the over-estimation of the educational facilities which resulted in a 40 per cent surplus of students in 1957 (one of the reasons for the “voluntary,” back-to-the-land line of the regime)? Yes, Chinese Communism industrializes – but at an enormous cost and through an enormous waste. Baran seems to assume that the only problem of transition is a willingness to mobilize potential surplus, he has left out a crucial element (indeed, in the long run, the crucial element): democracy which is an economic as well as a political necessity for socialism.
One final point from Baran’s book – his dismissal of violence as an “inevitable” concomitant of revolution. It is, of course, true that the great revolutions of the past – the English in the seventeenth century, the French in the eighteenth – were accompanied by great internal convulsions, by violence. But there were the struggles in which a minority (in the cases cited above, the bourgeoisie) were carrying on a struggle against feudalism. We cannot, of course, rule out violence in some areas of the socialist revolution (in Hungary, for instance, it was made necessary by the totalitarian character of the class enemy), but neither are we bound by old predictions, particularly as they relate to the advanced countries. The thesis recently offered by the French left socialists of the Union de la Gauches Socialistes discussing the possibilities of peaceful transition in advanced countries is of great interest in this regard. [38]
But where there is violence in the case of a socialist revolution we can make certain generalizations about it: first, that it is the last resort imposed by the armed resistance of the minority to the established, democratic will of the majority; second, that it is a temporary phenomenon; third, that it is directed against the armed insurrectionists of the old classes. How does this relate to China? In the beginning, one can argue that the violence was that of the majority against a fanatical, anti-democratic and unrepresentative minority. But that revolution, as we demonstrated in the first section of this article, was betrayed in the very process of its success. It was the means whereby a minority assumed total control over the majority.
In China today, terror and violence are a built-in feature of the system directed against workers and peasants, against the majority, by a tiny and determined minority. For Baran to analogize this to Marx’s discussion of violence, or to the general socialist attitude on violence, is incredible. It is true enough that a certain grim, brainwashing technique of “persuasion” is often used by the Maoist, but that cannot hide the ultimate basis of the dictatorship – which is its monopoly of the means of destruction and its willingness to use them against the majority.
Thus, on every count, I find Baran’s basic thesis lacking: first, his assertion that a potential surplus of the old ruling classes suffices for industrialization, or is the primary base of it, does not correspond to the Chinese reality; second, his assumption about the efficiency of a totalitarian industrialization does not take into account the available evidence of the waste of this regime; and finally, his cavalier remarks on violence have little or nothing to do with the Chinese situation – or with socialism.
 
CHINA IS A BUREAUCRATIC collectivist state; a dynamic, Asian repetition of the Russian pattern. Its motor is forced industrialization; its means, the exploitation of the vast majority. Its power rests ultimately upon terror. And those who believe that we have here a fundamental departure from Stalinism are wrong. Given the greater distance which the Maoists must traverse before they achieve industrialization, given the fantastic pressures of population growth, there is every indication that this will be an even more terrible counter-revolution than the Russian.
Ultimately, the argument of those who support such a pattern of totalitarian accumulation in the name of “socialism” rests upon a curiously mechanistic foundation. There were those in the European socialist movement before the first World War who pointed out that imperialism brought “culture” to backward peoples, that it shattered outlived social systems and prepared the way for the future. Consequently, they went on, imperialism was progressive. The Marxists of that period (I am thinking particularly of Luxemburg and Lenin) rejected this argument out of hand, for it divorced social development from the actual living struggles of the workers and of the colonial people. In the Junius Brochure, Luxembourg directed her scorn upon those bourgeois economists who saw each new railroad as an advance of “progress and culture.”
And so we must confront a new variant of this mechanism: only now it is not based upon the statistics of capitalist expansion, but rather upon the charts of bureaucratic accumulation. In each case, the grand historic abstraction allows its proponent to forget the very heart and soul of socialism – the actual lives of workers and peasants. To be sure, and Luxembourg noted this with regard to capitalist imperialism, there is a sense in which this accumulation prepares the way for socialism. So did American expansion during World War II, so did Pérez Jiménez’ policy in Venezuala – so does any increase in the productive power of the economy. If such a statistical evaluation were all that was necessary for the Marxist, then politics would indeed be simple.
But what is the policy of these “progressivists” during a strike under Mao? Toward peasant resistance to forced collectivization? Do not such acts “retard” the raising of productivity? Of course they do. And if the figures of increased heavy industry are enough to guarantee the progressive character of a regime and a social system, then the “socialist” is honor bound to take his side with the police power and against the (unfortunately) wrongheaded people.
But then, the traditional Trotskyist analysis avoided this dilemma. It conceived the bureaucracy as reactionary, as a fetter upon production; and the mere existence of nationalized property as progressive. Consequently, this point of view was able to defend the resistance of the people against the bureaucrats though it led to support for the imperialist imposition of bureaucratic collectivism in Poland). From an internal point of view, then, there was to be opposition; but with regard to the menace of capitalist imperialism, support of the social system, as it is, in the name of the defense of its progressive core.
This distinction never had any relevance; but to continue to maintain it now, in the face of the current evidence, is truly incredible. If it means simply that socialists do not support any imperialist power, i.e. that we do not support an American financed attack by Chiang on the Chinese mainland, that has nothing to do with our attitude toward the social system. But if it means that in an intra-imperialist conflict, in a struggle between two exploitative social systems, that the socialists “chooses” one over the other, then it is another form of social patriotism. And there is still another, and new, point Since a third, imperialist war runs the risk of the extermination of mankind, this becomes an over-riding consideration. We could not, for that matter, take responsibility for the purest socialists state in the world which employed nuclear holocaust as the means of “socialist” policy.
But what then should our attitude be toward China? Clearly, it must rest, basically and primarily, upon our solidarity with the Chinese people. As this article has demonstrated, even if in sketchy fashion, these workers and peasants are currently being victimized by the Chinese bureaucracy. That means that we cannot spread the myth, the illusion of abstract progressivism, that Mao is to be supported. Even as we subject the reactionary impotence of Chiang and his Kuomintang to analysis, even as we record the increase in production statistics, we cannot let our attention wander from the central problem: that of the people. Our aim, then, is to achieve the social transformation which China so urgently needs, in a progressive way, and not through the support of Mao’s totalitarian exploitation.
Concretely, this means that American socialists should make their criticisms of Mao in a certain context. The horrors of totalitarian accumulation, it goes almost without saying, are not documented in order to smear democratic socialist planning. And the necessary work of exposing Mao’s road must be coupled with a positive socialist alternative; and not abstractly, but in terms of avoiding World War III. Today, this means that independent socialists must urge an American program of massive aid to the colonial revolution, understanding all the while that this single point implies a far reaching campaign to change the very basis of American politics.
* * *
Notes
1. Both from Peasant War In China, translated in the Bulletin of Marxist Studies, No. 1, August 1957, pp. 15–16.
2. cf. Chinese Communism and the Rise of Mao by Benjamin Schwartz, Harvard, 1952, p. 97.
3. Jack Belden, China Shakes the World (French ed. 1951), p. 454.
4. Harold Isaacs, The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution (rev. ed.), p. 312.
5. cf. The Stalinist State in China, by M.Y. Wang, New International, March–April 1951, p. 101.
6. New York Times, February 25, 1958.
7. Quoted in an article by Tilman Durdin, New York Times, January 5, 1958.
8. For a full and documented discussion of Chinese Communist peasant policy in this period, see Leon Tribiere, The 1951 pre-Kolkhoze Policy in China at the Turning-Point in July, 1955, and the Crisis in the Chinese Communist Party, Saturn, Jan.–Feb. 1956.
9. Translated in Saturn, ibid., pp. 85–6.
10. cf. Mao’s China by Michael Harrington, in the Winter 1958 issue of Anvil.
11. Belden, op. cit., p. 483; and Gluckstein, Mao’s China (1957), pp. 192ff.
12. Gluckstein, op. cit., p. 193.
13. Quoted in China Under Communism, by Richard Walker, p. 106.
14. Proposals of the Eighth National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party for the Second Five Year Plan (Peiping 1956), pp. 24–5
15. Quoted in Saturn, December 1957, p. 87.
16. Paul Baran, The Political Economy of Growth, pp. 226–7.
17. Ibid., p. 228.
18. Ibid., p. 255.
19. Ibid., p. 278.
20. The New Reasoner, Winter 1957–58, pp. 121–22.
21. Gluckstein, op. cit., p. 103.
22. Ibid., p. 104.
23. Robert Gullian, Taking Away the ‘Good Earth’, New Republic, March 13, 1957. p. 33.
24. Gluckstein, op. cit., p. 255.
25. Quoted in Saturn, December 1957, pp. 151ff.
26. cf. Hans Bayer, Chinesische Wirtschaftspolitik, Gerwerkschaftliche Monatshefte 11, November 1957, p. 676.
27. Saturn, Jan.–Feb. 1956, p. 86.
28. New York Times, January 15, 1958.
29. New York Times, January 11, 1958.
30. New York Times, September 12, 1957.
31. New York Times, March 30, 1958.
32. New York Times, December 5, 1957.
33. Ibid.
34. New York Times, March 30, 1958.
35. New York Times, January 28, 1958, quoting the Chinese Communist press.
36. Quoted, ibid.
37. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, September 1957.
38. La Révolution Qui Vient, by Yvan Craipeau (1957).
 



Going through some back issues of the New Yorker I came across one of the most fascinating studies to have appeared in recent American magazines. Appearing in the October 26, 1957 issue, The Study of Something New in History, is a report on the U.S. Army analysis of the experiences of prisoners of war in North Korean camps. The piece is lengthy and well documented, and it would be impossible to detail all the evidence here. But take a few of the major points:
“One out of very three American prisoners in Korea was guilty of some sort of collaboration with the enemy ...”; “... the prisoners, as far as Army psychiatrists have been able to discover, were not subjected to anything that could properly be called brainwashing ...”; the breakdown of Army discipline – in the early days of the war involving attacks by enlisted men upon officers – resulted in an extraordinary high death-rate among Americans. Where the Turks, for example, maintained a morale, espirit de corps and group solidarity and made the tending of the wounded a collective responsibility, there was a tremendous tendency on the part of the Americans to become isolated, anti-social individuals. The consequence was, often enough, death. How explain all of this?
The Army’s conclusion is that the American soldier was not “prepared” to become a prisoner. For one thing, the sudden transition from Western to Oriental living standards was a profound shock. For another, the Americans were not prepared to deal with the carefully worked-out campaign of demoralization and indoctrination employed by the Communists. This does not mean that the disintegration of American morale was a consequence of “brainwashing,” i.e., of the use of drugs, hypnotic technique, torture, so as to change the personality of the subject in a fundamental way. On the contrary, the Chinese did not normally employ these techniques. Rather, they relied upon more simple techniques of the stick and carrot, of humiliation and favors, of atomizing the American units and setting soldier against soldier.
But then, the Army, as least as its views are reported in the New Yorker piece, could not (publicly) face up to more underlying causes of the crack-up in the Korean war camps. For these involve a recognition of the massive, world-historical transformation that is taking place in Asia and throughout the globe – a knowledge which is apparently denied to American statesmen and generals today.
The Korean War was the first time in history that an Oriental army met a first-class Occidental army and gained a stalemate. True, there were all kinds of mitigating factors. MacArthur was not allowed to bomb China itself; there were political limitations placed upon the conflict, etc. But when all the proper qualifications are made, an enormous fact remains: the myth of “white superiority,” of the Chinese as the slightly comic corner laundryman was shattered. That this was done by a Chinese Army which fought in the interests of a totalitarian and imperialist world-system does not alter the reality. In World War II, there was never a defeatist mood in America – it was always known that the power of the United States would prevail over the “Japs.” But the Korean War was different.
It would seem quite difficult to underestimate the psychological impact of this change. One point from the New Yorker is illuminating in this regard. In the first stage of the War (from June to late November), the battle was primarily between the North Koreans and the Americans. MacArthur’s insane policy of pursuit across the Thirty-Eighth Parallel (a policy blessed by Washington and revelatory of the more basic aims of American participation in the war) resulted in the sudden appearance of the Chinese Army late in 1950. The North Koreans had often shot prisoners, and the rumour among the American soldiers was that this was the expected fate of the captured. But the Chinese changed that policy. Sometimes, they even shook hands with the man they had just taken prisoner. The North Korean practice conformed to stereotypes of “Oriental” cruelty; but the Chinese shattered this conception. The result was that many a captive was thrown off balance at the instant of his capture. Or so the Army reports.
But secondly, there is the whole question of the role of politics in an Army. From the French Revolutionary Army, through the Red Army of Trotsky and in the streets of Budapest in 1956, it has been demonstrated time and again that a conscious, aware army – an armed movement of the people – has tremendous qualities of resourcefulness, bravery and the like. In a sense, the American Army in Korea in 1950–53 was the exact reverse of this image of the revolutionary Army. More than at any time in history there was a fuzziness as to precisely what the war was about; there was the frustrating fact that it could not be decisively ended; and there was the general lack of a political consciousness of participation, on the part of soldiers, on the part of people back home.
World War II had the minimal virtue of being fought under a progressive mythology; the Whitmanesque nothings of a Henry Wallace could provide it with the sound, if not the substance, of a liberal crusade against fascism. But the Korean War was fought against a progressive mythology, i.e. against a vicious system which, however, masks itself in the rhetoric of socialist humanism. And on the American side, there was no consensus as to what it all meant, no rhetorician to dress imperialism up in the armor of a crusade. It is impossible to read the New Yorker discussion without realizing that this factor – so pervasive in all of our national life today – was one of the elements in the incredible breakdown of the Army in the camps.
And what is the Army’s answer? In part, it is Eisenhower’s grim little statement, “I am an American fighting man” which is based on the assumption that what the Army knows happened did not happen, i.e. business at normal. In part, it will be, according to the New Yorker, a campaign to better acquaint soldiers with the conditions they will face upon capture. And, in part, it will be a program of political indoctrination. The only problem with the last point is that America today doesn’t even possess a good bogus political rationale for its policy. Once the platitudes about the “Free World” are over, there is nothing there. And so long as this persists, the terrible results of the Korean PW camps will be a very real possibility.
 



Has there ever been a novel in which a character is as politically motivated as Koestler’s Rubashov in Darkness at Noon and, at the same time, is a round, complicated person like James’ Princess Casimassima? Has there, in short, ever been a really successful political novel?
If we want to answer these questions seriously, our first task is to embrace a certain vagueness. The novel is hard enough to define in itself – and when all is said and done we should be glad to settle for E.M. Forster’s masterful imprecision: a novel tells a story. Given this shaky beginning, things get even trickier when we speak of a “political” novel. Since the term does not indicate a general style, like naturalism or impressionism, since it is a definition in terms of subject matter, we seem to be faced by a miserable critical alternative. On the one hand, we can define the political novel so broadly that it encompasses almost the whole history of the novel and thus becomes vague and useless. Or else, we can specify our definition more carefully and run the risk of inventing a sterile and artificial construction.
In his recent, provocative study of Politics and the Novel, Irving Howe attempted to cut this Gordian knot. To one reviewer, his definition seemed arbitrary and whimsical, but one suspects that this was because he was unaware of the intricacies involved. Howe wrote:
“By a political novel I mean a novel in which political ideas play a dominant role or in which the political milieu is the dominant setting – though again a qualification is necessary, since the word ‘dominant’ is more than a little questionable. Perhaps it would be better to say: a novel in which we take to be dominant political ideas or the political milieu ...”
Let this stand as a working definition. It simplifies, it is highly subjective, and it is probably as well as we will ever be able to do. But once having accepted it, let me state a perspective somewhat bleaker than Howe’s: the successful political novel will either be a roman a clef, the charade of a sociological analysis, or else the politics will be swallowed up by the apolitical. The first alternative, the method of Darkness at Noon, 1984, The Iron Heel, may produce works of a limited, though undeniable, genius. The second may result in a masterpiece, as in the case of Man’s Fate, but the technique is the subordination of the political to some other dominant motive – that is, the book practically ceases to be a political novel.
Why is this true? In part the answer is historical, it is found in the development of the novel, in particular it is the consequence of its complex relation to the fate of bourgeois society. And in part, the answer is formal, it involves the intrinsic difficulty of integrating politics into the felt narrative, of marrying Rubashov to the Princess Casamassima.
 
ALL OF THIS IS A WAY of saying that politics has bypassed the novel as a really significant subject matter.
The rise of the novel was contemporaneous with the bourgeois revolution. In the political order, feudalism was swept away, production was rationalized, the incredible complexity of modern life became a fact. In the aesthetic order, the novel was, in part, a reaction to this fact. As Lukacs put it in his study of the historical novel:
“The changed relationship between the psychology of men and the economic and moral circumstances of their life had become so complex that a broad representation of these circumstances, an extensive formulization of these interrelationships, became necessary if men were to be shown as the concrete children of their time.”
Thus it was that the novel was a revolutionary art form. For it shattered most of the old conventions, it sent literature probing into every corner of human life. In Fielding, for example, there is an exultant, liberating rush of art toward experience, one which burst through the classical cannon of the separation of styles. In Johnathan Wild Fielding wrote:
“... in all, we shall find that there is a nearer connection between high and low life than is generally imagined, and that a highwayman is entitled to more favor with the great than he usually meets with.”
And in France, Balzac was becoming “the secretary of French society,” and probing that incredibly thick and populous world of La Comedie Humaine.
These novels were soaked in society – for that matter, Lionel Trilling has defined the very essence of the novel in social terms. In Balzac, for instance, there is the careful delineation of the various classes and strata, of the ancien regime, the Napoleonic bureaucracy, the restorationists’ impotence, even of the French underworld, for he shared Fielding’s notion that the life of the criminal illuminated that of the bourgeois. And yet, the best of Balzac’s work was not political in the terms of Howe’s definition. When a novel of his is dominated by the political structure and setting (Les Employés), it is a failure; when his romantic spirit dominates, and the political observation becomes the subordinate stuff of his vision (Le Cousin Pons, Père Goriot, etc.) he produces masterpieces.
Balzac is, of course, an almost perfect case, and therefore an extreme one. But much of the same can be said of Walter Scott’s historicism and the many novels which it inspired. At its beginning, the novel was almost pervasively social, but not political in the sense of concentrating upon the superstructure of society, the political milieu. The reason for this is not too difficult to see. At this point, during the period of the rise of the bourgeoisie, there was as yet no global critique of society. The nearest thing to such a vantage point was the ideology of reaction, and that is why a Balzac, with his prejudice for feudalism, was able to create the most finely structured image of the new world to be found in his time.
Thus, the novel began with a social realism (usually mixed with romanticism), with a rush into the complexity and depth of the new bourgeois society. Yet, this did not produce a “political” novel in Howe’s sense of the term. (The nearest thing to it was Stendahl.) But, and this is the paradox, the worldview of the rising novel, that of realism, is almost a precondition for the political novel – the only real chance which such a type of literature had for existence was in this period. For then, reality was seen as solid, palpable, as there, and in such a world politics is a meaningful subject. Later, when politics became more pervasive, when the ideological critique of society was everywhere available to the artist, this world had disappeared, and this is partly why the most brilliant and insightful analyses of society were to be anti-political. An impressionist political novel, a surrealist political novel, these are almost unthinkable categories, because there is an irreconcilable contradiction between style and content, form and matter. Thus it was that the two halves necessary to the synthesis of a political novel – a realistic Weltanschauung in which politics is meaningful, and a political ideology – were sundered by history.
And here, one must dispute Howe’s formulation. He writes:
“The ideal social novel had been written by Jane Austen, a great artist who enjoyed the luxury of being able to take society for granted: it was there, and it seemed steady beneath her glass, Napoleon or no Napoleon. But soon it would not be steady beneath anyone’s glass, and the novelists’ attention had necessarily to shift from the gradation within society to the fate of society itself. It is at this point, roughly speaking, that the kind of book I have called the political novel comes to be written – the kind in which the idea of society, as distinct from the mere unquestioned workings of society, has penetrated the consciousness of the characters in all of its profoundly problematic aspects ...”
My quarrel is with a confusion of society and politics in this statement. Quite early in the development of the novel, indeed, in the time of Jane Austen, the problematic idea of society was present in the novel. Balzac is proof enough. But it was not a political idea, and that is the significant dividing line. To develop the question as Howe does is to miss the historical perspective and to tend toward seeing the political novel in its formal aspect, an element which is certainly important but only partially revealing of the actual process. (Incidentally, this criticism is made within a framework of feeling that Howe’s book represents a thoughtful, even brilliant, approach to a difficult subject.)
But turn now and look at the second half of the historical situation: the fact that the main direction of the novel became more and more estranged from politics at the precise moment that ideological movements made the political novel a real possibility, that the formal development of the novel was at odds with a political subject matter.
By the middle of the nineteenth century, the French novel was already moving far away from its beginnings. The liberating, tumultuous force of realism was dividing in two directions. One, via Flaubert, was toward the coldness of realism, and eventually away from society itself toward that magnificent aesthetic accomplishment of our time, the art of the interior self. The other road, that of Zola, was reducing the all-embracing vitality (and romanticism) of realism to a more mechanistic view which ended up in the dead end of the “slice of life.” Both movements were a reflection of the loss of elan in bourgeois society, the new threat from the rising socialist movement. That they were simultaneously anti-bourgeois in content, and soaked in the spirit of the bourgeois world, is only one of the paradoxes that result from the intricate relationship of art to society.
Franz Mehring wrote somewhat prophetically of this situation before the First World War (that his method was somewhat mechanistic does not destroy the validity of his conclusion). He saw that naturalism was only “halfway,” that it was simply representing, but that it had not achieved a really critical standpoint. And he felt that unless it did gain a new vantage, that it would go over to the side of decadence. His disjunction, it turns out, was sound – and the fact is that naturalism was unable to rise above itself. The truly great works of the novelistic imagination in the twentieth century have thus been produced by those bourgeois anti-bourgeois who were the magnificent, creative victims of decadence. And the high road of the novel has not been toward a new synthesis of the old naturalism and the new politics, but rather along the way of the disintegration of society. The characteristics of the best novels entre deux guerres are as Erich Auerbach recorded them: “multipersonal representation of consciousness, time strata, disintegration of the continuity of exterior events, shifting of the narrative viewpoint ...” In such a tendency, there was little that was conducive to the development of a political novel.
This is not to say that the novel had escaped politics. That is impossible. Rather, the political criticism was not expressed politically, for it was not merely society which the crisis of the superstructure called into question: it was all of reality. As Phillip Rahv put it in his Image and Idea, “... (the) artists are no longer content merely to question particular habits or situations or even institutions; it is reality itself which they bring into question.” Thus, on the one hand, naturalism had become so constricted that it could not rise above its narrow view of the world and achieve a political novel; and the anti-naturalistic trend, the method of greatness in our time, had gone beyond politics.
Two apparent exceptions should be noted. The first is that magnificent flowering of the second half of the nineteenth century, the Russian novel. Here there was a greater concern with politics. This higher consciousness was partially a function of the same situation which so politicalized the Russian working class: the pervasiveness of Czarist backwardness and autocracy. And yet, Dostoyevsky at his most political, say in The Possessed, has also gone beyond politics, that is, the political question is viewed, not primarily in terms of power or social class, but as it relates to the individual pathos, above all, to the problem of religion That, among other things, is why his most political novel, The Possessed, is inferior to Crime and Punishment and The Brothers Karamazov. In the masterpieces, there is no real pretense at political analysis, and the other element is clearly dominant.
The other exception concerns a series of contemporary novelists, most of them veterans of the revolutionary movement: Malraux, Silone, Camus, Sperber, etc. But here again, I would argue that their books either are an unfleshed political analysis (Orwell’s 1984), or else that they are concerned with issues more ultimate than politics (Camus’ Plague, Malraux’s Man’s Fate). The real synthesis, the hypothetical image of the political novel with which I began – the marriage of Rubashov and the Princess Casamassima – is not achieved in the work of these writers.
But finally, there is the one real exception, the work of genius which forces us to cast all of this in terms of general tendency and historical fact rather than as a literary law: Conrad’s Nostromo. In this book, there is the feel of social life (almost Balzacian in its force), political vision, even political prophecy. Perhaps nowhere else in the art of our time is there such an image of capitalism and imperialism. It is F.R. Leavis’ inability really to recognize how central the politics of Nostromo are that leaves his estimation of it somewhat up in the air. And at the same time, there is a wealth of deep characterization, a world of individual human beings.
And yet – even here, in this magnificent exception, the process we are describing is visible. For in Nostromo, and particularly in the person of its hero, there is always present that deeper theme of alienation and loneliness. This novel is richer than Lord Jim or Victory, but there is a real continuity, a focus upon the problem of the anguish of failure; the modern, slightly blurred hero seen at his supreme moment. Still, Nostromo is a synthesis and this makes it one of the finest works of the political novel – or, in a sense, the only achieved political novel.
Thus, history played a trick on the political novel. When the realistic view of the world was present, which is essential to the incorporation of political ideology into the novelistic imagination, the ideology was not. When the ideology had emerged, the novel, in its main tendency, had moved away from the solid, objective concern with the external world. Both events are complexly related to the rise and decline of bourgeois society, but their brunt is unmistakable: they made the political novel, as a serious art form, an exceptional case, they exiled it from the mainstream.
 
BUT THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT of the novel does not account for the lack of political novels all on its own. We also must take note of an important formal consideration, one which casts a great deal of light on some of the attempts to write political novels in our time.
In the last volume of Remembrance of Things Past, The Past Recaptured, Marcel Proust wrote, “True art has nothing to do with proclamations – it completes itself in silence.” And, a little later, “A work which contains theories is like an object upon which one leaves the price tag.” There is both truth and paradox in these comments. The paradox resides in the fact that Proust’s polemic against ideas in the novel occurs in a section, some seventy pages long, devoted to critical theory. But the truth is that there is at least a tension between the novelist’s task of portraying the felt human world and any attempt on his part to engage in ideological discussion. Indeed, this section of Proust’s own book, valuable as it is in itself, is unquestionably a flaw, not so much because it is an abstract discussion, but because it is much too long, that it is not organic with the rest of the book.
If, then, we abstract from the overly formalist bias of impressionism which Proust brings to his subject, we can recognize, not a contradiction, but a tension, between the fictional purpose and the discursive idea. In the novel itself, this tension has expressed itself in two forms. On the one hand, there are the books in the tradition of the roman a clef; on the other hand, there is the tendency of the perception of reality itself to overpower ideology in the novel, to shatter any real possibility of a synthesis.
It would be wrong to dismiss the first type of political novel out of hand. But we certainly have to admit that it is characterized by a certain thinness, that it never reaches the really profound. Evelyn Waugh’s political satires (say, Black Mischief), Orwell’s 1984, London’s Iron Heel and Koestler’s Darkness at Noon represent the wide range of possibility for this genre. And yet all of them have this in common, that their characters tend to be “flat,” that they are defined, not so much by a complex of human and social inter-relationships, but by their function of acting out a political theory. We do not feel that Rubashov is motivated by his unique and distinctive personality, but rather he acts according to Koestler’s analytic conception of the old Bolsheviks during the Moscow Trials.
Lukacs was greatly concerned with this problem of the typical, and made a sharp distinction between two approaches to it. He wrote:
“Thus, the type, according to Marx and Engels, is not the abstract type of classical tragedy, nor the figure in Schiller’s idealistic generalizations, and even less that which Zola and the post-Zola literary theory have made of it, the Average. The type is rather characterized as that striking personality in whose dynamic unity true literature reflects life, comprehending in its contradictory unity the most important social, moral and spiritual contradictions of a period, bringing them together in a vital unity.”
If we accept this distinction (as I do), then it is obvious that the authors of the novels we have just been discussing fail to create “types.” And even in their politicalization of character they are thereby cut off from a genuine and moving profundity.
This is not to say that these books are valueless. Well done, as in the case of 1984, they can be deeply moving. But they cut themselves off from a certain human complexity, they lose a feeling of depth and inter-relationship which has been the particular genius of the great novel.
On the other hand, there are “political novels” which are filled with the intricacies of personality, in which the characters move, not according to an analysis or as the charade of an ideology, but as unique personalities. And here, we can see the formal problem of the political novel in all its acuteness. For when this is attempted, the almost inevitable result is that the book actually subordinates the politics to other values and motivations – the novel becomes less political.
The classic case of this process is Andre Malraux’s Man’s Fate. Some time ago, William Empson wrote of it, “... the heroes are communists, but they are frankly out of touch with the proletariat; it is from this that they get their pathos and dignity and the book its freedom from propaganda.” I would go much further than Empson: for the ultimate values, the motivational spring of Man’s Fate is not political at all. The Chinese Revolution is the setting in which Malraux approaches the theme which has been central to his writing from the very first: death. And the real point of the book is not the inter-relationships which arise in the course of a revolutionary attempt to emancipate man from exploitation, but the drama of the aristocratic hero’s fight to transcend his own mortality. (In his later art criticism, the painter was to function in the same way as the politicals of his novels: Malraux’s Goya is Kyo from Man’s Fate in another guise.)
Why does this happen? In part the answer is historical, along the lines which we have already discussed. Malraux (and Silone and Camus) are the children of bourgeois culture even in their hatred of the bourgeoisie. They have the consciousness of modem man, and this is their general vantage point. And rather than being unique and separate authors, the representatives of a distinguishable genre, they are contemporary novelists who deal with the modern concern in terms of politics, in a political setting, and not as politics.
But there is also a formal consideration (though it is, of course, related to the historical). Politics is not "ultimate.” It is, however intricately, a reflection of more basic realities of human existence. This means that under the most favorable historical circumstances there will be a tendency to go “beyond” politics. And in an age such as ours, when it is precisely the basic realities (indeed, the very reality of reality) which has been brought into question through an unprecedented and total crisis of society, it is almost inevitable that the most political of novelists will go beyond politics. In short, the formal difficulty, the one which Proust discussed, has been made all the more effective by the specific cultural conjunction of our time.
Under the very best of circumstances, then, there would be many difficulties in writing a masterly political novel. In our time, the actual situation has led to a bifurcation of the political novel into its two parts, and has inhibited a genuine synthesis. On the one hand, we have provocative, stimulating books (all the more personal because of their journalistic immediacy) which are political but by that fact miss the fullness and complexity of life which is characteristic of the novel at its best. And on the other hand, we have novels written by politicals, even with political settings, but there the politics tends to be stagecraft and not the real substance of the book.
 
IT IS WRONG TO THINK that there is any simple and single literary category, the “bourgeois novel.” Such terms are the invention of a sterile, mechanistic determinism. And yet, we cannot utter a really complex judgment about the novel unless we understand its relation to the rhythm of bourgeois culture.
In part, what we are dealing with here is the persistence and pervasiveness of bourgeois culture, precisely at the moment of its decline. It was one of Trotsky’s more flashing insights to note, in Literature and Revolution, that the most characteristic cultural expressions of a society occur at the moment of its decline, during the imminence of its downfall. The political novel is, quite literally, impossible today in the sense of a real synthesis. So is the social novel. For that matter, one can cogently argue that the novel itself, as an art form, is nearing dead-end.
For the object is gone, culturally speaking. The tactile, palpable external world which was at the center of centuries of Western art is no longer there. And the process in literature for over a century has been toward subjectivity. In the doing, we have received magnificent works of the imagination, the various, eclectic, exciting and probing gift of decadence. We cannot deny Mann’s insight: our sickness has been creative. It goes without saying that the price is too high, monstrously so, that our beauty, warped and deformed but beauty nevertheless, is the consequence of a social agony and that a human being must prefer an insipid peace to a hundred Guernicas. Yet the major point that I wish to make here is not political or moral, but critical.
As long as our present cultural situation lasts – and in all of its permutations it will continue as long as our social situation does – we are cut off from a whole series of literary creations. Among them is the political novel. But that is not so serious, for that is a subclass of a subclass. The disturbing question is the one posed and answered by Orwell in his essay Inside the Whale. Are we now in a plight where we can say, as Orwell did, that there is the “impossibility of any major literature until the world has shaken itself in shape?” Is the situation of the political novel, its dead end, the symptom of a much deeper malaise which infects all our literature? I would not be as aggressively pessimistic as Orwell – nor so optimistic as to rule out the possible truth of his grim insight.
 



FOR SOME TIME NOW, THE European socialist press has been involved in a sharp conflict over the various tendencies in the Algerian resistance movement. The question is not so much one of which program is better, that of the Front of National Liberation (FLN) or the Algerian National Movement of Messali Hadj (MNA); rather it turns on the facts themselves. Which tendency is the strongest?
The June 6th issue of France Observateur carried a long article by Giles Martinet on the relative strength of the two organizations. According to Martinet, 80 per cent of the forces in Algeria itself are under the control of the FLN. At the same time, he points out that among the ranks the distinction between the FLN and MNA is not as marked as in the leadership: many who fight in units of the FLN look to Messali as the great leader of the Algerian revolutionary movement. Still, Martinet feels that he can speak of the “incontestable supremacy of the National Liberation Front.”
Yet Martinet nevertheless reports some of the facts about the Front which he finds disturbing. He notes, for example, that the Front claims the exclusive right to negotiate with the French on the question of independence; also that a majority of Frontists are cool to the plan put forward by Bourguiba of Tunisia which places a significant emphasis on holding free elections as soon as possible. The MNA, on the other hand, has been more forthright in its willingness to call for immediate free elections, and to guarantee the political rights of minorities within Algeria.
But one recent fact is embarrassing to Martinet’s estimation of the weakness of the MNA. In his discussion (published in early June), he wrote that the influence of the Messalists had declined precipitously in France itself, a traditional center of backing for the MNA. Unfortunately for Martinet’s point of view, the first Congress of the Algerian trade unionists took place during the very month that his article was published. The USTA (Union Syndicale des Travailleurs Algériens) is not only pro-Messali; it is apparently a viable organization with mass support among the Algerian workers in France.
Another view, which agrees with Martinet’s estimation of the actual relationship of forces in Algeria but works on different premises, is that of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU). According to Werner Plum, writing in the German trade union publication, Gewerkschaftliche Monatshefte, the Messalist tendency is “anarchist” and has little or no importance in Algeria. This article makes it plain that the official support of the ICFTU is to the Front in Algeria. It is all the more interesting when one considers that the French Communist Party, and the Communists in Algeria, are also partisans of the Front as opposed to the MNA. (Jay Lovestone, that ubiquitous figure who stands on the far anti-Communist right of the American trade-union movement, is also pro-Front, a fact which stands in interesting relation to his super intransigence on the Communist issue.)
On the other side, the strongest support for the MNA in France has come from the left socialists. The Trotskyists of La Verité have been outspoken in their defense of the Messalist tendency. And in the June issue of La Commune (organ of the newly formed Liaison and Action Committee for Worker’s Democracy), there are two articles which argue the case for the MNA. One of these, by Yves Dechezelles, includes a biting and incisive attack upon Giles Martinet and his reporting on France Observateur.
According to Dechezelles, Martinet and France Observateur have been involved in a sort of conspiracy of silence on the subject of the MNA. They feel that the Front is the “wave of the future” in Algeria, and as a result, they are prepared to ignore the MNA altogether. In particular, the whole question of Melouza (the Algerian town where a massacre took place; according to the MNA, it was an action of the Frontists against the Messalists) has been passed over without any real concern being shown. At the same time, Dechezelles recognizes that the refusal of the ICFTU to admit the MNA trade union, and its siding with the Front, was a blow to the Messalists. But he holds that it was not a final or decisive one.
More importantly, Dechezelles goes into the question of democracy and the FLN at greater length than Martinet. For him:
“The anti-colonialism of the Messalists is based upon democratic principles. It is opposed to racism and fascism. For the MNA, the Europeans of Algeria are Algerians just as much as anyone else. The MNA is opposed to blind terrorism which attempts to create a general sentiment of insecurity among the Europeans ...”
On the other hand, he finds that the FLN has attracted all kinds of elements, from the bourgeoisie to the Communists, and that it is unwilling to come out and make an authoritative, principled statement on the question of democracy.
It is always difficult to determine the complex interaction of tendencies at a distance. And the European press, as can be seen from the above, is literally a babel of voices on the question of the relative merits and strength of the MNA and the FLN. And yet, the information which is available has the general effect of confirming the independent socialist support of the MNA. It is not simply that Messali, and his followers, have put forward a social, and socialist, program, though that is significant. But the undeniable and controlling fact which is immediately present is the difference between the two programs on the question of free elections. A sympathizer of the Front, like Martinet, is forced to admit that the Frontists regard themselves as having some kind of exclusive right to negotiate, and that they are, at least, cool to the proposal for immediate free elections.
At the same time, it should be obvious that the Front has rallied considerable support and from the strangest and most antagonistic quarters: from Nasser; from the Communists; from the Algerian bourgeoisie; from the ICFTU. Such a catch-all front can only unite on the basis of suppressing serious differences. The forthright stand of the Messalists is far superior to such a situation.
The tragic part of this whole development is, of course, the fact that the internal struggle within the Algerian movement has aided the cause of French imperialism in Algeria. And yet, a policy of simply forgetting the profound antagonisms based on very real differences – a policy which Martinet tends toward – is ruled out of the question The Algerian revolution is not simply a question of freeing the land from France; it also raises the issue of how this will be done, of what form the newly independent nation will take. And given this problem, the position of the MNA, despite the arguments of Martinet and the ICFTU, remains clearly superior to that of the Frontists
 



The American Class Structure
by Joseph A. Kahl
Rinehart, $4.50
The question of class structure confronts one with a crucial paradox of the Marxist movement. The Marxists are, of course, fundamentally concerned with the analysis of social classes. And yet, in the hundred or so years of Marxism, little has been produced in the way of empirical, scientific studies of actual class relationships. And this becomes all the more curious when one realizes how much time academic sociologists have given to the subject in the last decade in the United States.
Marx’s own discussion of social classes was fragmentary, largely confined to a few comments at the end of the third volume of Capital. In some of his political writings – on French politics, for instance – he made a detailed analysis of the political relations between classes, yet he never really generalized his insights into a worked-out theory. And since his time, there has been very little done to fill in this tremendous lack. In his Historical Materialism, Bucharin tried to develop a more rounded Marxian view of the question, yet his work was forced to rely upon the insufficient data available to him at the time. And the strange fact remains in force: that the Marxists have hardly made a really scientific contribution to class analysis in over a century.
This is not to deny that there have been many brilliant Marxian discussions of particular situations, even of historical tendencies of classes in a variety of societies. Yet, the definitions, the basic method, remain unclarified. Ultimately, almost everyone will agree that the skeletal definition of the social class in terms of how individuals stand in relation to the means of production requires considerable amendment before it can become a really useful analytic tool, and this is often done on an ad hoc basis, but rarely in a consistent, theoretical manner. Or, to cite another familiar example, Marxists will regularly make a sharp distinction between objective and subjective social classes, between class and class consciousness. It is widely recognized that there is no one-to-one correspondence between the two. And still, there is no developed study of the inter-relationship. You will not even find it (beyond a few generalities) in a book like Lukacs’ Geschichte und Klassenbewustsein which places a tremendous emphasis on the emergence of consciousness from the social situation.
All of this places a Marxist at a disadvantage when he approaches an academic work on the subject. There is no difficulty in making negative criticisms, of pointing out how a particular sociologist does not understand this or that political element in his own book. And yet, the critique must be tempered with a certain humility. For the sociologists are providing us with a wealth of data, they are accomplishing the empirical work which the Marxists have failed to do. And if their empiricism often issues into an inability to integrate their findings into a conception of society in motion, it nevertheless retains a great value. And it should be something of a scandal to the Marxists that they have produced so little in terms of actual, concrete studies.
Joseph Kahl’s The American Class Structure is in many ways a typical book. It is filled with the charts and data which American sociology has been amassing on this subject over a period of a decade or two. Kahl speaks in terms of a real familiarity with the literature of his field. More, he is not prone to the out and out simplification and vulgarization of his opponents that one finds in some of his colleague’s work. And, also typically, he really doesn’t concern himself with the most basic question: of how his data relates to an understanding of American society in motion.
Kahl, for example, makes the following comment on the political situation in 1954:
“We have approached a stalemate and politics has lost the strong ethnic and class flavor it had for a space of one generation. As long as prosperity continues, the other issues are likely to predominate. Only one ethnic group, the Negroes, still feel underprivileged and actively use politics as a weapon for reform.”
Leaving aside the obviously questionable historical generalization (that American politics became class politics only in the 1930’s), the main point is clear enough. It was noted, for instance, by the contributors to the book on the American right edited by Daniel Bell: that in a decade and a half of relative prosperity, “status” considerations have acquired a particular importance, that class consciousness has not, in the recent period, played the role which it did during the depression.
The point is obvious enough and hardly debatable. Having said this, having noted that the situation depends upon prosperity continuing, one’s predictions about the movement of social classes in the immediate future becomes inextricably involved in a judgment of the general direction of American society in the next period. But this is what Kahl, and the other academicians, refuse to do. They are true to their empiricism, and as a result, they limit the usefulness of the facts which they themselves have so painstakingly discovered.
Kahl’s comment on C. Wright Mills is a striking case in point of this phenomenon. He writes of White Collar:
“The book usefully organizes the available data on the shift from the old to the new middle classes, and gives vivid portraits of some of the new types. But its interpretations suffer from Mills’ lack of sympathy for the new white-collar people: he sees them as automatons with false and empty lives. He writes from the disillusion of the thirties; he fails, in my opinion, to catch the spirit of the fifties. However, it must be admitted that we may now be living in a fool’s paradise; if major war or economic collapse should come, the thirties may live again.” (my emphasis)
But this comment indicates, to say the least, a disturbing procedure. An enormous variable is left indeterminant, one so crucial that it includes the possibility that the sociologists are living in a “fool’s paradise.” If that is the case, if a basic change in the economic conditions could vitiate all of the discussion on social classes today, then, if the writer is going to make full use of his material, it is crucial for him to have some view on the probabilities of basic change. Mills does. The fact that he integrates his empirical study into an overall conception of American capitalism is what differentiates him from almost all of the sociologists. And Kahl can, in a footnote, consider the possibility that his whole study may be a description, not of the American class structure, but of a momentary configuration of social classes under certain conditions. This places a real limit upon the value of his work.
But again, there is a very real value in this study and in others like it. Although there is a fundamental failure of method, there is an abundance of solid empirical material. Here, for example, is recorded in precise statistics the disappearance of the entrepreneur, the growth of the huge corporate bureaucracy. As a result of centering on this phenomenon, Kahl places a great emphasis on the importance of education, and he brings forth some very interesting data on the class factors involved in a college degree. But again, he does not project his findings. Currently, young engineers are being taken into the corporate bureaucracy at very high starting salaries. But at the same time, the opportunity for advancement, the ceiling, is closing in. The young engineer may begin at five or six thousand, yet he will find himself in the very frustrating situation of being condemned to a very slow progress from that point and he may early encounter the fact that he is not going anyplace. This places the brute fact that there are more college degrees in a certain perspective: it indicates a concomitant devaluation of the degree itself. In terms of class consciousness, such a pattern may well have a very important effect. In some cases, it has already led to the formation of crypto-unions in the field (crypto because of an unwillingness on the part of the trained white-collar worker to consider himself as part of the labor movement), in other cases, to unionism itself.
Thus, one has an ambiguous attitude toward a study like The American Class Structure. The Marxist cannot help but welcome such a book in so far as it provides real empirical material for the analysis of social classes. And at the same time, this work, and the many like it, suffers from the lack of a basic theoretical orientation. It is flawed by its own empiricism. The challenge remains: for the Marxists to produce studies which are as scientifically grounded and which combine the wealth of factual information integrated with the necessary conception of social dynamics.
 



The Functions of Social Conflict
by Lewis Coser
Free Press, $3.50
The very fact that this book by Lewis Coser is published is important. For over a decade now, the theme of “conflict” has been becoming more and more tabooed. Part of the conservative mood has been an ideology of class collaboration, an image of America as a unified society in which there is a give and take of ‘“interest-groups,” but never a struggle between classes.
In the introduction, Coser records how this has affected the academic community. After a description of the past, in which American sociologists did concern themselves with the problem of social conflict, he writes:
“... the majority of sociologists who dominate contemporary sociology, far from seeing themselves as reformers and addressing themselves to an audience of reformers, either have oriented themselves toward purely academic and professional audiences, or have attempted to find a hearing among decision-makers in public or private bureaucracies. They center attention predominantly upon problems of adjustment rather than upon conflict; upon social statics rather than upon dynamics. Of key problematic importance to them has been the maintenance of existing structures and the ways and means of insuring their smooth functioning.”
Coser’s description is apt, and his determination to break with this academic mood merits praise. His method is to discuss various propositions which arise out of a reading of Georg Simmel’s Conflict. However, he does not limit himself in any sense to a scholarly discussion of Simmel. Rather, he uses Simmel’s classic work as a point of departure, and introduces his own insights gained from Marx, Freud, contemporary political history, and from a wide range of historical and sociological reading.
Coser’s conclusions are as important as his determination to write this book in the first place. He thinks of conflict as having positive (but not necessarily positive) results. And he attempts to handle it in terms of rational description, dealing with labor, the army, the family and so on. Indeed, much of what he writes is extremely relevant to current politics—his thesis, for example, that rigid, totalitarian structures lead to an internal development of strong conflicts is obviously related to the current events in Russia.
But one serious criticism must be made, and it is a difficult one to handle. It is not so much a question of what Coser did write, but what he didn’t write. And in making such a charge, one is always open to the counter-assertion on the part of the author that it is unfair to take him to task for not having done the book which the reviewer would like to read. And yet, I think the criticism still has to be made.
Precisely because Coser is dissenting from a dominant mood, I think that he is under a responsibility to deal with some of the questions which that mood raises even if they are on a tangent from his scholarly purpose. The point should be obvious: a crucial focus of the whole problem of social conflict is the issue of class conflict in America. It is here that the lines have been drawn (a point which Coser recognizes in the section quoted from his introduction). And yet Coser, though often referring to the struggle of the working class, does not meet the issue head on.
There are, to be sure, occasional theoretical references, but they are not developed. For example, Coser writes:
“It may be that one reason for the relative absence of ‘class struggle’ in this country is the fact that the American worker, far from restricting his allegiance to class-conflict groupings and associations, is a member of a number of associations and groupings which represent him in diverse conflicts with different religious, ethnic, status and political groups.”
One can’t quarrel with such a statement since it is too fragmentary. If Coser intends the description of “the relative absence of ‘class struggle’ ” to refer to the last decade, and if his other qualifications can be taken as an assertion of the theory that, in times of prosperity, “status conflicts” take on a greater significance relative to “class conflicts,” then I would tend to agree with him. But if his “relative absence” is an account of American history, or a projection of the future, then I would emphatically disagree.
The point is that Coser doesn’t take the question up in systematic fashion. And I think he was obliged to do so, that it was an error to conceive a book on “The Functions of Social Conflict” without an open confrontation of this crucial point. And this, as was mentioned before, is all the more true because of the situation in the academic community today.
My criticism is a serious one, yet it should not obscure the value of Coser’s book. There is a wide range of evidence cited here, and it is handled in a sane, calm fashion. That is certainly to the good, and it makes Coser’s book worthwhile. I only wish that he had gone into the underlying problem, or that he will in the near future.
 



Dwight MacDonald’s reminiscences of his days in the socialist movement were published some time ago (In the March and April 1957 issues of Encounter), yet there is a certain fitness in taking them up in these pages, even if belatedly. For part of MacDonald’s experience was as a writer for the New International.
In his own way, MacDonald stands for a generation. He moved toward socialism while a writer for Henry Luce’s Fortune, flirted briefly with the Stalinists, and then gravitated toward the Trotskyist movement in the late thirties. During the war, he founded Politics, a magazine which began as more or less Marxist and developed rapidly toward anarchism and pacifism. By the time of the Berlin air-lift, Macdonald found himself in a dilemma. Typically, he shared it with his readers in a burst of candor. Pacifism, he felt, offered no hope for actually dealing with Stalinist totalitarianism, but neither did militarism. The conclusion? In a revised reprint of his Root Is Man, Macdonald decided to tend his own garden. No political theory appealed to him; all were somehow repugnant. Since then, he has periodically announced that he hankers after some form of conservatism, but he has never taken that particular plunge.
Now Macdonald looks back on his radical past. He finds it simultaneously fascinating and other-worldly, intellectual but insanely abstract, and in the doing he proves that he has not lost his own deft sense of irony. Yet Macdonald’s Politics Past is more than a memoir. For it also purports to be an account of why American radicalism failed.
The older, more mature Macdonald finds that radicalism in the United States had its hey-day during the Debsian period, and never again became a serious force.
“The radical tradition never came back,” he writes, “except among the intelligentsia. Not even at the lowest point of the depression, in 1932–3, were the Communists or the Socialists a serious political force. The CIO in a few years subsided from youthful rebellion into bureaucratic conservatism, a devolution that had taken generations in the German and British labour movements.”
By a curious inversion, such a retrospective view of the past is based on the very ultimatistic kind of reasoning which today’s chastened Macdonald now rejects. There was no revolutionary transformation of American society in the thirties, he seems to be saying, and therefore nothing much really happened. The CIO? That was a summer storm. And the real criterion is that the people did not buy the finished program; that is what proves that the thirties were untouched by radical politics. And yet, if one goes back to that period, the amazing point remains how much of a leap forward the American working class took, and how much of a role the American radicals were able to play.
 
UP UNTIL THE THIRTIES, ONLY a thin stratum of skilled workers in America were organized. The immense thrust of the CIO achieved an incredible and decisive accomplishment: it laid the basis for the organization of the most important sections of the American working class. True enough, this movement did not organize a mass political party of the working class. But the reasons for that are not mysterious, they are not a function of some law of a radical wave inevitably spending itself. The new social conditions of World War II intervened to forestall more significant changes.
But what of the radicals? Did they influence these events? The answer is both yes and no. The long tradition of working class militancy and agitation for industrial unionism was an essential element in the creation of the CIO and the surge of the American working class. In union after union—the Auto workers, the Coal Miners, the NMU, to name but a few—socialists played a significant role. The Communist Party, which in the thirties established its hegemony over American radicalism, was able to attract members precisely because it was involved in the very real work of organizing the American working class.
On the other hand, it would be foolish to think that all was well with the radicals. The left socialist and Trotskyist movements did not understand fully the enormous importance of the unionization of the working class. Their perspective was more grounded in the idea that the world in general, and the United States in particular, was in a pre-revolutionary situation. Paradoxically, it was through their betrayal of socialist principles that the Communists were able to make such great headway. By the end of World War II, fully a third of the CIO was under the heavy influence or control of those who acted in the name of Marxism, radicalism and socialism. In this sense, there is no doubt that the anti-Stalinist revolutionary movement failed to make full use of the tremendous opportunities of the period. Yet this is no basis for Macdonald’s conception that radicalism was impotent. His exaggeration is as false as the ultra-left hopes of many of his generation.
Still, Macdonald stands for a generation. And that raises an extremely important point. With a few exceptions like James Burnham, the bulk of the intellectuals and workers who were attracted to the socialist movement in the thirties and who have left it in the period of reaction, have not moved over to some far-right position. The initial impulse which led them to socialism is still operative, even if in a confused and distorted way. Many of them have found jobs in the labor movement or in the various civil liberties and civil rights organizations. And there, they usually represent the best, the most advanced section of the bureaucracy. Their position is not, to be sure, one of socialist principle; but then neither can it be dismissed as that of the "renegade.” These, and many like them, are capable of being attracted once more to the socialist movement.
And reading Macdonald’s articles, the striking thought is not how far he and others like him have moved from their earlier radicalism. It is the other way around. They have become, not so much hardened anti-socialists, as confused by their own admission. Their plight is part of the price our society pays for its current period of social peace, yet it is not an irrevocable thing. If a socialist must have sharp criticisms of Macdonald’s remembrance of radicalism past, if one must differ with his retrospective sociology, that is not to engage in a foolish and useless vilification. Macdonald lost his way, and rather spectacularly from a socialist point of view. So did many like him.
And many of them will return.
 



The Fall 1957 issue of Partisan Review contained a long, serious and highly interesting article by Sidney Hook entitled Socialism and Liberation.
There are so many remarkable things about Hook’s article that it is impossible to treat them fully in the brief space of this column. But let me take two points to give an idea of the intellectual flux which is taking place in the mind of a man who, for almost a decade, has symbolized a “hard” (heedless of many of the civil liberties aspects of the problem) anti-Communism.
For one thing, Hook views changes in contemporary Communism primarily in terms of shifts in ideology and in doing so he quite often seems to lapse into a strange methodology. For another, this very approach leads him to an estimate of Gomulka which is, to say the least, surprising in its softness and optimism. Indeed, at times one hears all kinds of echoes of Isaac Deutcher in Hook’s piece – which is something we had hardly been prepared for, given his past writings.
For Hook, the destruction of the Hungarian Revolution rules out the possibility of a sudden, internal transformation of the Communist world. Consequently:
“The only realistic perspective in the next historical period – short of a revolution or civil war within the Soviet Union itself – is, it seems to me, liberation by evolution. I mean by this the gradual transformation, within the ideological tradition of Marxism-Leninism, of the totalitarian system of Communism in satellite countries into a liberation culture ...”
Two points need comment here. The first is that Hook is concentrating upon the satellite countries in isolation from Russian developments. That is, he is mooting the really central issue, which is the spread of the anti-Communist revolution into the heartland of Communism itself, into Russia. We now know that the Hungarian and Polish events left their mark upon Russian society, indeed that their impact penetrated China and was one of the reasons for Mao’s famous speech of February 1957. Posing the question as Hook does, seeking to anticipate the fate of an isolated and unassisted anti-Communist revolution in one satellite, is simply a way of foreclosing the possibility of any significant internal development. (Can we forget, for instance, that Warsaw was the match which lit the powder-keg in Budapest?)
This is not to come out in favor of a sterile “revolutionism,” to predict that always and at every moment the Russian people are on the verge of an uprising. But it is to say that the question cannot be viewed in isolation – or rather, that if you do, you will be forced, like Sidney Hook, to see hope in a “gradual transformation, within the ideological tradition of Marxism-Leninism ...”
But the second thing which must be noted about Hook’s opening premise is of greater methodological interest: it is his emphasis upon change “within the ideological tradition of Marxism-Leninism.” (My emphasis) This shows up most sharply in his analysis of Gomulka. For example:
“... when Gomulka proclaims that ’the best definition of the social contents inherent in the idea of socialism is contained in the definition that socialism is a social system which abolishes the exploitation and oppression of man by man,’ ... these pronouncements constitute a more radical revision of traditional Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism than do Titoism and Maoism. Its sweep is as radical as Ockham’s intellectual transformation of Aristotle. For it follows at once from this conception of socialism that it is absent in the Soviet Union and the alleged people’s democracies ...”
Such an approach is truly remarkable, for it is based upon Hook taking Gomulka at his word. There is no analysis of the Polish leader’s balancing between the Nationalist right wing and the revolutionary left. Rather, there are sweeping conclusions drawn from the words themselves. Almost at random, I picked a Stalin pamphlet from my book case and turned up with this:
“What is the principal merit of the socialist method of industrialization? It is that it unites the interests of industrialization with the interests of the basic mass of the labouring population, that it does not impoverish the masses but improves their living standards ...”
It is from a speech delivered against the Opposition in 1926, and these words are, of course, the cover for a line of action which was to be their direct contradiction.
What is most surprising is that Hook himself has given ample evidence that he understands this point. Why then this change? The answer is, I think, related to the first point. Hook has no perspective of decisive mass revolutionary action within the satellites because he takes the satellites singly, he abstracts them from their relation to Russia and the rest of the world. Once having done this, his hope for change must then be directed toward the bureaucracy itself, or rather, toward the intellectuals.
“Even without war and foreign intervention, even without violent revolution, the intellectual elite of all Communist countries will produce in each generation, and in every social group or class, critical spirits nurtured on the ideals of freedom expressed in the classics of Marxism ...” (my emphasis)
Fine. That is, of course, true and we have had ample evidence of it. But when does this transformation inside the intellectual elite become politically operative, i.e. at what point does it constitute a significant threat to the ruling class (which will always put its Hairichs in jail and tell its Dudinstevs how to write books) ? Clearly the answer is, when the spirit which is most articulate, most conscious among the intellectuals, pervades the people and develops into action.
Without that action, without the support of the masses of people, the intellectuals may “constitute a permanent opposition to cultural and political tyranny” as Hook affirms. But will they provide a way for the transformation of the society? Will Hairich, unaided by the German working class, change Ulbricht? Hook does not face this question, because he has ruled out the possibility of really answering them. Instead, he has become ... soft on Gomulka, soft on Kardelj, overly anxious to find change in the bureaucracy, overly optimistic.
In all of this, it is, of course, impossible to assume the attitude of having the answer. The development of the struggle against Communism within the Communist world is an agonizing, zig zag thing. But once one rules out the most fundamental dynamic of that transformation, the action of the workers and farmers, of the people united against tyranny, there are only two political choices: “liberation” through the armed intervention of the West; “gradual transformation” through an inexplicable process in the Communist world itself. The first alternative presupposes risking the destruction of humankind; the second, a Communist ruling class remarkably susceptible to abstractions and unmindful of class position. It is strange to find Sidney Hook, in this article, tending toward the second choice.
 

