




This article is the first part of an analysis of the Indian crisis. The second part, which will appear in our next issue, examines the politics of the Indian left with particular reference to the key state of West Bengal.





The people who live in the Indian subcontinent are about a quarter of the people of the backward countries. With the population of China and south-east Asia, this region constitutes the heart of the problem of backwardness. If the income per head in Asia could be raised steadily, then the world system could be shown not at all to have exhausted its potential. If capital accumulation could be seriously advanced here, if some perceptible development could begin (and by ‘development’ we mean, not just increasing the stock of machines or the proportion of income generated in industry, but a clear and continuing shift of the labour force out of agriculture into industry) then perhaps world capitalism could look forward to another lease of life. The decisive confrontation could be postponed until the millions of Asia had been properly incorporated as proletarians.
Discovering why this perspective is unrealistic from the Indian end requires us to understand in some detail what has happened to the attempt by the new ruling class of independent India to raise the rate of capital accumulation. The attempt has foundered not simply on the immediate demands of predatory imperialist powers, but rather on a much less specific range of obstacles, all arising from the purposeless and sporadic development of the world market. The enormous potential of the world economy cannot, in present circumstances, be fused to the demands of Indian development. The imperialist impoverishment of the past hangs over the present, making it – in conjuction with present circumstances, virtually impossible to develop.
The Indian ruling class set out in 1947 with high hopes of establishing an economically independent and expansive segment of world capitalism. Now India’s rulers are being driven, step by painful step, to relinquish any such ambition. Each move they attempt to make, despite temporary successes, sooner or later comes face to face with either the intractable class stalemate at home or the intractable division of the world abroad. They are reduced to hanging on as the best that can be hoped for. To survive at all in such unpromising circumstances becomes a victory. Increasing military and police expenditure is the one area that really shows expansion.
Yet social paralysis and economic stalemate can continue for surprisingly long periods of time, particularly where one section of the ruling class feels that to settle with the other section will seriously jeopardize the entire social order. Despite an expanding labour force and increasing unemployment, despite increasing misery and hostility on the land, despite a rate of increase in the organic composition of capital that makes mockery of the sea of poverty in the country, despite a whole range of problems that seem insupportable, nevertheless the existing order survives. Indeed, some people regard the existing political order as stronger than it has ever been. For is it not correct that, after a debilitating economic crisis (the worst in the experience of India’s rulers) and the virtual disintegration of the ruling Congress, Delhi has been able to undertake a war in East Bengal with resounding success and Mrs Gandhi has been able to annihilate her political rivals at the polls? Almost, it seems, both the main foreign and the main domestic challenges have been decisively beaten.
The appearance is only part of the surface phenomena. Underneath, things look very different. Indeed, the Indian ruling class is no exception in this respect. For the paradox – increasing weakness with an appearance of rising strength – only parallels the position of more powerful capitalist (private or State) countries. The similarities do not end there, since all the obsessions of the advanced capitalist countries afflict India. Within India, the decisive relationships of the world system are reproduced, the patterns of domination and exploitation, of technology and output. In certain respects, indeed, India is in advance. Being one of the weaker segments of the world system, the reaction of the Indian ruling class to crisis, to a weakening of its world position, forces it to innovate in ways less developed in more developed countries. The combination of truncheon and Left-wing rhetoric, edict and populism, as a mode of political control is well advanced in India, Ceylon, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The singularly vital role of the Communist Party in adding a ‘progressive’ gloss to increasingly authoritarian rule also provides lessons for dominant powers.
 
1. The development of the Indian economy
The 1971-2 Annual Report of the Ministry of Industrial Development makes gloomy reading. It shows that the growth rate of Indian industrial production declined from 7.1 per cent in 1969, 4.8 per cent in 1970 to 2.2 per cent in the first nine months of 1971. After the severe recession of 1965-8, it had been generally assumed that the economy was now climbing rapidly out of the trough. But now it is clear that expansion was temporary: the problem is much more deep rooted than just the result of the poor harvest of 1965-7. Even the 1969 performance was poor; the Indian economy ought without much difficulty to be achieving a rate of industrial growth of 10-15 per cent each year.
The government claims that the current decline is the result of shortages of vital industrial inputs arising out of the limited capacity in a number of key industries (steel, non-ferrous metals, tractors, cement, paper, fertilisers). Yet all the evidence points to a problem of excess capacity in most key industries. The Indian economy has consistently been plagued with the problem of the underutilization of capacity, but at the moment some two out of every five industrial enterprises are producing less than 60 per cent of what they could. The steel shortage – coinciding with a gross underutilization of the existing steel capacity in the public sector – has now been offset by the import of some two million tonnes, yet this has still not produced a dramatic upturn in the engineering industries. In any case, the greatest decline in output has been in industries that are not vitally dependent upon the key inputs listed by the government – leather and fur products (a negative growth rate, −15.2 per cent), transport equipment (−11.9 per cent), cotton textiles (−7.9 per cent). If anything, the metal industries (+10.3 per cent) have tended to pull the index of production up.
The government’s argument is designed to show that the problems are temporary and will soon be eased. The official explanation of the downturn does not mention what appears to be the real source of difficulty. To understand that we need to explain what caused the earlier period of industrial expansion, roughly speaking through the second (1956-61) and third (1961-65) five year plans. The second plan injected a massive dose of investment into the economy in a short space of time in order to build as rapidly as possible a capital goods industry. This investment pushed the whole modern sector of the economy forward. The limits of growth were set by the balance of payments on the one hand and the course of harvests on the other. The push was sufficient to raise general industrial output a great deal and industrial employment a little, but certainly not sufficient to establish ‘self-sustaining growth’ (whatever that is) nor relieve the two main constraints.
In the sixties, defence expenditure – following the border clash with China in 1962 and the war with Pakistan in 1965 – increased very rapidly (in money terms, by some 41 per cent per annum from 1961-2 to 1970-71). This, along with the failure of two harvests in the mid-sixties forced a major cutback in public investment. The economy was pushed into slump. Neither the 1969 revival nor much improved harvests have been able to compensate for the continued slack in public investment.
The downturn forced the government to scrap the pretence, if not the rhetoric, of national planning. There was a ‘plan holiday’ for three years before the Fourth Plan (1969-74) began. Even with the beginning of the Fourth Plan, public investment did not revive – in the first two years of the Plan, it was some 25 per cent less than in the last year of the Third Plan (1965-6). In any case, the Plan was increasingly remote from Indian reality. For example, ‘black money’ – money concealed from the taxman – has grown faster than the national income for a long time and now constitutes a parallel economy. A recent government committee estimated that in 1961-62, Rs.8,110 million (very roughly £405 million) escaped the tax man; in 1965-6, Rs.l2,160m (£608m); and in 1968-69, Rs. 14,000m (£700m) (a dissenting note to the Committee’s report argues that these figures are underestimates, and the real total for 1968-9 should be Rs.28,330m and for 1969-70, Rs.30,800m). Whatever the facts – and the estimates can never be accurate – the rough size and rapid growth of black money makes all financial statistics in India suspect. With a volume of cash of this size outside the planners’ net, national planning becomes even more than usual inspired guesswork.
Defence expenditure has also eaten into development resources. The declared defence budget (as opposed to all the expenditure on defence which comes under other – apparently civil – expenditure heads) has risen from Rs.2,809m in 1960-61 to Rs.14,084m in 1971-72. Originally, this scale of expenditure was supposed to be designed to prevent Chinese and Pakistani military threats. No-one now believes that the Chinese are likely to attack India, and Pakistan has just been decisively defeated. However, there is no question now of reducing the scale of defence expenditure. It has assumed a life of its own, and indeed there is boastful talk of supporting India’s new role as a Great Power in South Asia with a defence budget of Rs.20,000m. Whatever illusions some of the military planners might have, the present size of the armed forces of India will no doubt be primarily useful in holding down Indians. If that is the task, then the size of the budget becomes explicable. To assist the new Bangladesh government against opposition within Bangladesh (as appears to have been guaranteed in the Indo-Bangladesh treaty and currently executed in Indian military operations against the Mizos and tribal insurgents in the Chittagong Hill Tracts) or to help Mrs Bandernaike put down her critics certainly would not require so much military expenditure.
Other forms of ‘non-development’ expenditure have also increasingly robbed the Plan of resources. Civil non-development expenditure has been expanding by some 37 per cent per year through the sixties. But in any case, the Plan appears to be increasingly marginal to government activities, more an exercise in public relations rather than economic strategy. In the Fourth Plan period so far, the government has undertaken 30 industrial projects that were not part of the Plan, abandoned 12 projects that were and made little or no progress on 55 other Plan projects. It is hardly surprising that Plan and expenditure diverge so widely; for example, in 1969-70 some 26 per cent of the Plan allocation for central sector organized industry remained unspent at the end of the year.
The decline in planning matches the decline in public investment. The cut in government investment between the third and fourth plans had the greatest effects on the industries created and sustained by the heavy industrial programme of the second plan. The capacity of the capital goods industries was expanded in the expectation that government demand would remain high. Yet with the end of the third plan, the government postponed even replacements and modernisation, let alone expansion. The declaration of a ‘plan holiday’ in 1967 was followed by a series of bankruptcies. The cut in the demand for steel not only afflicted the steel plants, it led to the financial weakening of, for example, coking coal mines (the government nationalised them in order to prevent unemployment). Machine tools and metal products were particularly badly hit, and are still operating at 50 per cent or less capacity. Railway wagon builders had expanded capacity to some 40 thousand wagons per year in the expectation of continued growth, but the railways then cut their purchases from 26 to 10 thousand per year. Formerly the government purchased half the national cement output and a third of paper production; now it takes a third and a quarter respectively.
The decline in public investment drove down private investment and savings (the rate of capital formation as a per cent of national income dropped from 13.2 (1965-6) to 9.6 (1970-71). This increased urban unemployment and so cut the demand for retail goods – for example, cotton textiles, leather goods etc. Inflation further hit working class consumption, producing an all round contraction of the urban market.
Within the cities, these various changes seem to have produced a shift of income from workers, manual and salaried, to the self-employed, professional and business strata, a shift which is probably dramatically large if we had any idea of the ‘black money’ flows. One estimate suggests that the real wages of factory workers fell by 7 per cent between 1965 and 1970. By contrast, the expansion in upper class incomes has produced a boom in those industries catering for upper class consumption, in particular the consumer durables industries (the output of which has increased by some 50 per cent over the past six years). But these industries – refrigerators, fans, air conditioning, household appliances – account for only about 5 per cent of consumer expenditure, so that their growth could hardly stimulate the whole economy. Small though the upper income market is, the tastes of the rich play an enormously powerful role in the distribution of private investment, and so the distribution of public sector output (e.g. steel for cars). Public transport in India is appalling, yet private motor car manufacture is receiving increasingly heavy priority (apparently regardless of the impact of the spread of cars on the urban transport system and the massive investment in roads that then becomes ‘necessary’). Of late, the government has licensed what it laughingly calls ‘the People’s Car’; it will sell for a price (about £950) which, on the official income statistics, may just come within the purchasing range of less than a million of India’s 547 millions. In political terms, the prosperity of the middle and upper classes has restored their morale and been a factor in Mrs Gandhi’s electoral success.
More important in the perspective for Indian development than the shift between urban classes has been the shift between industry and agriculture, between city and country. Good harvests and high government prices have moved income into the hands of the rich peasants at the expense of the urban working class paying high prices for its basic foodstuffs and of the government (the foodgrain price index, 1961-62: 100, reached 203.9 by 1970-71). Yet the increase in rich peasant incomes – like that of the urban upper classes – has not been able to stimulate the overall economy. Increased returns have too often gone into hoards, speculation and conspicuous consumption. Taking the cash out of the circulation system is in effect a forced deflation of the urban economy. To that deflation has been added the effects of the government’s policy in trying to damp down inflation by radically increasing taxes (three times last year, supposedly to pay for the refugees) to end deficit financing.
This outflow of income to the rural areas (or at least, to certain rural areas) is only the tip of the iceberg. For the struggle against the rich peasantry is rapidly becoming the most urgent single task in making possible any further phase of rapid development in India. The analogy is not exact but the second plan in India could be seen as Delhi’s attempt at the Soviet first five year plan – but without collectivisation. The fourth Indian plan is the re-establishment of Bukharinism. Whereas Stalin broke unequivocally with the Russian peasantry in the first Soviet plan period as the precondition for rapid capital accumulation, the second Indian plan was an attempt to industrialise by stealth without taking on the rural ruling classes (of course, a serious attack on the rich peasantry – including here the landlords and large landowners – would seriously have jeopardised the social order; Nehru did not have a mass Communist Party as his instrument of power). The creation of a heavy industrial structure ought to have made it unnecessary to drain resources out of agriculture into urban industry; once it matured, the public sector should have generated resources capable of bearing the brunt of capital accumulation without taking on the peasantry. Indeed, in India’s industrial strategy, the public sector ought to have played the role of those State farms that, in Russia’s agricultural strategy, the Left Opposition saw as the means to feed the growing cities without affronting the peasants.
However, the performance of the public sector has been nothing short of catastrophic. Far from providing a regular stream of savings on the basis of which further development could take place, the massive losses made by the nationalised corporations have been a constant drain on available resources, making further development even more difficult than would otherwise be the case. At the moment, for example, the public Ranchi Heavy Engineering plant is said to be unable to operate at over 20-25 per cent of capacity; the Durgapur and Rourkela steel plants at 40 per cent of capacity; cumulative losses on the public sector steel plants reached Rs.1,300m in 1970 on an investment of Rs.10,250m. The rate of profit on capital employed in the public sector is said to be 2.5 per cent (give or take a few statistical tricks), a return that would prompt any ordinary capitalist to move his capital into something else.
Although agriculture was never neglected to the degree some people now suggest, nevertheless it seemed to the government that in the first three plans, poor agriculture was the Achilles heel of the Indian economy. That agriculture needed a massive increase in inputs was a viewpoint which accorded exactly with that of the richer peasantry. The rate of growth of industry in the first three plans was nearly three and a half times that of agriculture. Now, however, the pattern has been reversed – in the past five years, industrial growth has been only half that in agriculture (6.5 per cent per year). Yet the expansion of agriculture has not done what the government said it hoped for, it has not produced rapid industrial growth, only a richer stratum of peasants.
The ‘green revolution’ in India is almost a textbook example of the paradox of capitalism – each increase in output seems only to make conditions worse. Leaving aside the social effects of the expansion in wheat output where it has occurred, it is difficult to see how agricultural expansion could be much of a stimulus to the overall economy. The returns to agriculture are concentrated in very few hands, too few to generate a real expansion in demand. Commercial crops have not been much improved by the recent changes, so there has been no decline in the price of industrial raw materials that might assist the industrial economy. In any case, industry has in the past twenty years moved further and further away from agricultural processing industries. As in the world economy generally, the creation of synthetic and substitute raw materials has decreased industry’s dependence on agriculture. The weight of chemicals and engineering in total industrial production has increased from about 20 per cent in 1951 to nearly 40 per cent in 1965. Chemical substitutes (polyester, nylon, PVC, polyethylene) are displacing cotton, jute and wood products. In certain respects this trend is disastrous for the Indian economy, for it usually means decreased employment (for example, of peasants growing cotton) and increased imports of crude oil (for the petrochemicals industry). Plastic sandals at very low prices are afflicting the leather industry. On the railways, the rapid change over to diesel trains is displacing the indigenous coal industry, again to the advantage of international oil companies. [1] The dominant pattern of the world economy is imposed on the internal economy, despite all contrary efforts.
Nevertheless, the Indian government has put an increasing volume of its resources into agriculture. In addition, the terms of trade have moved against the cities throughout the sixties. The price of finished manufactured goods, as a percentage of the price of agricultural commodities, moved from a high of 130.1 in 1963-4 to a low of 71.5 at the bottom of the agricultural recession in 1967-8. The expansion of agriculture after this last year has not at all changed the situation. High food prices – sustained by the government purchasing system -with an industrial recession have only continued to drain out of the cities. Again, it needs repeating, that only the narrowest stratum of rich peasants gain from this situation; the mass of peasants with very little or no marketable surplus remain as poor as before.
The government’s declared aim of developing agriculture (which is why foodgrain procurement prices were originally set so high) fits exactly the views of entrenched rich peasant groups in each State Congress party. It follows that conflict between agriculture and industry is reflected in the conflict between the States (the provincial governments) and the Centre, a conflict we will return to later. The logic of the second plan was to impose on the territory of India a geographical division of labour – for example, heavy industry was concentrated in the area of coal and iron sources in eastern India; Bombay became the main centre of petrochemicals and light manufacturing; Andhra, Punjab and Western Uttar Pradesh were major foodgrain producers. But the growth of State level power has steadily eroded any such division now. Food surplus States do not want to be dependent for industrial goods on other States; industrial States do not want to be dependent on other States for their foodgrain supply. As a result, the food surplus States are busy developing industry, whatever the cost, and food deficit States are developing agriculture. The two most recently proposed steel mills, for example, are to be located far from the supply of coking coal (and one of them is even far from a port to which coking coal could be brought or the output shipped out), both in food surplus States and remote from the main heavy industrial zone of India. On the other hand, Maharashtra – with a poor arid soil (but the Bombay industrial region) is attempting at very high cost to reach self-sufficiency in foodgrains, regardless of the cheaper supplies of foodstuffs available from its food surplus neighbours. West Bengal, also an industrial State, is attempting to follow suit. The growth of State-level economic autonomy moves the development path away from that course which fosters the interests of the national capitalist class, the national government and the nationalist petit bourgeoisie [2], and in favour of the interests of the local State petit bourgeoisie (including the rich peasantry). Given that the threshold concentration of resources required to launch and sustain development is rising all the time, this fragmentation of resources makes development increasingly difficult.
What makes the problem of the collision between the rural and urban ruling classes so urgent is the growth of unemployment. [3] For there to be stability, the Indian ruling class must be able to provide a steady and increasing stream of jobs some semblance of hope. Yet the cost of providing one new job is rising each year as the technology of industry changes in accordance with the world system as a whole – petrochemicals displaces the cotton, leather, jute industries without making up anything like the employment. At the moment, a rate of growth of industrial output of 8 to 10 per cent per year will not absorb much of the existing reserve army of labour; very soon, a twenty per cent rate of growth will not do. The world economy’s growth rate does not compensate for the domestic deficiency. Nor, despite the fond hopes of some people, is agriculture a place where surplus humanity can be shunted and forgotten. The prosperity of the rich peasantry (as well as its aggregation of the biggest chunk of resources put into the land) is likely to stimulate the introduction of labour saving equipment on the land in the longer term, and that will force people out of agriculture rather than making for more employment. More and more the modern economy threatens to degenerate into, on the one hand, the absurdly uneconomic public sector, sustained by taxing the cities and on the other, a small booming private sector for the high income market of the rich, rural or urban – a distant replica, on a very much smaller scale, of the US, European or Japanese consumer markets.
The government’s response to the failure of the industrial economy to grow has been to nationalise anything which was threatened with closure and to relax the ban on the entry of private companies into certain areas reserved for the nationalised industries. In the former case, the government has taken over recently the Bihar coal mines, Indian Copper, a number of heavy engineering companies, some 41 textile mills (it is considering acquiring another 67 ‘ailing’ textile mills). The public sector has become enormous within the modern economy. Of the 101 largest companies operating in India, 30 are publicly owned and include the nine largest companies; the 30 companies hold 60 per cent of the assets of the 101 companies. The largest private group (Tatas, with 9 of the 101, including the largest private company in India, Tata Iron and Steel) has total assets of Rs.4,860m; the largest company of all, the government’s Hindustan Steel has assets of Rs.10,270m (Tata Iron and Steel’s assets are worth Rs.l,860m). Twenty-seven of the 101 are foreign owned with combined assets of Rs.7,600m (23 per cent of the total).
However the concept ‘private’ is increasingly blurred. For not only are private companies now operating in fields reserved for the government, not only are ‘joint ventures’ spreading (in joint ventures, few of the restrictions on private companies operate, but private profits are made with government money), but also an increasing volume of public money flows into private companies, usually without any particular obligations. The government, either directly or through public financial institutions, holds some 31 per cent of the equity in the three largest private companies; if it converted all its loans to equity, it would hold 60 per cent. On average, the government holds 16 per cent of the equity of private companies, but the proportion sometimes rises as high as 50 per cent.
Despite much empty rhetoric about curbing capitalist excesses, the Indian government is heavily involved in ensuring that private capitalism continues to be profitable. Private business has not, by way of recompense, succeeded in restoring economic growth. For the private sector depends for its survival on public investment, on the kind of expansion of demand that took place in the second plan. But where are the resources for such an expansion to come from? Increasingly, for the private capitalists, agriculture is the only source for further capital accumulation. The rich peasants have been protected from taxation, their assets expanded at the expense of urban savings and their revenues enhanced out of urban tax revenue. The capitalists, rather than the socialists, are the people with the most powerful economic – if not political – interest in squeezing the kulaks.
The government by contrast refuses to take any clear positions. At most there is a rhetorical commitment to taxing agriculture, but in practice the issue is unlikely to be pressed very far. At the moment, the government is trying to rationalise the failure of Indian industry to grow. In a recent ‘keynote’ speech, Mrs Gandhi argued that for far too long India had sacrificed social ustice to the ruthless pursuit of economic growth. Now the abolition of poverty’ must be the first target. She did not explain how poverty is to be abolished without economic growth. The latest Planning Commission document in preparation for the Fifth Plan repeats these brave phrases, jutting the fleshpots of economic growth behind it. In practice, the strategy of the plan is unlikely to be much changed – there is to be more expenditure on rural employment and social service schemes. Since the allocation set aside in the Fourth Plan for these purposes was not fully used, it is difficult to see all this flurry – the ‘New Economies’ as it is grandly called – as any more than a more than usually cynical propaganda exercise. India has not achieved a high economic growth which can now be refused in favour of social justice.
 
2. Centre and States
The conflict between the agrarian and the industrial ruling classes, between rural and urban, is partly reflected in the collision between the Centre – the Government of India – and the States. Here there is space to mention only two elements in this connection – the financial relationship between the two, and the issue of agriculture’s privileged position in the national economy.
Industrialisation of the backward countries has pushed many of them further and further into debt. Repaying and servicing the debt consumes a larger share of export earnings, and this in turn often threatens to stifle all further development. Formally – but only formally – the internal relationship between Delhi and the States shows the position. In March 1951, the States had an outstanding debt of Rs.2,450m (roughly £122m); by the end of the current financial year, the cumulative debt had reached Rs.87,580m (or £4,739m). The rate of increase is of the order of 165 per cent per year. Within this debt, loans from the Central Government have increased fastest – at about 195 per cent per year. However, the burden of repayment and interest payments has grown faster – they took 52 per cent of loans in 1965-6, 86 per cent in 1969-70. In the current year, payments to the Centre will exceed the size of its loans to the States.
The Centre’s loans to the States represent its power of bribery. They are a lever to influence the States’ behaviour, so that if the rate of lending is negative, that represents a decline in Delhi’s power rather than the stranglehold of international lenders over some backward countries. For Delhi, there are few sanctions against defaulters, and none against the aggregate of States. The Minister of Planning, alarmed at the size of the debt, recently banned further loans. The only result has been an equally alarming increase in the States’ overdrafts on their accounts with the central bank. The overdrafts make a mockery of any attempt at monetary or credit control policies by the government. The Minister, nothing daunted, banned an increase in overdrafts, but he cannot possibly hold such a ban and risk the bankruptcy of a State.
For an individual State, the situation can be alarming, and prompts various State Chief Ministers to demand greater economic autonomy. The non-Congress government of Tamilnad constantly complains at the ‘reverse flow of aid’ and Karunanidhi, the Chief Minister, has talked threateningly of his party, the DMK,. being a Tamil Awami League and prepared to lead a similar struggle to that which took place in East Bengal. The Kerala State government which includes Congress, has made similar threats, demanding that the State’s debts be written off and the financial neglect and strangulation of the State be ended or a new Bangladesh movement will arise to free Kerala. There are similar threats in other States, and the Communist Party of India (Marxist) has taken up the same position in West Bengal.
Yet they are only threats for the real balance of power lies ultimately with the aggregate of States. Individual States may feel – rightly – oppressed, but they are more interested in bargaining than breaking with the Centre. For they need the Centre. Each local bourgeoisie struggles to secure its unchallenged domination in each State against national forces, but also needs national forces to protect itself against ihe possible revolt of its own local people. The threats are attempts to squeeze more out of Delhi in competition with other States, not the first step in secession. As will be seen later in the case of West Bengal, the intervention of the Centre can be vital in protecting the local ruling order against its local challengers.
Where the real power of the States is most clearly seen is when they combine against the Centre, when their nearest interests are at stake. In particular, agriculture – part of the sphere of responsibility of the States – touches all most sensitively. The powerfully entrenched position of the rich peasants within each State Congress has ensured that land reform legislation has largely been effective, that agriculture has been kept largely untaxed and that a significant flow of resources has been diverted into rich peasant hands.
In the sixties, particular rural groups have grown strong on this rich diet. In the Punjab – on the basis of the new wheat technology – annual income per head has increased from Rs.307 (1961) to Rs.854 (1970), and if that is the average figure, the rich farmers must have done very much better (the Punjab’s foodgrain output has increased from 2m tons in 1950-51 to 6.5m tons in 1969-70). Nor is this phenomenon simply the result of the new hybrid seed, for in Andhra Pradesh the larger rice growing farmers are very prosperous. It is said that tractors are now replacing bullocks even among the smaller farmers (who find it cheaper to hire a tractor for short periods than keep bullocks all the year round). Army officers and civil servants have been induced to retire into farming because it is such a lucrative way to make money and escapes all taxation. Congress Ministers are not averse to dabbling in land speculation (contravening the land reform laws at the same time) either in their own names or that of their wives.
The prosperity of the richer farmers is purchased in part at the expense of the poorer farmers. The growers of hybrid seed have been favoured with the lion’s share of irrigation water, fertilisers, pesticides and so on, all of which deprives the poorer cultivator of his share. The market is so favourable, also, that landlords and richer peasants are eager to grab as much land as they can. The violent incidents between share croppers or labourers and larger farmers seem to be increasing. Last November, for example, ten share croppers were shot dead, four burned alive in their huts and thirty five wounded when thugs in the employment of local landlords set out to teach them a lesson; the sharecroppers were trying to prevent the landlords seizing a piece of their land. The granaries can be full while there are starving people. Right at the moment there is famine among the poorest tribal people of part of Bihar State (the Paharias), but Bihar State has announced it is within sight of ‘self-sufficiency’ in food grains.
To lower the permitted size of land holdings (the ‘ceiling’), it has been argued, will make available land for large numbers of landless peasants. To introduce the stringent taxation of rich peasant agriculture will produce a flow of resources for development without a radical restructuring of Indian society. To lower the present price at which the government buys wheat – indeed, to eliminate government wheat purchases altogether -will simultaneously save the central budget a considerable sum and force the rich farmers to grow crops neglected in the present agricultural boom, either commercial crops or other foodstuffs vital for the national diet (e.g. pulses). But to achieve any or all of these desirable ends requires the Centre to subordinate and compel the State Congress parties to execute Delhi’s wishes.
Mrs Gandhi’s victory in the last elections was seen as achieving this subordination. Before the March elections in some 16 States, the prime minister supposedly vetted the leaders and candidates of every State Congress, securing in each case loyalty to her programme (to lower the land ceiling) and dismissing any who seemed doubtful in loyalty. At the same time, the government’s Agricultural Prices Commission (APC) produced a report (which every year seems to reach the same conclusion) arguing that the highest production cost for wheat in India is about Rs.50-55 (and the lowest, Rs.38) per quintal, yet the government’s purchase price is Rs.76; the APC urged that the government’s procurement price be cut, depending on the type of wheat, by between Rs.4 and 8 per quintal, scarcely a very dramatic reduction.
It was thought the combination of Mrs Gandhi’s purge of Congress (and humiliation of State Congress leaders) and her election victory would ensure that the wheat price, the land ceiling and the agricultural taxation proposals would be easily achieved. Yet very little had changed in reality. The basic balance of power remained the same, Mrs Gandhi may have increased the loyalty of her party members to herself, but only on condition that she refrained from injuring the interests of their supporters. Immediately after the election, Mrs Gandhi’s personally selected Chief Minister of the Punjab announced that the Punjab Congress would not be lowering the land ceiling in that State. Four days later, the Chief Ministers met in Delhi. Despite the Finance Minister’s alarm that the total government wheat bill had increased recently from Rs.350m to Rs.1,200m, the Chief Ministers threw out the proposal for a cut in the wheat price. Indeed, the irrepressible Punjab Chief Minister argued that, since it now cost Rs.80 per quintal to produce wheat, the procurement price ought to be raised. The meeting went further, for it successfully extracted a promise from the government to increase the proportion of the wheat crop it was obliged to buy and refrain from unloading government wheat on the market without consulting the States.
Only three States grow wheat in significant volume, but the others – with the exception of West Bengal, now the most loyal of the loyal – rallied round to support the threatened agrarian interest. In return, no doubt, the three wheat growers will support other States on issues close to their interests (for example, Gujerat’s demand for the government to guarantee the price of raw cotton). Outside the Chief Minister’s meeting there was remarkably little dispute about the wheat price; none in the lower house of the national parliament; in the upper house, members – regardless of political party – condemned the APC recommendation. So far as the government is concerned, it looked as though it recognised the inevitability of its defeat beforehand and put up no real fight. Mrs Gandhi did not put her reputation to the test by attending the meeting and fighting for the APC proposals.
The balance of power revealed by this encounter means little can be expected of the proposal to lower the land ceiling or increase agricultural taxation. The government has already shunted the former proposal into a committee of enquiry as if information was the main obstacle to taxing the kulaks. Last year the Chief Ministers refused to accept an agricultural tax to pay for the Bengali refugees, so it is doubtful whether a committee report this year will soften their obduracy. They have a powerful ally in the central Minister of Food and Agriculture. He has recently performed sterling service on the land ceiling issue. The ceiling to be most drastically lowered was to apply to ‘perennially irrigated’ land, and the Minister last month kindly defined this as land irrigated for at least ten months of the year from government canals and wells. The rest of the land – including land irrigated from private water sources (mainly tubewells) – is accounted as ‘dry’ and therefore subject to much more generous land ceilings. On this definition, ‘perennially irrigated’ is rare and proportionately becoming rarer. At the moment, about 22 per cent of India’s cultivated land is irrigated (though probably not for anything like 10 months per year), and about half of this from government water sources. The expansion of private tubewells has been a boom industry for the past ten years, all through the years of so-called harvest failure. Government and banks have pushed the financing of private wells hard, and rich peasant profits have also assisted. Indeed, the spread of tubewells is something of an index of the prosperity of the richer peasants -at the end of the third plan, there were something like 80,000 private tubewells in the country; in the years of slump and harvest failure (1966-9), another 175,000 were built; and during the fourth plan, yet another 190,000. So the Minister’s definition must have caused an audible sigh of relief in rich peasant households round the country (the Minister’s explanation – that this was the definition standard in all the previous land reform legislation – only made matters worse).
 
3. West Bengal
The impact of the crisis of the sixties on the working class has been most powerful in the State of West Bengal. Of all the States, this is the one most dependent upon the national economy for its prosperity. It is also the State where the left was strongest and yet now has been most decisively defeated. West Bengal and its immediate environs were designed to be the heavy industrial zone of India. Five major steel plants, the major part of the coal and iron ore mining industries, heavy engineering plants and a very large chemical fertilizer plant, railway wagon and repair workshops were all concentrated here. In the Calcutta Metropolitan District, a quarter of India’s engineering capacity is located, much of it in heavy engineering. Vast sums have been poured into the area to sustain the growth of the capital goods industries. Between 1959 and 1965, investment in the larger factory sector (units employing 50 or more workers with power, 100 or more workers without power) increased at a compound rate of 21 per cent per year (by contrast, income increased by 12 per cent per year and employment by 5 per cent per year). Capital per worker has consistently been high and increasing rapidly; it increased by 147 per cent in the same time period. The other major employer in the West Bengal industrial sector is jute, an old and declining industry.
The result of this industrial mix is that what was a serious recession in India in the last half of the sixties was a slump in West Bengal, or rather in the industrial heart of West Bengal, Calcutta. It inflicted grave damage on the working class, its organisation and morale.
Registered factory employment in the Calcutta Metropolitan District (CMD) fell by nearly 100 thousand between 1965 and 1969 [4], whereas it rose by nearly 16 thousand in West Bengal as a whole. Of the decline, engineering lost 29 thousand, jute 55 thousand. Even the upturn of 1969-70 scarcely affected engineering at all and at the end of last year, still only 40-50 per cent of capacity was being used. The jute industry, strongly assisted by the war in East Bengal (the other major jute producer, then part of Pakistan), did make some recovery in 1970-71, putting on 20 thousand new jobs (the rest of the CMD lost 2 thousand jobs at the same time). If Bangladesh’s jute manufacturing industry recovers soon, however, it may mean a return to slump for West Bengal’s jute industry.
In addition to unemployment, wages have not at all kept pace with price inflation, particularly the increase in food prices. The total real wage bill in West Bengal is said to have declined by 7.5 per cent between 1965 and 1968, and per capita real wages by 3.3 per cent. The large inflow of refugees in 1971 cannot at all have improved the situation since food prices must have been further inflated and wages depressed by the willingness of refugees to work for virtually any pay. Even most recently, there has not been much improvement. In the year ending October 1971, registered unemployment increased by 220 thousand which, on the normal ratios used, suggests a total increase in unemployment of three quarters of a million.
Worker reaction to this catastrophic economic performance has been to wage a bitter and savage struggle for survival against the attempt by employers to offload their problems on to them. The physical decay of Calcutta, now notorious as an example of neglect, only exaggerates the open class warfare that has occupied the city for the past five years. Take for example the number of workers in dispute as a percentage of all workers in registered factories; this proportion was about 14 to 15 per cent in the fifties; it rose to 18 per cent in 1966, 32 per cent in 1967 and 1968, and 85 per cent in 1969. Or take the per cent of man days lost to total man days worked; this rose from under 1 per cent to nearly 5 per cent in 1970 (both sets of figures include lockouts; nearly half the disputes involved lockouts, and the average duration of lockouts – 45 days – was three times that for strikes). Or take the rate of political murders: as officially estimated (or almost certainly underestimated), these rose from 108 in 1969 to 1,169 in 1971, the year of the Congress ‘clean up’ of Calcutta.
The government has devoted less and less of its attention to trying to raise the economic level of West Bengal, more and more to trying to beat opposition into the ground. Thirteen battalions of the Central Reserve Police – the Central government special police force – along with several thousand local police and, from time to time, army units have been required just to hold the CMD together. West Bengal’s expenditure on the police has risen from Rs.l60m in 1966-67 to Rs.450m this year. This scale of spending means little can be raised for development. Maharashtra State (the other most industrialised State) raised Rs.2,250m for its 1972-3 development plan; West Bengal has raised Rs.750m.
The central government has now begun to push in some cash to the CMD economy (during President’s rule last autumn, and with the help of the abolition of Calcutta Corporation). With its simultaneous policy of massive physical repression, it is hoped the State can be restored to ‘normal’. So far the government’s policy has been successful, and indeed has been ratified by the substantial increase in its popular vote at the elections in March. Factory disputes, violent clashes on the streets, political murders, all seem to be declining. The number of gheraos (locking up the managers in their offices until they agree to negotiate) at the notorious trouble spot, Durgapur steel plant, has declined from 517 in 1969 to 20 last year.
 






This article is the second part of an analysis of the Indian crisis. The first part, which appeared in our last issue, examined the economic background and the failure of Indian capitalism to solve the problem of development.



The failed revolution of West Bengal
The possibility of a revolutionary situation in Calcutta Metropolitan District depended entirely on the revolutionary political forces available. The objective conditions could hardly have been more favourable. Calcutta, with the right cast, could have played the role of Petrograd. In fact what revolutionary movement there was, crumbled against a ruling class far shrewder and tougher, far better organised and far more clearly aware of its interests than any of the Left alternatives. By comparison, the revolutionaries appeared to be only playing with words. The invasion of Bangladesh by the Indian army has made India the great power of South Asia. The much less publicised domestic baptism of fire took place in West Bengal.
What were the available organisations on the Left? The Indian Left is dominated by the two major fragments of the old Communist Party of India.
 
The Communist Party of India and the Communist Party (Marxist)
In 1964, the Communist Party split. The lines of the division had existed for quite a long time. In part, the dispute was about the domestic strategy to be pursued – separating those who thought the best way forward was in alliance with the Congress Left, and those who wanted one or another of the more radical alternatives. The divide also separated the local bases of party support and its rural organisation (the Left), and the party bureaucracy, members of the central and State assemblies and the trade unions (the Right). What made it impossible to hold the party together was partly the Sino-Soviet dispute, and more immediately the border clash between India and China in 1962. [5]
The smaller fragment of the split, the pro-Moscow Right under S.A. Dange, retained the party name, the Communist Party of India (CPI). The larger group which carried off the main geographical areas of CPI strength – in West Bengal, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh – called itself the Communist Party of India (Marxist), the CPM. Later on, the CPM also split, or rather crumbled on its Left wing, to produce a third Communist Party, avowedly against parliamentary politics altogether; this was the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), CPML.
The developing crisis in West Bengal – and also in Kerala – as well as the vagaries of the simple majority electoral system, brought the CPM and its allies increasingly close to a majority in the State Assembly. While the CPM was a minority party, it could sustain both parliamentary politics and revolutionary rhetoric whilst evading the question of what was the real method of attaining power. But the strangulation of West Bengal thrust the CPM forward into the position where it could attain parliamentary power. In 1967, when the West Bengal United Front (which included both the CPM and the CPI, along with 12 allies) won 51 per cent of the vote (as against 41 per cent for undivided Congress), the CPM could no longer evade the question of its attitude to forming the State government. It succumbed to the temptation and led its forces for some five years into the marsh of – not merely parliamentary representation – but pursuit or defence of State government power.
The United Front government fell in late 1968, after which President’s rule (that is, direct rule by the central government without a State assembly) lasted until new elections were held in February, 1969. In that election. Congress – again with 41 per cent of the votes – secured only 55 seats, whereas the CPM with 20 per cent of the votes, won 80 seats. The ensuing CPM-led coalition government lasted until March 1970 when another bout of President’s rule intervened until new elections in March 1971. It should be added that, in late 1969, Congress split between Mrs Gandhi’s Congress (R) and Congress (O). In the 1971 elections. Congress (R) won 28 per cent of the vote but secured 105 seats; the CPM with it’s highest voting score – 32 per cent – won 113 seats. A weak Congress-led coalition was formed and lasted until June of last year when President’s rule was again introduced. Delhi ruled until the elections of March of this year when Congress (R) won its highest proportion of the votes in West Bengal’s history – 50 per cent – and 216 seats. The CPM’s vote went down to about 28 per cent (a drop of 4 per cent only on 1971) but the number of seats dropped disastrously from 113 to 14. The Right Communists, the CPI, allied with Congress (R), won 12 per cent of the vote and 35 seats, giving the governing alliance 251 seats in an assembly of 280.
The only reason for giving these figures is that, in the sometimes random variations in number of seats, much of the articulate political middle class has lived a hectic, indeed, frenetic political life over the past five years. Yet from the variation in the vote – with the exception of the effects of the 1969 Congress split on the 1970 Congress (R) vote – it is clear that although there have been changes, these have not necessarily reflected any very powerful shifts of opinion. Congress vote has remained around 40 per cent throughout; the CPM vote has climbed from around 20 per cent to 30 per cent and now seems to have fallen back a little. The seat swings give CPM followers the excitement so signally lacking in the actual behaviour of the party, it seems as if hot and bloody class war is being fought out in the polling booths. Politically, the Right Communists, the CPI are now little more than a pressure group for the Soviet Union within the ruling Congress. CPI politics – simple, hardly even Left-wing, Social Democracy – distinguish the party in no way from the rhetoric of Mrs Gandhi’s Congress apart from its curious addiction to things Muscovite. Nevertheless, its politics and behaviour have some kind of coherent rationale. The CPM, by contrast, has failed to find for itself any clear role. What it has achieved over the past five years is the destruction of any serious revolutionary upsurge in West Bengal (or anywhere else). It has set back the possibility of a revolutionary movement a long way. Yet it has still not found any coherent kind of role – for example, pressing for ‘structural reform’, so beloved by Left parties seeking to escape revolutionary politics.
 
The Class Nature of the Indian Revolution
In 1967, the CPM decided (in New Situation and the Party’s Tasks) that a political crisis was maturing which might lead even to a non-Congress coalition in Delhi. The CPM, it said, should participate in various non-Congress governments, not because participation could lead to any serious reforms, but because the party must win allies and support – ‘it is imperative’, it said, no doubt with sceptical members in mind, ‘that our party realises that its immediate future in no small way depends on how it plays its worthy part in running the two State governments of Kerala and West Bengal’. [6] It argued that the central government was the organ of the class rule of the bourgeoisie and the landlords, led by the big bourgeoisie in alliance with foreign capital. The big bourgeoisie, because of its alliance, refused to complete ‘the democratic anti-imperialist tasks of the Indian Revolution’, one of which is the replacement of the government by a ‘State of People’s Democracy’ led by the working class (viz. the CPM). The CPI on the other hand regards Delhi as the ‘organ of the class rule of the national bourgeoisie as a whole which upholds and develops capitalism’. For the CPI, the national bourgeoisie and its government is basically progressive, but threatened by the monopolists and ‘feudal elements’. All progressive forces must rally round to support the progressive national bourgeoisie – Mrs Gandhi, no less – in order to create a government of ‘national democracy’ where power is jointly held by the working class (viz. the CPI) and the national bourgeoisie. [7]
Neither party believes that it is practicable to struggle for the socialist revolution. The disagreement between the two is over how progressive Mrs Gandhi’s Congress is. The CPM argues that ‘the basic and fundamental task of the revolution in today’s context cannot be carried out except in determined opposition to and struggle against the big bourgeoisie and its political representatives’. The CPI seeks rather to ‘transform Parliament from an instrument serving the bourgeoisie into a genuine instrument of the people’s will’. For the CPM, there is no chance of transforming parliament. Parliamentary and non-parliamentary methods of struggle must be combined to ‘push forward’ the movement. State governments, it argues, can do little to solve fundamental problems. For example, United Front governments should be ‘treated and understood as instruments of struggle in the hands of the people more than as governments that actually possess adequate power that can materially and substantially give relief to the people’.
This position permits the CPM to sustain a radical rhetoric – denouncing those with illusions in parliament – with a surprisingly conservative practice. When the CPM led the State governments of West Bengal and Kerala, it simultaneously initiated popular demonstrations against the central government – but feared to use its power as State government to influence the national government. Elementary reforms – or even trying to achieve elementary reforms – were neglected because supposedly this would lead to reformist illusions. Yet in practice, the CPM has become completely identified with the attempt to secure parliamentary power, and having secured it, keep it whatever the political cost.
Whatever the CPM leadership says, in practice on various occasions it has been nudged very close to the CPI. In the national parliament in late 1969 for example, when Congress split (to the delight of the CPI which was able then to identify Mrs Gandhi’s Congress (R) as the progressive national bourgeoisie), the CPM was forced to decide whether or not to support Mrs Gandhi’s minority government or write it off as indistinguishable from the rival Congress. In fact, it decided Congress (R) was the lesser evil and offered support. In the Presidential elections the CPM supported Mrs Gandhi’s candidate, Giri. President Giri is the man who twice since the CPM gave him their support has imposed President’s rule on CPM-led State governments.
 
Bangladesh and the CPM
In 1971, the CPM performed the same ideological acrobatics on the issue of Bangladesh. It had decided by then that Mrs Gandhi’s government was ‘semi-fascist’ since Congress thugs were beating up and murdering CPM members, instead of just concentrating on the cadres of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist). Yet the CPM gave unconditional support to Mrs Gandhi’s ‘semi-fascist’ government in its approach to East Bengal. It argued that war was threatened (before it actually broke out) by the Pakistan military dictators against ‘our country’ because India had helped the refugees and supported the independence struggle – ‘It is India’s duty and right to support this freedom struggle ... India must do this to safeguard her own independence and democracy [presumably a semi-fascist democracy – NH]. And if war is imposed upon us for doing this, it is war to defend freedom and democracy, a just war.’
The CPM trade union federation – CITU – accordingly promised to avoid strikes, continue production without interruptions through the war, see all disputes were settled quickly through negotiation and co-operation with the government. Unilaterally, it agreed to stop all strikes currently in progress, to accept government arbitration terms even when these were not satisfactory and collect funds from the workers for National Defence and Bangladesh relief – ‘Workers in every factory should contribute a day’s wages and get the employer to contribute an equal amount’. Presumably Mrs Gandhi’s government had become ‘progressive semi-fascist’. [8] The CPM leadership’s line is designed – as before – to assist unity, to carry both the chauvinists and the radical opponents of Congress (R) on the Bangladesh issue. But on occasions the muddle incites opposition. The CPM tried in 1967-8 to avoid taking a position on the Chinese case in the Sino-Soviet dispute in order to hold the party together, united in their opposition to the Soviet position. A draft document (the ‘Madurai document’) of mid-1968 rejected all the positions (except one) advanced by the Soviet Union but said nothing on China’s agreements. As a result, the Andhra Pradesh and Kashmir units of the CPM threw the document out. Nevertheless it was accepted by the national party at its Burdwan plenum. Some 60 per cent of the Andhra CPM then walked out of the party to form an explicitly Maoist group. Only when Peking itself directly attacked the CPM did it make any kind of reply, and even then its response was eclectic rather than coherent. It supported the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, warmly praised the Soviet attitude to the struggle in Bangladesh and also the Soviet position on Kashmir (a ‘domestic problem for the Indian government’; the Chinese are for the right of national self-determination of the Kashmiris). These gestures did not evoke any olive branches from Moscow so the CPM has tried to establish a ‘middle affiliation’ between Moscow and Peking. The CPM leaders now take their holidays in Roumania!
 
The Maoists Split
The ambivalence of the CPM as well as its participation in two State governments inevitably affected its more revolutionary members. What the CPM leadership called the ‘ultra-Left’ became increasingly important through 1967 and 1968. A whole range of revolutionary groups appeared on the Left flanks of the party, and this affected not only the local standing and tactics of the CPM but also its international standing. China was happy to accord the CPM a certain benevolent neutrality (which tended to keep the CPM’s Left moderately happy) while there was no alternative. Already in early 1967, two movements, of agrarian revolt were underway – in Naxalbari (whence ‘Naxalite’) in north Bengal and in Srikakulam, Andhra Pradesh. Indeed, the attitude of the Andhra party to the Madurai document was partly conditioned by its involvement in Srikakulam, a development which seemed quite inconsistent with the CPM’s aspiration to government power. In Naxalbari, it was the activity of CPM cadres, in particular Kanu Sanyal, which generated the movement.
The CPM’s participation in the 1967 West Bengal State government persuaded the Communist Party of China that the CPM was not its chosen instrument in India. On the basis of the Naxalbari movement, Peking announced that India was now objectively ripe for armed struggle; only a Communist Party was lacking. On behalf of the CPM, Basavapunniah detected the hand of the big bourgeoisie – and subsequently the ubiquitous CIA – in the Naxalbari movement, claiming its was a conspiracy to discredit the CPM. However, at that stage the CPM was still trying to temporise; it denounced police violence and intervention in Naxalbari (the Minister in charge of the West Bengal police at that time was Jyoti Basu, the chief of West Bengal CPM) and called for negotiations. Subsequently, it was less discreet in its attempts to root out Naxalism by force.
Whatever successes were won in Naxalbari, they were temporary. The lessons that Kanu Sanyal drew from the failure of the north Bengal agitation (Report on the Peasant Movement in the Terai Region) were that it lacked a strong party organisation, it failed to build a powerful mass base and was guilty of ‘old line thinking’. None of this however moderated Peking’s adulation. It praised the Naxalbari to the skies and did not mention its failure, let alone discuss the reasons for this. It was anxious to attack the CPM through by the Naxalbari movement; in Andhra where the CPM was not participating in the government, the Srikakulam agitation at this stage received much less Chinese attention. The CPM scattered on its left flank a number of groups committed to rural guerilla warfare. Some of these came together to form a co-ordinating committee in West Bengal and start a journal, Liberation (Deshabrati). In November 1968 an All-India Co-ordinating Committee of Revolutionaries was formed (subsequently ‘Communist’ was inserted in this unwieldy title, hence AICCCR), but it still probably included only a minority of the Maoist groups in India (it did not include one of the largest groups, the Andhra group of Nagi Reddy).
The leading theoretician of the AICCCR was Charu Mazumdar, a former old-time CPM district leader from north Bengal. He argued – in contrast to the positions of the CPI and CPM – that the chief contradiction in India was between the peasantry and the ‘feudal order’, a contradiction that could be overcome only by armed peasant struggle against the landlords. A party would be formed, he said, out of the youth of the working class, of the peasantry and ‘the toiling middle class’, after the struggle had begun. The armed struggle was supposedly the first step in seizing the State, but in practice its main driving force – insofar as peasants were involved – seems to have been to seize crops and land.
 
The Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist)
In March 1969, the secret rural-based West Bengal AICCCR launched an open public rally in Calcutta to proclaim the formation of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) (CPML). The new party not only excluded the Andhra group but a number of others, all of which were denounced by the CPML. In July the CPML received official recognition; the Peking People’s Daily acknowledged the CPML as the only genuine Communist Party in India. The party had neither programme nor constitution. Instead of a strategy, it had a political resolution which committed its members to maintaining an organisation which was secret, rural and dedicated to armed struggle. There was no provision for building mass organisations, rural or urban, and indeed, Mazumdar implied that work in mass organisations would make difficult the party’s aim of remaining secret. In any case, it was suggested, mass organisations would inevitably permit the domination of rich peasants and lead to ‘revisionism’. Only a secret organisation could properly secure the leadership of the landless peasants in the movement. Mass organisations would become possible when particular rural areas had been cleared of class enemies (Peking did not contradict this argument although it was clearly quite inconsistent with Mao’s tactics – open mass organisations should precede, not follow, armed rural struggle).
Secrecy, as operated by the CPML, was inevitable elitist. The party was dependent on a few reliable cadres, and that increasingly prevented the involvement of those, the peasants, who were supposed to be emancipating themselves. Secrecy is necessary in all kinds of situations, but it is tolerable in a revolutionary organisation only where there are already organic links with the class the organisation claims to lead. Without this, the organisation isolates itself and becomes increasingly marginal to the class concerned. Originally, CPML squads of cadres – usually students from Calcutta – were to organise the peasants to act against landlords and police. But it became safer for the squads to attack the landlords themselves, without involving peasant support (quite often, the peasants were probably far too shrewd to get involved in what was clearly gangsterism, although they might be quite happy to share the rewards after the event). This is the origin of the notorious ‘annhilation tactic’ that Charu Mazumdar unveiled as his particular contribution to the corpus of Marxism-Leninism in February 1969. Cadres must win the support of the landless peasants by systematically murdering the most hated landlords and so clearing areas of class enemies.
The police net closed in with increasing rapidity wherever the CPML cadres undertook any kind of action. The Calcutta students were usually easy to identify in the rural areas. After a phase of demoralisation in the police when the United Front government dithered, the forces of the law used the inexperience of CPML cadres as a training ground for counter insurgency which will stand them in good stead in the future. Yet the worse the situation became, the fewer lessons Mazumdar seemed prepared to learn. He argued now that guerilla warfare could be started anywhere (not just in remote areas), mass organisations were always a hindrance in waging guerilla warfare, and guerilla warfare depended for success on first liquidating the ‘feudal classes’ in an area (Peking Review in 1969 gave some kind of sanction of this position although carefully emphasizing at the same time the importance of mass participation). In late 1969, Mazumdar announced that the party was on the verge of forming a People’s Liberation Army and beginning a civil war. By early 1971, he said, the army would begin its triumphant march across the plains of Bengal.
 
The Turn to Urban Terrorism
In the year up to the spring of 1970, the CPM-led government had been trying to establish an unchallengeable monopoly of political support in Calcutta. The CPM used its government power to try and eliminate Congress support – and indeed support for any other political party, including its allies in the government – first in the police and bureaucracy of the State, then among organised workers and in rural areas. The era of open violence had already begun.
It was in this situation that, in mid-1970, Mazumdar began to shift the centre of CPML activities out of the countryside into Calcutta city in order, he said, to unleash a ‘red terror’ against the ‘white terror’ stalking the city. To assist the campaign, the CPML recruited a motley gang of footloose thugs. Open street warfare ensued with considerable bloodshed on all sides. In Calcutta, the CPML tried to have a mini-Cultural Revolution. It attacked educational institutions, government offices, burnt pictures and books, smashed statues. Retrospectively, Mazumdar said the campaign constituted the students destroying the superstructure of society while the peasants attacked the base. However very few peasants were doing any attacking outside the daydreams of the CPML leadership. In July of 1970, the Calcutta district committee of the CPML decided on the murder of class enemies in the city – policemen, military personnel, capitalists, black marketeers. In practice, this usually meant policemen, and finally policemen who were known supporters of the CPM. Peking did not criticise the new turn, it ignored the CPML completely (from October 1970 to October 1971, Hsinhua was silent on the vast Indian revolution which, until then had reportedly been sweeping all before it). Mazumdar’s reversal of policy is difficult to explain. Perhaps it was a tactic of despair, after all attempts at a rural revolt had failed. Perhaps he calculated that the mass following of the CPM would respond to a sustained CPML campaign and replenish his reserves of cadres. Or perhaps the cadres, hunted continually in the rural areas, just voted with their feet and fled home to Calcutta as the only retreat safe from police search. Another argument has it that Mazumdar had in fact become a police agent or at least had entered some kind of deal with Mrs Gandhi.
Perhaps this story is malicious slander. It was certainly in the interest of the CPM to put about such stories: the CPML and the Congress (R), it could claim, were part of one conspiracy to destroy the only real revolutionary alternative. But even in CPML circles, the ‘explanation’ of the failure of the hallowed tactic of guerilla warfare could be simplified if Mazumdar was a traitor; the explanation would require no radical reappraisal of the whole strategy. In any case the CPML was wrested from the control of Mazumdar by another group, the Bihar-Orissa Committee (the leadership of which includes Ashim Chatterji and is largely in gaol); Mazumdar himself has been captured, and is now said to have died in prison.
Evasion characterises Peking’s attitude. Having given uncritical support to Mazumdar’s line of pure terrorism, Hsinhua has now moved over – without explanation or critical scrutiny of the record – to praising the Bihar-Orissa Committee (of Chatterji) and its emphasis on the role of mass organisations.
In the autumn of 1971, the Chatterji group produced a document that acknowledged the CPML’s mistaken attitude to mass organisations, to the recruitment of lumpen proletarian elements (the Calcutta thugs who practised annihilating class enemies) and to the ‘annihilation tactic’. However, in the same document, it also argued on the Bangladesh issue that since Peking supported Yahya Khan, all true revolutionaries must do likewise; Yahya, it said, was an anti-imperialist figure like Prince Sihanouk. By contrast, Mazumdar’s document acknowledged no mistakes but did say all true revolutionaries should support the struggle for an independent Bangladesh (perhaps Bangladesh was the issue that changed Peking’s mind).
The disastrous politics of Maoism remain unchanged by the debacle. Indeed, there are still areas of armed struggle, or at least, rural agitation in the country; in particular, the Revolutionary Communist Committee of Andhra Pradesh continues its operations in the Andhra forests; it opposes the ‘annihilation’ tactic, tries to build mass organisations and is fairly cautious in approach to the authorities. In West Bengal, doubts have certainly been expressed about China’s foreign policy vis-à-vis Bangladesh, but where Maoism is at its most vicious and destructive – in the domestic struggle – there are still few criticisms. Perhaps two or three thousand political activists have been murdered; the government claims to have 7,000 CPML supporters in gaol. Yet still the radicals of West Bengal cling to the politics of Peking. It took all of that loss to learn the primitive lesson that ‘when party warfare replaces political action, it provides a powerful reinforcement to Right reaction’. [9]
 
The Repression
The new Congress goevernment of the spring of 1971 tried to deliver the final blows in eliminating the CPML and the CPM. It is said that large numbers of CPML members crossed over to Congress to form the nucleus of the Congress youth organisation (Chattra Parishad); another story is that the government offered to release 800 ‘Naxalites’ provided they agreed to work for Congress. The youth Congress has certainly been the spearhead in trying to eliminate the CPM. Jyoti Basu claimed in January that 600 CPM activists had been killed in the preceding 18 months. The attacks continued through the period of President’s rule, culminating in a drive to ensure the CPM was defeated in the last elections. The constituency of Barangar in Calcutta had been held by Jyoti Basu with a very handsome majority since 1952; in March he lost the seat to the CPI (Congress’s ally) by 39,000 votes.
The violence did not stop with the election victory, for the youth Congress is now busy carving out a place for itself at the expense of both the CPM and, perhaps also the CPI and some elements of Congress itself. The Chattra Parishad has been trying to break up the CPM trade union organisation and establish itself in its place.
In February of this year, the CPM trade union federation, CITU, appealed plaintively to employers to protect their workers against Congress and police attacks – no talk of worker militia here.
Both the CPI and the CPM rejoiced originally at the destruction of the CPML. New Age (the CPI ‘central organ’) in March also crowed publicly at the liquidation of the CPML, the ‘ultra left’ – ‘It has paid dearly for its politics of terror, disruption, opportunism and clandestine liaison with the grand alliance of reaction’. Yet what has been done to the CPML and continues to be done to the CPM, can equally well be done to the CPI should it ever show any signs of independence.
The CPM has learned no lessons. At the 9th party Congress in July 1972, the Political Resolution was carried without major opposition and the leadership congratulated for steering between Right reformism and Left adventurism. The leadership explains its loss of so many seats at the last election – its radical defeat in pursuit of what, by default, must be seen as its primary tactic – by blaming all its troubles on Congress gangterism and manipulation of the vote (Congress’s intervention was not very successful, in this case, since the CPM vote was not cut so radically). Jyoti Basu and the CPM have now emerged as the most passionate defenders of Indian ‘democracy’ against Congress’s ‘anti-democratic’ actions. The party is boycotting the State assembly by way of protest (but not, it should be noted, the two houses of the central parliament). Basu’s complaints, along with the CPM’s characterisation of Congress as ‘semi-fascist’, might be taken as arguments for the party going underground. The rhetoric of the CPM leaders occasionally suggests such flights of fancy, but reality is less exciting. It is clear the party leadership is pathetically dependent on the existing parliamentary set-up. Without elections and parliament, what is it do do? The CPM leadership is old and tired (at the Congress, of the 408 delegates, only 57 were said to be under 35 years of age); it could not become revolutionary by small stages. If Mrs Gandhi will not allow it to be a parliamentary opposition, it no longer has any raison d’être.
The CPM is not now a cadre organisation. Nevertheless, it is better organised than most Indian political parties and in its heyday had roots in the organised working class of West Bengal. Yet the real force of its support came from the Calcutta lower middle class whose hopes and fears, for a short time, seem to have been embodied in the party. Both the CPI and the CPM draw support heavily from the educated. The last election howevet showed that such support provides no sure bulwark in elections. Only a small proportion of the CPM vote needed to swing behind Mrs Gandhi’s Left nationalist rhetoric to exaggerate the effect of the Congress offensive and the vagaries of the simple majority system.
 
The Lessons
The politics of the CPML embodied the attitudes of a particular social group, and, as a result, attracted recruits and support from the same social group. This was both cause and effect of the perpetuation of these attitudes. For the party never recruited a significant number of members from any stratum other than the student-intelligentsia milieu of Calcutta.
The political confusion, incoherence, implicit elitism and unashamed romanticism of the party’s politics were, in essence, Narodnik, and not accidentally. The CPML and the Narodniks were drawn from the same social source, embodied the same kind of frustration and idealism, and were attracted to certain similar kinds of activity. Where the power of a major social class is lacking, terrorism has an obvious attraction for the dedicated middle-class revolutionary. If one stratum of the Indian middle class reaches instinctively for terrorism (and there is a significant terrorist tradition in India), yet another demands the carefully circumscribed opposition of parliamentary radicalism, full of exciting rhetoric but not actually oversetting the existing order of society; raising the spectre of revolution, not to destroy the society, but rather to blackmail the Establishment into conceding more. This tradition is a more powerful one in India than that represented by the CPML, and has included a whole generation of those who struggled for Independence and, afterwards, against Congress Raj. But, like the membership of the CPM, it is ageing, and the certainties upon which controlled opposition depend – above all, that development, progress, is taking place, even if in an unfavourable way – are dissolving. The development crisis knocks away the raison d’être of parties like the CPM, for it means that only a real revolutionary force can tackle the problems.
So far in India, the Left has followed the sterile alternatives of rural guerilla warfare or terrorism, and parliamentary politics. The CPML’s adherence to the first is the mirror image of the CPM’s pursuit of the second. Both represent courses of action open to middle class radicals (even if drawn from different strata) that require neither conscious class politics nor identification with class interests. Both preserve the ‘independence’ of the radicals, that is, allow them to operate in accordance with their own social attitudes rather than with the interests of the classes they claim to represent (peasants or workers). Because of this ‘freedom’, it is possible for activists to swap between one alternative and the other without apparently any great political transition. The instability of the Indian Left reflects the shallowness of its social roots. It is outside the main arenas of class struggle and sees little necessity to be inside, except as a temporary foray to secure an audience or a stage army for a demonstration. For the most part, it dismisses the battles fought as no more than ‘economism’; in doing so, it gives up all opportunity of making itself the real leadership of the classes in struggle, of rooting itself securely. In exchange, it preserves its sectarianism, its voluntarism, its volatility and, for the most part, its irrelevance.
The social basis of the revolutionaries is also the source of the theoretical poverty of the Left. To know what Indian society is as a prelude to changing it requires the revolutionaries to be identified with the working class. Of course, all Indian socialists talk about the proletariat, urban or rural, but the word is largely detached from any real workers or real peasants; the concept is a puppet in the revolutionary’s private show, rather than embodying real people with wills and interests that cannot be automatically read off from some preexisting formula, but are revealed only by joining in the ongoing struggle. The outworn formulae of Stalinism and Maoism fill the vacuum, and much ingenuity and talent is devoted to trying to give meaning to these formulae rather than examining Indian reality. For example, the term ‘feudalism’, rarely defined or explained in any rigorous form, is in much vogue, even though it is doubtful whether any serious sense of the term could ever have been implied to India. A belief in the existence of Indian feudalism becomes a matter of faith, rather than a question for scientific enquiry. Conceptually, Indian cannot be allowed to be capitalist because that would put socialism on the agenda, and, after all, China has only just had its ‘national democratic revolution’. Politically, the argument is double edged. For the danger of ‘feudalism’, of reactionary forces, is one of the arguments for the CPI lining up with the ‘progressive national bourgeoisie’. Of course, in parts of India there are relationships which may disappear with the further growth of Indian capitalism, but to make them of central significance is to divert attention from the important tasks. The kulaks are not a feudal class but a rural capitalist class, and insofar as ‘feudal’ elements survive, they are part of the rich peasantry.
The tyranny of concepts does not end even when, as with the CPM, the socialists break with foreign patrons. The CPM’s alternative to loyalty to Moscow or Peking is not political independence but Indian nationalism and a reformism without reforms. It does not lead the party to root itself more securely in the working class, but to become even more free floating, blown by the temporary winds of middle class politics. The CPM, in practice, is the instrument of the section of the ‘toiling middle class’ which invariably sees itself as ‘the people’. And ‘the people’ are a vast nameless throng, suitable for demonstrations and voting, but not as the instrument of self-emancipation and the government of society. If the lack of a serious working class base impoverishes theory, it also makes a strong disciplined organisation impossible. Disciplined sects are certainly possible, but not an organisation that is politically significant, operating in the centres of power rather than on the margins of society, a village or a parliament. Yet the daily battle is still being fought out in the cities of India, and a force could be built there from which base it would make sense to attempt to create peasant organisations. Without that base, peasant work leads back to the same sterile alternatives.
Even those alternatives are scarcely worked out with any clarity. Where Marxism, in isolation from working class struggle, degenerates into a system of false consciousness, a style of talk which masks rather than clarifies and guides political purposes, revolutionaries can provide no clear direction or coherent leadership. On the Indian Left, there are enormous resources of idealism and self-sacrifice, but existing without any coherent political framework or serious revolutionary organisation. The vacuous ranting of politicians – ever onward and upwards – consoles the defeated and prevents the learning of lessons that might challenge the politicians. Indeed, in such circumstances, clarity itself is seen as defeatism. Even after the experience of the past three years in Calcutta, some of the so-called revolutionaries can still argue that it was all for the best: omelettes need egg breaking etc. The bombast of Peking’s propaganda provides a good example of this quite undiscriminating attitude to experience. For the Chinese Communist leaders, their propaganda is not important, for they are not called to account, not required to pay for their mistakes. Peking cares little for what happens in India, and has no serious interest in a coherent revolutionary alternative there. It requires only an echo, a few sycophants who can substantiate the Chinese claim to represent all the oppressed people’s of the world.
The Indian working class is the only force that can decisively wage war on the rulers of India. That the weakest link of West Bengal, in the last crisis did not snap, is partly attributable to the fact that the revolutionaries did the ruling class the favour of removing themselves from the working class centres and going into voluntary exile in the villages. In China (and also Vietnam) two decades were required to build a rural alternative. Time on that scale is something that will not be available in the coming phase. The rich peasants are soaking up the surplus that should go to industrialisation. The Indian bourgeoisie will almost certainly not be prepared to push its demands on the rich peasantry to the point of open social collision, simply because an open confrontation could produce a radical social breakdown. Imperialist domination of the world market makes it impossible for Indian capitalism to develop the country without an agrarian transformation. The result is a stalemate, accompanied by increasing corruption and social decay. The mass of the population will pay the costs. Increasing unemployment and shrinking mass consumption, now exacerbated by high rates of inflation, will generate successive sporadic revolts by the desperate. To curb rebellion will demand an increasingly authoritarian regime, modelled in the first instance on West Bengal. The army and the police will drain off an increasingly large chunk of resources, so making development – and job creation – even more difficult.
The need for a revolutionary alternative in these circumstances could hardly be more urgent. The vicious downward spiral of defence and unemployment can be broken only by a revolution that challenges the kulak at home and imperialism abroad. But to challenge these requires also a frontal assault on Indian capitalism. Only the Indian working class, with the help of sections of the peasantry, can break out of this stalemate and secure the concentrations of power against both the bourgeoisie and the rich peasants.
 



DID YOU see the story about Moscow having a lower standard of living than the rest of the Soviet Union? The tortuous argument went like this: in order to meet the demand for unskilled manual labour in the city over the past 15 years, 700,000 workers have been brought in from poorer parts of the country. Currently, some 70,000 arrive each year to do the jobs Muscovites will not do. Mostly young people, they arrive on temporary visas and live in dormitories, but after three years of good behaviour, they can get permanent status.
The natives, the beneficiaries of this import of cheap labour, complain bitterly that the city and its services are being swamped by outsiders: they want tighter immigration controls. The city authorities did try to restrict entries more tightly, but on all sides the public employers protested that they could not meet their plan targets unless they had the right to bring in cheap labour.
A few issues ago this column featured the problems of a growing scarcity of unskilled manual labour in Japan (SWR, November 1986) and in the United States (SWR, December 1986) and it is interesting that similar issues afflict the Soviet Union. The problem in the Soviet Union is less an overall shortage in the country than scarcity in particular places like Moscow. The scarcity is a product of controls – otherwise masses of workers would migrate there, since the wages and conditions are the best.
Siberia is the opposite because of its ferocious climate and poor facilities. Workers will only go there for temporary periods and, by Soviet standards, very high wages. The government has long tried to get workers to move out of some areas – for example, from Central Asia – to Siberia. Big construction projects (for example, the Daykal-Amur railway, the Tyumin oil fields) have great difficulties in recruiting and keeping an adequate labour force.
There is a supply of labour, however, which is fully mobile without high pay: foreign workers. It is not clear how big this labour force is. In the spring of 1982 a Japanese newspaper picked up an article by the Vietnamese Minister of Labour in the Hanoi daily, Nhan Dan. The minister said an agreement had been reached with the Soviet Union for 10,000 Vietnamese workers to go to work in the Soviet Union. Commentators speculated that this labour was in part repayment for Vietnam’s £2 billion debt to Moscow. The workers were to work for five to six years, the minister said, in coal mines, chemical plants, textile and engineering factories and in the south where the climate was warmer. They would be joining “several thousand” other Vietnamese undergoing training as apprentices in Russian factories.
At about the same time, Radio Prague reported that some 14,000 Vietnamese workers were working in Czechoslovakia, and another Hanoi daily, Hanoi Moi, carried a report that some 50,000 Vietnamese workers were employed in East Germany, Hungary and Bulgaria. Izvestiya gave more details on the Russian picture: “over 7,000” Vietnamese, between the ages of 17 and 35, were in training in the Soviet Union for one year; Tass amplified – one year’s training and four years working.
Nayan Chanda, one of the leading journalists on Vietnam, reported from Hanoi sources that the flow of workers to the Soviet Union is not at all new. Since at least 1967 workers have been sent there “supposedly for vocational training but in fact providing cheap labour for Soviet factories”. The workers, he says, get “board, lodging, clothing and a small amount of pocket money for the first three years”, with full pay after that. Most of the workers are aged between 18 and 25, and none are permitted families. Other sources say the overwhelming majority of Vietnamese workers are sent to Siberia, and the Soviet government retains 60 per cent of their pay as part repayment of Vietnam’s debt.
From Vietnamese refugees in Canada come stories of letters received from their relatives, working as “guest workers” in the Soviet Union. They complain of the very long separation from their families, the poor conditions and pay. Some say that between 60,000 and 100,000 Vietnamese workers were officially working overseas. One man, living in a work camp next to a construction site in Siberia, wrote:
“We are given seven roubles a month as allowances, enough to buy ten packs of cigarettes. That is all we get. When I first arrived, they issued me with one pair of winter shoes, a thick jacket, a sweater, a pair of trousers, one cheap shirt and some undershirts and shorts, to be used for the next three years ... When I left home, I never expected life in this Russian region would be so wretched. Winter is raging right now ...”
The issue is not the same as in the United States for the numbers are small alongside the Soviet labour force (37 million employed in industry, 11 million in construction). But the mobility and the cheapness must seem remarkable to Soviet industrial planners, as well as the degree of discipline that must be exercised to survive in Siberia’s permafrost – rebel workers cannot run away.
The migration of workers is always a response to the anarchic or accidental location of new employment – the movement of labour “equilibriates” demand and supply. It is essential to maintain profits, and generally costs governments nothing. Furthermore, the migrant is always a good target on which to heap blame for the failures of the government or employers. The same principle seems to be true in the Soviet Union, even though the country still seems to have big reserves of unskilled labour in the countryside and tightly controlled wages. Any increase in the tempo of growth – the target of the Gorbachev regime – can only exaggerate the localised scarcities, forcing either increased wage differentials or increased immigration.
 



THERE IS a myth that governments learn lessons from history and experience. There’s another one: that “ideologies” control their adherents so that when Chinese Communists call themselves Marxist-Leninists it shows they are dedicated to Lenin’s aims.
The recent events in Tibet – now bludgeoned into silence by a quarter of a million Chinese troops (and the expulsion from Lhasa of the 14 foreign journalists who witnessed the riots) – shows how wrong both ideas are. You would have thought the evidence overwhelming that if you beat a people into national loyalty over 37 years, you will reduce them to a permanent simmering rage – sullen hatred, punctuated by explosions of violent rage. Consider the beating in Tibet – the average expectation of life for Tibetans is 40, for Chinese over 65. Agricultural income per head in Tibet is half the Chinese average. Over 70 percent of Tibetans are illiterate, compared to 32 percent of Chinese.
Even given all this, Peking still expresses hurt horror at the striking exhibition of Tibetan hatred of the Han Chinese in Lhasa. After all, the Chinese have been liberalising their rule since 1980. But does anyone think the savageries of the conquest of Tibet in 1950 are so easily forgotten, let alone forgiven? What of the punitive devastation of Tibetan civilisation following the 1959 rebellion? And what of the even more dreadful ransacking of the culture of the high plateau by the Red Guards, supported by the provincial government, during the Cultural Revolution?
It took Peking nearly 14 years to reverse the grotesque blunder of the Cultural Revolution – forcing the nomadic herdsmen to give up their herds, settle in collectives and terrace the shallow soil of the hills to grow winter wheat (which leached the soil) instead of traditional barley – without herds or grain famine was the result.
The Chinese say they have pumped in the equivalent of nearly three billion US dollars between 1952 and 1983 just to keep Tibet going. They have now announced spending equal to 160 million dollars on construction works – the repair of temples and monasteries among other things. But this is not to make up for past savageries, but as preparation for the big expansion of the tourist industries.
Having failed in 37 years to do much in Tibet, now the foreign tourist is to be the saviour. Big construction work will attract more Han Chinese into Tibet in search of the premium wages paid to the Chinese for working there. Even more Tibetans will feel expropriated.
As for being “Marxist-Leninist”, it would be laughable if it were not tragic. Given Lenin’s fury at the slightest trace of Great Russian chauvinism, can you imagine his dumbstruck horror at the performance of Han Chinese chauvinism in Tibet? Remember poor old Shahumyan who had the temerity to suggest in 1913 that a future socialist state ought to make the Russian language be used throughout the country? Lenin blasted away:
“Why will you not understand the psychology that is so important in the national question and which, if the slightest coercion is applied, besmirches, soils, nullifies the undoubtedly progressive importance of centralised, large states and a uniform language?
“But the economy is still more important than psychology: in Russia, we already have a capitalist economy, which makes the Russian language essential. But you have no faith in the power of the economy and want to prop it up with the crutches of the rotten police regime. Don’t you see that in this way you are crippling the economy and hindering its development?”
Lenin’s point is absolutely clear – the economy integrates, but social and political oppression divides. It is the Han Chinese who make it impossible to integrate Tibet in China.
The Chinese Communist Party has power, overwhelming power in Tibet, so a chauvinist orientation fits its role as a ruling class. That is not true of much of the left which, even if by silence, accepts the Chinese repression of Tibet. This is – as in the case of the opposition to the Russians in Afghanistan – because the old order in Tibet which the Tibetan nationalists wish to restore is “feudal”, so the Chinese are progressive “even if, comrades, we do not approve of their methods”.
Now the old regime was unequivocally monstrous, and it is not accidental that the leaders of the anti-Chinese movement are monks of that peculiarly awful religion, Lamaist Buddhism.
Yet the fact that the old society was hideously oppressive is no justification at all for the Chinese to copy it, even if in different ways. On the contrary, the backwardness of the Tibetans is the most powerful argument for more sensitive treatment, not less. That unbelievably stubborn and passionate devotion to religion and the fourteenth incarnation of the Dalai Lama means that the memory of the old order (or the fantasy) is the heart of a heartless world for Tibetans – and to repress is to seek to liquidate their very existence.
There can be no trust whatsoever between Tibetans and Chinese until Tibet has the right to secede and the right to establish that regime which constitutes “self-determination”.
Denying the right of Tibetans to secede is forcing them into the arms of the old order. There can be no reform or progress in the long struggle to overthrow the Lamaist order while Chinese domination continues. Peking’s violence is what keeps reaction in power in the hearts of Tibetans. So all the educational schemes in the world, all the progressive reforms, emancipation of women, due process of law rather than arbitrary aristocratic rule, all are turned into new forms of oppression without the initiative and wholehearted promotion by the Tibetans.
Meanwhile, the silence of Lhasa returns – broken only by the clatter of the 24 Sikorsky Blackhawk helicopters over the Dalai Lama’s old Potala palace. The Great Powers are embarrassed since they are busy wooing the new Saatchi and Saatchi People’s Republic. Of course, the secret agents of Moscow, Washington and Delhi will be seeking to make mischief in Lhasa, just to keep the options open, but ultimately no one cares very much. No struggles to secede from an existing country have succeeded in modern conditions without the support of an outside power, and even then it is rare.
The Tibetan case is not very promising. But the riots show, just for a brief moment, the real nature of the Chinese regime under its new liberal leadership. And they show it to the workers of Shanghai, since the exposure in the foreign press forced the Chinese television to give a full coverage – that is possibly its biggest likely effect.
 










Cumulative debt:
17 largest borrowers
($ billion, Index
1982 = 100)





Net transfers
between top 17
largest borrowers
and Western banks
and governments
($ billion)



YOU MAY not have noticed, but 20 February saw the end of civilisation as we know it. The Brazilian government defaulted on two thirds of its debt (by announcing a refusal to pay interest for an indefinite period). Oddly enough, this momentous event evoked only mild reactions in Washington.
Treasury Secretary Baker murmured moderate approval of the efforts of Brazil to avoid a worse crisis (crippling the economy by continuing to pay so much interest). And on Wall Street the shares of Citicorp, the bank with the largest loans to Brazil, dropped five and a half dollars to $52.75, a mark of the threat to Citicorp’s 1987 profits, not to its very survival. The world, it seems, is to end with a whimper, not a bang.
In fact, the “debt crisis” has become an increasingly phoney threat, a banker’s ramp to frighten us all. After all, others – albeit with lesser size of debt than Brazil – have defaulted. Peru, Nigeria, South Africa and a host of others have been obliged to reschedule their debts (adding the outstanding interest to the principal and extending the repayment period).
Furthermore, the banks have spent the last five years salting away reserves to cover bad debts, reaching deals with other banks and governments to offset a run of defaults, selling the debt at knockdown prices or swapping it for shares in companies operating in the country concerned (a complicated deal, the details of which need not concern us).
In sum, as a threat to the world financial system, the debts of the developing countries are not crucial except in very special and unlikely circumstances.
More worrying are the debts of North America. Domestically, companies, farms and households are supporting an Everest of debt, dwarfing the small hills of Brazil, Mexico, Korea and the rest. The US government has been borrowing around $200 billion every year since Reagan came to power (as compared with Brazil, the largest Third World borrower, that has spent 20 years or so accumulating a debt of $100 billion).
Indeed, this borrowing kept interest rates very high (as well as keeping the value of the dollar high for a time), so crippling the Less Developed Country borrowers. High interest rates have attracted into the States a massive share of the world’s savings. The US has also been importing about a quarter of the world’s manufactured exports while its own exports declined – producing a deficit on its trade balance last year of about $150 billion. In sum, the Reagan administration may have added a million million dollars to the external debts of the United States – now that really is walking tall.
This vast overhang of American debt can be managed in ordinary circumstances, despite the bankrupting of the odd bank, company or farm. But put it alongside the vastly inflated scale of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. As the yen has strengthened, there has been a massive flow of funds both abroad (to finance the US trade and government deficits) and into Japanese stocks and shares.
Monetary values have soared in the scramble to buy, going far beyond the expected profitability of the shares (indeed, the strong yen is hammering the profits of exporting companies). These are just the conditions for a stock market crash – when a chill to confidence turns to galloping pneumonia.
The problem is not the straw of a Brazilian default, but the appalling vulnerability of the camel of North American debt and Japanese speculation. If default pushed a Japanese bank to the wall, it could puncture the balloon of Japanese share prices. If that pulled down American financial companies operating on the Japanese stock exchange (or affected the shares of Japanese companies trading in the United States), it could affect confidence in the States – and the whole precarious house of cards could tumble. There would be no way of Europe saving itself.
Dramatic stuff, but unlikely. The scenario would require a whole series of coincidences and accidents, not to mention the paralysis of governments. The Japanese government could organise the overnight rescue of a bank or seek to sustain the market on the margin long enough to smother the knock on effects. And if that did not happen, the US government has become quite skilled in organising and supporting threatened banks to inhibit a generalised crash, especially with the coordinated help of the European governments and international agencies (the Bank of International Settlements, IMF etc). In 1929, when a comparable run of financial crises, starting in Vienna, finally toppled Wall Street, these types of intervention were beyond the capacity of most governments and there was much less coordination.
On the other side, it is clear there is not much banks can do to punish defaulters. Gone are the days when Citicorp (or its predecessors) could call up the US Marines to act as bailiffs. The financial press not long ago was full of dark threats that the exports and overseas assets of defaulting countries would be seized (on, for some reason, “the high seas”, but not the low ones). The country would get no imports or credits and quite swiftly the economy would come to halt.
It now seems there is no legal power to do any such thing – exports and credits usually concern private companies, and could not be seized when the debt is owed by the government. There is even doubt whether the exports and assets of public sector companies could be legally held. And the threat to withhold new loans or credits does not carry weight – they are already denied to the countries with most debt. The historical record bears out the case. Most of Latin America defaulted in the 30s and nothing happened. In Brazil’s case the economy expanded by 11.8 percent per year for several years after the 1931 default.
In the case of the US government’s reaction, this shows Baker is more worried about keeping up or expanding US exports to Latin America (to reduce the gigantic trade deficit) than saving the odd bank. Between 1976 and 1981, US exports to Latin America increased three times over, fuelled by easy international bank loans.
The shutting off of new loans after 1982 had a violent effect on US export industries as governments in the south were obliged to slash imports. Thus squeezing the debtors leads not only to an expansion in the US trade deficit but also to the lay off of workers in American exporting industries.
However, if the debt crisis is in reality not much more than a nightmare for bankers, a different kind of nightmare continues for many Brazilians. The debt might worry an international ruling class, but even without the debt starvation persists. A recent Catholic report alleges that seven million Brazilian children have been abandoned in the past five years.
“In Rio, every month about 100 children under three years of age are abandoned in the streets and hospitals ... In Acre [an Amazon State] impoverished mothers sell their young daughters to lorry drivers or gold prospectors as prostitutes ... In Sao Paulo, there are 1,200 gangs of child criminals and between them they have 10,000 firearms.”
About a quarter of a million Brazilian children die under the age of one.
But was it different before 1982? Will it be different if all the debts are cancelled? The crisis continues with or without debt. Indeed, Brazil is by no means the worst off. A few months ago, the Government of Tanzania (with a quite small level of debt) announced a programme to promote donkey farms. The country could no longer afford to import oil to run trucks to the villages to collect the crops and deliver all the other things that make life possible. Now that is a debt crisis.
The poor of Africa with much tinier debts than the better off of Latin America are the worst afflicted by the debts. They do not loom large in the $1,080 billion owed by Developing Countries, nor do they contribute much to the Third World’s financing of Europe and North America – $82 billion over the past five years (see the box). But in terms of sheer human survival they are much more important. The bankers do not care about that at all. And the very poor are too poor to borrow anything.
The debt crisis reflects the terrors of bankers about their loans. It has very little to do with any real fears about people.
 











THE CAMPAIGN for famine relief in Ethiopia and Sudan had the merit of spotlighting the terrible conditions there. But it had the bad effect of concealing just how many other countries were starving or close to starving. The chart shows the countries where the average calorie intake has fallen below what is considered medically the minimum between 1974 and 1983.
The chart does not include all the countries that, in 1984, had insufficient food per head; 44 of the 96 main developing countries were in that position. And it does not include some key famine cases, for example Ethiopia and Sudan, because they improved their position between 1974 and 1983 – from 82 to 93 percent for Ethiopia, and 88 to 90 percent for Sudan.
Above all, the figures do not tell you who actually eats what; the figures are based upon the availability of foodstuffs, not the availability of money to buy the foodstuffs.
However, despite these severe weaknesses, the chart does show that a lot of countries now have access to only four fifths of what food is needed to maintain a minimum standard of life (and it is a pretty austere minimum). And it highlights some catastrophic cases – Mali, Ghana, Chad. Ghana is especially extreme – like, to a lesser extent, Zimbabwe – because of the disastrous fall between the two years.
It also illustrates one of the elements in the growing import of foodstuffs by developing countries. Between 1970 and 1984 these imports increased 71 percent. Now there is no harm in food imports – indeed, the enhancement, enrichment and diversification of diets requires increasing trade – provided developing countries have an equal opportunity to export those goods where they have an advantage.
That is the problem. Agriculture is one of the most extreme cases of tight control within world capitalism – indeed, a new theory of imperialism could be based upon the control of foodstuffs rather than capital or manufactured goods. And it is here where we can identify one of the most powerful sources of famine.
The good citizens of Europe, North America and Japan pay roughly an extra £51,000 million annually to subsidise food production at home. The Europeans, especially generous in this respect, pay about £66 for every man, woman and child in Europe each year.
As is notorious, this prodigious open handedness has built mountains and lakes of surplus foodstuffs, now sufficient to feed the whole population of Africa five times over. World cereal stocks are approaching 200 million tonnes – when the countries of the Sahel region in Africa needed only 3 to 4 million tonnes to keep their starving alive.
The size of European foodstocks is at last becoming insupportable. The value – £8,760 million – is notional, because if an attempt were made to sell the stocks, world prices would crash so low that less than half the notional value would be recovered.
The cost of storage is now coming to exceed the value of what is stored. Take, for example, the one and a half tonnes of butter (ten pounds a head of the European population). It costs £143 million per year just to keep it – and even then an unknown quantity is deteriorating into nasty butter oil.
No wonder the EEC is so desperate to offload the stocks in any way at all provided it does not reach needy consumers in Europe. They are now selling butter stocks at under 3p per pound (as against £1 per pound on the European retail market) to be fed to calves. And this year the Russians will be given a £143 million subsidy to take EEC butter.
This astonishing heap of corruption is not, however, the problem, nor simply the way in which European governments oblige their inhabitants to pay astronomical prices to produce foodstuffs that must be in the main pure waste. The real problem – and where it connects with famine – is that the EEC subsidises agricultural exports.
Europe spends £3–4,000 million annually to dump foodstuffs on the world market – which then wrecks the export markets of developing countries. As a result, developing countries are denied the opportunity to earn the revenue that allows them to buy grain (even though prices are now desperately low) to offset famine.
Take, for example, sugar. Because of the subsidies, the EEC has now become the largest exporter of sugar in the world, even though, compared to sugar cane growers, sugar beet producers are very inefficient. In the sixties Europe supplied about 8 percent of world sugar exports; in the eighties, over 20 percent.
The scale of subsidies is scarcely believable – especially, compared to Mrs Thatcher’s notorious views on social spending. In mid-1984, when the EEC exported sugar at £93.50 per tonne, it was buying it from European sugar refiners at £346.50 per tonne. The subsidy – of £253 – was nearly three times the value of the sugar on the world market. You wonder why they don’t just pay the money and cut the sugar out altogether.
Such a scale of subsidy is death to Third World producers. On the island of Negros in the Philippines there is a famine because of the mass sackings that have resulted from the low sugar price that Common Market exports have caused. Filipino exports – 2.6 million tonnes in 1977 – were 600,000 in 1985.
Mozambique is now an endemic famine area; 100,000 are said to have died in the famine three years ago, and over three million people are at risk in the season 1986–7.
Mozambique’s sugar exports, running at nearly 200,000 tonnes in the early eighties, were 23,000 tonnes in 1985. Mauritius depends for 65 percent of its export earnings on sugar, not to mention Jamaica. The World Bank reckons the developing countries are losing about £5,400 million per year because of the agricultural policies of the More Developed Countries.
The EEC is doing the same thing with olive oil, wrecking the export markets of Tunisia and Morocco. Argentina’s debt crisis is vastly exaggerated because the EEC has taken to dumping wheat and beef in key Argentinian markets (beef exports from Argentina have fallen 40 percent in the past 15 years).
Brazil has been hard hit in the sugar market where it is one of the cheapest producers (production costs are under half Europe’s) – earnings from exports of sugar fell by 56 percent between 1979 to 1983. The United States has launched a major programme to subsidise rice exports to the severe loss of the world’s largest exporter, Thailand.
World agricultural trade has become dominated by these monstrous conspiracies that simultaneously rob the consumers at home (particularly hitting the poor through high food prices) and wreck the markets of developing countries, so forcing famines on them. The price of hunger is growing abundance of wasted food. And on top of that, the system does not even protect the farmers.
Since the early seventies the income of British farmers has been halved and their debts doubled (they may total £8,500 million this year). The Mid West of the United States is now being reduced to a new rural dereliction as family farms fold under the weight of debt, followed by the towns, villages and factories they supported. The only gainers are a handful of the largest farmers (usually companies), and big processing, storing or trading companies.
Now, more than ever, the struggle to rid the world of famine starts here – not with the begging bowl and pleas for pity, but by breaking the criminal conspiracy of the Common Agricultural Policy.
 






 


WHAT A pity! After all the huffing and puffing Reagan climbed down and the long threatened agricultural trade war between the United States and Europe fizzled out.
If the two had started to fight, there was just a chance that the Common Agricultural Policy of the EEC would have received such a battering, it would have folded – the ageing New World would once again have rescued the Old from its lunacies. But it ended with a whimper, not a bang.
What was it about?
The US claimed that when Spain joined the Common Market in January of last year, the increases in the tax (or tariff) on the Spanish imports of maize and sorghum (for animal fodder) from the US cost Americans 400 to 500 million dollars (not a lot on the EEC bill for imports from the States of 53 billion dollars).
Washington demanded compensation – the EEC should agree to import an extra 4 million tonnes of grain, reserving 2.8–3 million tonnes for US suppliers. If the EEC refused to do this, the US would impose a tax of 200 percent on European exports to the US of cheese, white wine, brandy, ham, gin, olives and other things.
Europe offered to increase its grain imports from the rest of the world by 1.6 million tonnes, 1.2 million tonnes of which might be taken up by the US.
Furthermore, if the US tried to punish Europe by taxing other imports, the EEC threatened to levy an extra 50 percent tax rate on imports from the US of 395 million dollars worth of maize gluten, wheat and rice.
Both sets of gangsters were fast on the draw, standing tall, as Reagan might say, on Main Street.
Two days before the US-set deadline, both sides climbed down. The EEC agreed to import two million tonnes of maize from the rest of the world, 300,000 tonnes of sorghum, and an extra 450,000 tonnes of other cereals. Furthermore, it would cut import duties on 20 other industrial items for four years to help Washington.
The skirmish is over, and disappointingly so, but the war must continue. In agriculture the EEC is the rogue shark and must collide with the largest agricultural exporter, the US.
The new Congress is keen to find popular targets for American hostility, and it is easier to attack the importers of US goods than expand US exports or cut Reagan’s heroic budget deficit (as the result of arms spending).
But what they see as hitting foreign importers by punishing their exports in fact punishes American consumers.
A 200 percent tax on US imports of European cheese punishes American cheese eaters more than it hurts European cheese makers. Furthermore, this “cost” is not justified by any other gain.
Import controls have saved no jobs in textiles where there have been controls on imports for 30 years. The price of Japanese-made cars is increased by 15 percent in Britain as the result of import controls – and by nearly £1,000 in the United States. The buyers are fleeced with import controls, not the foreign exporters.
Reagan is not driven just by the new Democrat dominated Congress. The Congressmen are baying against foreigners to persuade American voters that, contrary to all appearances, someone in Washington cares. But Reagan is also desperate to avoid increasing taxes as he keeps up spending on arms.
To do that he must cut non-military, spending – and the subsidies to agriculture are a prime target.
US farm policy has shifted from paying heavily to persuade American farmers not to grow crops to trying to force an expansion in exports to get rid of the surpluses.
This is impossible to do by fair means while the EEC so massively subsidises agricultural exports. The issue is not the European market, but all the third markets of the world where the US and Europe compete.
The problem is getting desperate as farmers produce more and more on both sides of the Atlantic. World grain stocks – now about 375 million tonnes – have increased 50 percent since 1984 (you thought there were famines!). US exports of wheat, peaking at 50 million tonnes in 1981, were under 20 million in 1985.
If the Americans could only eliminate the European share, about 20 million tonnes, then Reagan’s budgetary problems would have some slight relief.
This is where everybody starts playing dirty, while claiming a monopoly of crystal virtue. In mid-1985 Washington announced an “Export Enhancement Program” to subsidise exports to whatever third markets the EEC exported to. Since then 655 million dollars have been spent in the campaign to beat Europe.
Late last year Poland was offered grain to beat off the EEC. In early January Switzerland was offered 250,000 tonnes of barley and sorghum. In February China was offered one million tonnes of wheat – all subsidised.
Of course, the US paid little attention to countries that exported grain without subsidies (Australia, Canada, Argentina, for example). Nor was much consistency introduced – as the US dumped its grain abroad, it cut sugar imports from the Caribbean by 40 percent. All issues were subordinate to confronting the marauder shark of the EEC.
It has to be war – or so everyone should hope. The racket in agriculture is too extreme. The eighth round of GATT (General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs) talks held to liberalise trade began last autumn in Geneva, but here the Americans and Europeans cosily collude to exclude agriculture and reject the demands of other major exporters and the Third World.
The two arch champions of efficient capitalism thus block the exports of the efficient in favour of their own inefficient and heavily subsidized exports. In such circumstances one can only hope for a war between the two wings of the Mafia on each side of the Atlantic.
The battle between Washington and Brussels epitomises the lunacies of the system. For punishing the foreigners is actually punishing the home population, especially the poorest.
Western controls on the import of garments from the Third World punish the buyers of garments here, especially the poorest ones.
The poor of Britain are able to buy fewer cheap clothes as the result of protection. It is a mark of how much we swallow the arguments of the employers that everyone chatters about saving jobs, not about protecting the poor. Own goals are the means to punish the wogs!
Pray for war.
 



YOU MIGHT miss it. The shabby paint boasts, ‘Indian Renaissance Institute’. Inside, at the end of a long garden – full of mountain flowers at this time of year – is a pleasant colonial house, bathed in the soft evening sun.
A covered terrace shades wicker chairs and a table, a bit tatty now. There are photographs of a man in grey flannels and open necked white shirt with rolled up sleeves, very nineteen thirties.
The pictures are of M.N. Roy, once the terrifying voice of the Communist International in the cool corridors of British power in New Delhi, the Viceroy’s nightmare of Bolshevism.
This was the last house where Roy and his American wife, Ellen, lived. It is set in the foothills of the Himalayas at Dehra Dun.
Roy was a village boy who came to the big city about 1905. He started his political life throwing bombs at the British in Calcutta. For this discourtesy, he was locked up several times in Calcutta’s exceptional prisons.
In 1915 his group sent him to the Netherlands East Indies (now Indonesia) to guide into eastern India a ship load of German arms with which to begin the revolutionary war of independence.
The attempt failed, so Roy went again. This time he moved on from the German embassy in Batavia to the one in Tokyo. He then travelled to warlord Peking to negotiate German arms shipments over China’s western border to India. Again the Germans balked and sent him to San Francisco where he married his first wife, Evelyn Trent, and thence to New York.
He was in New York when the United States entered the First World War. Immediately, the American police began rounding up Indians as German spies or collaborators. The Roys fled south, finally to Mexico, on the high tide of the famous peasant revolution (1910–1920).
Here, at last, the Germans paid up, but now it proved impossible to get back to India. After a major effort to do so, Roy gave up. Instead, he settled down, learned Spanish and threw himself into the politics of the Mexican left and the émigré North American radicals. He became the secretary of the Mexican Socialist Party and drafted its manifesto.
That might have been enough for a Bengali boy a long way from home. But it was not. Already, the world of socialist and anarchist politics worldwide was being transformed by the Russian revolution.
A Russian Bolshevik, Michael Borodin, trying to get into the United States, was refused entry and went south to Mexico to enter by the back door. It was not to be, for he was summoned home for the second Congress of the Comintern in Moscow in 1920 – and took with him the two Roys as delegates of the Mexican Socialist Party (which, at the last minute, changed its name – but not its politics – to the Mexican Communist Party).
On the way, Roy stopped off in Berlin. For a short time, he plunged into the turbulent politics there, making friendships with some of the leaders of the German Communist Party that were later important.
In Moscow, the Comintern was preoccupied with the defence of the embattled young Soviet regime – to be achieved partly by the creation of a world proletarian movement and its alliance with the independent struggle of the national bourgeoisie of the ‘backward and colonial countries’.
There were very few representatives of these countries at the Congress and very little was known about them. Roy found himself cast in the extraordinary role of a leading representative of the ‘Asian revolution’ and of the jewel in the crown of the largest of the empires, the British.
It was this temporary privilege which allowed him to debate with Lenin and induced Lenin to recommend Roy’s thesis to be included in the minutes of the Congress as an addendum to the offficial resolution.
Lenin had however carefully amended Roy’s theses to dilute some important errors. Throughout the twenties, Roy developed an alternative ‘ultra-left’ position, summarised in three points:


European capital had become heavily – decisively – dependent on the profits made in the colonies. The European workers’ revolution could not succeed unless a revolt in the colonies cut off this flow of profit. Instead of the colonial revolution being marginal to the European struggle, it had become central.
 
Because of this dependence, European capital was obliged to make major concessions to the rising national bourgeoisie of the colonies, permitting it to develop its own capitalism – ‘the post-war imperialist finance capital demands the industrialisation of the colonial country [and] it is no longer possible to completely exclude the indigenous bourgeoisie from the profits of exploitation.’ (India in Transition, Aug. 1922)
 
This changed position of the national bourgeoisie meant that it would not champion the independent struggle or the bourgeois revolution; it would settle for a compromise with imperialism. The only revolutionary struggle would be that of the social – rather than the national – movement, of peasants and workers, and this in the more advanced backward countries put on the agenda a workers’ revolution and the creation of Soviets.


In sum, there were no ‘stages’. The position of the Bolsheviks on the bourgeois revolution in Russia was repeated in the colonies – the bourgeoisie would not do it, and would bend all efforts to defeat revolution.
The position was ultra-left, but the deviation was a healthy one in comparison with what came later in the Comintern – the complete subordination of the social struggle to the national, of the peasants and workers to the national bourgeoisie.
After the Congress, Roy became an important Comintern agent – trying to organise a Communist Party from Indian political refugees in Tashkent, to foment rebellion among the border tribes of British India, producing a journal for clandestine despatch to India from Berlin.
Finally, as a member of the Executive Committee of the International, he participated in all major discussions – including the expulsion of Trotsky.
In the spring of 1927, he was despatched as Comintern representative to China just after the catastrophic defeat of the Chinese party by Chiang Kai-shek. He went, he thought, with the complete backing of Stalin, to launch a peasant revolution to destroy Chiang.
At the Congress of the Chinese party, however, he failed to win the party away from the preceding Comintern line – support for the left Kuomintang and, very softly, support for the peasant movement (a line maintained by his old friend, Michael Borodin).
As he was to admit later, it was impossible to support the peasant revolution and the landlords of the Kuomintang at the same time.
He was recalled, and held to be responsible for the disasters that followed from Stalin’s policy (although he had himself been a party to that policy). Fearing the worst, he made a secret escape to Berlin.
There he became involved with his old friends, Brandler and Thalheimer, in a Communist Opposition to the Comintern (a protest against the Comintern’s Third Period), and that sealed his fate in Moscow.
In 1930 Roy at last returned to India, to a world of stifling backwardness. Arrested by the British, he served six years of his twelve year sentence in gaol. He then joined the Congress and became active trying to create a Marxist wing.
But on the outbreak of the Second World War he demanded a united anti-fascist movement against Germany and opposed demands for Indian independence until this was accomplished.
That earned him the charge of being a collaborator of British imperialism from the Communist Party up to the time when Germany invaded Russia – and the CP adopted the same line as Roy.
Lenin’s defeatism, Roy said, was wrong in the Second World War because the Soviet Union now existed and Europe was dominated by fascism (so the Second World War was also a European civil war). He was expelled from Congress.
Later he came to argue that the mistake of the Comintern was to orient on one class only, to generalise from the fluke of Russian experience which could never happen again. The unification forced on all classes by the threat of fascism would after the war provide the basis for universal socialism without the need for revolution. In India that needed a philosophical revolution, the renaissance, embodied in his ‘Radical Humanism’. In 1954, he died.
The old man who took me round the house got a bit breathless. ‘We hoped to make it a museum and library for world Radical Humanists,’ he said. ‘But we are very few now, and the house is costly to run. So we sent the archives to the Nehru library in Delhi. And now we let the house to paying guests.’
Do the paying guests sense the ghosts of Bengal terrorists and German spies, of Zapata and Madera, of Lenin and Trotsky?
The house sleeps, its historical significance seeping away, remembered by fewer and fewer. It is a pity the new generation will not remember the audacity and heroism of the past – but a relief also that they are preserved from its nightmares.
 



IMMIGRATION has always been a difficult issue for the labour movement. Even among revolutionaries, opposition to immigration controls has often been a purely compassionate act, unrelated to the economic realities of capitalism.
Why is it difficult? Because ‘common sense’ seems to demonstrate a central principle of bourgeois ideology: employment is a function of the simple supply of labour (which is itself determined by population change, the sources of which are supposedly mysterious).
Unemployment therefore occurs because there are too many workers competing for jobs, not because the system, the employers or the government determine it. To admit foreign workers, in such a view, is palpable insanity.
The world is never so simple, and severe labour scarcities can co-exist with high unemployment. For workers cannot be substituted for each other. Unemployed miners cannot fill a lack of nurses; doctors will not work as sweepers; shorthand typists cannot turn their hand to farming.
The labour force is a complicated structure of skills and experience where the ability to do one job depends upon millions doing their jobs – one person’s skill is only possible with the collaboration of masses of other skills.
It follows that an economy could break down and precipitate mass unemployment not because the supply of labour was too large, but because it had the wrong bundle of skills. Such problems are likely to afflict a high technology economy more than a low skilled one – indeed, the more elaborate and sophisticated the skills become, the more the danger that there will be no one to do the low skill jobs without which high skills become nothing.
Astronauts and computer programmers depend on masses of lower skilled workers to be able to do their jobs, just as generals are just people dressed in fancy clothes without the soldiers.
Without the others, the high skill worker is reduced to foraging for his or her own food, doing their own laundry. This is why workers ought to have an interest in defending the whole bundle of skills that are the condition for their own job to exist.
How does this relate to immigration? There is a big contrast between Europe and the United States in the matter of immigration. In Europe, it is said, there is tight control of foreign workers entering and the stock of immigrant workers has been reduced in some countries.
In the United States, with its 2,000 mile border with Mexico, the control is only in theory tight; in practice the doors are always half open. The United States receives legal immigrants equal to about a quarter per cent of its population each year, and some people guess, about half a percent of illegal immigrants. On the orthodox case, therefore, there must be less unemployment in Europe than in the United States. In fact, the position is the reverse:



Rates of unemployment, 1985




United States


  7   %


 


Spain


20.6%




Britain


11.6%


France


10.8%




West Germany


  8.7%


Holland


14.4%




Italy


13.3%


Belgium


12.9%



The position is the opposite of the orthodox case – as the labour force of the United States has grown, so the number of jobs has expanded (over 8 million new jobs were created between 1981 and 1985), whereas in Europe the smaller the rate of growth of the workforce, the higher the rate of unemployment.
Nonetheless, American workers – like their European brothers and sisters – favour tighter immigration controls. Reagan’s hysteria is not unpopular – “The simple truth is that we’ve lost control of our borders – no nation can do that and survive.”
But there are powerful forces of opposition – farmers (some people estimate 90 percent of farm labour is illegal), sweatshop and restaurant owners depend on cheap immigrant workers, bankers fear the loss of their loans to Mexico if Mexican workers cannot earn in the United States and send the money home, and 200 churches defy the government by helping to smuggle and give sanctuary to illegal immigrants on the run from terror in Central America.
The Wall Street Journal on ideological grounds opposes all border controls. But for the liberals, the horrors of police terrorisation against immigrants on the southern border confirm the commitment that control must be tighter – and must exist to prevent ‘American jobs’ being stolen by foreigners to the loss of the disadvantaged natives, blacks, women and hispanic people.
Four times since 1973 the opposition has beaten off the attempt to formulate a new immigration act in Congress. But now a new bill, agreed by both Houses, awaits the President’s signature. It promises, for the first time, to punish employers if they employ illegal immigrants – but the fines are small, and the employer has only to ask to see evidence of identity, not to check that the evidence is not forged.
There is to be increased spending on border control, an increase in legal migration from Mexico and an amnesty for those arriving before 1982.
Finally, just for the Californian farm lobby, any illegal farm worker who spent at least 90 days in the country up to 1 May of this year, can claim temporary legal residence.
The Act will not control immigration to the United States, and if it did, it would be economically damaging both to United States capitalism and American workers. There is already a labour scarcity for unskilled workers – especially in farming – and American workers are too skilled, even the unskilled ones, to do that work. As the population ages and the number of teenagers (the people who do much of the unskilled work) declines, as more people take early retirement and other get more education and rise in the skill levels, the scarcities will get worse.
One study showed recently just how much illegal immigrants contribute to the Unites States national output, how little they take back – and how large a part of US total employment depends upon them being there to work.
Another study estimates that with a 3 percent rate of growth of national output and half a million immigrants a year, there will be a shortage of 5 million workers in the country by the year 2000, most of them unskilled. Without them, everybody else’s jobs and income are threatened.
To stop workers entering the US is no substitute for the struggle to improve the wages and conditions of the poorest workers.
The issue of US immigration is only part of an emerging set of problems concerning the maldistribution of the world’s labour force. For example, south-east and south Asia, with 45 million new inhabitants per year, is now producing 9 million graduates annually. The advanced countries, north America, Europe and Japan, grow by 10 million a year and produce 3½ million graduates.
But the output of the advanced countries is much more dependent upon a supply of skills than Asia – without access to the skills, the advanced countries could slow down even further. Some people see the United States’ growth – compared to Europe’s – as a by-product of the United States picking the most skilled workers worldwide and being able to find a supply of the least skilled as well.
At all levels, the United States is becoming more cosmopolitan. For example, at the top 20 universities, 15 percent of the staff are foreign born (compared to 4 percent in Europe). Foreign workers are also overrepresented in the key growth industries (aerospace, electronics, computers) and services (software development, advanced health care etc.).
Is the new Immigration Act then just a mistake? From the point of view of capital’s economic interest, it is irrational – a measure that, insofar as it is effective in its stated intentions, must be defeated. But this only highlights the essentially political role of the Act – concession to the battered nationalism of the Americans, surrounded by foreign imports and immigrants and supposedly directed at the most sensitive gut issue – jobs.
In practice, immigration will not be controlled but natives will feel someone in Washington cares – and the police, the courts and the employers will be armed with further instruments to terrorise the worst off sections of the labour force (and everyone who looks or sounds like a foreigner).
So the Act is a complex mixture of hypocrisy and oppression, covering the need of the American ruling class to accept a measure of the free international movement of labour as one of the conditions of its own economic survival. How long can the rulers of Europe hold their line?
 



IT TOOK quite a short time for the name Pol Pot to enter the lexicon of political monsters.
The Kampuchean is credited with the deliberate liquidation of Cambodia’s middle classes and intelligentsia, with the wholesale destruction of libraries, historical monuments and cultural remains, hospitals and medical services, education; and with the systematic murder or starvation of hundreds of thousands.
Wilfred Burchett, long-time supporter of Peking and an old journalist who ought to know better, faithfully recorded the stories that small children were fed to crocodiles in a farm at Siem Reap. And all this simply from ‘ideological commitment’.
The case was never convincing, not because the Kampuchean Communist Party had anything to do with socialism or popular emancipation, but because no social order can be built on such consistent and universal violence.
Most of us learn a wariness of such stories after seeing the headlines in the Daily Express and Daily Mail, where the strangled mixture of violence and terror in the minds of the readers turns a pennyworth of truth into a pound of fantasy. After all, no one made a monster out of President Suharto of Indonesia and his coming to power cost up to a million slaughtered – but then he was eliminating a leftist regime for the west.
The case on Pol Pot (presented in Francois Ponchaud’s Cambodia Year Zero and Barron and Paul’s Murder of a Gentle Land) is about as convincing as Attenborough’s dream film, Gandhi.
The myth was outdated almost as soon as created. The horrors of Pol Pot’s Democratic Kampuchea seemed invented to conceal the even greater horrors of the US military action in Cambodia (and even more, in Vietnam). If between half and one million were said to have been killed by Pol Pot, just as many or more died in the preceding years of US sponsored management.
But the overthrow of Pol Pot was achieved by Vietnam, close ally of the Soviet Union. Immediately the Washington history writing machine was put into reverse to prove the Vietnamese invaders were monsters and Pol Pot was not so bad after all. The CIA’s Kampuchea: A Democratic Catastrophe was one contribution to an amazingly swift turn-round.
The change of gear was helped by Pol Pot’s open campaign to convince Washington that he was the stoutest defender of democracy in Indo-China and should become a military client of the Pentagon. It was also helped by that legion of American liberals, yanked rudely to the right by Reagan and Rambo, who had fought against American intervention in Indo-China but now – faced with the endless grey militarism and famine of Vietnam, let alone Pol Pot – have begun to wonder publicly whether US intervention was, after all, so wrong.
However, the myth of Pol Pot is tough. An Oscar winner, The Killing Fields, has helped keep it alive (although dangerously introducing the complexity of good and bad Khmer Communists). In Peru, the Sendero Luminoso are accused of being a Latin American version of the Khmer monster. And a transparent effort by the right to whitewash Marcos of the Philippines alleges he must be supported because the Filipino Communist Party are ‘Pol-Pot-style’ horrors. If Pol Pot did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.
However, there were real horrors. If there is revisionism among the liberals, the left too has to absorb the shock of Pol Pot. Michael Vickery’s Cambodia 1975–82 (South End Press, Boston) is part of the attempt to come to grips with the issues. He seeks as carefully as possible to define what happened, where, when and why, and finds that some appalling things happened but in only a few places and times (mainly 1977). He shows fairly convincingly that, far from being the happy hobbit land portrayed by the western press, traditional Cambodia was pretty horrific. Thus,
‘for the rural 80 to 90 percent of the Cambodian people, arbitrary justice, sudden violent death, political oppression, exploitative use of religion and anti-religious reaction, both violent and quiescent, were common facts of life long before the war and revolution of 1970s. The creations of Pol Potism were all there in embryo.’
Second, the economic burdens on the peasantry increased steadily throughout this century (with the first major revolt in 1967–8), producing a strong hostility to the cities. Sihanouk’s educational policy, he says, produced a mass of partly educated youth that refused to work in the country and migrated to the city.
Finally, the war broke the social structure, inflicting terrible damage and disorganisation and driving masses of the destitute off the land to the cities. On the other hand, the new Communist Party rulers of 1975 consisted of powerful provincial groups operating in great rivalry with each other; they vested life and death powers in the hands of raw peasant lads. A thousand petty slights, real and imagined, as well as petty thefts, could be inflicted or avenged in the name of the proletariat.
Furthermore, alongside overblown Phnom Penh (the capital) were the empty lands that needed to be cultivated if Cambodia was to be able to export agricultural goods (and so import most other things); it was ‘understandable’ that the urban population should be transferred to productive rural labour, but it was done by inexperienced cadres without training or equipment, and soft city hands were destroyed tilling barely fertile soil.
Parts of the case are plausible even though much of it is special pleading and repeats – as if novel – ancient fragments of the conventional Third World Studies’ case, applicable everywhere.
Vickery says that the Cambodian events were a peasant revolution.
The ‘peasant-revolution’ tag provides him with a defence of non-peasant Vietnam and China. The Khmer regime failed, he concludes, because ‘it turned its back on “Marxist communism” (his unexplained inverted commas) and the economic failure of Democratic Kampuchea confirms the predictions of orthodox Marxism.’
No it doesn’t. Vickery is too weak on Marxism to draw any such conclusion. Nonetheless, this is the beginning of an attempt to penetrate the western fantasy to the real and complex, albeit savage, heart of darkness. It is very long (349 pages), and reading it occasions wonder at the contrast between the author’s meticulous industry and the paucity of his theory. But that was the same with most of the opponents of the Vietnam war. Many of them thought the war was about Vietnam itself and the regimes of north and south. When the north took the south, they had time to be disillusioned. In the spring of 1968, International Socialism (Neither Washington nor Moscow – but Vietnam?, IS 32) put it this way:
‘There is no contradiction between support [for the National Liberation Front (NLF)] and realistic appraisal. We must oppose the terrorism of US intervention in Vietnam, and we must defend unconditionally the right of the Vietnamese to be left free of outside intervention – to do so, in the circumstances, is to offer unconditional support to the NLF. But Ho Chi Minh is not thereby some genial uncle nor the NLF merely the Vietnamese YWCA ... when the issue of American power is settled, we know what kind of regime and politics the NLF will then choose – and be forced to choose by the logic of their situation. But that is, for the moment, another fight.’
 



WHAT is it that wrecked the British budget, caused riots in Delhi, sent the pound down and British inflation up, saved the advanced industrial group of countries some 50 billion dollars a year, bankrupted about 2,000 of the wild-catters in the Texas oilfields, and pushed to the wall Nigeria, Mexico and Venezuela?
What was amazing about the precipitate fall in oil prices was not that the fall took place but that we should all take it for granted that the world could be turned topsy-turvy by what appears as an act of God (Mammon rather than Jehovah).
The oil price decline has another significance. Thirteen years ago, OPEC made its first attempt to recapture some of the lost value of its crude oil. Between 1950 and 1973 when the prices of manufactured goods increased enormously, the price paid for a barrel of oil was held obstinately by the oil companies at under two dollars. When the price was pushed up, world slump was blamed on the oil producers (in fact, slump began much before the increase in oil prices).
Out of the academic woodwork came a host of experts to cry doom: energy was running out, the fragile world was crumbling, we were to be punished for our greed and materialism.
Further out was a nastier version: with finite resources, there was room in civilisation for only a few, a lifeboat’s-worth, so most of the Third World must be prevented from developing (or trying to climb on board).
There were those on the left who produced the mirror image of the gloom merchants. They rejoiced that at last capitalism was getting its come-uppance, and without anyone having to lift a finger. In the declarations of OPEC they heard the trumpets of the legions of the Third World sounding the triumph of liberation.
At last OPEC had proved capitalism could be beaten – by forming a cartel and fixing the price of raw material exports high, any poor country could begin to shift resources away from the rich countries.
The fact that the representatives of the poor were in no way anti-capitalist, that they included the King of Saudi Arabia, the Shah of Iran, the Emir of Kuwait, did not affect the argument. The monarchs were the unconscious instruments of a wider purpose. They could not behave but in a manner to speed the emancipation of the Third World.
What a change there is now. The King of Saudi Arabia and the Emir of Kuwait plead with Mrs Thatcher to stop scooping the OPEC market by letting prices fall. Sheikh Yamani appeals to Mexico’s president to do the same. With a price that has fallen from 1979’s 34 dollars per barrel (and 40 dollars for Nigeria’s Bonny Light crude) to fifteen in February, Venezuela bravely urges it be fixed at $17.25.
Algeria, Iran and Libya, the radicals mind you, offer a scheme to cut production in order to hold the price at $16; but what OPEC sacrificies by self-control, Britain, Mexico, the US and Russia will claw back by picking up the vacated demand.
Nigeria, leap-frogging from one coup to another in the attempt to escape the axe, and Iraq, burning money in its unwinnable war, both insist that within OPEC they should have a bigger share.
Saudi Arabia and the Gulf sheikhs, weary with the squabbling, and controlling the largest supply, yet with the lowest demand for ready cash, hint that they will flood the world with crude to bankrupt the British and the Mexicans, taking the price down to $10.
At that price only the Saudis and the Gulf States could cover their costs, so not only would they push out the British, they would break OPEC. It is a Samson in the temple trick.
The price hovered nervously about $15 on the Rotterdam spot market not because of the British and the Mexicans. Nor because there has been any conspiracy of the industrial powers. They no more control the price of oil than anyone else. The decline is there because of the slump, the downturn in the United States economy that has pulled down much of the rest of the world.
Almost all commodity prices – and interest rates – have fallen. And oil has not by any means fallen furthest. Look at the performance of sugar. That sank well below the costs of production, producing starvation in the sugar island of Negros in the Philippines.
The OPEC price increase in the seventies not only vastly increased exploration – so making profitable the high cost oil of the North Sea and Alaska – but it produced a drive to more economical use. Consumption in the West has fallen by 11 percent since 1979. Thus, to the effect of economies has come slump, and the world is now dogged by considerable overcapacity.
Far from raw materials running out and energy coming to an end, oil is now in hopeless over-supply leading to the shutting down of marginal wells and the suspension of exploration. There was no physical shortage nor could governments manipulate it. It was the market that produced both the scarcity and the glut.
However, the triumph of the market over reformist ambitions is little consolation to those most victimised. The British can get by. But Mexico and Nigeria are being squeezed.
At $27 per barrel, Mexico earned up to $17 billion from the export of crude and its derivatives. The decline in the price has halved the country’s estimated revenue this year, so that it can no longer meet the interest payments on its $100 billion debt to foreign banks and governments.
Thus, on top of the collapse of 1982, a new one is now threatened. Mexicans have been squeezed for four years – wages have been cut by nearly a half for those with jobs (the Mexican peso is now worth a twelfth of its dollar value of 1982).
In February the government was obliged to cut $8.68 off the barrel price of its exports just to keep its markets. The decline in revenue forces more cuts in imports and generalised domestic deflation – a slump on top of a slump.
The price decline has demolished what was left of the myth of OPEC. It was fostered in the West as an explanation of the slump of 1973-4 (and to a lesser extent, that of 1980-1). It was never very plausible since, important though oil is, its pricing cannot determine the global system at all.
Nor was OPEC decisive. For in the late seventies over half the world’s output was controlled by just three powers, two of them not in OPEC – the Soviet Union, United States and Saudi Arabia.
But the myth of OPEC did sterling service in providing a scapegoat to deflect attention from the inherent nature of capitalism. The myth can now be retired from duty. Watch out for the next ‘explanation’ of difficulties.
 



PRIME MINISTER Nakasone made some idiotic comments last month about how inferior the level of intelligence is in the United States because of America’s black, Puerto Rican and Mexican inhabitants. It illustrates yet again, despite the fabulous material and technical advances of Japanese capitalism, the backwardness of Japan’s ruling class.
Its racialism could get temporarily hysterical as Japan is drawn increasingly into the world system as the condition of the future power of its rulers; kaikoku (the internationalisation of Japan) is inevitable, despite all the kicking and screaming of Nakasone.
Integration is happening very quickly. The yen has increased in value remarkably – last October one US dollar purchased 214 yen, this May only 168. There has been mild panic in Tokyo as imports cheapen and exports grow increasingly expensive. Despite all the self-interested squeals of Western business, imports are growing.
And in the export trade Japan’s power is being dented. One estimate has it that profits on Japanese exports are expected to decline by 30 percent this year.
Shipping and shipbuilding have been particularly hard hit – to the advantage of South Korea and other shipmakers in Newly Industrialising Countries. By August the estimated fall in the value of Japanese car exports to North America was put at £6.25 billions – or more than the combined profits of all Japanese car companies in 1985.
The problem is not simply the increase in Japanese export prices, but also the domestic effects of a rising yen. At the exchange rates of mid 1986 the wages of Japanese steel workers were approaching 20 dollars per hour (or about £13), or roughly the same as US levels (where the steel industry is crippled and contracting).
As a result Japanese companies are following their competitors overseas to find cheaper labour – and doing so when a high value yen makes it particularly cheap to buy or create assets outside Japan. In steel, Kawasaki is now importing a major part of its sales from its Brazilian affiliate and considering the closure of one of its two integrated steel works in Japan.
Matsushita’s current plan aims to increase overseas production from 14 to 25 percent of its world output.
Sony aims to double its overseas production in three years.
For many other Japanese companies in electronic consumer goods the favoured locations are Korea and Malaysia, but utilising some components from the United States and France.
The front runners pull their suppliers with them. As Japanese vehicle producers expand output in the United States – US-based production of Japanese car companies is expected to reach 2 million vehicles in 1987, compared to US imports of Japan-manufactured cars of 2.3 million – Japanese component manufacturers are obliged to follow their buyers to the United States.
To compete with Japanese-made cars their US rivals are obliged to patronise the same component makers. Hitherto this has meant increased imports to the US, or it did before the yen began its steep climb. The value of imported car components in the United States increased from 480 million to 2.8 billion dollars between 1980 and 1985.
As US car companies have been busy developing joint ventures with their Japanese rivals, so the same links have been fostered with component makers – in companies like General Motors – NHK Spring, Delco Moraine etc.
The global spread of manufacturing capacity of Japanese capital and its increasing intermixture with non-Japanese capital is only a small part of the process of the internationalisation of Japanese capital.
Japan’s rulers have an abundance of capital seeking profitable outlets in conditions where investment in Japan is becoming relatively unprofitable (at least in comparison with the past), and in conditions where the value of the yen makes capital exports cheap. This is the background to Japan emerging as the largest overseas investor in the world, and the largest lender to the United States.
Japanese banks are poised to overtake the value of assets of British banks in Britain, and the Tokyo Stock Exchange has become the third leg of the tripod of global finance: New York-London-Tokyo.
Yet all this hardly affects Japanese society itself. It can still be seen as Japan conquering the world and putting down the dirty foreigners – not as the world market conquering Japan.
The second process is coming in a different form – the tiny first indications of the internationalisation of the Japanese labour force. The big Japanese companies can shift production capacity abroad as the dollar value of Japanese wages rises, but the enormous mass of little companies, the sweated trades and dirty jobs cannot. You cannot clear Tokyo’s garbage in Seoul or Kuala Lumpur.
Some of the first segments of the domestic labour market to be affected have been – as in the United States and Europe – restaurants, bars, construction and farming. Barmaiding and prostitution are now said to be dominated by the Japayuki-san women from south east Asia. They enter Japan on short-stay visas provided by the underworld and then stay on at pittance wages. Japanese farmers – with their tiny farm plots – are legally importing Filipina girls to marry and set to the farm work Japanese women are no longer willing to undertake.
Illegal male workers, mainly from south east Asia but also from Pakistan and Sri Lanka, do the dirty jobs in restaurants (dish washing etc.) and on building sites. Higher up the scale, doctors from Taiwan and South Korea are said to practise illegally. An unofficial estimate puts total illegal immigration at over 100,000 per year.
Thus, as happened in Europe in the 1960s, the pace of growth is drawing the more highly skilled Japanese worker into higher occupations, leaving sectors where conditions and wages are so poor there is an inadequate supply of native labour to man them.
The problem is made worse insofar as the Japanese birth rate is low and skill acquisition takes longer and longer.
In conditions of high growth a contracting available labour force could produce a wild labour scarcity and soaring wages – and still fail to man sectors of the economy except at prohibitive costs.
Thus internationalisation of the labour force could be the only way to prevent the Japanese working class “holding the country to ransom” and to ensure the continued world position of the Japanese ruling class.
Officially, the government is still committed to the defence of the “racial purity” of the Japanese, and forbids the admission of foreign workers.
But there are strong arguments within the ruling class calling for kaikoku as the condition for the survival and growth in power of the Japanese ruling class.
What is remarkable about the process is how fast it has come. What took decades in Europe and North America has arrived – like the startling economic transformation of Japan itself – with breathtaking speed. And the main direction is all to the good. Increasingly Japanese capital will lose its national specificity, becoming indistinguishable from a non-national global capital. That will assist the process of the integration of the Japanese working class into the world and weaken the appalling hold of nationalism on workers. Then Nakasone’s ignorant blathering will be greeted in Japan with the derision it deserves.
 



ON 1 MARCH, the rule that no more than 29.9 per cent of a member firm of the London stock exchange could be owned by a non-member was ended (an event called in the City ‘the little bang’). On 27 October of this year, fixed commissions paid to stock exchange members for trading will end. The level of commissions will become competitively decided. This is known as ‘the Big Bang’.
What is the meaning of these apparently trivial events? They come as the culmination of a long drawn out process which, in sum, is as revolutionary as anything else that has occurred in world capitalism. Most people in the City think that the big bang will constitute a major transformation, but nobody knows what the final results will be.
In the long boom in the world system up to 1974, private financial markets grew much faster than the official reserves of governments. This was especially true of the Eurocurrency market which expanded twenty times over between 1970 and 1983. One of the symbols of an officially supervised system was the maintenance of fixed exchange rates by governments. In 1971, the private offshore markets had attained such domination that they swept away the fixed exchange rate system. The combined efforts of the leading states of the world could do nothing to stop it.
Financial instability was considerably increased. The weakness of public finance could only be offset by permitting private finance to flow freely between countries. In 1974, the United States and West German governments dismantled the main controls over the flow of finance between themselves and the rest of the world to encourage short term inflows to strengthen currencies. In 1979, Britain and Japan followed suit. As a result, finance capital flowed freely between those four establishing what is now recognised in the textbooks as ‘perfect mobility of capital’.
The British were only just in time. London handles the largest share of the Eurocurrency market, but it could lose that swiftly if conditions for inflow and outflow of finance were more restrictive than in other markets. 1979 was a belated attempt to match 1974 on Wall Street and in Frankfurt.
Once linked to a global market, some surprising things happened. For now finance capital could, in principle, dispense with any particular country. More narrowly, competitive commissions (introduced in the United States in 1975) narrowed margins and forced concentration, the merger of firms at the same time as global integration was taking place.
On the one hand, finance companies tried to diversify into all sectors in order to balance profit earnings and match their competitors; on the other, they tried to create new giant global general companies, operating in all financial centres on terms of equality with the natives. Out of the Wall Street changes have emerged some new giant general finance companies, poised to take over London and Tokyo: Merrill Lynch, Salomon Brothers, American Express, Shearson Lehman.
In Britain diversification is now well advanced. The banks moved into insurance broking, house mortgages, property development. The building societies moved into banking, and foreign exchange dealing. The trustee savings banks became ordinary banks and ran credit cards. Department stores are set to sell stocks and shares and lend money. Industrial companies – for example, BP and GEC – set up banks (but outside Bank of England control because they do not accept deposits from the public). The small partnerships that used to dominate the stock exchange are being converted to limited liability companies. And overall, in the turmoil of reorganisation the desperate search for staff is bidding up pay to astonishing heights (most recently, Chase Manhattan lost its 13 Eurobond sales and trading staff, bribed with higher pay to other companies).
Key elements in this dissolution of traditional sectors has been both the great increase in competition and radical changes in new technology plus the means to transfer information. The isolated areas of expertise have disappeared as all relevant global data becomes available on one small screen – and prices in all major markets can be presented in one instantaneous format. This is one of the reasons why companies that deal in the hardware of information (for example, British Telecom) or have traditionally transmitted information (for example, Reuters) have also moved into financial activities. The growth sector of Reuters’ work is now transmitting share prices globally.
People foresee the emergence of general money centres or financial supermarkets: single companies that handle all types of transactions, from the transmission and storage of financial information, distribution of cash, transfer of credit, retail sale and purchase of stocks and shares, insurance, mortgages, gold and commodity dealings and so on. Some leading companies are well along that road.
One element of this has been the integration of the markets in different countries for trade in stocks and shares. The Eurobond market started the trend twenty years ago, but in the last five years, the value of international equities traded in London has increased from 2½ to 10½ billion dollars. Much of this trade does not go through the established stock exchanges. It is handled by 24 hour telephone markets maintained by the largest security houses and automated trading systems. If the trend continued, it would spell the end of stock exchanges.
This was the reason to break the ancient monopoly (17 jobbers and 200 brokers) of the London stock exchange and open it up both to competition and to foreign entry. For the non-exchange markets which provide the basis for evading the stock exchange have come to dwarf it. The 1982 Eurobond turnover was double the value of the transactions of the New York stock exchange and seven times that of London. With decontrol, the large finance houses are swarming into the London exchange in order to add the vital link in global control between Tokyo and New York. Furthermore, the changes affect all units of capital – industrial companies can now move their stock trading to wherever it is most profitable. Thus, sixty per cent of ICI’s stock is now traded in New York.
On 1 March the Californian bank, Security Pacific, was the first into the London stock exchange by increasing its share of the ownership of an exchange member, Hoare Govett, from 29.9 to 80 per cent (Security Pacific already have their own London merchant bank and operate on the Eurocurrency market). Phillips and Drew became part of the Union Bank of Switzerland. Nomura of Japan and Merrill Lynch of New York are next in line.
The pre-eminence of London in global finance can only be secured by increased Internationalisation. Japanese banks – with overseas assets in 1985 at 640 billion dollars – have just overtaken United States banks (at 580 billion dollars). It is entirely appropriate that, owning 23 per cent of all the banking assets in Britain, Japanese banks are just about to overtake the position of British banks in Britain.
The stock exchange has been driven to liberalise by the pressure of the world financial markets. But it is still very nervous. It could fail to capture the new global equities market. The New York stock exchange has just applied to become a ‘self-regulatory organisation’ on the London exchange in order to keep an eye on its New York members. The two stock exchanges are colluding to try to ensure they keep what they have. The joint statement of the two exchanges speaks of their new relationship as ‘a major step in the revolutionary development of a global trading system’ (in finance – NH); they then add bravely, ‘within the framework provided by the world’s leading stock exchanges.’
They ought to be nervous since, with new technology, the world market need not be in any particular place at all. Perhaps this observation underlies a certain amount of movement away from the City – Morgan Guaranty to Stratford; Citibank to Lewisham; Chartered Consolidated to Ashford; Sun Life to Bristol; Midland to Sheffield, and Barclays to Poole. But there are still queues of the world’s banks to get into the City (the number of foreign registered banks in Britain was 114 in 1967, and is now over 400).
The scale of operations is far beyond the control or regulation of any particular government or any likely combination of governments. As the Financial Times put it recently: ‘The national frontiers which once ensured that national markets would remain broadly self-contained and thus responsive to national supervision are becoming completely permeable.’ National regulations become unenforceable where companies can slip out of the national net to another centre. Companies cannot be suspended from trading if they trade in many centres.
This is part of the reason for the recent spate of City scandals – in Lloyds, the stock exchange, the tin market and the ramifications of a staid and respectable bank, Johnson Matthey, dabbling in gold speculation in order to rob the government of VAT. As institutions combine, prices can be made to rise or fall before you buy or sell. A recent enquiry into these ‘insider deals’ by the stock exchange concluded:
‘Time and again our investigations have run up against a brick wall of an offshore company, whose true ownership we cannot discover. We can track down the small insider deals which are done in this country, but the big fish go offshore.’
Gingerly the government is trying to formulate new rules and regulatory agencies. It is a difficult business because the rules must balance the degree of order and honesty required to safeguard the validity of transactions against restrictions that will deter dealings in London or allow overseas markets to outbid London for the deals. The Eurocurrency market came to London originally because Wall Street’s rules were more restrictive. The reverse process can happen, or there can be movements to other offshore markets – in the Caribbean, Luxembourg, or Singapore. The flurry of scandals, sudden changes, the disappearance of well known landmarks in the system, are the symptoms of momentous changes. Understanding them is constantly clouded by an archaic nationalism. For the changes are not about the takeover of the City by ‘US banks’, or ‘Japanese banks’ so much as the use of London as a key element in the transactions of the new world capital.
In the long history of capitalism, there have been changes in the law or regulations which have been forced by a long prior process of evolution but which then precipitate even more radical changes. The 1862 Companies Act is of this kind. It allowed a capitalist to borrow and operate with capital other than his own. A joint stock company under limited liability gave the capitalist access to an unknown multitude of lenders (that henceforth played no role at all in the management and control of the firm – they simply drew, as it were, a rent on their loan). As Hilferding put it, commenting on a similar change in Germany, the emergence of the corporation – ‘The corporation can draw upon the whole supply of free money capital’. The legal change signified the emergence of the class of capital as opposed to a group of individual capitals and capitalists. Accumulation no longer depended solely upon short term returns or the profits of the individual company.
But that was national capital, whether British or German. What we are now witnessing is the escape from simply national capital to a global pool of capital, the source of which in terms of countries is unknown. It is a change even more momentous than the establishment of national pools of capital.
It is quite unclear what phases the emergence of world capital will go through, what methods will be used to establish order in an unsupervised market, what will be the complex patterns of relationships between the international interests of world capital and the national interests of States. Can the competing clusters of global capital maintain an order while subordinating the States to the administration of localities.
So the big bang on 27 October does have some significance.
 











THERE IS a school of thought which argues that there is not much future for a competitive car industry in developing countries. Even in making car components, they say, the developing countries will remain restricted to the marginal and low value parts (windscreen wipers and so on).
In the late seventies, the idea of the ‘world car’ became popular in the big car making companies – a car of standard design, sold in all countries. That included many developing countries. The idea is said now to be dead. The industry, in sum, will remain where it is – in North America, Europe and Japan.
The notion must be a great relief to governments in America and Europe. It will not be much relief to the workforce since, even if the ‘industry’ stays, jobs do not continue. Since 1979, 158,000 jobs have been lost in the British industry, 130,000 in the Italian and 55,000 in the French. Some estimates suggest the European industry as a whole needs to lose another half million jobs to approach Japanese standards of productivity.
But is it even true that the car industry is marked by immobility? It is an odd idea when you consider how recently Japan emerged as the second largest maker of cars in the world – the process was concentrated only in the last twenty years.
Why is that process of redistribution to stop? The industry has, since the second world war, proved very mobile in terms of tne geography of location of capacity. In 1950, companies in the United States produced 76 percent of the world’s output: in 1979, 28 percent (and that share included the value of imported components). In 1956, 97 percent of world output came from North America and Europe; in 1979, 65 percent.
In the two decades to 1980 – as the bar chart shows – the rates of growth of the leading newcomers to car production (excluding Japan) were generally much higher than the rate of growth of world output – world output increased just under two and a half times over when the output of the newcomers increased over nine times over. The chart does not include countries with a high growth rate that began car manufacture after 1960 – for example, South Korea, Malaysia and China. By 1980, the countries represented in the bar chart had pushed up their output to 4½ million vehicles annually, 12 percent of world production (compared to 3 percent in 1970).
In component manufacture, it does not seem third world output is restricted to low value items. In 1983, the United States imported 3.6 million engines, two-thirds of them from Mexico and Brazil. Ford and General Motors have made – and continue to make – major investments in engine manufacture as well as vehicle assembly in the northern states of Mexico. The leading US car companies have become very dependent upon imported components in order to compete with imported vehicles – which is why Ford and General Motors are the leading opponents of import controls in the car trade.
The strategy of survival for the big US companies is both increased imports of cheap components (and whole cars as well), and buying shares in the foreign companies with which they compete. General Motors now owns 34 percent of Isuzu and 5 percent of Suzuki. It has a joint venture with Toyota. Ford owns 25 percent of Mazda, and has a joint venture with Toyo Kogyo in the United States and Mexico. Chrysler is raising its holding in Mitsubishi Motors to 24 percent and operates jointly with it in the US. By 1990, it is reckoned that Japanese companies (or joint ventures) will produce one and a half million cars in the United States.
Japanese companies are already themselves under threat from the newcomers. US controls on imported cars from Japan have pushed Japanese manufacturers into higher value cars (with the same number of cars, the value is much higher) – the $12 26,000 bracket. With astonishing speed, newcomers have moved in to fill the cheap car market gap (the $5–6,000 bracket) – in particular the Yugoslav Zastava and the Korean Hyundai Pony.
In Canada, the Korean Hyundai has had amazingly swift success in pushing back the Japanese. The first Pony cars arrived early in 1984 when the company aimed to sell 5,000; 25,000 were sold. In 1985 it is expected 85,000 Ponies will be sold – double the sale of any Japanese or European imported car. But the threat of import controls remains, and last August, Hyundai announced a $150 million investment in a Canadian plant to produce, by 1990, 100,000 cars, well placed to supply, duty free, the US market; (meanwhile, Japanese companies have lobbied Washington for restrictions on Korean and Taiwanese car imports!).
Korean output is still small by world standards. In 1981, operating at 50 percent of capacity, Korean companies made 121,000 cars and exported 16,000. The 1986 target was for 492,000 and 2 million in 1991 (with 900,000 exported). The 1991 target for all vehicles made in Korea is 4½ million (although Hyundai have a private estimation of 5 to 6 million, 55 percent of them exported). The Korean performance in shipbuilding – which took the country from 0 percent of the world market in 1970 to 23 percent in 1983 should caution the sceptics against ridiculing these targets.
Meanwhile, other hungry newcomers are on the prowl. The first shipment of the Malaysian Proton car (the result of a joint venture between the Malaysian government and Mitsubishi) arrived in Europe this year; Ford Lio Ho of Taiwan are constructing a new plant, most of the output of which is for export. Further out, General Motors, Volkswagen and Daimler-Benz are planning joint ventures in China to raise output from 1984’s 320,000 to one million by the 1990s, while some of the large Japanese companies are now manufacturing in India.
Where does all this leave the giant US car industry? Recent estimates suggest a continued shrinkage in the output of US companies – from 7.8 to 6.4 million in 1988 – and a faster decline in their share of 1988’s 12.6 million car market, to 57 percent. Japanese plants in the States should supply 7 percent, and imports from Japan 28 percent; imports from Europe 5.5, from South Korea 2.1 (or a quarter of a million) and from other places, 1.2 percent. Of course, US companies is a misleading concept when so much interrelated ownership and joint ventures are involved, and the US output includes a large input of imported components.
It does not seem the automation of car manufacture will change the trends. Already labour costs are down to 20 percent of the total, so that low wages in less developed countries are not necessarily a key matter. The more advanced of the less developed – the newly industrialising countries – are tending to specialise in capital intensive production (leaving to the poorer less developed, labour intensive manufacture), with the more developed concentrating on skill intensive and innovation output. Korea’s performance in shipbuilding and steel, like that of Mexico and Brazil, is the prototype; not garment making. The new car manufacturing plants of the less developed will be nearly as capital intensive as those in the more developed countries.
The concept of the world car as a planning target for the big world companies may have taken a knock of late, but the reality of the market constantly pushes the industry piecemeal in the same direction. The Japanese will soon face a host of new Japans. But each time round, the process becomes faster and faster – Japan’s dethronement will be much quicker than that of Europe and the United States. But there is no case to assume the dog-eat-dog syndrome can be contained in the Atlantic economy.
 



‘Every time anybody starts anything which will unwind or unravel this orderly, organised, sensible, rational society and make it, irrational and emotional, I put a stop to it and without hesitation.’ – Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore National Day Speech, May 1982.
Singapore has come unstuck. For a quarter of a century, it has been one of the most state dominated and directed economies in the world, barring the Eastern bloc. In many ways, it was the prototype for the Keynesian managed economy. In the early eighties, public spending took 44 percent of gross domestic product (a third of it to defence). The government participated, directed or led every important sector of the economy, from manufacturing to trade and finance.
The results appeared spectacular. By 1983 Singapore had the second highest per capita income in the third world – 3 percent above Italy, nearly 40 percent above Spain, and over three times that of Argentina. The rate of growth of output per head between 1965 and 1983 was an astonishing 7.8 percent per year, the highest in the world (including the oil producers). In 1980, the government boasted that Singapore would overtake the 1980 income per head of Japan by 1990.
A key element in Singapore’s version of state capitalism was the tight control of labour. The National Wages Council decreed wage levels annually. The National Trade Union Congress’ government-appointed officials controlled the unions in detail. The Central Provident Fund tapped wage increases, an enforced tax supposedly to finance public housing and welfare provisions but actually to meet government funding needs (50 percent of gross wages were paid into the fund, half by employers and half by employees). Immigration of workers was tightly controlled. And finally, massive pressures were brought to bear to control the birth rate – with special favours to encourage the educated to breed (in the thirties it used to be called eugenics).
In the early sixties, the unemployment rate was as high as 15 percent, but by the mid-seventies headlong economic growth had produced virtual full employment. At such a point, either the government would be obliged to permit immigration, or the labour force would have to become more and more productive (which means higher and higher investment per worker) or there would be massive wage pressure.
The government was cocky, certain it could achieve the middle of these three alternatives. Singapore was to become a land of computer programmers, consultant gynaecologists and astronauts. The government deliberately tried to push out of the island low productivity jobs (much of the garment making was expelled in the mid-seventies), and lower the number of immigrants. In 1979, it was decided the change was not happening fast enough and, to accelerate it, gross wages should be increased by 20 percent per year for three years (in practice most of the increase went to the fund, not to wage packets). In 1982, the decision was taken to phase out immigrants by 1991.
Meanwhile, as the planners planned, the world was changing fast. An American boom sucked in Singapore’s exports: the US took 14 percent of the city’s exports in 1975, 20 percent in 1984. This last year supported a growth in the gross domestic product of 8.2 percent (after 1983, 7.9 percent). The effect of this massive export boom was compounded by a massive property boom in the city – construction spending increased by a quarter annually from 1981 to 1984. Property became a major outlet for the amazing 42 percent of national income saved in 1984.
Regardless of government intentions to increase gross wages, a desperate labour shortage rapidly pushed up net wages and drew in legal or illegal immigrants. The government tried to escape by increasing shift times (from eight to twelve hours). They also tried to increase the retirement age – from 55 to 60 and then to 65 – but the threat of political opposition curbed the ambition.
In the first half of 1985, the wave broke. The United States economy turned down. The property boom collapsed. Electronic component manufacture plunged into world crisis (and component exports had been a key element in Singapore’s growth – to the US they increased 53 percent in 1983, 25 percent in 1984). Shipbuilding turned down sharply (half Singapore’s capacity is to be closed). And the oil refineries – Singapore is the third largest oil refinery centre in the world – were caught in a general decline in demand (the refineries were operating at 55 percent of capacity in 1985). Underlying many of these changes was the fact that the Singapore dollar was tied to the US dollar, and as the American currency rose, this effect was added to rising local wage costs to price Singapore exports out of the US and European markets.
Over 8 percent growth in 1984 turned into 1.7 in 1985. It will not be much better in 1986. Investment declined by nearly 40 percent in 1985, and the profits of the foreign companies that dominate Singapore’s economy declined by 70 percent (Singapore companies’ profits declined 35 percent). The rate of return on manufacturing was halved (to 16.5 percent). Bankruptcies rose by a quarter. And in December of last year, Pan Electric Industries collapsed and the Singapore stock exchange was closed for three days, with ramifying shock effects on the Asia dollar market and the city’s standing as a financial centre.
Policy was badly dented. 1985 saw a swift increase in unemployment, 90,000 jobs were lost, two thirds of them affecting immigrant workers (who were promptly expelled from the country). The government suspended its policy of increasing gross wages, imposed a wage freeze and tried to find ways of cutting net wages. Last December, early results appeared when the opposition parties polled a third of the vote. And in January, after eight years without a recorded strike, workers in a US oil company walked out in protest at the sacking of six workers (which included five trade union officers).
Everything seemed likely to go into reverse. Wage cuts, cuts in the employer contributions to the Fund, tax cuts and a continuing policy of government withdrawal from participation in the economy (including the privatisation of the massive public sector). Singaporeans note that Hong Kong, with scarcely any government direction of the economy, has ridden the downturn far better than Singapore. When Singapore returns to growth, as it surely will, it will be as a much closer replication of Hong Kong’s laissez faire. Friedman has dented Keynes yet again.
History had not, after all, been abolished. The world market that the tiny bourgeoisie of tiny Singapore had manipulated so brilliantly for two decades had at last caught up and overtaken Lee Kuan Yew, just as he was thinking of retiring and handing over to his son (yes, despite all the electronic gadgetry, nepotism flourishes). After all the years of confidence in the power of the state to shape the world, privatisation and the market had won. And with the freeing of the market, comes the freeing of labour.
 



ONCE was bad enough. Twice is unforgivable. A year ago, the party that dominates Mexico, the Party of Institutionalized Revolution (PRI), was caught fiddling the elections in the northern states of the Mexican federation.
Last month the same thing happened. Some 140 foreign journalists were on hand to see, when the doors of the election offices were opened, the ballot boxes already stuffed with fictitious votes. Rumour has it that ten billion pesos were used to fix the results.
One of the worst cases occurred in the election for governor of the large state on the United States border, Chihuahua. The leading opposition party, PAN, claimed to have been most damaged in last year’s elections.
On that occasion, the PAN militants rioted, and a police chief was burned to death in one township. This time PAN seized the bridge to the United States and wrecked the transborder traffic for a few days. Three PAN leaders went on hunger strike.
PRI stoutly denied any interference with the poll. The president, De la Madrid – the supposed Mr Clean of Mexican politics – openly praised what one journalist called ‘the mammoths of the old political bureaucracy’. PRI accused PAN of being agents of Reagan and the US Republican Party, and of wilfully trying to involve the church in politics, contrary to the constitution.
The priests did urge churchgoers to vote PAN, and, after the election, Archbishop Almeida of Chihuahua tried to close all churches for one Sunday to protest at PRI fraud. But PRI also tried to get the church on its side, and after the election, organised a demonstration of PRI Catholic women against the archbishop. Almost certainly the Mexican ambassador to Italy approached the Pope who duly forbade the closure of the churches on the grounds that mass could not be denied Catholics on political grounds.
The picture is more complicated. Earlier polls suggest PRI would have won anyway. Ballot fraud is an old tradition, but the current scale suggests the political exhaustion of PRI, its demoralization under the impact of crisis. PRI cannot indefinitely treat Mexico as if it were a small corrupt banana republic, and Mexicans, as if they were a mass of credulous fools.
Mexico’s gross domestic product is now eleventh in size in the world, and the share of product generated in industry (40 percent), is larger than in Britain (36 percent), France (34 percent), or the United States (32 percent). By the year 2000 a new giant manufacturing power will have emerged on the world stage.
But despite all the noise, PAN has been unable to stir the mass of the population. The crisis is severe. Even the PRI trade union federation grumbles, claiming real wages have fallen 40 percent in the last decade. Among the half the labour force that is officially employed, unemployment is running at over 15 percent, and inflation is over 100 percent.
Yet there have been no real riots, no sacking of supermarkets or general strikes as in Brazil. What political opposition there is remains small and relatively isolated, unable to focus mass demands and resentment. And most of it has gone to PAN, a conservative catholic and nationalist party.
Thus, in the Chihuahua governor elections, the poll was only 50 percent. The PRI claimed 61 percent of the votes and gave PAN 32 percent. The five parties of the left – the PSUM (the heart of which is the old Mexican Communist Party), the PMT (nationalist, leftist intellectuals), PRT (Fourth International), and two PRI outriders, PST and PPS – gathered just 3.4 percent of the vote between them (or 1.7 percent of the electorate).
Admittedly, the crisis is not all of a piece, especially in the north. The lower the peso sinks (it was 26 to the dollar in February 1982; it is now about 660 to the dollar), the more severe the crisis in the centre of the country, but the more the border zone next to the United States booms. North Americans flock across the border to exploit very low Mexican prices, to utilize the free trade shopping malls.
The American-owned factories in Mexico boom because the dollar value of wages is so low – employment in manufacturing in foreign owned plants on the border increased from 150,000 in 1982 to over 250,000 now.
Most of the border cities boast of increasing factory jobs this year. Ciudad Juarez, one of the largest, has 60,000 women employed in factories; it claims the longest bar in the world, in a tavern capable of taking 15,000 (and restricted to women between 5 and 9.00 p.m. when the day shift ends).
But the failure of the opposition parties further south to escape from the politics of sects is equally apparent. There is no shortage of issues – from city employment and wages to continued rural warfare between the landless and the landowners. Yet what rebellion there was came not from workers and peasants, but from the middle classes, private business and the church.
The role of private businessmen is curious. In general, capital prefers stability even if the government is not ideal (and may even be rhetorically hostile to business). Yet in two recent cases, the Philippines and South Africa, rebellion is backed by an important segment of capital. In Mexico, business has done well out of the years of PRI rule, but now part of it has swung hard against the government to the point of publicly championing the demands of PAN.
What is lacking in Mexico so far is a crisis of the ruling order, the disintegration of its right to rule. This complex phenomenon is not simply a function of the existence of a mass revolutionary party that is able to force such a disintegration – the mass party is also partly a function of the incapacity of the ruling order to sustain its political, social and moral integrity in the face of massive material challenges.
Most Mexicans – including the militants of PRI – are cynical, with very low expectations of political change. But that helps PRI; it can easily meet the most modest bribes required to sustain the loyalty of the cadre, watering the deep roots it has in Mexican society (the PRI has no parallel in the rest of the Americas, and its existence has ensured there is no cycle of military power in Mexico).
The PRI mixture of leftish rhetoric (and endless talk of revolution), mild state capitalism when required, and virulent anti-Americanism has regularly disarmed a left that has little else on its banners.
Consider the absurdity of the left demonstration in support of the last president when he nationalized the banks – in order simply to guarantee their debts to overseas lenders – they should have been demonstrating – or, better still, organizing – for the workers to seize the banks, not just accept state appropriation.
Now the left spends its time baying after the IMF and the government’s decision to join GATT, the issues of middle class nationalists that hardly connect at all with the material problems facing the mass of the population.
The earthquake a year ago was one of those bolts from the blue that could turn cynicism to fury, and it nearly did. The fact that so many buildings fell when they need not have done so, that many of the 9,000 or so who died could have been saved were clear from the beginning.
In the midst of it all, amid the blood, tears and brickdust, De la Madrid appeared on television – just as everyone needed a passionate rallying call – with his usual tired ranting. The alienation of the president from the feelings of the mass of people symbolised the alienation of the PRI, its exhaustion. The five months incompetence and corruption that followed in the relief operations only increased the agony, bringing the government’s reputation to its lowest ebb.
But then a new minister started moving fast, shifting a lot of World Bank money – 44,000 dwellings to be built in ten months in inner Mexico City – and what political opposition there had been, dissolved.
The left missed the opportunities. The bad old traditions of politics afflict all parties, the bad old conditioned reflexes of nationalism and state capitalism. This is not an argument for embracing an even worse abstract internationalism, but rather for focussing on the material questions that confront the mass of Mexicans in order not to demonstrate, to seek influence or pressure or make moral gestures, but to build an organised party.
While the socialists cannot do this, the PRI leaders do not need to stuff ballot boxes. Their right to rule Mexico is self-evident to the majority.
 



The Emergence of Indian Nationalism
Anil Seal
Cambridge University Press, 70s
Problem of Empire: Britain and India, 1757-1813
P.J. Marshall
Allen and Unwin, 35s
Mr Seal’s much-heralded book is an important contribution to the analysis both of a period of British imperial rule in India, and of the rise of the independence movement. The book is well researched, sensitive in its treatment of issues, and lucidly written. It is particularly skilful in analysing the relationships between different groups in the developing opposition to British rule (cf. in particular, Seal’s account of the Muslim relationship to Congress Chapter 7).
However, it also needs to be said that the book is marred by certain factual errors and, more substantially, by some most troublesome theoretical assumptions which only become fully explicit in the last chapter. Mr Seal is fighting battles against both Indian nationalist historians and Marxists. He sees his book as evidence against the thesis that class issues were involved in the rise of the independence movement. But his view of class is so odd, that he cannot see the class issues present in the material he uses. The ‘evidence’ follows from the way he presents his material, not from the material itself. He has no account of what was happening to India as a whole, the course of the Indian economy, and the events which created the driving force of opposition. He describes the growing frustration of educated Indians in the three main imperial cities, and does so with skill, but that frustration would have had no significance at all unless matched by changes on a wider scale than this. As it is, Mr Seal returns inexorably to the British imperial interpretation of the opposition – it was just a group of Bengali politicians on the make. For Mr Seal, classes dissolve into groups, and groups into individuals, driven by ‘self-interest’ – like the Utilitarians, he wishes to say that all human action is ‘selfish’ (which, of course, in one meaningless sense of ‘selfish’, it is). With such a crude methodology, it is marvellously ingenious of Mr Seal to have produced so interesting a book.
The second book provides two things. A long introduction describes the important transition in the relationship between Britain and India from being one where Britain imported manufactured goods from India, to one where India imported manufactured goods from Britain (and exported primary commodities). Second, the author presents a series of extracts from important documents of the period. The introduction is interesting, although almost exclusively concerned with the British end of the relationship, and, in particular, the political and financial history of the East India Company. The documents are less useful, except for specialist historians who need to refer to official documents (12 of the 45 extracts are from the texts of Parliamentary Bills or Acts). The particular extracts chosen are not always of much interest – for example, a rhetorical passage from Clive’s defence before the Commons, 1773, is included. More interesting would have been some account of what was happening in India and of the views of the private British traders who were eroding the position of the East India Company.



1. Where We Stand
IS’s position on the backward countries in the past has been in essentials a reiteration of the points advanced by Trotsky in The Permanent Revolution. The heart of this position is the declaration that only through the agency of the industrial working class in the backward countries can imperialism be decisively defeated in the backward countries and can socialism become a possibility. But if, in the unstable conditions of a backward country, a minority proletariat can defeat imperialism by establishing workers’ power, the dictatorship of the proletariat, that dictatorship can only survive and provide the basis for socialism if it is able to spread the revolution to the imperialist countries themselves. If the revolution does not spread, then the dictatorship of the proletariat is likely to be defeated or wracked with the internal contradictions of a backward society in an imperialist-dominated world. On the other hand, if any other class leads the onslaught on imperialism, then the perspective of the revolutionary movement will be nationalist rather than internationalist. Thus, the contradictions of isolated backwardness will be enshrined from the very beginning in the movement; the movement will not be able to break fully with imperialism; and ultimately the post-revolutionary regime will turn upon the working class itself.
 
2. Introduction
(a) Events since 1917 have continued to demonstrate the long-term attrition of the world bourgeoisie. On the one hand, in the advanced capitalist countries, the position of the mass of private owners of the means of production has been successively limited by two interdependent processes:

the concentration of production has continued to separate the mass of small powerless owners from the largest owners and managers of companies;
the alliance between the largest companies and the State, embodied most clearly since the last world war in the permanent arms economy, has further concentrated power within a minority of the owning class.

Without a solid core of State capitalism, private capitalism in the advanced capitalist countries cannot survive. Finally, the accumulation of capital in a whole new area of the world economy, the Eastern Bloc, has not been undertaken by private capitalists but by the State. On the other hand, in the backward countries, the native bourgeoisie is too small – because its role is circumscribed by imperialism – and too integrated into imperialism itself, to constitute an independent national class. To survive, it also needs a more or less extensive public sector to protect it and make profitable enterprise possible. Thus, on a world scale, the bourgeoisie has proved progressively less capable of reproducing itself. The dominance of private ownership has been steadily weakened, without this weakening in any way the dominance of capitalism as a system or the dominance of the world ruling classes.
(b) The integration of the parts of the world economy has also continued at an increasing pace since the First World War. But this integration does not signify increasing interdependence. Contrary to Lenin’s account of imperialism, the evolution of the world capitalist system has not led to the advanced countries being the purely consuming segment and the backward countries the producing segment, of the world economy. On the contrary, the advanced countries have concentrated an increasing proportion of both production and consumption, thereby making themselves less, not more, dependent upon the backward countries. This asymmetrical integration means that any socialist strategy that relies solely upon a revolt in the backward countries producing a major economic crisis in the advanced countries is doomed to failure. This is not, however, to say that the political implications of a revolt in one or more backward countries could not be important in the advanced countries. Around the European block of advanced countries, there are numerous ‘weak links’ which, if broken, could perhaps precipitate a political challenge within the advanced countries. Ireland is one of the more obvious examples, but there is also Spain, Greece, Turkey, Algeria and the European countries under Soviet domination. These are among the same selection of countries seen by the Bolsheviks as important for the development of the European struggle. Lenin himself carefully distinguished between the different implications of struggles in near and distant backward countries:
’The struggle of the oppressed nations in Europe, a struggle capable of going to the lengths of insurrection and street fighting will “sharpen the revolutionary crisis in Europe” infinitely more than a much more developed rebellion in a remote colony. A blow delivered against the English imperialist bourgeoisie by a rebellion in Ireland is a hundred times more significant politically than a blow of equal weight delivered in Asia or Africa.’ [1]
On the other hand, it would be quite wrong to underestimate the indirect effects of a struggle in a more remote backward country. Thus, the strain of the Vietnam War on the US government has precipitated important conflicts within the United States. The tension between expenditure on defence and on urban renewal and welfare payments brings the Vietnamese struggle into the middle of the internal American political debate.
(c) The regimes in the backward countries face three interrelated problems:

the national question – that is, securing or preserving the national independence of the country concerned;
the agrarian question – that is, transforming agriculture so that simultaneously the rural population secures rights in the land and an adequate livelihood from agriculture, at the same time as there is an agricultural surplus capable of supporting the cities and the drive to industrialisation;
the development question – that is, raising the rate of the accumulation of capital to the point where a long-term transformation of the economy takes place.

This transformation is embodied in a rapid expansion of national output at the same time as the share generated in agriculture is declining, and the proportion of the population employed in agriculture is declining.
The impossibility of solving permanently any of these three problems arises directly from the failure of the world proletariat to present a revolutionary challenge to the system as a whole. Of major importance in this respect is the failure of the proletariat in the advanced countries to challenge their respective ruling classes, and thereby make possible – at a minimum – the destruction of the straightjacket of Stalinism on the one hand, and Social Democratic reformism on the other. A revolutionary proletarian response to the rise of Nazism in Germany, to the Civil War in Spain, to the Second World War, to the carve-up of Europe after the war, to the Hungarian revolution, and so on, would have laid down a series of political alternatives with major implications throughout the world. Without the example of a proletarian alternative from the most advanced and experienced sections of the proletariat, the field was left open in the backward countries to other political alternatives.
 
3. The Class Struggle in the Backward Countries
(a) Stalinism and Social Democratic reformism were the two faces the proletariat of the capitalist countries presented to the rest of the world. They were also the active forces on the Left organising within the proletariats of the backward countries. In practice, Social Democracy was much less important than Stalinism, and less clearly distinguished from it, than in the advanced capitalist countries. Thus, at no stage in the struggle for independence, did the major political alternatives available encourage an authentic, independent proletarian response, an explicit demand for the dictatorship of the proletariat, workers’ power. Moreover, changes within the capitalist countries and between the imperialist powers and their colonial dependencies made it possible in a large number of cases for political independence to be granted without a major social struggle. The damping down of a domestic social struggle inhibited the formation of politically distinct classes and permitted a heterogenous class coalition to wage the battle for independence.
(b) But these two ‘external’ circumstances – the internationally available political alternatives on the Left, and the reaction of imperialism to the struggle for independence – were also matched by certain objective features in the new working classes of the backward countries. These objective features would not have inhibited a proletarian movement had it appeared, but, in the circumstances, they fitted closely the political priorities of Stalinism. Very briefly, these features were:
(i) telescoped economic development created new working classes in the backward countries which are much more sharply differentiated within the class. The working class simultaneously includes both the most advanced strata of technically highly skilled workers in – by world, not local, standards – the most sophisticated industries; plus an important block of unskilled or semi-skilled workers in industries important in earlier phases of development (for example, cotton textiles) both large-scale and small; plus an enormous mass of workers, many of them illiterate, in small-scale shops, household and traditional craft industries; plus an even larger number, partially employed in petty trading and miscellaneous services.
The old working class of Western Europe in the early phases of capital accumulation was, by contrast, concentrated in the second of the four groups listed above – a small group of highly differentiated skilled workers, along with a mass of unskilled labour, both employed in what are today backward industries, with a much smaller section in the last group (petty trading and miscellaneous services). Again, the speed of the development of working classes has tended to prevent the slow development of forms of working-class organisation. The pattern in Europe where skilled workers were able to organise craft unions, which then provided the stable leadership for mass unions, has not been possible in most backward countries. In many cases, the leap to mass industrial unions has been made, without the sinews of organisation within the factories being capable of sustaining such units.
Furthermore, the proportions between production workers and other workers within the working class in backward countries has changed significantly. New investment has the modern technical characteristic that enormous additions are made to output with relatively little new employment (in comparison to 19th century European industrial investment). This relative decline in productive workers within the working class in part changes the nature of the class. Thus the pivotal role played by a concentrated mass of productive workers in the history of West European capitalism cannot be repeated in exactly the same way. On the other hand, the modern economy – even in backward countries – is a much more interdependent process, so that the effects of a relative decline in productive workers is offset by the interdependence of all segments of the modern economy. On the other hand, social differentiation seems also to be more pronounced in the working classes of some of the backward countries. In British working-class history, the conflicts between workers from different parts of England, between English, Irish and Jewish workers, were factors which inhibited class solidarity, but these seem of less significance than the open communalism among, for example, Indian workers, or tribalism, among African workers. Imperialism itself deliberately played upon these divisions in order to maintain its control, and the newly independent ruling classes have not been averse to pursuing the same tactic. However, this factor cannot be assessed independently of the available political alternatives which stress class solidarity. In the absence of such a political alternative, the social fragmentation of the working class continues to reflect the fragmentation of the peasantry between different districts (since many of the new workers are rural migrants). This fragmentation, left to itself, can be very restrictive for a very long period of time, and is ultimately only superseded by the unified attack of the ruling class.
(ii) Imperialism and full or partial State capitalism has created a much larger urban petit-bourgeoisie. For Marx, the petit-bourgeoisie was pre-eminently the mass of peasant small-holders, the shopkeepers and independent artisans or small businessmen in small towns – that is, all small property-owners. By the nature of its mode of production, such a stratum was incapable of collective political leadership and, as a result, oscillated between the two major classes, the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. By contrast, in the backward countries today (and, for that matter, in the advanced capitalist countries) the urban ‘petit-bourgeoisie’ is propertyless, pre-eminently engaged in large-scale bureaucratic employment, especially in the agencies of the State. Its material conditions of life are very poor, particularly in comparison with its aspirations to a fully middle-class way of life. On the other hand, its employment subjects it – as was not the case with the Victorian petit-bourgeoisie – to large-scale collective organisation, although not to direct organisation in the production process (that is, the sources of the generation of material wealth remain outside its activities). Yet, being propertyless, this stratum has no vested interest in the private ownership of the means of production, nor is the bourgeoisie proper large enough to be a major point of attraction for this stratum. Because it is heavily concentrated in the cities, it dominates urban politics, particularly on the Left. And for obvious reasons, this stratum is primarily interested in an extension of the power of the State.
(c) Thus, as a result of this changed class structure – of the weakness of the bourgeoisie proper, of the failure of the proletariat to raise an independent political alternative – the central debate in many backward countries is not that between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, but between the urban petit-bourgeoisie – pressing for an extension of the State and of public employment – and the rural petit-bourgeoisie – pressing for the devotion of more national resources to agriculture. This is the heart of a struggle which appears in its external form as a political debate between State ownership – identified by the urban petit-bourgeoisie as ‘socialism’ – and rural capitalism.
The bourgeoisie proper is too weak to survive on its own, and the index of its weakness is shown in its dependence upon the State, the public sector and national planning. Thus, the bourgeoisie may for limited purposes ally “with the urban petit-bourgeoisie against the rural challenge of landowners, landlords and kulaks, but it is more likely in the long term to ally with the rural petit-bourgeoisie in defence of private property. In any case, the role of the bourgeoisie is, at every stage, qualified by its intimate involvement with foreign capital, by its role as a fifth column of imperialism within the politically independent State.
(d) The perspectives of Stalinism appeal directly to the urban petit-bourgeoisie. The mass of Communist Party members is most often drawn from this section of the population. The upper stratum of the working class is often better off than the mass of the bureaucratically employed petit-bourgeoisie, and it has not in the past identified its interests separately. Indeed, the organisation of the working class itself has most often appeared, not as the action of the skilled workers, part of the self-activity of the class itself, but as a by-product of the struggle of the urban petit-bourgeoisie for dominance. Urban petit-bourgeois political parties created trade unions as ancillary supports for their politics, rather than workers creating unions to defend their interests. In the independence struggle, as in Bismarck’s Germany, the workers traded their political loyalty for the promise of welfare legislation and improved wages once independence had been won. After independence, where full State capitalism was not achieved, the urban petit-bourgeois political parties continued to use sections of the working class as supporting forces in their struggle for power, but at each stage ensuring that these forces did not assume any kind of independent role (thus, for example, the bribe for worker loyalty in the independence struggle was in part a body of labour laws; since independence, labour courts have become a major institution in mediating the class struggle; the law is introduced by the State, itself the bastion of the urban petit-bourgeoisie; its existence demands that trade unions be operated by lawyers, that is, members of the urban petit-bourgeoisie, and that only trade unions ‘recognised’ by the State be permitted to fight in the courts). Again, however, the lack of an independent proletarian challenge makes possible the role of the urban petit-bourgeoisie. If the challenge existed, then it would not be possible for the urban petit-bourgeoisie to play the role it has done.
(e) Thus, the objective characteristics of the industrial working class and its relationship to other classes, have provided an important basis for the success of Stalinism or perspectives close to Stalinism. This in its turn has inhibited the appearance of an independent proletarian politics. And this in turn has left the national stage vacant to purely nationalistic forces, and in particular, to the struggle for State capitalism by the urban petit-bourgeoisie.
 
4. The Role of the Petit-Bourgeoisie
(a) However, whether or not a genuine national bourgeois revolution is possible or the proletariat fails to begin the permanent revolution, the central questions facing any particular backward country remain. The vacuum has been filled by different types of petit-bourgeois leaderships, borrowing at different times on the grievances of different sections of the population in order to build and lead a coalition of classes. The existence of the vacuum has lent a degree of autonomy to sections of the urban petit-bourgeoisie that was not envisaged by Trotsky (indeed, this possibility was explicitly ruled out by Trotsky in The Permanent Revolution).
But if there are great similarities between the sections of the urban petit-bourgeoisie in different countries, there are also striking differences in the degree of autonomy with which such sections have been able to act. For example, both Mao Tse-tung in China and M.K. Gandhi in India built movements of class coalition. Mao warded off the demands of poor peasants in order to keep the rich peasants and small landlords in his coalition, stressing always that domestic issues of class conflict must be subordinated to the central task of evicting foreign imperialism. Likewise – although in very different language – Gandhi consistently opposed class demands within Congress, stressing the need for ‘harmony’ in the common struggle against the British. In China, social disorder and military organisation in a remote geographical area underpinned the supremacy of Mao within the Communist Party, and the relative independence of the Party from class interests; as a result, Mao was scarcely ever openly challenged by a class-oriented opposition. In India, the struggle was waged in the centres of power, and Congress was a coalition of interests wider than those used by the Chinese Communist Party. Gandhi’s attempt to secure the adherence of large landowners to his cause, and keep loyal the largest capitalists, brought him under continuous attack from the urban petit-bourgeois elements within Congress. Both Mao and Gandhi claimed that it was really the peasantry which was the basis for the movement, but in practice both relied heavily on sections of urban classes – the small town petit-bourgeoisie – and the rich peasantry. What most sharply differentiates the two movements is Mao’s use of military force. The army gave the CCP its independence of class interests; the lack of military force made Gandhi as much victim as master of the class coalition he led. But the possibility of using independent military force was a function, not so much of CCP politics or subjective wishes, as the concrete circumstances of the struggle in China.
Thus, the clearest difference between the two movements is in the degree of autonomy available to the leadership. Where the autonomy was greatest, as in China, the circumstances of the national independence struggle were particularly unique. In the spectrum of independence struggles, the Indian example is much closer to the norm than the Chinese. Again, in China the final victory of the revolution led to a much more decisive break with the old order. In India, Congress tends constantly to resubmerge in the remnants of the pre-Independence society, to fight out in its midst the unresolved social struggle.
(b) In the case of China, nearly 100 years of social disorder, including the disintegration of the country, a major foreign invasion and waves of a long drawn-out civil war, preceded the Communist Party’s victory. This background of long-term social collapse is essential in understanding how the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party was able

to achieve a role independent of the entrenched classes of pre-revolutionary China; and
to secure a much more decisive break with the old order, and to undertake a much more radical attempt to solve both the national and agrarian questions.

But the social basis of the Chinese regime and the failure of the international revolution to relieve beleaguered China of its national isolation, also demonstrates that the Chinese leadership cannot finally answer the development question, and as a result, cannot therefore achieve long-term stability. In the period since 1948, the great efforts to accelerate the accumulation of capital in China have done little more than keep pace with the rate of growth of the. population. The poverty of the population severely restricts the possibility of extracting a substantial surplus consistently over a long period of time. Without that surplus, only foreign assistance, itself only forthcoming in the event of a proletarian revolution in the capital abundant countries of the advanced world, could relieve the inner contradictions of the regime. But without development, the regime tends to stagnate or disintegrate into warring factions, which even further inhibits the national accumulation rate. And if the development question cannot be answered, then the other two questions will reassert themselves in new forms – concretely, for example, by peasant seizures of the land once more in order to secure a stable livelihood and throw off the yoke of the State’s demand for the agrarian surplus; or by foreign encroachments on China’s territory, encroachments which China can do little to prevent in conditions of backwardness.
(c) The Communist Parties have been, in the past, able to act as the most radical and disciplined wing of the urban petit-bourgeoisie. Ironically, they borrow from the historical experience of the proletariat under capitalism in order to organise the urban petit-bourgeoisie, and champion a coalition of interests. In the presence of an independent political proletariat, such organisation would be no more than a shadow, but in its absence, it has in a few countries – in conditions of long-term social crisis – been able to play a major role. But it is only in a few countries. In India, the non-Communist urban petit-bourgeoisie proved fully capable of leading the independence movement and resisting Communist takeover. The CP in India never came even remotely near to assuming a monopoly of the nationalist cause. In Indonesia, the nationalists were similarly easily able to control the movement, despite having to wage a bitter and sustained war against Holland, and they prevented PKI domination up to long after the achievement of independence. The same is. true in Burma where the urban petit-bourgeoisie was much weaker, and in the Philippines and Malaya. Indeed, Vietnam where the Communist Party was able to secure an almost unchallenged hegemony of the nationalist movement, seems the exception rather than the rule.
Nor was it the Communist willingness to use armed force which secured their leadership. Between 1948 and 1950, the Communist parties of Burma, Malaya, Indonesia and the Philippines, all launched armed struggles and campaigns of guerilla warfare, sparked off by the victory of the Communist Party in China and the advent of the Cold War. In all cases, the struggles were disastrous, isolating the cadres from the centres of power and population, and destroying their political credibility. In Indonesia, it took 10 years for the PKI to live down this abortive episode. In Burma, the Communists became irrelevant rural fragments. In Malaya, the nationalist forces were pushed into the arms of the British in self-defence. In no case, did the armed struggle bring to the Communist Parties the hegemony of the nationalist movement. The failure of the advocates of universal guerilla warfare to analyse this disaster indicates the lack of seriousness in their perspective.
(d) However, in those exceptional conditions where the Communists have been able to lead a majority of the petit-bourgeoisie, victory has made possible a more radical attempt to overcome the three central questions facing backward countries. But this attempt is necessarily conditioned by world circumstances, by the demands which those circumstances make upon the new regime. The demands, with domestic material conditions, circumscribe at every stage how far the three central questions can be met. In failing to meet the three questions, the stability of the State capitalist regime is immediately placed in jeopardy. To form a stable ruling class – that is, a class the members of which recognise a common interest against the subordinate classes as more important than the interests which divide sections of the ruling class – requires both a long period of stability and a relatively high rate of growth of the national economy. Russia provide; a good model in this respect. Without a high rate of economic growth, the rulers of Russia would have tended to disintegrate into warring factions, each competing to displace the other. High growth, expansion sustained in the armaments industry, gave Stalin the power to mobilise the majority against minority opposition within the Party, to create out of a socially heterogenous group, an homogenous ruling class. In this sense, China today does not possess a stable State capitalist ruling class. It has the embryo of such a class. Whether the Chinese leadership can create a class, at the same time as sustaining the rate of economic growth and warding-off foreign threats, turns upon the behaviour of the rest of the world, upon the imperialist powers.
(e) In all the post-colonial backward countries, the stability of the new regime, of the urban petit-bourgeoisie, is circumscribed by the existence of other entrenched classes – a land-owning class and rich peasantry, an urban bourgeoisie and proletariat. In the new regimes led by Communist Parties such is the autonomy of the new order, they have been able to liquidate over a period of time the exploiting classes, simultaneously expanding their own material base, the public sector. Thus in China, first the landowners were eliminated, then the rich peasantry, and finally, the national bourgeoisie (although in this case, interest and dividend payments to the rentiers were not eliminated until the Cultural Revolution, nearly 20 years after the revolution). This leaves, of the former entrenched classes, only the urban proletariat. In China, the regime has tried to keep the proletariat in alliance with the regime, but the demands of capital accumulation constantly push the regime towards diluting the working class – the ‘worker-peasant system’ – to cut labour costs. External threats impel the regime to expand its defence efforts which in turn force it to raise the rate of accumulation, which in turn increases the pressure on the subordinate classes and the likelihood that the ‘alliance’ will break down. If it does, the urban working class could once more raise an independent challenge to the regime.
(f) On the other hand, in those countries where the urban petit-bourgeoisie was unable to secure as much autonomy as in China, the role of entrenched classes is much more powerful. For the sake of simplicity, two separate cases can be identified,

Countries where the urban petit-bourgeoisie was able to terminate the independence struggle, and thereby inherited a major position of power in the post-independence regime. In India, Congress tried to expand its autonomy by liquidating the traditional rulers, undertaking a land reform programme, and pursuing an industrialisation strategy for massive expansion of the public sector. In this way, it was hoped to secure the same result as that in China. However, while the traditional rulers were deprived of political power (based upon the old Princely States) and universal suffrage in the short-term undercut traditional power, nevertheless the old rulers and the richer peasantry infiltrated Congress to ths point where it was possible for them to nullify the land reform and, indeed, expand their power by milking the State of development funds. On the other hand, within the organs of the State, the national bourgeoisie was able to protect and enhance its position, limiting the State to those industrial activities directly of need to private capital. In Egypt, the military origin of the new regime lent it greater autonomy than that secured in India, and it was able to make much greater encroachments upon national capital, but not to eliminate private land ownership. In both Egypt and India, a ‘mixed’ system prevails, that is, an unstable struggle between the urban petit-bourgeoisie and entrenched classes, between a public sector and a majority private one. Again, the movements of world economy in terms of changes in trade, capital, direct political manipulation, heavily determine how far this struggle can be won by one side or the other, and how far the accumulation process is raised or lowered.
Countries which did not go through an independence struggle at all, and therefore, ones in which the urban petit-bourgeoisie was never able to the same degree to achieve some political autonomy. In some cases, the State in these countries plays the role of a classically Bonopartist regime – as, for example, in Brazil – balancing between entrenched classes which ultimately control the main basis of power. Again, however, external events – like the role of foreign capital – can push even this kind of State into creating a public sector, which, in its turn, can sustain a separate interest striving to dominate the society.

(g) However, the fragmentation endemic in the petit-bourgeoisie does not cease to exist in modern conditions. Particularly is this so given that the urban petit-bourgeoisie only really creates its material basis after the revolution, and can only do so in conditions of rapid industrialisation. The main target of the urban petit-bourgeoisie is the State, and therefore national power is necessarily its sole aim. Conception of international solidarity obviously threaten this national power (unless ‘international solidarity’ is seen as subordination of foreign countries). Thus, the domestic fragmentation of the leadership is matched by the impossibility of an international alliance of petit-bourgeois regimes. Not only, therefore, is domestic instability one result, external disunity in the face of imperialism is equally disastrous. Given that many backward countries are primarily commodity producers for imperialist powers, the class nature of the regimes involved makes collaboration between them in order to control their markets impossible. Thus, for example, faced with a monopoly buyer of oil, the disunity of the oil-producing countries is the trump card in imperialist control. Individual backward countries are in this way vulnerable to complete manipulation by the advanced capitalist powers. The only available response is an attempt at national economic autarchy, attempting to cut links with the world market. But this in its turn only makes even more difficult the process of capital accumulation, only ‘drags backwards’ the productive forces, as Trotsky says in The Permanent Revolution. The costs ‘of this regression are enormous. One calculation estimates that in 1965 the backward countries spent $US2,100 million in domestic resources to manufacture automobile products which had a world market value of only $800 million. The backward countries paid this price in order to avoid importing these products from abroad. But the ‘loss’ of $1,300 million is just about equal to the amount in aid advanced by the World Bank in the 23 years of its existence. On the other hand, where the State capitalist regimes also intervene internationally, they do so, not to create an international class alliance which will wage a common class struggle within a number of countries against those countries’ ruling classes, but merely to imitate the tactics of the imperialist powers, to establish ‘friendly’ countries by. offering aid and diplomatic assistance to the ruling classes. Thus, China’s assistance to Zambia, or to Ayub Khan’s Pakistan, at no stage hazards even mild criticism of the existing regime, and thus aids the existing ruling classes against their own masses. In the case of Pakistan, China merely ‘ignored’ the popular revolt of this year, remained loyal to Ayub right up to the end (much as the Soviet Union remained loyal to the Kuomintang right up to the Chinese Communist Party victory in China) and then merely transferred its support to the new military ruler, Yayha Khan.
(h) The instability endemic in the urban petit-bourgeoisie forces the leadership of each regime to employ extraordinary measures to enforce loyalty. Imitating the State capitalist regimes, one-party States are used to enforce a common discipline on the disparate elements of the ruling class. Any criticism at all threatens to open Pandora’s Box, to release the stifled class struggle. To eliminate all forms of opposition by using the mechanisms of Party control, backed by liberal use of police truncheon, political murder and gaoling, describing the whole as ‘real’ socialism, corresponding to the ‘classless’ nature of the people, is one way to enforce stability. Another is to make the army the regime, so that to Party discipline is added military control. The central contradictions of backwardness which impel army rule have been seen most recently in Indonesia, the Sudan, Libya, Somalia, Brazil, Bolivia, Argentina. On the other hand, the impossibility of the ruling class surviving without the bayonet, is starkly matched by the impossibility of the bayonet solving the central contradictions. In Nigeria, Egypt, Pakistan, Burma, militarism is like a dangerous drug: the more it is taken, the more it is needed. Even the high rates of economic growth in Turkey and South Korea do not remove the instability. In Turkey, the army glowers in the wings, waiting only to return to power. In South Korea, the translation of the military leadership into civilian disguise only conceals the real balance of power. The prize for the year 1969 goes to Dahomey, clocking up its sixth coup since independence in 1960.
Again, the domestic instability provides an essential basis for imperialist manipulation – whether it be the French in Chad, or the Russians and Americans in the Middle East and south Asia, and so on. Thus, urban petit-bourgeois leadership simultaneously exacerbates the conditions of backwardness and strengthens the domination of imperialism on a world scale.
(i) Any ruling class or clique reduced to dependence upon its armed forces – as in China – or reduced to making the armed forces the core of the ruling class – as in Egypt – is in a state of grave weakness, of endemic instability. Since the question of political power cannot be settled decisively, and there is little possibility of relief from abroad, it is impossible for the regime to answer the development question. And this means that there can also be no permanent answer to the national and agrarian questions. Thus, the perspective becomes one of insoluble stagnation. It is the paucity of political alternatives which permits the long-term crisis to continue, the paucity arising from the failure of the proletariat to intervene.
 
5. The Development Question
(a) Hitherto the most important engine of growth, forcing the most rapid rate of capital accumulation, has been the world market. With the partial exceptions of American and Soviet development, virtually all other countries which have developed have done so by means of their relationship to the world economy, primarily by exporting goods but also by importing capital or, at least, capitalists. Today, there is no evidence at all that the exceptional conditions within which Russia and the United States developed (the land available, size of population, nature of external markets and technology) are shared by any of the currently backward countries. However, while integration into the world market appears to be a necessary condition of long-term growth, it is not a sufficient one. On the contrary, whereas in the 19th century, foreign capital went to backward countries to exploit raw material sources, thus expanding the export flow of the country concerned and making possible a major import flow of development equipment, now much of the direct foreign capital entering backward countries is interested in exploiting only the internal market and expanding its imports from its parent company in a metropolitan country. In the absence of large-scale exports from other sources within the backward country concerned, the balance of payments is a consistent restriction on the expansion of the economy, both in terms of importing new capital equipment, and also in importing raw materials and spare parts for existing plant (given a sluggish agriculture, the import of foodgrains may also exacerbate the working of the economy). On the other hand, to cut off all links with the world market (or at least, what links can be cut) is to force the economy back to an even more primitive stage, to base the accumulation process on what can be squeezed out of the local population. The problems involved in economic autarchy seem greater than the benefits which accrue from ending foreign exploitation, although quite clearly this foreign exploitation can be curtailed in certain respects. In the absence of an international revolutionary alternative which will break the stranglehold of world imperialism the contradictions of backwardness – for example, that increased exploitation by the world market is the precondition for an increased rate of domestic accumulation – are insoluble. It seems clear on the evidence since 1948 that none of the backward State capitalist countries has been able to sustain a rate of accumulation fast enough to constitute rapid development (there are few statistics on North Korea, but impressions suggest it has sustained the most significant growth). On the other hand, the most rapidly growing backward countries in the past decade are almost all in some way or other favoured client States (South Korea, Taiwan) satellites of a geographically close advanced market (Greece, Turkey, Spain; Jamaica and Mexico) or economies geared to export of one or more strategic commodities (Malaysia, Venezuela). Yet the growth that has taken place has not been rapid enough to subsume some of the central problems, to expand jobs as rapidly as the labour force and food as rapidly as the population and accumulation needs. In Venezuela, after a decade of a 10 per cent rate of growth each year, unemployment is still as high as before. In India, unemployment and underemployment may cover as many as 30 or 40 millions. Meanwhile, the advance of world technology, monopolised at source by the advanced capitalist powers and designed for their needs, continually lowers the possibility of employing the population as output expands. As a result manufacturing continues consistently to employ a smaller proportion of the non-agricultural labour force. On the other hand, the fastest rate of growth stimulates very rapidly the development of a proletarian opposition which itself seeks to divert resources into wages – South Korea’s ability to attract foreign capital is already under threat from the pressure of skilled labour for higher wages. Thus, even in the most ‘favourable’ conditions, the petit-bourgeois leadership is caught between the millstones of the world market and the proletariat, and its hopes of independent national power becomes increasingly illusory.
The symptoms of the crisis are: increasing financial dependence (an outflow of resources in repayment of aid, loans, dividends and interest); a relatively slow rate of growth, continually subject to restrictions from the balance of payments and fluctuations arising from oscillating or declining commodity prices; output expanding far more rapidly than employment, creating, as population and labour force increase, a growing army of underemployed and unemployed; the threat of the urban masses, subjected to conditions of the utmost misery. If the alternatives available are socialism or barbarism, the second has been the choice of the ruling groups in the backward countries today.
(b) There is little or no choice open to the leadership in the backward countries. Either they already command a part of the world market in a strategic commodity, or they are compelled just to hold on. For the oil producers, they command the commodity in highest demand, and therefore possess the most advantageous economic position. But their disunity, and the feverish search for oil resources or substitute energy sources within the developed countries (most recently North Sea gas, Alaska, etc) ensure that any individual oil producer cannot command his own price. This is even more true of. other strategic commodities – copper, nickel, iron ore. If the price is too high, the capitalists of the advanced countries will find other sources (the US has just discovered between 250 and 1,000 million tons of exploitable iron ore in Nevada, for example; the British are reopening Cornish tin mines) or create substitutes. Thus, even commanding a strategic commodity gives only short-term and strictly limited bargaining power to a backward country, let alone the weakness of commanding a commodity which is not strategic (coffee, tea, cocoa, jute, raw cotton). On the other hand, without a strategic commodity for export, a backward country has only its internal market to offer as inducement to foreign capital.
(c) Closing the national borders in order to stimulate industrialisation so that formerly imported goods can then be manufactured domestically is only a short-term palliative. For on the one hand, foreign companies already within the economy are likely to become monopoly suppliers to the domestic market, making dependence on foreign companies even greater; and on the other, the ability of domestic companies to compete abroad is reduced since they now have a protected home market, and export earnings are a first casualty. Latin America is a good example in this respect. Import-substitution industrialisation has left most of the Latin American countries even more dependent than they were before. The intensity of US investment and intervention in South America makes these countries in certain respects an extreme phenomena. They did not participate in the colonial revolution of the 20th century (although, aspects of the revolution occurred in Mexico and Cuba, and abortively in Bolivia), and thus remain in some respects colonies without colonialism. On the other hand, the much longer phase of growth witnessed in some Latin American countries makes them the most backward of the advanced rather than the reverse. In class terms, such countries (Argentina, Chile, Uruguay) already have the class structure of a fully capitalist country, with a developed proletariat and dominating bourgeoisie. The role of the petit-bourgeoisie is accordingly much more restricted. In such countries, the agrarian question is much less serious (although, extreme in some areas of each country) but the national question much more so. Given the size and significance of the proletariat, the prospect of the dictatorship of the proletariat is, in purely objective terms, much more promising. The degree to which that promise is realised, however, turns upon the available political alternatives and how far these raise the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
(d) Just as in the period 1880 to 1914, so in the period since 1948 world trade has expanded very rapidly and, as one of its by-products, permitted the growth of a number of backward countries. The growth that takes place is distorted to fit the priorities of a world market dominated by advanced capitalism, but nevertheless it is growth. The expansion of world trade is essentially a function of the expansion of the advanced capitalist countries. In the earlier period, world trade was much more centrally an exchange between capitalist and backward countries, but today the most dynamic sector is the exchange between capitalist countries themselves. Thus, the growth in the backward countries that has taken place is at a slower rate than the growth of world trade itself. The long-term viability of the growth of world trade turns upon the rate and pace of growth of the metropolitan countries. Even if this were to remain high, the share of the backward countries in world trade is likely to continue to decline as it has done since 1950. The advanced capitalist countries are less and less dependent upon the backward majority, even though the domination of the backward by the advanced grows heavier. The drain of resources out of the backward grows larger, but that drain of resources is less and less significant for the growth of the advanced. Through a complex series of mechanisms governing aid, trade, foreign investment, as well as direct and indirect political means, the advanced powers continue to drain resources from the backward. Indeed, debt repayments in the immediate future will increasingly consume a larger proportion of the export earnings of the backward – when Shylock forecloses, all growth is likely to be paralysed. Given a prospect of relative stagnation in the advanced countries, the effects on the backward are likely to be extreme.
(e) In the attempt to overcome the crisis, particular ruling cliques will inevitably be forced ‘Leftwards’ – that is, they will be forced to make more or less substantial encroachments upon entrenched social groups in order to buy popular support for their own survival. Nasser’s role in Egypt between 1956 and 1966 is an important example of this process. The fate of Nkrumah in Ghana and of Soekarno in Indonesia illustrates also, however, how fragile this Leftward movement is, how it is unable ultimately to honour its promises in conditions of intractable backwardness. Most recently, General Ovando Candia in Bolivia and General Velasco in Peru have similarly moved ‘Leftwards’ by nationalising major US oil interests in their respective countries. General Candia was one of the people involved in the murder of Guevara, which has not prevented some of the Fidelistas rallying to the support of Candia as a Leftwinger. Velasco has followed up his measure with what looks like a radical land reform proposal.
Of course, in the world-wide struggle against the domination of the capitalist powers, socialists must support every move against that domination, whatever its source. But they must do so without illusions, that is, while seeing that this blow against imperialism does not break the contradictions of backwardness. Indeed, it may make some of them worse: without the oil cartel, Bolivia is already finding it extremely difficult to sell its output. As the first blow in an international strategy to destroy imperialism, expropriation of foreign capital is vital. But without that strategy – a strategy which is open to the international proletariat alone – expropriation is merely a measure to fortify the national power of a national ruling class. Nationalisation as a legal change of ownership has no socialist implications; it is only socialist if it represents a change in class power, a victory for the working class (and in the Bolivian case, the Bolivian workers will remain as they were before nationalisation). Of course, the struggle of a national ruling class for independence does have political implications. On the one hand, it can stimulate elements in ruling classes in other countries to imitate the process – thus, the Bolivian and Peruvian changes prompted an Argentinian general, Eduardo Labanca, immediately to proclaim an attack on all US investment in Argentina. On the other, workers, at first no doubt diverted by the ‘Leftward’ shift, also see how easy it is to make a major change of this kind, despite countless earlier arguments about its impossibility, and about how empty such a shift is in the absence of real class power.
The same kinds of considerations arise in appraising more or less radical regimes in backward countries. Socialists must support Nasser both against imperialism and against the reactionary regime of Saudi Arabia and the Gulf Sheikhdoms (themselves, much more clearly creatures of imperialism itself) but without identifying the regime in Egypt as ‘socialist’ or pretending that Nasser can win this struggle. The Nasser regime itself depends upon subventions from Saudi Arabia, the by-product of the activity of the international oil cartel. Without any kind of international class perspective, Egypt can do no more than operate as just another national unit trying to dominate other national units. Nasser cannot challenge Saudi Arabia on class and political grounds, and thus he cannot provide any ultimate perspective for Arab unity. Alone and isolated, Egypt’s ad hoc responses to the contradictions of backwardness are the symptoms of crisis rather than means to solve it. Thus, the Leftward shifts have to be supported, but with critical insight into the preconditions for a real solution. The Leftward shifts are no more than stopgaps in the long-term crisis, itself generated by the impossibility of solving the development question in contemporary conditions. Certainly, they are no substitute for a proletarian internationalist strategy. As Fidel Castro is reported recently to have told a group of Brazilian revolutionaries: ‘It is five times more difficult to develop a country than to win a war’. His pessimism clearly focuses on the fact that both radical reforms and a popular coup by guerilla forces do not in and of themselves overcome the contradictions of backwardness. The stalemate of development arises directly from the failure of the proletariat to present an independent internationalist alternative. The perspective for world trade makes it look as though the crisis will get worse, leading to greater differences within and between backward countries, greater obstacles to collaboration between backward countries, and greater domestic instability.
 
6. The Preconditions for a Socialist Movement
(a) The failure of the proletariat has isolated the Left, leaving socialists with no other weapons except intellectual or actual guerilla warfare. In the advanced capitalist countries, the memory of a strong political movement of the working class still in many cases remains. The ruins of that movement still mark the political landscape. But in many backward countries, there is not even the memory, only ‘foreign’ theories. Thus, it is not at all surprising that the first steps of opposition in backward countries learn little or nothing of the lessons of the working-class movement – except some of the rhetoric – and, usually unconsciously, revive pre-Marxist utopian socialist thought. For many revolutionaries in the backward countries, as with the utopian socialists, the working class is not the agency for the achievement of socialism, and the ‘proletariat’ can be any force which happens to be in opposition to the status quo. Given stagnation in the backward countries such forces multiply – the unemployed, the urban lumpen proletariat, sections of the richer or middle peasantry, tribal groups on the very fringes of society. As the society decomposes there are possibly many such groups, each capable of adding a little to the decomposition, but none capable of constituting an alternative ruling class. The political revolutionary, student or urban petit-bourgeois, sees his role as using such groups in order to seize power, and on this basis create an independent national economy and accelerate the rate of accumulation. The pre-revolutionary strategy depends for success on an available vehicle to transport the revolutionaries to power, and a status quo sufficiently rotten to collapse without serious struggle. The post-revolutionary strategy is entirely Utopian economically, although important short-term advances can be made in terms of popular welfare.
The only example of success with this pre-revolutionary strategy occurred in Cuba. In the case of China, as argued above, not only did a major foreign invasion intervene, a World War, but also the Communists waged a struggle for nearly 18 years before coming to power. Similarly, the struggle in Vietnam is directly related to the peculiar – indeed, unique – overlapping of the decolonisation struggle and the Cold War. In the case of Cuba the decisive element in the confrontation between Castro and Batista was the collapse of the Batista forces rather than the size and significance of the Castro threat. To generalise the Cuban case requires us to believe that many regimes are as vulnerable as Batista. Yet, regardless of the brutality and corruption of numerous regimes, there are few countries of substance where there is any evidence of such vulnerability. Even Haiti has so far proved impregnable. In the countless rural guerilla revolts which have marked modern history – and earlier mention was made of the 1948-1950 Communist insurrections of South-East Asia – the surprising feature is how few, not how many, have been successful. Numerous regimes appear to be perfectly capable of tolerating rural revolt, even sustained like the Huks in the Philippines or the Malayan Communist Party, over many years, without this having any political implications for the country at all.
More than this, the actual politics of the revolutionaries concerned are essentially Narodnik, elitist and anarchist. Owing allegiance to no major class, such revolutionaries are responsible to no one. Therefore their political analysis turns not upon the nature of society and the class struggle, but upon their individual élan, their morality and dedication. They are, in all but name, Liberal nationalists of the 19th century with the difference that the problems facing them are much more intractable, and that they require a social programme to attach their movement to the dynamo of the grievances of heterogenous social groups. Many nationalists in backward countries have certainly understood that the national revolution cannot today be achieved without a socialist programme. The success of the Chinese Communist Party in securing the hegemony of the Chinese nationalist movement has demonstrated that. In this sense, all revolutionaries are necessarily socialists today. But most of them have not understood that the national revolution is impracticable and utopian without an international revolution. All programmes – the Liberal for national independence, and the socialist for world revolution – have thus become one, all stages have become telescoped. The demands of 19th century Liberalism – of Garibaldi and Kossuth – for national independence, cannot be achieved this side of the world socialist revolution.
Without an international class strategy, each isolated revolutionary becomes no more than a nationalist. Political States replace classes. The ‘third world’ becomes a unified revolutionary class, despite the bitter class struggle running right through each member State of the third world. And the advanced capitalist world similarly becomes a unified ruling class, despite the class struggle which racks its very vitals. The political squabbles, leading to war, which divide the ruling classes of the backward countries are forgotten. And at its worst, the world’s solitary enemy becomes the United States, a unified class of oppressors. In this scheme, there is no need for class at all, no need for a political party to embody the politics of a class, no need for the scientific analysis of society as the basis for strategy. Only that revival of anarchist mythology, The Deed, undertaken by the saints, is required to set the world tumbling. And for the deed, individual morale, not class solidarity and clarity of political purpose, is the precondition. Nor are advocates of this position in any way susceptible to argument. The countless failures of The Deed are as nothing to a solitary success. The failures are explained as those of individual dedication, not of the objective situation. Society is thus always a bonfire, and the revolutionary’s sole function is that of spark.
In practice the truth is less heroic and simple. Of course, in certain circumstances the spark is vital, but alone it is certainly not enough. The dedication of revolutionaries is also vital, but alone it is not enough. Dedication untempered by a clear knowledge of reality is merely stupidity – the tiny socialist forces can be completely eliminated, and the movement set back for many years as a result. In practice, Mao was among the most cautious political leaders of any revolutionary movement, which is why he took so long to come to power and did so unhampered by loyalty to any specific class. Castro is much more clearly the model for revolutionary audacity, but even in his case the lack of a class movement which emancipated itself crucially weakened his challenge to Batista and his post-revolutionary attempts to build a strong State. The fate of Guevara in Bolivia is the more standard result. On the other hand it would be quite wrong to denigrate the heroism and sacrifice of these populist revolutionaries. Their defeat is a defeat for the Left. That they are misguided is a product of our failure to create a proletarian movement which is a viable alternative to the solitary national coup.
However, whatever the role of populist socialists in backward countries, their effects in the advanced capitalist countries can be dangerous, both by diverting the centre of revolutionary attention away from the proletariat, and by substituting élan for theory. More to the point, the muddled class orientation of such socialists makes them easy victims for shifts in the politics of particular ruling classes. Maoist foreign policy occasionally favours particular capitalist classes – for example, the French – because de Gaulle was seen as ‘anti-American’. ‘Anti-Americanism’ thus becomes the key criterion of a revolutionary. Within each capitalist country, one segment of backward national capital is struggling against advancing international capital, and an alliance between backward capital and the ‘revolutionaries’ around a programme of radical nationalism might have some success. Servan-Schrieber’s account of US domination of Europe, in defence of the existing European ruling classes, could thus come close to Maoism or Fidelistas. Given the stagnation of capitalism, the rising threat of proletarian challenge, the need by ruling classes for diversifying politics – racialist and nationalist – the way would be open for some political alliance in which the rhetoric of revolution is married to the politics of conservatism. When Hitler came to power in Germany a number of important Social Democrats thought it was a major advance to socialism. Some of the Maoists and Fidelistas could go the same way. The class nature of any possible future socialist movement is the only protection against individuals pursuing this path – working-class power is the aim, not radical action or institutional reform alone.
Populist socialism today embodies despair at the intractability of the contradictions of the world as well as the rebirth of hope that change can be achieved. If the class is dormant, then at least one individual will strive to bear witness to what he believes. If he is successful in attaining power, then he will begin to describe the unique way in which he came to power, his technique, his contribution to science. Thus, in China, an account of military technique replaces class politics. But this substitution saps any possibility of serious social analysis, of locating revolt within existing society rather than on its margins. It means also that analysis takes its frame of reference as the national borders, and ‘internationalism’ is not class solidarity across frontiers, but merely sentimental dogmatism that, for example, only armed struggle on the Vietnamese, Chinese or Cuban ‘models’ (and each is seen as exclusive of the others) can lead to socialism. Again, nationalism dominates even this semblance of internationalism, reformulating the Stalinist contention that defence of the Soviet Union is the defining characteristic of a true proletarian internationalist. Thus, an essential part of any attempt to overcome the populist position involves necessarily coming to terms with the Russian experience. The Maoist muddle about Stalin is a good example of their failure in this respect. The Maoists in Britain today are not Stalinists, but they do not know it, and if they did they would not know why.
(b) In terms of the perspective facing us, the strategy of rural guerilla warfare remains very strong among socialists in the backward countries, in the absence of any other. But, in Latin America, the failure of Che Guevara in Bolivia has been a major blow to the credibility of this strategy. One of the first results has been a return in many countries to the earlier, pre-Cuba, urban guerilla action, on the model of the Tupamaros of Uruguay. This is an important change, although it still leaves the socialists acting out mass resentment before a passive audience, rather than building an organised class movement. Nevertheless, the socialists are forced back into the areas where the proletariat is concentrated, are forced into political argument rather than self-imposed isolation. The change occurs at a moment when military rule in much of Latin America is curbing the possibility of economic and political advance by the working class. Of course, as earlier noted, there are pressures on some of the generals ‘Leftwards’ which could give them a breathing space in Peru and Bolivia. But this is likely to be a temporary respite. The combination of urban guerillas and widespread economic stagnation could do more than usual to jell out a coherent proletarian force – provided the politics or the example are available. In Argentina in recent months, workers of the Left Peronistas have undertaken urban guerilla actions – that is, proletarian activists, rather than students or intellectuals. On the other hand, other Peronistas have visited Spain to request the return of Peron to Argentina, to request the recreation of a reformism (and the wartime import-substitution boom which made it possible) which will make ‘unnecessary’ proletarian power. Thus, there are some small possibilities of a reunification of the socialists and the working class, a reunification which, to be successful, must transform both sides and place in the centre of any strategy the dictatorship of the proletariat.
(c) In Asia the signs of the possible creation of an independent proletarian politics are smaller. Certainly economic attrition is taking a terrible toll of the mass of the population, but this alone is as much demoralising as capable of precipitating revolt. In 1969’s upheaval in Pakistan, there seemed to be briefly the possibility of a proletarian intervention when the textile and railway workers of West Pakistan went on to the streets. The movement then seems to have disappeared in the common struggle of the urban petit-bourgeoisie. But possibly the attempt by the Pakistan army to stabilise ruling-class political power and the instability of the urban petit-bourgeoisie proper could be very clearly demonstrated in the coming period, particularly if there is a partial return to parliamentary politics. The exhaustion of both the military and parliamentary alternatives could force the creation of an independent political proletariat. If this were the pattern of events, then the political situation in India could be transformed for the first time since Independence. There would exist a new alternative to the squalid wrangling of factions within and without Congress. And a change in India would transform Asia, particularly if conjoined with an upsurge in the Middle East which simultaneously rejected Zionism, the Arab monarchies and Nasserite reformism. The transmission effects of the permanent revolution – the twisted reflection of which appears in the Washington image of ‘the dominoes’ – would once more become effective, arising out of the despair of backwardness and directed at the chains of oppression in capitalism itself.
But the shift away from rural guerilla warfare for socialists in Latin America has not been clearly matched as yet in Asia. In India the revolutionaries of the fragments of the Communist Party remain focussed upon such a perspective (the abortive ‘Naxalbari movement’) with the possible exception of some CPI cadres in the Calcutta area. Certainly, the experience of CPI State government in West Bengal and Kerala (although both are officially coalitions) will be salutary in robbing both the ‘parliamentary road’ and the urban petit-bourgeoisie of credibility. But this lesson has not been matched by the development of an independent proletarian politics. In Indonesia, the opposition still appears to be concentrated among the depressed peasant strata of central Java, although the student enthusiasts of Jakarta who originally assisted the army to throw out Soekarno have now long since swung into opposition to the military regime. Until the rural struggle and the urban petit-bourgeois opposition evokes an answering movement of urban workers, it will almost certainly pose no major threat to the regime. For the ruling classes have also learned lessons from China, Vietnam and Cuba. On the other hand, the exhaustion of all other strategies – Stalinist, both Moscow and Peking varieties, the Soekarno left reformism, and the military, limit the possibilities of evading the formulation of a proletarian strategy. In particular, Peking’s role in encouraging the Indonesian Communist Party in its reformist support of Soekarno, in direct contradiction of its claimed politics, will for the moment have robbed the Maoist alternative of much credibility as a revolutionary alternative.
(d) But the Asian perspective is predicated on a very narrow basis. The proletariat exists, but its politics do not. In Africa, the proletariat is the newest in the world, and the degree of development lowest. Nevertheless, Lagos and Accra workers have already made their mark. Africa is increasingly sucked into the whirl-pool of the world market, manipulated on each side by the imperialist predators. The results in the Congo, and now in Nigeria, in the increasing rash of military coups, are the same as those in other regions. Yet so far no trace of an independent proletarian politics has made its appearance. A primary target must obviously be the lynch pin of southern Africa, where racialism and class struggle combine. Again, a proletarian revolt which sparked off an answering movement in southern Africa would shake the entire status quo of Africa. The European revolution was stopped on the borders of Germany and bottled up in backward Russia. In Asia, India and China are the Germanies of today, and in Africa, South Africa and Rhodesia. These countries are not the sparks, but the boosters without which the rocket will not go beyond the stage reached by the Russian revolution.
(e) In the past Stalinism in its prime exercised power against all revolutionary action, whatever type of action it was. Now Stalinism is weakening throughout the world, fragmented between different nationalisms – Russian, Chinese, Cuban – and increasingly unable to unite a popular politics with the exigencies of orthodox diplomacy. A mark of the disintegration is the contradictions within the external politics of each national Stalinism. Mention has already been made of the Chinese position on Pakistan, Indonesia and France, and the same contradictions exist in Chinese policy towards Egypt and the Middle East. The Cubans are less able to manoeuvre than the Chinese, but nevertheless their oscillation between accepting Moscow direction (on, for example, Czechoslovakia), and the reverse, illustrates clearly that their foreign policy is less a function of their politics and more a bargaining counter against Moscow. Quite rightly, Havana is afraid of a deal between Moscow and Washington which will completely isolate Cuba and make any foreign policy worthless. Given Cuba’s economic dependence on Soviet sugar purchases and equipment supplies, a Moscow abandonment of Havana could be the spark for a counter-revolution. The instability of Cuba’s situation underlines the necessary limits on any Fidelista policy going beyond Cuban nationalism.
A greater danger than these contradictions is the complete dissolution of Marxism altogether into a vague populist socialism. At each stage in this account, the main weakness of a proletarian challenge has been seen as its lack of theoretical equipment to deal with its crisis. The dissolution of Marxism makes this situation worse, even if it also clears the board of diversionary ‘socialisms’. However, simultaneously, the non-proletarian alternatives are becoming increasingly limited in concrete terms. The alternatives – a revival of proletarian politics, or stagnation and crises – remain.
 
7. IS and the Struggle in the Backward Countries
(a) Thus, what is centrally lacking in the backward countries today is a clearly expressed strategy to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat. Without this aim the sporadic involvement of workers in broader movements has no specific political implications except as a possible prelude to proletarian independence. Isolated and alone in one country, the proletariat can only, through major crises, very slowly begin to move towards an independent strategy, and it is unlikely in modern conditions to have the opportunity. Thus, the role of the international situation (proletarian revolts in other countries) and of class-conscious socialists is vital. Yet the socialists themselves are, by and large, not committed to the dictatorship of the proletariat as much as the urban petit-bourgeois aim of purely nationalist State capitalism.
The task of revolutionaries in backward countries is thus clear: to raise the slogan of the dictatorship of the proletariat and organise around it. Given the aim, a broad coalition of forces is available to wage the struggle, a coalition that must include large numbers drawn from the urban petit-bourgeoisie and the peasantry, but more important, must be based essentially on the working class and, in particular, those sections of it employed in large-scale modern industry. An authentic proletarian organisation would immediately change the terms of the debate, and begin the long task of working towards the permanent revolution. That task would be immeasurably shortened by a sustained proletarian revolt in an advanced capitalist country.
(b) In certain limited respects the prospects today are more promising for the development of a proletarian movement than for the past 20 years. The limits of the State capitalist alternative are more clearly apparent, as also are the limits of the strategy which leads up to State capitalism, rural guerilla warfare. The scale of oppression by the advanced countries grows steadily heavier and more clearly apparent, so that both the alternatives of national independence in conditions of backwardness and integration into the existing world market – the alternatives of the urban petit-bourgeoisie and the national bourgeoisie respectively – are shown to provide only temporary solutions. In such a context, an internationalist and proletarian strategy could come to be seen as a more practical alternative.
(c) IS’s role in assisting this process is obviously, if regrettably, limited. Organisationally and financially, IS is scarcely equipped to do very much outside of Britain. However, our theoretical position could be of particular importance in what help we could give. In particular, our critique of Stalinism and our consistent stress upon the role of the proletariat could be important in clarifying perspectives for some socialists in some backward countries.
(d) So far as our work in this country is concerned, we must at the same time as describing clearly the class content and direction of movements in the backward countries, clearly and strongly affirm that we are always and everywhere on the side of the oppressed against the oppressor. Whatever the nature of the opposition to imperialism in the backward countries, as socialists we must be clear in supporting it. The international linkages of revolt do not follow the distinctions of economics. In 1968-9 the sparks which flew between Berkeley, Peking, Paris and Karachi came from different fires, but their ignition power in the student revolt was the same. The qualifications we have about petit-bourgeois revolts concern, not whether we support them or not – we must always and everywhere support them against imperialism – but how far such revolts can be a substitute for the struggle of the proletariat and the achievement of socialism. But our basic position is quite clear. As Lenin put it: ‘if tomorrow, Morocco were to declare war on France, or India on Britain, or Persia or China on Russia, and so on, these would be “just” and “defensive” wars, irrespective of who would be the first to attack; any socialist would wish the oppressed, dependent and unequal States victory over the oppressor, slave-holding and predatory “great” Powers’ (Socialism and War, 1915).
 
Notes
1. Selected Works V, p.304. Lenin’s 1920 theses, although applicable to the whole colonial world, were primarily directed at the Middle East, Turkey and Iran in particular. The subsequent Comintern Congresses were similarly more concerned with nearer backward countries than distant. The Fifth Congress in 1924 was mainly concerned with prospects in the Balkans. Despite US attempts to demonstrate an irrepressible Soviet desire to control all the backward countries from the very earliest times, in fact Stalin undertook only the barest intervention in the Far East, primarily in China to offset possible Japanese intervention in Siberia, and usually through orthodox diplomatic means (fostering one warlord against another). Very briefly – from 1925 to 1927 – he undertook a more systematic intervention through the Kuomintang, but the debacle of 1927 cut short this interest. In any case, the interest had existed in part to defeat Trotsky in the internal faction fight within the Russian party, and that interest ceased after 1927. Up until the Second World War extensive Soviet intervention was inhibited by Russian military weakness. In the case of India, Moscow’s interest was so weak, it delegated responsibility to the British CP (Palme Dutt); similarly, the Philippines was given to the US CP, Vietnam to the French CP, and so on. This lack of direct control made possible the development of independent Communist Parties.
2. Cf. an attempt to reconstruct the behaviour of the Shanghai working class during the most radical phase of the Cultural Revolution, in VI. The Workers, p.19 of China: Let a Hundred Flowers Bloom, IS 35, Winter 1968/9.



THE TOWN of Snoul is lost under the holocaust. 4,000 corpses, most of them probably innocent Cambodians, have all been dutifully classified as ‘enemy troops’.
And countless nameless Cambodian villages are lost accidentally in shell holes. The American desert in Vietnam has begun to eat into the paddy fields of Cambodia.
The two invasions of Cambodia a week ago have now been extended to seven or eight separate invasion points. The 10,000 US and South Vietnamese troops have grown to something over 55,000.
The order – ‘hit anything which moves’ – ensures that few will remain to complain.
Rumour governs the tanks and the artillery. In the case of Snoul, it was rumour that the ‘Vietcong’ were there which prompted the order to ‘blow the town away’. After destroying it, the rumour can be checked.
But the sudden explosion of the anti-war movement in America has forced some verbal concessions. American troops will leave in ‘five or six weeks’ or by 1 July and will not invade Cambodia beyond a 19 mile limit.
In military terms, the two concessions are obviously absurd. If the ‘massive concentrations of enemy troops’ are 20 miles from the border on 2 July, Nixon cannot and will not withdraw his forces.
Nor has he said South Vietnamese troops will withdraw and they will need US air support. There are ‘no US troops’ in Laos officially, but it does not prevent a major US backed war taking place there.
Nor has the 19-mile limit prevented the launching of a flotilla of 100 vessels from South Vietnam up the Mekong River to Phnom Penh.
A third or a quarter of these vessels are US manned, but they are supposed to be carrying ‘medical and food’ supplies to the Cambodian capital and therefore are not subject to the 19-mile limit.
The overall invasion makes no more military-political sense than it did when it was launched. If it was to ward off possible attacks while US troops evacuated the South, the operation will have to be repeated every three to six months.
Despite wild claims and energetic efforts to manufacture ‘major enemy bases’ little of note appears to have been discovered in the invasion. If the NLF were there, they have long since gone beyond the 19-mile limit.
The Lon-Nol government has relinquished all claim to being neutralist and nationalist. In opening the door to US troops it has guaranteed its own destruction, whatever else happens.
 



Philosophy and Myth in Karl Marx
Robert Tucker
Cambridge. 35s. (and a paperback)
This book is both excellent and disappointing. Excellent, for the critic of Marx who shows such sensitive exposition of the philosopher is rare; disappointing because the final estimate of Marx’s contribution to our thinking seems, alongside the earlier analysis, relatively shallow. Three quarters of the book traces the development of German philosophy through Hegel to Feuerbach and Hess, laying bare the intellectual roots of Marx’s philosophic writing of the 1840s. At the same time, the points of critical transition are indicated and criticised. Finally, the work of the ‘mature’ Marx is discussed in the light of what has gone before, with particular reference to the transition from the concept of alienation to that of the division of labour, and the charge that the later Marx (and, more pertinently, the work of Engels) is inconsistent with the younger. Here the author is exact and sensitive – all Marxists and those interested in Marx can hardly allow this book to go by without studying it deeply. It goes far to righting the balance induced by the arid Scholasticism of Stalinism, and is a very perceptive discussion of philosophic issues which were one of the promptings of the 1956 Revisionist movement amongst Polish intellectuals. However, Professor Tucker seems to do less than justice to the complexity and richness of the mature Marx’s work. Tucker’s work becomes increasingly bent towards proving his main hypothesis: that the paradigm usage of ‘alienation’ is as a psychiatric term indicating an abnormal personality at war with itself, and that Marx incorrectly projected this notion into a species-term – the implication being that Marx, in so projecting on to Society a notion only truly meaningful in relationship to abnormal individuals, created a Myth for which there could be no empirical verification, and which served irrational purposes not related to any specific class or social situation. There is not space here to answer the criticism – suffice it to note the most plausible evidence for this projection in the tension in Marx between social scientist and moralist. On the other hand, Tucker does not seek to justify or analyse his own notion of ‘Myth’ (or whatever ‘Non-Myth’ is), is liberal in the spuriously persuasive use of ‘real’ (i.e. the ‘real’ world) and the doubtful distinction between ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ life. Moreover, he seems to think that notions concerning ‘individuals’ (as opposed to ‘classes’ or ‘societies’) are somehow more scientific in his own treatment than any other – to a certain extent he misinterprets Marx in the earlier works as discussing the problems of the individual, and not the problems of the species under capitalism (which leads him to see a transition to a social critique as an erroneous projection). In addition, Tucker does not appreciate or attempt to understand the social significance of Marxism – if he had, perhaps his book would have been even better. As it is, it is pretty good.
 



Macmillan: Portait of a Politician
Emrys Hughes
Allen and Unwin. 25s.
It was sad that Emrys Hughes decided to write this book, and sad that a reputable publisher decided to publish it. Sad because the pitch is queered for a little while, and a real biography of Macmillan would be important and worthwhile.
Macmillan played a key political role in the 1930s in bringing together expanding sectors of industry and Tory radicals, and presenting a solution for the problems of the inter-war economy based upon a form of corporatist state capitalism. The Labour leadership in 1945 carried out a very similar programme in the name of socialism. To have explored the precise role of Macmillan in the interwar economic manoeuvres would have been very interesting, much more interesting than pursuing the personal career of the politician in the 1950s.
But all these complexities are lost on Mr Hughes. He has gathered together the bits of information that are already fairly well-known, padded it out with a great number of words and incidental quotations, and used the entire works to make cheap cracks about Macmillan the man. This sort of cheap offensiveness which no doubt stands the Opposition in good stead for a political critique (who really cares whether Macmillan wore a fur-hat in Moscow?) is hardly meat for anyone seriously concerned with politics. The performance tends to reveal more about the shallowness of the writer than the meaning of his subject – and as Mr Hughes claims to be a firm left-winger, it is an even sadder revelation.
The illusion that Mr Macmillan, his personal characteristics and oddities, are important determining factors in Government policy is one shared equally by Conservative and Labour benches, and by all who seek only to paddle in the rather deep pool of politics.
 



Studies in an Inflationary Economy
F.W. Paish
Macmillan. 45s.
This volume comprises a series of essays published in economic journals through the nineteen-fifties, with the addition of two new chapters. These discuss various theoretical and practical problems of industrial economies with, in some pieces, particular reference to the economic hist, ory of Britain since the War. The theoretical pieces are in general, like much of general economic theory, rather dull and unrewarding, but the main bulk of the book contains masses of extremely interesting material – on the volume of British savings, on monetary policy, British capital exports, the finance market, taxation and profits etc. Necessarily, as these essays have been published earlier, this involves much repetition – more careful editorial pruning would no doubt have concentrated the impact of the book more.
As to the central thesis of the book, the nature and causes of British inflation in the 1950s, this is argued tersely and persuasively. In effect, it amount to a sort of short-term variant of the over-production explanation of depressions – the rate of increase of output tends, with the economy at full blast, to meet the ceiling of capacity at periodic intervals; and demand, kept at an increasing rate by the boom, then bids up the money value of real output. The solution, in Professor Paish’s eyes, is to run the economy at under capacity, the unused margin absorbing fluctuations – 5-7 per cent unused capacity (with 2-2½ per cent unemployment) is his estimate. As one would expect, the emphasis in the thesis is more on stability than growth. In addition, Mr Paish repudiates the argument that trade union pressure is the prime cause of the wage push that begins inflation – which should please some of the sillier trade union leaders.
What Professor Paish does not estimate, of course, is the political impact of 2-2½ percent unemployment (although, in 1951, Mr Gaitskell accepted such a figure as reasonable) – which scores, to a certain extent, the inadequacy of merely an economist’s view of the subject. However, this should not detract from the very stimulating argument in general and the wealth of information Mr Paish utilises to back his case up.
 



The State and the Farmer
Peter Self and H. Storing
Allen and Unwin. 30s.
The Economics of Subsidising Agriculture
Gavin McCrone
Allen and Unwin. 25s.
Allen and Unwin are to be congratulated on the publication of these two complementary volumes. The first is a political study of the organizations within agriculture (the Marketing Boards, the Farmers, the Workers and the Landowners) and their interaction with the State. Comment is at a minimum, and although one can disagree vigorously with their solid middle-of-the-road perspective, nevertheless the highest commendation one can make these days on pressure group books is deserved in this case: the book is firmly sensible. The second volume is much more ambitious and less successful – the subject here is the economic sources of food in their world context and the place of Britain and its indigenous supply in this context. The book is clearer and sharper than the first but the subject, the world economy, is too wide for adequate comprehension either in a volume on world food trade or an economist’s narrow focus of efficiency.
However, the wealth of information in both books is an illuminating and exciting spotlight on this small corner of the British economy where autarchy, protectionism and other flotsam of the 1930s have been preserved into the ‘market economy’ of the 1950s. In addition, Self and Storing have a trenchant account of the relationship of the farmers to the Labour Party – or rather the contortions of the Labour Party in seeking to woo agriculture at the top while doing nothing for the agricultural workers. A limitation of the book is that it is written in the pause before the Common Market storm – and may well be merely historical within five years. Similarly, McCrone’s book is limited to some extent by sticking to his subject – i.e. he has no examination of Eastern European and Soviet agriculture which should contain useful lessons (and in this case, possibly crucial ones) for the relationship of farming to the State. However, for Socialists the Self-Storing volume is important – agriculture is a unique problem, and the politics of it have played an important role in Britain since the 1930s. The second volume is more specialized, although its information is valuable. The pity is that the two books could not have been written by one author.



Tirril Harris, 22 years old, has studied Philosophy, Politics, Economics at Oxford, and Psychology at London; is currently engaged in research in social psychology. She is active in the Young Socialists, YCND, and the Labour Party.
Jim Kincaid, 26 years old, is a research worker at Aberdeen University, having studied English and Economics at Glasgow and Sociology at the London School of Economics. Was International Secretary of the National Association of Labour Students (1960-61), is currently active in the Young Socialists and Labour Party. Is a reviewer for International Socialism, has contributed to New Left Review (cf. Spring 1962 – Slum Clearance) and is currently preparing a book on Government housing policy.
Ross Pritchard, 24 years old, is a lithographer from Glasgow, and active in the YS (Springburn and Hornsey) and YCND.
Noel Tracy, 22 years old, is an accountant, is Chairman of Holborn and St Pancras CND, active in YCND, the YS, and the Committee of 100.
We are concerned here to sketch out something of the history of the Labour Party, defence and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament – the aim is modest and the conclusions similarly provisional.
The main forces within the Labour Party working for a change in foreign policy have traditionally been more heavily middle-class than on other issues [1] except on those occasions where foreign policy has been intimately related with crucial domestic policy issues or has been part of a general wave of radicalism. Thus, for example, foreign policy and particularly defence was a crucial domestic issue in the period 1949-51 insofar as meeting the cost of defence entailed a conscious Government policy of lowering the standard of living and cutting back social service expenditure. [2] It would not be surprising therefore to find that the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, a group dedicated solely to a foreign policy’ issue and firmly resistant to adopting a general programme, should have been in its inception heavily middle-class. This point is confirmed both from contemporary press accounts and from a small survey done of the 1959 Aldermaston March. [3] Such a movement is likely then to be heavily ideological (as opposed to reacting sharply to material issues, viz. the wages pause, redundancy, a rising cost of living, housing etc.) and more closely related to relatively remote happenings (e.g. talks in Geneva) than ordinary domestic political activities. It is not inappropriate therefore to sketch out something of international history up to 1957 as a preliminary and attempting to gauge its impact on domestic politics for the development of a nuclear disarmament movement.
 
The Cold War
It should be said at the outset that if CND were a direct function of international tension and the danger of the use of the Bomb, it should have been formed much earlier than it was for by 1958 (the year the Campaign was set up), the Cold War in its classical phase was already well over. This heyday began seriously in 1948 with the conjunction of the coup d’etat by the Communists in Czechoslovakia and the Berlin air-lift. Churchill’s Fulton speech in 1946 announced the creation of the iron curtain, 1949 saw the consolidation of a Communist regime in China and the announcement that Russia possessed the Atomic Bomb. A year later, events in Korea brought matters to a climax which threatened to obliterate the distinction between Cold and hot war – the US general, MacArthur, considered bombing installations in Manchuria and thus precipitating a world war, and later there was talk of invading China proper with nuclear weapons. Attlee flew in haste to remonstrate with Truman (30 November, 1950), and, whatever the reason, Truman climbed down – MacArthur was ordered home and forcibly retired into Remington Rand, not, however, without seven and a half million people giving him the most tumultuous ticker-tape reception in New York, suggesting something of the degree of popular support in America for tough Cold War policies. Although Korea was stabilized in unhappy stalemate, the damping of one flash point seemed only to increase the pressure elsewhere. We can here only pinpoint a few of those pressures – the war in Malaya (beginning in 1948, and culminating in the murder of the British Governor in the early fifties); in Indo-China, where early in 1954, Dulles said his policy of ‘massive retaliation’ would be executed ‘instantly, by means and at places of our own choosing’ – emphasizing the helplessness of Britain and all other countries in preventing America embarking on all-out war. Dulles studiously avoided all talk of negotiation – ‘appeasement’ was the only apparent alternative to ‘brinkmanship’ – and funnelled increasing American military aid to the French in Indo-China.
Beginning in 1953. tension began to ease off – one of the reasons being that, as from August, Russia possessed the H-Bomb [3a], so equalizing and stabilizing the balance of forces. The first Formosan crisis of early 1955 demonstrated that maximum tension was over – Dulles might threaten to invade China and Eisenhower consider using tactical nuclear weapons, but American policy was entirely directed to preventing the outbreak of conflict rather than mobilizing one side for an all-out solution – friction must be contained not intensified. By now it was accepted as it had not been in 1948 and in Korea that the frontier between East and West was stable – relative spheres of influence achieved de facto recognition from the other side, both as a negative gesture of weariness at the continued instability, and as recognition that each side had armed itself to such an extent and sufficiently widely throughout the globe that any small friction anywhere could evoke all-out conflict. As a result, the crude realpolitik of earlier years gave way to a propaganda war to win the now apparent uncommitted ‘third force’ of no man’s land. This ‘force’, the poorest and weakest sector of the world but the only remaining area for either side to expand into, had been developing continuously since the war – its power could only develop in an ideological conflict as ideology was all it had to offer. Furthermore, as both sides were at pains to court it, its role seemed vastly superior to the negligible military forces at its disposal. India, independent in 1948, studiously refrained from alignment. In 1949, Yugoslavia broke away from the Soviet Empire, and posed a similar problem. Later Egypt demonstrated a revolution without immediate alignment to the East. Later as African states attained independence, their voices were added to the chorus of those who were united only by their common antipathy – the Cold War was to their advantage insofar as both sides existed and could be played off against each other. For despairing Western radicals, the ghost of an alternative to East and West was a temptation not to be resisted – third forcism, the promise Social Democracy as an alternative to both Communism and Capitalism never fulfilled, achieved a new incarnation at the hands of the nuclear disarmers.
Internal changes within the Soviet Union seemed to help the general thaw (and in some peoples eyes, caused it) – the death of Stalin in 1953 (as, it was alleged, the death of Dulles later) permitted more flexible Russian policies: the Soviet Union could favour international stability rather than Russian expansion. The evidence seemed to bear out the thesis – by 1955, the Russians had signed a peace treaty with Austria (a long outstanding bone of contention) and made a settlement with Finland that involved substantial concessions. On the other hand, although to many the West seemed reluctant to accept the ‘thaw’, substantial changes of direction did occur – Churchill called as early as March, 1953, for summit talks; by 1954, McCarthyism, the most extreme expression of Cold Warism, was politically dead. By 1955. both British parties were pledged to seeking summit negotiation as the universal panacea. Indeed, Eden’s 1955 election campaign in foreign affairs leaned heavily on his claim to have badgered the Americans into considering a meeting with the Russians. [4] The Geneva Talks which followed were amiable but fruitless, and the Disarmament Talks, a ‘stately dance’, seemed to suggest that the problems were deeper than merely ‘bad communication’ between both sides. However, good fellowship persisted – Khruschev and Bulganin were invited to visit Britain and accepted. Before we look into the concrete impact of these events, what can be said of the likely effects? Firstly, one of the chief British fears in the early fifties, for obvious reasons on the present account, was that Britain would be implicated in a crisis of American making. This became associated with the increasing knowledge that Britain, being the forward defence line of an almost invulnerable American continent, was not only one of the most inviting and necessary first targets of an Russian attack, but was also the most indefensible. Later, the evidence of rising radioactivity and its relationship to leukaemia (contingent upon the information deriving from Hiroshima, the experience of the ‘Lucky Dragon’ and the new world-circling fall-out clouds that resulting from the size of American tests) emphasized fear with terror. What solutions to these problems lay open to the articulate middle-class? The absence of a firm opposition to the status quo in all its aspects, Communist or Labour, and furnishing of the labour movement alter the period of Labour Government, of trade union apathy and bureaucracy, threw critics of foreign policy back upon their own resources and upon the tradition of Liberal protest – mobilizing ‘public opinion’. However, in the early fifties, it was possible, empirically, to rely on two possible autonomous solutions evolving out of the actual logic of events – thus, the death of Stalin could prompt many to rely on the mere evolution of a ‘more liberal’ Russian attitude to solve international problems. When this failed (for many, the solution still persists – cf. the writings of Isaac Deutscher), reliance could be placed on summit talks, a concept with a hoary Liberal history that dates from the Concert of Europe through the League of Nations, the summit meetings of the twenties (cf. Lloyd George’s desire to meet Lenin at Rapallo, 1923), Chamberlain’s attitude to Hitler, the Big Three during the War and so on, and Disarmament Talks. The apparent failure of both these solutions, of course, did not destroy a belief in them – hope continues to spring eternal. But they did cast doubt upon the processes of political selection which allowed men to be nominated as world leaders who, it seemed, were neither sensible (‘responsible’) nor saw the problem of world agreement as urgent enough. From here, it could be suggested, the way forward lay through the formation of a pressure group to compel leaders to be sensible or to attempt penetration of political organizations in order to influence leaders (although this was a much longer shot). If this also seemed to fail, one can see an easy transition to an ‘anti-political’ climate of opinion that seeks through one means (terrorism, minority illegal protest) or another (revolution) to overthrow not only the existing leaders who negotiate but also the structure on which they stand.
 
The ‘Peace Movement’
What formal reaction to world events can be discerned up to 1957? The subject falls into two separate streams – that within and that without the Labour Party. Outside the Labour Party there was minimal activity – although the petition of the British Peace Committee in 1950 (as part of the Stockholm peace petition campaign) collected one and a half million signatures demanding a multilateral end to the manufacture and testing of the A Bomb. Too much emphasis should not be placed upon this. Petitions are of their nature passive and pious, and this one to a certain extent demonstrated an aftermath of wartime sympathy
[part of the text is missing here in the original]
munist-front paper Peace organizations (cf. the proscribed list of the Labour Party). More interestingly, in 1951 the Peace Pledge Union’s ‘Non-Violence Commission’ (formed in 1954) which united a small following of Quakers and pacifists, held its first sit-down outside a South Wales army-camp – some seventy took part for a few hours. The following year saw three PPU demonstrations under a campaign known as ‘Operation Gandhi’ – outside the War Office (January 11) when thirteen were arrested; on a march from Aldermaston village to the nearby building site of the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment (February) in which some twenty-five participated in leafleting workmen (the posters read: ‘Atom Bombs disgrace Democracy’ and ‘No More War’); and at Mildenhall US Bomber Base (June 28th) where two sat down and fifteen organized a poster parade. In 1953 the PPU held a small demonstration outside the Germ Warfare Research Establishment at Porton on Salisbury Plain. Thereafter, apart from a lobby on the German rearmament question organized by the British Peace Committee (they claimed that some 17,000 participated), 1954 and 1955 saw little non-Labour Party activity. Within the Labour Party itself, the defence issue received consideration primarily through the marginal question of the detail of NATO organization in Europe and German rearmament. In March 1952, 57 of the 295 Labour members in the Commons defied the Whip to vote against a Government motion approving the rearmament program. The following Autumn at the Party Conference, USDAW called for ‘a re-examination and reduction of the rearmament programme’ and was only narrowly defeated (3,644,000 to 2,228,000). The narrowness of the defeat justified the leadership’s reimposition of Standing Orders in preparation for the Party’s opposition to German rearmament. At the 1953 conference, a resolution urging that ‘there should be no German rearmament before further efforts have been made to secure the peaceful reunification of Germany’. By February 1954, however, both the NEC arid the PLP had given their support to German rearmament, the Berlin Conference presumably constituting the ‘further efforts’ – Bevan, the earlier leader of the rearmament revolt, who resigned from the Shadow Cabinet over the question of SEATO early in the year, was notably silent at the Party Conference. However, without him the defence opposition waged its largest campaign – and would have carried the day but for the Amalgamated Society of Woodworkers who, despite their mandate, switched from opposition to support of the platform at the last minute – the leadership won by a very narrow majority (3,270,000 to 3,022,000). Furthermore, it has been assessed recently [5] that the anti-leadership vote at this Conference has never been equalled since – 900,000 Constituency votes were cast against the platform, with 280,000 for, and 125,000 abstentions; compare this with the 1960 Conference when 260,000 were against Gaitskell, 521,000 for, and 289,000 abstentions. However, to outside opinion, non-partisan foreign policy seemed to rule the day; as Gaitskell said: ‘I doubt if foreign policy will play a big part in the next election – not because it is not important, but because Mr Eden has in fact mostly carried on our policy as developed by Ernest Bevin, in some cases against the views of the rank-and-file Tories’. The impression did not stop some 62 Labour MPs defying the Whip in the debate on the 1955 Defence White Paper which committed Britain to the development of the H-Bomb, but it did prompt, in an election year, the expulsion of Bevan from the Parliamentary Party (by 142 votes to 112). The current US H test series added urgency to the scene, and evoked from Bertrand Russell a statement, signed by Einstein, denouncing testing, which was placed before the British Parliamentary Group for World Government and led on ultimately to the Pugwash Conferences (July, 1957). The loss of the 1955 election ought to have started off the revolt proper, but, it can be suggested, the leadership was in a powerful position plausibly to blame the Bevanites for their defeat. In addition, the leadership question was decisively settled once and for all in 1955 by the election of Gaitskell (Gaitskell: 157; Bevan: 70; Morrison: 40) – which in its turn impelled Bevan to seek a modus vivendi with the new and strong Labour establishment – he was elected Treasurer of the Party, and shortly afterwards made Shadow Foreign Secretary. Henceforth, he became not the Left winger seeking to shift the leadership left, but the leader seeking to shift the Left right. Earlier in 1956, incidentally, Cousins became the General Secretary of the Transport and General Workers Union.
 
The Events of 1956-8
Activity, then, up until this tune had, apart from the struggle within the Labour Party been small – and within the Party, the attack had been a complex attack directed against the long right-ward drift on all aspects of policy since 1949. That attack had been voluble but powerless in the face of the block trade union vote that supported the leadership. The middle fifties changed the entire tone of preceding political discussion and induced the first instability, still very small, in the traditional political scene. Thus with 1955 the long Tory boom ended and balance of payments crises with domestic stagnation and inflation replaced it. The most striking first effect of this can be seen in the ‘Middle-Class revolt’ of the middle fifties – witness the vociferous demands of Conservative Party Conferences for relief for the middle classes, the formation of right-wing ginger groups (The Middle Class Alliance, The People’s League, The League of Empire Loyalists), the upsurge in right-wing activity (cf. the publication of Crossbow in late 1957 which, to the surprise of its Editors, sold more than 8,000 of its first issue) and the course of the Liberal vote as a threat to the Government in by-elections (culminating at Rochdale and Torrington).
More specifically, however, in late 1956 the largest single catalyst occurred – the British invasion of the Suez Canal. This produced the largest single upsurge of political activity (on both sides) in foreign affairs since the War. For a short time, also, the Labour Party was able to marshal this opposition behind itself. However, this was relatively shortlived, especially as the Parliamentary Party’s opposition ended abruptly with the cessation of military operations. The National Council of Labour’s campaign against Suez, ‘Law – Not War’, in November, 1956, took care to emphasize the limited nature of Labour’s protest – people were invited ‘to bring effective pressure onto the Government through the normal constitutional parliamentary methods’, and were warned ‘to refrain from taking industrial action as a means of influencing national policy in the present crisis’.. However, these minutiae did not affect the main issue – indeed for new rebels they only tended to emphasize the bankruptcy of the Labour Movement as an instrument of revolt. It is certain that Suez should have led to a considerable increase in the strength of the Communist Party and its allies had it not been for the fortunate coincidence, at exactly the same time, of the Hungarian revolution. The natural end of dissatisfaction with the Labour Party was denied – indeed, the Hungarian revolution impelled out of the Communist Party a considerable body of support, culminating the drift from the Party begun by the Twentieth Congress in February of the same year. Thus for the first time, there was created between the traditional parties and the Communists a voluble force which ultimately coalesced in the New Left and CND. Paradoxically, it is worth noting that the conjunction of Suez and Hungary demonstrated the stability of the broad frontiers of the world – neither side strove directly to intervene in the ‘domestic’ troubles of the other: the preservation of the status quo as basic doctrine to both sides and as summed up in that most conservative phrase, ‘peaceful co-existence’, was exhibited as a fact rather than aspiration. Correlatively, the end of external terror allowed the luxury of internal protest. Early in the following year (1957) the National Council for the Abolition of Nuclear Weapons was formed, and began holding meetings and marches (a Women’s protest march was held on 12 May – it emphasized that the protest be ‘silent and dignified’). The PPU despatched two to the test area of the first British H Bomb series in August (they arrived too late), and in September set up the Direct Action Committee. The publication of the now notorious Sandys’ White Paper in the Autumn more clearly than anything earlier emphasized the precise logic of defence policy – Britain was no longer to be defended, it was to rely totally on retaliatory force to deter invaders which, in its turn implied, that Britain was prepared to use its Bomb first without prior attack. Shortly afterwards the launching of the first Russian sputnik demonstrated a technological lag in the US – a lag that confirmed impressions produced by the miscalculations of the Spring test series that America could no longer be relied upon to be able and willing to defend Britain. This series also, incidentally, emphasized the heavy dangers involved in the release of radio active material by testing.
Meanwhile, within the Labour Movement the same general trends could be observed as outside. At the TUC Congress in September, the General Council was instructed to negotiate a new defence policy with the Labour Party (which duly appeared in March of the following year) and a resolution condemning tests was passed with the approval of the platform. Rereading the debates, one is impressed with the spontaneous opposition to the Bomb and the whole complex of Western strategy that existed, but a complete lack of any suggestions as to what should be done. In October, the Labour Party conference was significant both for a similar exhibition of doubts and for the end of Bevanism. Bevan presented the official foreign policy, and intervened decisively in the defence debate to swing the Conference against Lambeth and Norwood’s unilateralist resolution (defeated by 5,836,000 to 781,000). Bevan’s main argument against the resolution was that it entailed leaving ‘a variety of treaties and alliances, most of which he did not like’ [6] – it was a point the Left failed to answer and consistently down played, thus leaving themselves open to defeat by the Right. Bevan also said that if Conference resolved against continuing tests, this entailed suspending production : implying that the only tactic required of unilateralists was to achieve a resolution pledging a Labour Government to end testing. Left-wingers took up the same point in the 1958 and 1959 Conferences (cf. also Cousin’s resolution to the 1959 TUC Congress) to the weakening of their own
case. The shock of Sevan’s conversion helped unilateralists to disentangle themselves from the leadership issue within the Labour Party – it was sufficiently traumatic for Cousins to ask the 1957 Conference to postpone voting until after lunch so that, the Economist suggests (17 September, I960), he could seek to swing the T&GW EC against the platform. The British H Test series along with the Sandys’ White Paper prompted considerable protests in the Press – Russell broadcast a demand for unilateral British action against the Bomb, and a series of articles under his name and that of J.B. Priestley appeared in the New Statesman attacking nuclearoiogy. A protest meeting called by A.J.P. Taylor at St Pancras Town Hall proved a considerable success. At the turn of the year, the ‘H Bomb Committee’, an offshoot of Victory for Socialism, and confined to Labour Party members, was resuscitated, at the same time as the National Council for the Abolition of Nuclear Weapons was reorganized to broaden its program (so that it included in its aims unilateral abolition of the manufacture of nuclear weapons) and membership (Russell, Norman Mackenzie, Priestley and some scientists joined; Universities and Left Review and The New Reasoner were asked to participate). Peggy Duff, one-time business manager of Tribune was brought in as organizer. Finally, early in the new year, a select gathering at Canon Collins’ house (Collins, Russell, Priestley, Acland, Michael Foot, Kingsley Martin, Professors Rotblat and Waddington, King-Hall and two representatives of the National Council) designed a new campaign against the Bomb. It is clear from this that a majority of initial participants were drawn from the Labour Party, and especially from the formal Left. However, when the Campaign was actually formed, there were relatively few prominent Labour people on the Executive Committee, and the Campaign resisted all attempts to become associated with the Party. In February, after a successful lobby of the House of Commons, the inaugural meeting of the new Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was held at Central Hall. Its two immediate actions were, through its Oxford members, the holding of a referendum among University students, and its decision to support the small symbolic march of Direct Action to Aldermaston over Easter – it is estimated that some 10,000 gathered to send the march off, and some 5,000 marched. [6a] As will be seen from the preceding account, this qualitative change in the scale of activities had taken place with astonishing rapidity.
We have already tried to point out some of the reasons why CND should have developed when it did. The sharp change in political climate, both Right and Left, amongst the middle class after 1955-56 cannot be over-emphasized in this context – as witnessed by the appearance of Universities and Left Review in the Spring of 1957 which sold some 8,000 copies of its first issue (having expected to sell 2,000). The nature of this broad political change, however, should not be misconstrued – it did not fit neatly into the tradition of the Labour Movement. On the contrary,as volubly as it was Left, the change was almost as much a rejection of that tradition and the beginning of a move towards some alternative. [7] The discredit achieved by the Cold War was shared equally between Communist and Labour Parties – the record of the Labour Government and Party since the War, Deakinism and bureaucratic politics in the Unions (confirmed by events in the ETU in the late fifties) on the one hand, Stalinism and the regimes of Eastern Europe on the other, along with an unprecedented level of working-class prosperity (which on the one hand induced despair in many socialists and on the other jealousy in many professional groups), broke many of the orthodox links between middle class radical politics and working-class militancy. In the 1930s, both trends were incorporated through the two political parties of the Left within a broad movement – the plight of the unemployed was welded to the fight against Fascism – a Labour Movement was an aspiration worth striving for. By the middle fifties when propaganda (against strikes and selfish Unions) had done its worst without commensurate reply, and when inflation even further exacerbated relations between classes, even the aspiration had gone: the Unions were relegated to merely industrial welfare organizations. This fragmentation of the Labour Movement itself, sections striving alone for particular ends, helped free the middle class radicals – and their form of revolt bore the marks of traditional middle-class ethos : an emphasis on the morality and irrationality of international affairs, an attention to the detail of foreign relations, a commitment to keeping the question of the Bomb quite separate from all other issues (both domestic and foreign), an exaggeration of the role of individual responsibility and sacrifice, and, its counterpart, a minimization of the crude problems of power and the necessity of mass action if a genuine revolution was to be effected. Some of these attitudes were later to coalesce into forms of anarchism, a certain irresponsibility as well as a disregard for the very pertinent criticisms of unilateralism (cf. our earlier reference to the relationship of testing to production at Labour Party Conferences, or the failure to reply by the Left on the question of NATO) – almost all strands of opinion were dominated by some form of elitism. Of course, insofar as these attitudes were dominant, is was impossible for CND to spread much beyond the middle-class. Furthermore, initial political attitudes were often very ambigous. Thus, for example, one of the concerns of Universities and Left Review was the plight of the ‘scholarship boy’ as portrayed in Look Back in Anger and later discussed in The Uses of Literacy, the plight of the working-class boy disappointed by middle-class life after a University career and longing for a return to a romanticized ‘working-class community’. Of course, this may be a problem, but it is only remotely related to serious socialism and is hardly a political question. This point also touches upon another concern of the late fifties – ‘Youth’. Although an intolerable volume of nonsense is pronounced upon this subject, it could with some plausibility be suggested that between 1955 and 1958, the first purely post-war educated generation was reaching maturity, a generation on whom the conflicts of the thirties were lost, and who were prepared to begin again, building a radical movement. Certainly, it can be said that many, regardless of age, felt themselves to be new in a sense other than young.
 
CND and the Labour Party
Once formed and having achieved national publicity quickly (with the 1958 Aldermaston March), CND helped only ideologically to clarify the forces of opposition to the leadership within the Labour Party. It served as a sort of Popular Front for the Left, and for the first time for a long time, different sections of the Left (with the notable exception of the Communist Party at this stage [8]) were able to unite under its umbrella with religious and pacifist groups as well as a whole variety of newcomers to politics. More than this, CND was able to give the forces that fought on German Rearmament a new target and new arguments. In March of 1958, the new Labour Defence Statement was published, enshrined in two documents: Disarmament and Nuclear War and, in April, Disengagement in Europe. Combined they pledged the Party to seek summit talks, the suspension of British tests, negotiation for the end of all tests, general disarmament, a ban on all new bases in Britain until an attempt had been made to negotiate with Russia and an immediate end to H-Bomb carrying patrols in Britain. The second statement specifically welcomed the Rapacki Plan and flirted with an innocent form of Third Forcism. The NEC recommended that the statements be given the widest possible distribution, especially among trade unionists, and be used as the basis for ‘an educational campaign consisting in the first instance in regional conferences within the Labour Movement’, which suggested, as Miliband [9] points out that the NEC were more concerned to persuade their own followers than either the Government or the electorate. The concern was accurately directed as was shown later in the year at the Railwaymens’ Conference where, although a unilateralist resolution was defeated (39 to 11), a resolution condemning nuclear bases and stockpiling was carried (46 to 31). In September, at the TUC Congress, the Firemen moved a unilateralist resolution, seconded by the Tailors and Garment Workers (who, significantly, emphasized their reservations on unilateralism but seconded the resolution because it condemned German rearmament) and supported by the Tobacco Workers, Vehicle Builders, Engineering and Shipbuilding Draughtsmen, Foundry Workers and ASSET. Explicitly, the General Council asked Congress to reject the resolution as it was pledged both against unilateralism and for German rearmament – the delegates were obedient. At Scarborough, the Labour Party Conference, although the Agenda showed that 102 of the 428 resolutions were unilateralist, the Fire Brigades unilateralist resolution was firmly rejected (5,611,000 to 890,000) as was a resolution against bases, which, significantly fetched out a large number of previous abstentions (5,349,000 to 1,926,000). Another resolution from Kingston-upon-Hull demanded that the NEC prepare an economic plan to ease the readjustments of ‘total disarmament’ and ensure that ‘economic necessity should not be used as an argument in support of the maintenance of the fighting services and arms industries’; this seemingly innocent wish was dubbed unilateralist by Gaitskell and accordingly Conference rejected it, 5,705,000 to 840,000. [10] The lessons of the Conferences were fairly clear : the peripheral aspects of defence (bases, patrols, testing) evoked considerably more support than a head on attack on principles of nuclear defence. That support was direct successor to that which had opposed German rearmament. In addition, there was no question in 1958 of CND manipulating the Unions – the spontaneous feeling was far more powerful.
Meanwhile in CND itself, events had already changed. The alliance between CND and Direct Action was broken in August when Direct Action pledged itself to ‘civil disobedience’. Earlier activity by the DAC at Stevenage had resulted in an hour long strike by 1,000 building workers. However, only some fifty attended the meeting during the strike and so far as can be seen the strike left no real political mark on Stevenage. DAC also carried out a traditional PPU demonstration at Swaffham Rocket Base – 40 demonstrators were maltreated in a brawl, and when they returned to continue their demonstration a fortnight later, were all arrested and imprisoned for 14 days. DAC was more realistic than CND in seeing quickly the necessity for industrial action, but it approached the question in a very similar way – the strike was a gesture by a minority. However, on the CND side, at their Conference early in 1959, a resolution was passed explicitly condemning US bases, and thus beginning the move out of morals into politics – the question of NATO being the almost inevitable next question mark.
1959 was for the Labour Movement, more importantly than any other political issue, Election year – this both delayed and concealed the development of unilateralist feeling (the Blackpool Conference of that year was an Election postmortem not a normal policy-making one), and, after the loss of the Election, increased the general opposition to the leadership. Most important, anti-Gaitskellism became hopelessly muddled with the unilateralist issue as did the Clause Four controversy, newly revived by Jay’s Forward articles – and it was on the leadership issue rather than the specific policy ones that the decisive centre of the Party began to shift away from the official line, gratuitously helping the unilateralists in the process. However, this is to jump the story. Although the Transport and General were not yet pledged to unilateralism, Cousins moved a moderately unilateralist resolution for the first tune at the TUC Congress in September, This, incidentally, contained in one of its clauses a reiteration of Bevan’s 1957 point that a suspension of testing means a suspension of production (cf. p.9). It was defeated but not drastically (5,214,000 to 2,690,000). Another resolution pledging the TUC to oppose US missile bases in Britain, was, however, passed against the recommendation of the platform (4,040,000 to 3,865,000). More surprisingly, earlier in the year (June), the Municipal and General Workers had pledged themselves to unilateralism (150 to 126 with 75 abstentions) and were only shifted from this position by the titanic efforts of Sir Tom Williamson who called a Recall Conference in August, refused to allow delegates to be mandated, and duly reversed the shaming decision (194 to 139). The recall was engineered ostensibly to consider a new policy statement published by the Party after the NUMGW Conference. This statement posed the way forward for Labour as lying through a ‘Non-Nuclear Club’. As Miliband has noted, once the NUGMW vote had been reversed, the non-nuclear club expired, its task complete.
1960 saw, it hardly needs to be said, the solitary political victory for unilateralism – the achievement was only marginally related to the existence of CND, and was, as suggested here, a far greater victory than would have been suggested by a survey of the relative balance of forces before the General Election in 1959. However, on the CND side the rising arc of activity, participation and clarification of policy continued. At CND Annual Conference, the issue of NATO was clearly faced although the actual resolution carried, in its wording, seemed to allow evasion : ‘the aims of CND, the unilateral renunciation of the H Bomb by Great Britain, cannot be achieved so long as this country remains a member of a NATO which is committed to a reliance on nuclear weapons in the so-called ‘defence of the free world’. Meanwhile, Direct Action had carried out its first substantial action at Harrington Rocket Base – six leading Committee members were arrested prior to the demonstration, and some 100 were arrested at the base. This success, no doubt, along with the failure of the Summer Summit (following the U2 incident), prompted Russell to challenge what he thought was the relative inertia and drift of CND (even though the Easter Aldermaston was an even more successful demonstration than previously) – accordingly a Committee of 100 was formed to gather the more militant elements of CND together and absorb Direct Action for an ambitious program of civil disobedience. The news of the new campaign was leaked to the press while the Labour Party Conference was in session at Scarborough. It was clear, well in advance of this Conference, that it was likely to be decisively unilateral – The Economist began a campaign in April to persuade Gaitskell to ‘fight again’. Given the Co-op Party’s Conference decision, the Transport and General, later the AEU resolution (in face of fierce opposition from the chief officials of the union) and the commitment of USDAW (shopworkers), the issue seemed clear. Furthermore, in this year, the Communist Party belatedly swung behind CND (May) which tended to increase the pressure within the Labour Movement towards unilateralism – especially when it is remembered that in previous years the Communist Trade Union leaders had often cooperated with the Right-wing to defeat the Left on defence. [11] However, before the Scarborough Conference, the AEU (engineers) was publicly embarrassed at the TUC Congress (Douglas, Isle of Man) in September – by voting both for unilateralism and for official Labour Party policy, with the result that the TUC was pledged to both incompatibles. Cousins moved the unilateral resolution and it was carried 4,356,000 to 3,213,000 – the most explicit opposition coming, interestingly enough, from the white collar unions (TSSA, CSCA, IRSA and the Clerical Workers Union). The Joint Labour Party-TUC Defence Statement [12] was then debated, and passed (4,150,000 to 3,460,000). The road to Scarborough lay open – the Party Conference Agenda of 435 resolutions showed 161 of these on nuclear disarmament, three-quarters of them unilateralist. At the Conference proper, the first unilateralist resolution (moved by the AEU) was passed by 3,303,000 to 2,896,000 – the narrowness of the majority suggests the delicacy of the balance; in addition, the number of abstentions (cf. the third vote below) suggests that a number of votes which were cast directly against the leadership were withheld from supporting unilateralism proper. The second resolution, from the Transport and General, for unilateralism, a stronger UN and the admission of Red China to the UN (seconded by the Fire Brigades) was passed 3,282,000 to 3,239,000 (an anti-Cousins vote?). The irrepressibly loyal Woodworkers (cf. above) moved a resolution reaffirming loyalty to NATO (although urging its internal reform) and welcoming the official Policy statement – and were defeated, 2,999,000 to 3,331,000. Finally, the NEC statement was rejected 3,339,000 to 3,042,000. The victory had been sustained all along the line, even if with puzzling variations in the votes. As mentioned earlier, the anti-leadership feeling was high although (cf. p.6) not as high amongst the constituency, parties as in 1954 (The Economist had expected at least 750,000 Constituency votes to be cast against Gaitskell in April). The victory had really been created by the thaw in the unions, created, that is, by a relatively small group of Trade Union officials – most notably the Transport and General, USDAW (shopworkers), AEU (engineers) and NUR (railwaymen): this was Deakinism in reverse gear allied to the post-election antipathy towards Gaitskell. The New Statesman provides an excellent case study of how unilateralism was smudged into anti-Gaitskellism (of a most virulent, personal and unpleasant kind) and even this modest revolt lost out later on. To a certain extent the personnel represented the same shift – from the unilateralist Kingsley Martin to the centrist John Freeman.
With this unlooked for triumph, it might have been thought that CND would henceforth have bent its efforts to holding the breach in the Labour Movement and achieving a Labour Government as fast as possible. However, in retrospect, 1961 is the year of the Committee of 100, the year of activity most remote from the traditional political field. Within the Labour Movement the Left, almost dumbstruck by its accidental good fortune, took the achievement of its victory as won (neglecting precisely the accidental nature of that victory) and henceforth waged a battle in the obscure marshes of constitutionalism – whether Conference decisions were or were not binding upon the Parliamentary Party. The key political debate was left open. And while it was open, the small handful of trade union officials who had swung the vote one way, proceeded to swing it the other as the Election faded into retrospect, as the prospect of an alternative leadership to that of Gaitskell faded (with the defeat of, incidentally, the non-unilateralist, Harold Wilson, at the Autumn PLP elections) and as the organized pressure of the leadership both on ideological and unity grounds began to make itself felt.
The actual course of events can be recounted relatively briefly. In February, the Crossman-Padley compromise statement was duly produced and published. The pure muddle of the unilateralists (or their eagerness to achieve a flimsy unity within the Party) was demonstrated when Cousins voted for the statement in committee and Michael Foot gave it his support (Tribune, 3 March, 1961). The statement was clearly intended to fudge the NATO issue – the switching of the USDAW and AEU votes in April-May to supporting the statement was adequate testimony to its effectiveness. By June, the Foundrymen and the Vehicle-Builders (some of the earliest protagonists of moderate unilateralism) had swung over to supporting Gaitskell. Padley overtly acknowledged the role of his statement later by dropping it and so leaving the union leadership with a free unmandated hand (compare the Williamson and NUGMW tactics in 1959). At the same time, a new organization within the Constituency parties was working towards recementing the Party – The Economist (June 17th) was already congratulating the Campaign for Democratic Socialism on its success so far, with the claim that ‘there are now said to be 250 Gaitskellite whips in the CLPs’. By 22 July it was known that only 100 of the 419 resolutions to Party Conference dealt with unilateralism – The Economist confidently predicted that Gaitskell would probably not even have to worry about dissension over Polaris bases. The official policy statement was clear and tough (issued in February): ‘Britain cannot oppose on principle the establishment of allied bases on her territory. She must remain free to decide according to the circumstances of the case whether or not a particular project should be accepted’. However, Policy for Peace, the statement, did seek to clarify its position on various points which might have seemed like concessions to the unwary – technically, it was no longer useful for Britain to remain an independent nuclear power (suggested by George Brown and the Defence Minister in a Defence Debate, April 1960, but rejected by Gaitskell at the time), the non-nuclear club required a stronger supra-national authority (pace ‘World Government’).
Meanwhile, in the unilateralist campaign proper, key changes had taken place. As we have seen, the relationship between the three elements, th Labour Party, CND and Direct Action-Committee of 100, was uneasy but consistent – with the Committee of 100 as the advance guard seeking to make CND more militant and dedicated against orthodox pressure group politics, attempting to eliminate hangers on and make all unilateralists militants; with CND as a large and amorphous amateur group with ill-defined borders and, if anything, an antipathy towards party politics or specific alignments, riding ahead of the Labour Party seeking to illuminate the ideological terrain rather than exercise direct intervention, and demanding minimal participation by its . membership (wearing the badge, attending a few meetings, marching from Aldermaston); and the Labour Party, in which unilateralism was one among many key issues, but the one selected by the Left to wage its perennial onslaught upon the leadership. 1961 is significant in that, as the fight within the Labour Party was lost and the real balance of long term forces became apparent, the Committee of 100 stole the limelight from CND. The March from Aldermaston of this year suggested that the Campaign while bigger had not maintained its momentum of advance. But the civil disobedience campaign showed that what had been lost in numbers had to some extent been made up by a rise in militancy among a minority of the Campaign.
On February 18th, some 4,000 sat down outside the Defence Ministry. On April 29th, 2,000 sat down along Whitehall (826 were arrested). In June, a very successful demonstration against Polaris was held at Holy Loch in Scotland. Finally, in the Autumn, what proved in retrospect to be the climax of the campaign occurred in Trafalgar Square. Against a back-cloth of the Berlin crisis, before the demonstration, Russell and some 33 members of the Committee were arrested. In addition, stringent police warnings against demonstrations helped to stimulate a demonstration of, it is estimated, some 15,000 (of which 1,300 were arrested). Henceforth, activity could only be an anti-climax – in December, a much more ambitious attempt to organize simultaneous demonstrations throughout the country (Wethersfield, South Ruislip, Brize Norton, Bristol, York, Liverpool, Manchester and Glasgow) achieved disappointing support – the State remained unmoved. To a certain extent, the Committee sought some change of tactics in setting up an Industrial Committee of 100 to start work on achieving industrial action for unilateralism. The Labour Party Conference of this year, as we have shown, was already clear in its possible outcome before it took place. In the event, the official policy was ratified by a decisive majority: 4,526,000 to 1,756,000. The Transport and General resolution was similarly defeated, 4,309,000 to 1,891,000. Resolution 297 which, for the first time, pulled out the key political issue, and demanded British non-alignment with either of the two blocks (a reflection of the Belgrade Conference earlier this year?) was overwhelmingly defeated, 5,476,000 to 846,000 – a clear indication that the Transport and General vote had been cast against the resolution. However, the marginal effects of defence policy continued to attract support and Polaris was condemned, 3,611,000 to 2,739,000, and the merely anti-German resolution condemning the training of German troops in Wales was carried – 3,519,000 to 2,733,000.
It is obviously far too early here to evaluate the present period in very concrete terms (the September demonstration of the Committee of 100 which will have occurred after this article has gone to press, will exhibit the trends far more clearly than we can here). However, it certainly seems at the moment that the unilateralist campaign has subsided somewhat since the peak period of 1960-61. Although the March from Aldermaston was again larger, the momentum of its increasing size is declining. In addition, as an index of support, it is of doubtful reliability since Easter walking tours need not demand a great deal of its participants. More reliably, the demonstrations of the Committee of 100 have attracted declining support (so far) – thus the demonstrations against the resumption of tests by the Americans and the Russians, the Holy Loch and Greenham Common action were all relatively poorly supported. In addition, the industrial activities of the Committee seem to have had very little impact – indeed, on some accounts, such activity has consistently declined until now the Industrial Subcommittee consists mainly of a small group of dedicated political militants without influence in the industrial field, even where formerly it was claimed to possess such influence (most notably on the docks and amongst some engineering factories).
In addition, the Campaign itself suggests some retreat from its earlier radicalism, not to mention that within the Labour Movement unilateralism has subsided as an issue (it is significant that the Transport and General Workers have not put forward their usual resolution to the 1962 Labour Party Conference). In 1960, as we have, seen, CND went on record as opposing NATO; in addition, in 1961, CND Conference welcomed CND movements abroad, including such movements in America and the Soviet Union – although, it has been suggested, the National Council in fact did nothing about this resolution. However, in 1962, CND Conference rejected any question of supporting anti-Bomb movements in the US and USSR. On the other hand, the Conference recorded its support for industrial action against the Bomb, although the National Council studiously refrained from any action on this score – indeed, Canon Collins in July explicitly rejected any idea of industrial action on behalf of the National Council (which prompted the resignation from the Council of Pat Arrowsmith, who was working in Liverpool to achieve industrial action, and the Rev. Michael Scott).
 
Conclusion and Evaluation
Firstly, it can be said that CND was a by-product of the Labour Movement – indeed it expressed the frustration of many within the Labour Party at the failure to make headway there, and incorporated within itself the opposition to German rearmament. To this can be added the new force of the New Left as precipitated specifically out of the Hungarian and Suez events, plus the old time pacifists. This combined force recruited more generally as a result of the political upsurge of the middle fifties which we have discussed. The formal impact of this new movement upon the Labour Party, we have suggested, was very small. What influence has passed between the two has been through militants who belonged to both organizations and through the medium of the national press. In the Unions, where so far as the 1960 decision was concerned, the decisive vote for unilateralism was engineered, the impact of CND was even less since the dual membership militants are a much smaller number. The vote of the unions was much more the survival of the German rearmament campaign, increased by the general industrial unrest of the late fifties, and rendered victorious by the 1959 General Election defeat and the ineptitude of Gaitskell in exacerbating Party relations so soon after that defeat (cf. the Clause 4 debate). However, this temporary result was righted as soon as the balance of forces within the Party reasserted itself – the block vote which, manipulated by either side, is equally unreal, but in support of the leadership does express the combined force of the centre and right of the Party. The impact of CND on the country at large has been much more considerable, and was probably at its peak in terms of general discussion during the struggle within the Labour Party. In the Spring of this year, a UN survey found some 21.2% of the adult population favoured ‘unilateral British action’ and a more independent foreign policy. In addition, this growth of general support has helped increase the working-class support (although, as a proportion of possible support this is minimal) and give a viability to the organization which, for example, the New Left alone did not attain and disappeared as a consequence (although many New Left people bear the brunt of present operations around the Committee of 100 and Peace News). This breadth should not be exaggerated, however: CND is still primarily a middle class organization that is also a broad political coalition. Attempts to clarify its ends seem necessary, but such clarification can also destroy its present strength. However, the failure to make any impact upon industrial workers by unilateralists in general makes the movement very limited in power and points up more general criticisms of both the Campaign and the Committee of 100-As we have seen, the Stevenage strike involved politically very few workers, and the activities of Pat Arrowsmith in Liverpool do not at present suggest greater success. As a publicity venture. Stevenage could be argued for; as a means of political involvement, it was more akin to a gratuitous hour-long holiday than a symbolic gesture. The Committee of 100 itself has not helped to clarify its intentions on this score – if its demonstrations are means of achieving publicity they are successful and the poorness of response recently, while disappointing, is not disastrous (although the setting of formal targets does make ‘failure’ the only alternative to ‘complete success’ which is unfortunate). If the aim is symbolic gesturing, there are means to make such gestures without the destruction of its own supporters. If, however, the aim is to challenge the State seriously, the entire operation is not only wrong, but dangerous: i.e. not only can the State not be defeated until a majority segment of the country firmly opposes it (as, for example, in a General Strike), but also to mislead its supporters on the assumption that the State can be so defeated is to lead them to rapid disillusionment and alienation from the general (and less demanding) struggle. Thus, for example, to demonstrate outside a base (the disobedient aspect of such demonstrations is not in question here) is one thing; to seek to immobilize a base in the hope that this in any way deflects the State from its purpose is merely foolish. The State is only ‘immobilized’ immediately before a revolutionary attempt, and although some small and temporary inconvenience to particular servicemen may be achieved by Base demonstrations, there can be no question of defence policy being affected. Indeed, it has been the moderation of the State in responding to such demonstrations that has allowed even the small inconvenience that has occurred to be felt (but, see also the South Ruislip demonstration on a Saturday afternoon when even this inconvenience was minimal as the Base was closed for the weekend). Industrially, this lack of clarification of aims is disastrous – strikes are the end of political activity (and rarely, at that), not the beginning. Furthermore, effective industrial action must not discriminate between the jobs of the workers involved – indeed workers on bases should not be asked to pay (literally) for the lack of activity of other workers.
There is no particular merit in armaments workers per se striking. Not only is it only effective, but also more desirable on other grounds that general workers should be asked to strike. But asking people to strike is not something that can be done by a few outside militants temporarily visiting a factory – it can only be achieved if there is genuine (which means durable) political commitment by the workers themselves – even if this means no more than the minimum demand, viz. marching from Aldermaston at Easter. It has been said that there is a strike a day in Fords – and those strikes occur because workers are intimately implicated in the continuing controversy concerned, and know that their action can achieve some change. In the case of unilateralism neither of these conditions exist. Moreover, to fulfil the second condition, sectional strike activity is pointless – neither dock workers blacking armament materials not Stevenage builders knocking off for an hour can rid Britain of the Bomb – only the combined attempt of all sections of workers can exercise requisite power to achieve this. [13] Which brings us back to the question which faces not just the Committee of 100, but the entire unilateralist movement – how to implicate the working-class. It was suggested at the beginning of this article, and there is good evidence to support it [14], that there is a broad division between the militants on immediate material issues (wages, unemployment) and the broad ideological ones (e.g. foreign policy). It was also suggested that the division was at a minimum in the thirties when both strands were cemented together within the broad Labour Movement – the fight against Nazism was the fight against unemployment. That is to say, only a broad radical programme can cover all sections and aims, and unite all elements in the struggle towards what was called in those days, socialism. The discrimination of one element in a necessarily revolutionary program means that only a minority are likely to be implicated – indeed, not only has CND concentrated merely on one issue, it has expressly refused to pursue the implications of that issue which lead to a revolutionary position (viz the abandonment of NATO) and necessitates a total change in society, which in its turn necessitates a broad radical program. Such a stance leaves the Campaign wide open to the charge of sloppy idealism and muddle from the Right-wing, who have certainly been eager to spell out the implications of unilateralism that the Left was too frightened of (cf. Bevan in 1957, p.24, here) as well as allowing the possibility of such a failure as occurred over the Padley-Crossman compromise (here, p 28). More seriously, without a broad program, the Campaign fails to appeal on all issues to working-class support, and fails to pose what has been an unconscious end of this process, an alternative to the Labour Movement. Thus, for example, the militancy generated in the St. Pancras rent riots of 1960 or the spontaneous opposition to the wages pause did not accrue to the benefit of CND as a radical organization, but merely served to emphasize the fragmentation within the Labour Movement. Furthermore, moral affirmation is thin gruel as propaganda; to accuse the powers that be of irrationality is no substitute for a tough-minded analysis of the cost of defence, the burden of taxation, the deficiencies of our society alongside defence expenditure, the role of defence in the economy, the interests that are vested in defence, the relationship of the wage pause and the application to join the Common Market to defence expenditure – to sum up: the relationship of the fight against the Boss to the fight against the Bomb.
As it is, left to itself, the Campaign becomes the Committee and is prey to some of the silliest attitudes of isolated emotionalism – elitism, the martyr’s complex, anarchism and minority egotism. This is perhaps a little hard, but it is time that we, as both members of CND and supporters of the Committee of 100, sought a little more clearly for the way forward. CND has been the most impressive political movement since the War and has implicated more new people on the Left than any other; the Committee of 100, in being prepared to break the law, has injected into British politics a revolutionary element that is fertile and necessary for any genuine mass movement, even though this is at the moment more an individual purgative than a prelude to a revolutionary movement. Furthermore, at some stage CND has to define its relationship to the Labour Movement – those that have sought in the past to become alternatives have, sadly, all been destroyed. Although this says nothing of the future, certainly at the moment the lesson is fairly clear – those who seek ultimate revolutionary power can do so only through the existing structure of the Labour Movement, through uniting their aims in a general program of radicalism, through relating the new demands to the continuing tradition – if no more, this safeguards against easy defeat on one issue. But more, it makes for a spreading of aims over a much wider audience. On the other hand, the existence of CND has provided a recruiting platform for socialism as well as meaning that people expelled from the Labour Party are not thereby at the same time expelled from the political struggle. This should not encourage adventurism by the Left in the Labour Party, but it is some safeguard against immediate political deaths. The viability of CND in the long-term unless it can break out of its middle class shell has been here doubted – but whether it can or not, to some extent rests upon those who are already in the Left of Labour Party.
 
Footnotes
1. Backbench Opinion in the House of Commons, S.E. Finer, H.B. Harrington and D.J. Bartholomew, Pergamon, 1961.
2. The Economic Survey for 1949 and 1950 and the Budget speech of 1949.
3. Perspective, Journal of the London Schools Left Club, Summer 1959.
3a. The end of the US nuclear monopoly certainly influenced at least some people into opposing the Bomb – for example, Russell and Priestley were in favour of nuclear deterrence up to this point.
4. The Cold War, D.H. Fleming, Vol. II. p.737 – Fleming estimates that American willingness to negotiate was directly related to the ‘necessity of winning an election for the British Conservatives’.
5. K. Hindell and P. Williams, Political Quarterly, Summer 1962.
6. p.165, Labour Party Conference Report, 1957.
6a. The Universities and Left Review played a considerable part in the first Aldermarch; the London organization for the march was run from the (still unfinished) Partisan coffee bar; and the organized Left was pretty noticeable, especially on the wet stretch from Slough when only about 400 marched-
7. The Middle Class Vote, J. Bonham – ‘The Middle Class do not admit that socialism should be exclusively motivated by the interest of the manual wage class. Welfare should be a moral obligation, not the spoils of a victory by one class over another’ (p.193).
8. Zigzag: The Communist Party and the Bomb, by Raymond Challinor, International Socialism 3, winter 1960.
9. p.341, Parliamentary Socialism by Ralph Miliband, Allen and Unwin, 1961.
10. Although on June 23rd, 1962, at Watford, Gaitskell announced that plans for the transfer of economic resources from defence to civilian purposes were necessary to increase foreign confidence in Britain and promote multilateralism.
11. The Trade Unions and the Labour Party by Martin Harrison. 1960.
12. The attempts of successive policy statements to take some of the wind from unilateralist sails were usually fairly half-hearted. Thus, see the 1959 statement (The Next Step) which, in trying to concede, repudiated the possibility of democratic Conference control explicitly: ‘The next Labour Government must be free, in view of facts which are not available to a party in opposition, either to modify or reject altogether the nuclear strategy and the defence priorities which it will inherit when it comes to power’. The 1960 statement (Foreign Policy and Defence), perhaps on the advice of The Economist, was less concerned to concede even this possibility. The failure of the Blue Streak missile that spring was used as additional argument for a NATO ‘non-nuclear club’, and Thor missiles were rejected on purely technical grounds of relative vulnerability. The statement piously stated that the West must never be the first to use nuclear weapons, and that the NATO Council of Foreign Ministers ought to have more control over its generals. Grossman had earlier sought to produce a compromise to avoid the Scarborough debacle (published in the News Chronicle in May) but this involved an increase in conscription and the new Defence Statement refused to be drawn.
13. The affair of the Jolly George after the Russian Revolution is often cited as precedent here – it is important to note that had the dockers been alone in their opposition, the Government could with relative ease have despatched materials to Russia by using blacklegs or troops. It was because the Government feared the opposition of the entire Labour Movement that the action of the dockers was effective.
14. Finer, Berrington and Bartholomew, op cit.



Backbench Opinion in the House of Commons
S.E. Finer, H.B. Berrington, D.J. Bartholomew
Pergamon. 60s.
This book is a work of clarification. It sets out to examine the political content of Private Members’ Motions in the last Parliament and correlate the signatures appended to these motions and the background of the members concerned (viz. occupation, education, constituency, seniority as an MP). Despite the promising title, the book is a mixed bag – at best, offering clarification of points already noted, at worst a miscellany of trivialities. As an example of the triviality, we might cite their excited overall generalisation: ‘there are indeed significant – in some cases highly significant – associations between the substance of a Motion and the type-class of (the) Member supporting it’ (their italics). This aside, however, the book, despite itself, has interesting things to say. It spotlights. the division in the Labour Party, through which the class division in the country runs (thus the intense friction and need for grossly restrictive discipline), as well as the split between trade union members (left on ‘material’ issues, right on ‘ideological’ ones) and the rest of the party between economic radicalism as amongst the Unionists, and political radicalism. In addition, there are curious bits of information that illuminate the dustier corners of Parliamentary politics – thus the consistent left (‘ideological’) attitude of the Miscellaneous Professions group (which overlaps the other Left group, Co-operative-sponsored members – cf. Mr Gaitskell’s firm limitation of the number of Co-op sponsored candidates for, on the evidence of this book, fairly obvious reasons).
On the Conservatives, there are also points of interest – their relative homogeneity as a class, and heterogeneity of interest within that class – although ‘Directors of public companies were in every sense a better entrenched and more well-established group within the party’. More interesting is the split between Conservative MPs elected since 1951, and those elected earlier – most of the characteristics associated by Labour with Conservatism are shown in the earlier group and are, by inference, a dying factor. Free market economy, growth, Europe, pro penal reform etc. are the attitudes of the new men – symbolised in Macmillan’s accession to leadership of the Party.


Proofread by Anoma Cartwright (April 2008).

Incorrigible Rebel
Arthur Horner
Macgibbon & Kee. 1960. 25s. 235 pp.
‘Lenin once said that it would take three decades for men to adjust themselves to new circumstances. I found this out when we began to build the nationalised industry. I found that old habits of thinking went on. Men’s minds did not change because the circumstances of their life were changing. Moreover, although we made so many advances, we knew, and most of the miners knew, there had been no real fundamental change in society ...’
This is the contradiction in Horner’s life and the one that makes his anecdotal biography curiously myopic. There is a contradiction between the young militant, the firebrand that swept through the Welsh coalfields and dedicated his life to the working-class struggle and the realization of communism, and the later official who ‘began to build the nationalized industry’, who was commended by the NCB on his responsibility and, on retirement, given a miner’s helmet bearing the signatures of all members of the Board in memory of his services. We might well say, with Ernest Jones, ‘Miners everywhere will invite their Secretary to review his position and take his handcuffs off.’ The paradox between a rank and file militant and a trade union official; between support for the Russian Revolution and carrying out the routine functions of helping to provide coal to maintain a war-effort against Russia; of dedicating oneself to working class victory while never calling an official strike since nationalization; of formally advocating workers control while never pressing for it (e.g. during the passing of the Coal Act) and, in fact, concentrating entirely on ‘protecting the interests of the miners’; of formally hating a ruling class while delighting in the pleasures of hobnobbing with its members and being praised by them – the paradox is a sad marginal note on the failure of a revolution. Like Russia, Horner had to be content with socialism in sentences. This is not a good autobiography – under the impact of success, the man has grown too large to allow much picture of the more interesting context which was his field of action. It is a series of anecdotes, stringing together what is largely already known. By far the most interesting part of the book is the first half where he recounts his life as a militant rank-and-file adequate testimony of his enormous courage and the tenacity that made him a scourge to the coal-owners. By the time he was ready for power, he had become ‘responsible’. His achievements in the mines were real and important, but they cost him the hard edge of genuine rebellion. As a biographer, he is obviously much more at home in the earlier period when the lines were clear. As an official, it must have cost him a great effort of personal control to reconcile his early experience with his later function – keeping the coal supplies running. The stock defense of socialists in doubt – the demand for a planned economy – kept him just in touch with the old life.
 



Saving in a Free Society
J. Enoch Powell
Hutchinson for IEA. 1960. 21s. 136 pp.
Modern Conservative economics is founded firmly upon a pragmatically amended version of laissez-faire. The amendments take place in practice, rather than economics, but occasionally the first intrudes on the second.
Mr Powell, however, lets little practical amendments impinge on his analysis. On the contrary, his is one of the more consistent approaches. His extravagantly priced book explores the Victorian virtue of thrift and seeks to reconcile it with modern economics. With a Utilitarian nicety about individuals (so far as one can tell, always members of the investing class), he expends a lascivious precision over trivia. Finally, pressing on through considerable quantities of half-illuminating statistics, to the key conclusions: profit taxes ‘distort’ the economy, government manipulation of the interest rate ‘distorts’ the economy, inflation is a bad thing and ‘distorts’ investment decisions, taxes on savings ‘distort’ the distribution of real resources, and, finally, the key to the matter, less income tax would increase savings and could be regained through indirect taxation.
The conclusions are admirably worked out in a world where there are only high savers (i.e. high income receivers) and equilibrium growth, rather than justice, is the prime consideration. The State in this picture is a self-negating umpire, or even, just an observer – any interference on its part destroys the beautiful logical mechanism leading far more effectively to the ‘satisfaction’ of individual ‘wants’. Which individual is a question he cannot ask.
However, the interest of Mr Powell lies not in his musings but in his position. Other Conservatives do not look upon the economy in quite so purist a fashion, but nevertheless more and more are reaching similar conclusions to Mr Powell. When the jargon is unpacked, this book is a contribution to the steady disintegration of the Welfare State. Retaining the verbiage of welfare, never risking a violent measure, the present government is dismantling the legal apparatus set up by Labour to act as some small protection for the working-class. If the economic wind blows, the machinery of inter-war oppression will be found to be reassembled intact and yet again the working-class will find itself beginning from scratch in the struggle to keep alive.
 



Pressure Group
H.H. Wilson
Secker and Warburg. 18s.
The Political Quarterly: The Conservative Party
Stevens. 8s 6d.
The two classic examples of Tory nationalization, straight public ownership under the control of ministerial nominations, date from the inter-war period: Airways and the BBC. Both have had commercial competitors put alongside them in the 1960. What this small historical detail implies is important – objectively, the terrorized twenties and thirties, when capitalism sheltered more and more behind State power, have disappeared, and private ownership has emerged to stand on its own feet without public crutches; subjectively, as Ralph Samuels has shown (Out of Apathy), the public service ethic is in decay, business supersedes State in attraction as a ruling-class career and the ‘Americanization’ of Britain speeds on its way. The trend is not altogether as clear as this yet – Cunard and Thomas-Baldwin still need heavy public grants, but the opposition shown to these measures in the Conservative Party indicates how difficult such action is getting. Professor Wilson has excellently documented one aspect of the trend – the long, bitter and powerful fight waged by the new young Conservatives to achieve commercial television in the face of fairly solid opposition from the old style Tories. It is an object lesson both in the collapse of an attitude and in the unseen growth of new forms of business power. Given the secrecy of the whole conflict, Mr Wilson has succeeded enormously well in piecing together the story. With the minimum comment, he traces the formation of the rival lobbies, the massive volume of publicity and articles turned out by the commercial side, the direct operation of advertizing and radio interests on Conservative MPs, all against the back-cloth of the preceding capture of the Conservative Research Centre by the commercial side. The issue was one of principle – although neither side argued as if it was. The party political content of the conflict was minimal, but the victory for business set precedents which will last until again capitalism needs a State frontage to survive.
The Political Quarterly’s spotlight on Conservatism is foggy and for the most part conventional and uninteresting. Conservatives operate under the curious assumption that it is their own merit which is the secret of their success – which leads to endless and tedious discussions of what Conservatism is. However, two pieces in the journal have some interest, for the same reasons as are suggested above in relationship to Wilson’s book – an article on the formation of policy by Hennessey and one on the relationship of Conference to the Party. For the rest, it is dull, pious and muddled.
 



Family Needs and the Social Services
Political and Economic Planning
Allen and Unwin, 30s.
This is an excellent book as far as it goes. PEP in 1957 set out to execute a survey in Greater London and later Northampton of families with dependent children, to determine in detail what the impact of welfare services were. Sadly, the study in its terms does not deal with the old age pensioners, and on the housing question is already well out of date (not to mention the new health charges).
However, the results are still interesting, and show the Health Service is by far the most important factor in the whole ‘welfare state’. On the other hand, housing is the great failure – a third of the people interviewed had a housing problem of some kind, and a quarter of the respondents had a very serious problem. Health, operated by that minor if ferocious pressure group, the doctors, was obviously more easy to manipulate than the much more important section of the ruling class scrambling for building materials. The sample used was a representative one, so providing a fairly reliable cross-section of the population, but necessarily under-playing the plight of the ‘under-privileged’ (a grotesque phrase). One third of the families owned their own homes, one per cent were ‘problem families’, 12% had taken National Assistance at some time or other.
The main conclusion from the survey stands out clearly – welfare legislation has at no time been remotely a causative factor in present prosperity: at best it was a pleasant but little gift in hard times, at worst it was a constant drag to pay in good times. Prosperity has come with regular and high-wage employment: and such has been the relative income rise, welfare is, for the majority, not very important and as a consequence, can be eroded by the Conservatives without major protest. For the margin at the bottom, it is quite important although rarely sufficient. As a catalogue of realism from the receiving end, PEP have done an excellent job.
 



British Industry
J.H. Dunning and C.J. Thomas
Hutchinson. 30s.
Growth in the British Economy
PEP Report
Allen and Unwin. 30s.
The first of these two books is a good introduction to the second. It provides a brief and concise resume of economic developments in this country since 1914, documenting the change over from heavy to light-medium industry, the decline of the traditional manual-worker and the increase in black-coated. In addition, there is some account of the development of power resources, of innovation, intervention by the State, changes in the structure of ownership, and external economic relations. The aim is modest, the exposition cautious and precise, supported by selected statistics. For trade-unionists, there are tables that might be of interest; for those unversed, the book is a fair introduction although expensively priced. The second takes up where the first leaves off, and plunges much more deeply into the morass of economic practice. Here is the world analysed in terms of production: a viewpoint shared by managerial Tories and right-wing Labour. The text is direct and clear, backed up by relatively lavish statistical material, and covers the complex of problems surrounding the question of economic growth. At the end, a series of recommendations roughly pursue a moderate Economist line.
It would take too long to pursue all the elaborately worked-out arguments that are presented – suffice it to note how sharply the political wings are divided from this, the predominant Centre. PEP defends the general level of taxation, the social services, and, by implication, the nationalised industries; they call for national planned co-ordination and a wages policy; they call for more expenditure on education and capital investment in welfare (to increase production potential and cut losses). Here, the, conclusions coincide with the demands of the traditional Left and repudiate the bad old Tory past. On the other hand, they are intent on ensuring that all costs should be born by ‘consumption’ – they quote West Germany, France and the US as prototype growth economies where cost-relationships are more ‘correct’. They deplore the failure of nationalised industries to revert to pre-war pricing relationships between industry and consumer, and the continued (partial and declining) financing of the social services out of general progressive taxation. They suggest that, in this way, labour is receiving numerous hidden subsidies, making it cheaper to industry than it would otherwise be, and increasing the burden of taxation on industry. Their suggestion would throw the whole weight of distributing income on to the factory floor – and incidentally, give a powerful argument for wage increases all round when the Health charges rise. As PEP well knows, income distribution through direct industrial bargaining is a much messier business (and omits all kinds of groups, witness the OAPs), and it is unlikely that the unions will recoup on the factory floor what they lose in higher fares, higher coal and electricity prices, increased health charges etc. ...
This is, then, under the sophisticated ‘progressive’ gloss, a very class conscious book. Perhaps the authors are partially right, and the changes in the distribution of purchasing power since 1938 are seriously curtailing economic growth while stimulating inflation and balance of payments crises – if they are, it is a serious indictment of our ‘reformed’ British capitalism.
 







Nigel Harris is 26 years old, and spent two years in the army before going to Oxford to read Philosophy, Politics and Economics. He is currently writing a PhD thesis on Toryism: the State and Industry since 1945 at the London School of Economics. He is active in the Labour Party, was for three years on the Executive of the National Association of Labour Students’ Organizations (Chairman for two of these) during its period of revivification, and editor of its paper Clarion.





J. Chamberlain (1885): ‘I ask what ransom will property pay for the security which it enjoys?’ [1] – (1917) ‘Curzon was against any extension of the franchise; ... on this, Henderson thumped the table: did he want the workers to get their rights by compromise or revolution? ...’ [2]
Q. Hogg (17 February 1943, Debate on the Beveridge Report): ‘If you do not give the people reform, they are going to give-you social revolution. Let anyone consider the possibility of a series of dangerous industrial strikes, following the present hostilities, and the effect it would have on our industrial recovery ...’
It is not inevitable that in a class-society widespread poverty must exist, but historically in Britain it has seemed almost inevitable. The primary causes for such poverty, at times encompassing as much as two-fifths of the population, have been in the first instance irregular employment or employment on short-time – the margin of unemployed has always kept what wages were paid depressed. It is in the light of these causes that we should initially judge contemporary prosperity – current ‘affluence’ is more the result of continuous high employment, with a high labour demand bidding up wages, than of any ‘fringe’ benefit such as the ‘Welfare State’. A by-product of this prosperity has been a fragmentation of the traditional ‘solidarity in poverty’ which earlier characterized the working-class, and a resultant neglect of that margin of poor which stubbornly resists absorption. It is in relation to this margin that welfare is of maximum importance. To estimate the size of the margin accurately is impossible – but Townsend guessed in 1958 that it might cover as much as a fifth of the population. He defined the margin as those who, left to themselves, would starve.
Welfare in Britain is a complex of legislative measures, passed for many different reasons and at different times over the last hundred years – when combined, the measures compose both the Fabian administrator’s view of ‘the common interest’ and, an older Tory tradition, an attitude of care towards dependants that stems from feudal mythology. Generally, the elements contained in the body of welfare legislation are very wide – laws limiting exploitation, setting minimum standards of work and quality of goods, controlling public health etc. Thus, the Factory Acts, Shop Acts, Mines Acts, minimum wage legislation, laws on the arbitration of disputes as well as trade union legislation are often included in the bundle. So also is the Government commitment to high employment (Cmd 6527 1944), the organization of Labour Exchanges, unemployment insurance etc. More commonly, the health service, housing policy, education, the dole, national assistance etc., are items most people would think of. However, there are preconditions necessary for these items to be in any way useful or to fulfil the large claims made for them – namely, that benefits received through these services are not taken away in other payments to the State – whether such payments be direct contributions to the cost of these services, or to general prices (purchase taxes) or taxation. Thus, to understand the impact of welfare it is necessary to look closely at the taxation system, and at other aspects of government pricing policy – viz. the prices of the products of the nationalized industries, or the subsidizing or not of other prices (e.g. agriculture, rents, house building etc.). The subject is vast, complex and astonishingly dull – we can here only draw out some of the main lines of welfare itself, but some indication can be given of how benefits received in one form are taken away in another.
The motives at stake in any given piece of welfare legislation are complicated and disparate. Many factors, from the crudely opportunistic to the sincere reforming, operate to dilute a measure or produce one that is irrelevant to the problem which needs to be solved. However, whatever the prior reasons, the effects of welfare legislation add up to an evasion of the overall problem – they serve as a substitute for the transformation of society, a refusal to face the issue of the distribution of wealth and power: if all got enough income in the first place, comprehensive welfare schemes would be only marginally necessary. As it is, the problem of poverty remains untouched – its effects being partly ameliorated. As socialists, we are concerned with remedial measures – not how to moderate the impact of poverty, but how to create a society in which poverty cannot arise in the first place. For that reason, the welfare legislation of Britain, like nationalization measures, is not necessarily related in any way to socialism although such measures may be approved on humanitarian grounds. Indeed, contrary to Labour’s propaganda claims, welfare legislation is restricted neither to Britain nor to socialist parties – it is common to most heavily industrialized countries, including those without significant socialist movements. Furthermore, some of these countries achieve a higher level of welfare – in 1957, Germany spent some 17-18 percent of a smaller national income on welfare, while in 1951 when Labour was still in office Britain spent only 11-12 percent (compared to 9½ percent in 1938). John Saville in 1957 suggested a correlation between low-wage countries and a high proportion of the National Income devoted to social charges – with Britain half-way along the scale (see table [3]). His figures are now rather out-of-date, and recent changes have contradicted his hypothesis – both scale of benefits relative to earnings, and the faster increase in general wages in Europe has pushed Britain further down the scale. He also notes that employers’ contributions in this country are significantly lower than on the Continent – a suggestion of the relatively cohesive and resistant ruling-class in Britain relative to most other European countries where revolutions of one kind or another have made inroads in the traditional ruling-class. Certainly, on specific services the conclusion that there is very little peculiar to Britain is unavoidable – Germany has a better insurance coverage for illness, and spends half as much again as Britain on social security. Britain spends a lower proportion on housing than all but three of fifteen other European countries. Shonfield confirms the overall impression with a table (see note [4]) showing German labour costs relative to British. The German national pension scheme takes 14 percent of the total labour costs, 2 percent goes to unemployment insurance and over 2 percent to sickness insurance. Comparably, the total figure is 3 percent in Britain. A percentage system (against a flat-rate one) ensures that contributions and benefits rise realistically with national income and inflation. It is not possible here to go into the impact of the German scheme, taking, as it does, the maximum from workers’ current pay (and penalising the lowest-paid), but the comparative conclusion seems inescapable: far from leading the world in socialism, Britain is not keeping up in capitalism.
The history of British welfare falls into fairly clear phases – the long slow growth through the nineteenth century, with a jump up during the Disraeli period, leading to the first great innovating phase with the Liberal administration of 1906-15. The inter-war period saw the Conservatives accepting the Liberal measures, while reinterpreting them in ways which have only been really effective in the post-1951 phase. Tory stagnation gave way to War and the second wave of innovation under Labour – followed by the fifties and a period of digestion which, supported by the totally new phenomenon of continuous high employment, allowed the Conservatives to consider the emasculation of most of what had gone before. The two key creative periods in the whole process were those of Liberal and Labour administration, differing in important respects from each other. The Liberals operated very much as a buffer state between ruling-class and ruled – the social basis of their own political power was dwindling quickly as the old enterpreneurial group either disappeared or crossed to the Conservatives, and the last period of Liberals in office, bright as a meteor before extinction, sought to substitute working-class support. On the other hand, however, they were still a ruling-class party, offering concessions to the narrow margin of ‘under-privileged’ from a position above, and concerned to protect the important interests of the ruling-class. They were not concerned to refashion society either through welfare legislation or taxation policy – but rather to offer a helping hand to the very poor. Labour, on the other hand, was ostensibly the voice of the threatening class, concerned in its propaganda to urge the radical change of society – welfare, as taxation, was one of the means to redistribute wealth. However, the State that was to operate the change was itself neutral – and therefore bound to treat all equally: as a consequence, the welfare schemes were not so much a helping hand to the few as a universal service for all. War experience with overall controls, rationing and ad hoc welfare, meant that most of the legislation associated with the formation of the ‘Welfare State’ was designed and some even executed by the War-time Coalition Government (e.g. Butler’s Education Act, the Beveridge Report, White Paper on Employment Policy etc.) – it was modest and, relatively, non-political. Large parts of it had been initiated by the Conservatives and they allowed the rest without major protest – something that did not happen with the Liberal innovations. The Liberals found much more difficulty in both instituting welfare and protecting the ruling-class – and as their schemes referred directly to those in need, the relative advantage from their legislation to the working-class was considerably more Labour with egalitarian aims, attempted their universal scheme against a back-cloth of inequality, and in so doing, left that inequality basically untouched.
In the period considered, what reasons, intentions, results or effects can we see in welfare legislation; why does a ruling-class in general feel it necessary to concede welfare, or what forces within that class compel its acceptance? At any one point of time, as earlier suggested, the factors are complex – ranging from the sincere if narrow concern of reformers like Shaftesbury to the struggle between big business and small.
The preceding historical resume has suggested one reason for the Liberal legislation – a party’s search for a social base, for survival. War is a time when, from necessity, the government is hypersensitive to demands from below- – both to keep the war-effort at a maximum, sustain physical fitness and morale, and to sidestep impulses that could lead from a strike to a revolution. Overall, we can see the long-term search to render the social structure stable and relatively invulnerable to periodic crisis while ensuring that the supply of labour is both adequate and efficient.
This search for a supply of efficient labour has been one of the few continuous threads in the history of welfare. The Inspector General of Recruiting noted after the Boer War ‘the gradual deterioration of the physique of the working classes from whom the bulk of recruits must always be drawn’. [5] Later, during the first World War, Factory Inspectors noted that total output increased with an increase in food intake and decreased alcohol opportunity (not the most illuminating point) and so provided one of the reasons for the Government to encourage factory canteen building, allowing the cost to be written off against excess profits duty. In the same way, ad hoc concessions of shorter hours were made – the Health of Munitions Workers Committee Report of 1916 (Cmd 8186) noted that ‘it is significant that... no employer who has once adopted the shorter scale of hours ever desires to return to a longer period’ [6], so obvious was the resultant increase in output. The aim of the Government was always, first, to attempt to get employers to introduce most measures themselves without statutory intervention (so getting firms to foot the cost, and allow the postwar ‘return to normal’ without Parliamentary complications) – B.S. Rowntree, the early pioneer and first Director of the Welfare Section of the Ministry of Munitions argued persuasively in that light: ‘Real betterment of conditions springs in the last analysis from the conviction in the mind of the employer that here lies his plain duty, a duty which does not conflict with his business interests but promotes them, since it is obvious that workers who are in good health and are provided with the amenities of life are more efficient workers’. [7] The reduction in absenteeism which resulted from such measures adequately justified the policy.
In the Second World War, Rowntree’s sentiments were not forgotten – Beveridge noted that ‘each individual citizen is more likely to concentrate upon his war effort if he feels that his Government will be ready in time with plans for that better world’. [8] Samuel Courtauld (Chairman of the rayon firm) went even further in discussing the Beveridge Report: ‘social security of this nature will be about the most profitable long-term investment the country could make... it will ultimately lead to higher efficiency among them (the workers) and a lowering of production costs’. [9] Indeed, the legislation that followed the War was often justified to doubtful Conservatives in efficiency terms – the ‘safety net’ was to keep everyone on the labour market.
The discussion above has covered in addition to the question of efficiency, the powerful impetus given to welfare moves by War – not merely to increase effectiveness, but also to divert pressures. Working-class action as for example during the rent strike in Glasgow (1915) prompted the introduction of legislation that has often remained on the statute-book long after the pressure has receded – the present Conservatives are only now beginning to dismantle the 1915 rent measures (as Ford’s are seeking to cancel their war-time concession of a tea-break). Even after the first World War, however, given the continuous level of unemployment and industrial militancy, it was impossible for the State to reduce its welfare commitment without courting revolution: wave after wave of Conservative backbenchers launched attacks on successive Chancellors to cut expenditure, and failed. Expenditure in general and the dole in particular, far from gradually dwindling into a form of insurance solely paid for by the working-class, expanded into a straight Exchequer subsidy to the workers. Even the 1931 crisis could not force its abolition. The precondition for that abolition (as an Exchequer payment), full and continuous employment, has only been present since the end of the last war. John Saville [10] has argued that welfare was primarily big business’s search to make its labour efficient and defeat small business. The thesis is undoubtedly plausible in the earlier period but has a declining relevance today – at the moment, State welfare helps small business to be competitive by ensuring that the fringe benefits only provided normally by big business are available to all. Large organization business has now a declining interest in State schemes. Both to retain or attract its labour force, and evade the elaborate tax restrictions, its interest lies in private welfare: a point more dramatically illustrated by the figures of growth in private welfare schemes which will be discussed later.
Welfare legislation as a whole takes the controversy over the distribution of wealth off the potentially more dangerous factory floor bargaining where solidarity can attain the maximum, and conceals it in the mist of administrative bureaucracy – all demands for change henceforth have to go through the fine mesh net of party and parliamentary politics, and the reforming attention of the working-class is either lost or riveted firmly to the conventions of Cabinet government.
Finally we can mention some subsidiary reasons for welfare. One of Beveridge’s aims was to rationalize the complex of unrelated statutes passed earlier, and so cheapen the cost of welfare benefits. Educational changes are at least partly related to the demand for certain types of highly-skilled labour. Nursery schools are a direct incentive to married women to work in a high labour-demand market. Effects of a broader nature are produced by recently introduced hierarchic schemes (the new pensions plan, rent differentials) – additional help is given to the fragmentation of class consciousness.
Before leaving the question, the ideological function of welfare should not be missed, especially as epitomized in the phrase ‘the Welfare State’. Under its auspices, ‘reformed capitalism’ can abandon its bad old past and claim both to have rectified its errors and, now corrected, to be the most efficient form of social organization available. The People, alias the Labour Party, having stormed and taken the commanding heights through capturing political power, have proved the authenticity of the traditional claims of Parliamentary democracy, can effectively control the new interest-free managerial controllers of British industry and organize prosperity both through wage bargaining and welfare legislation.
Given the wave of welfare legislation, how has postwar and high-employment capitalism assimilated it? The answer is complex and multi-dimensional:
1) Labour’s initial social security schemes were, as mentioned, on a flat-rate benefit and contribution basis, and universal in scope. So they have certain automatic effects:

being universal, the relative advantage of the working-class and even of the poor, was destroyed immediately.
 
in paying for the scheme, a flat-rate system of contributions (National Insurance stamps) bears upon all equally, and so must inevitably penalise the poor majority vis-à-vis the rich minority – numbers are taxed not means.
 
with a flat-rate benefits system, inflation such as we have had continuously since the War, erodes its value (witness the pensioners). The result has been an absolute decline in the value of benefits and an even bigger decline in their value relative to earnings. Thus sickness and unemployment benefits are now relatively lower than at any time since 1911.

2) The Conservatives have not been content to let inflation destroy benefits, but have sought other means of emasculating the system. It is necessary initially to take some note of the means used to finance welfare. The money for benefits comes partially from direct contributions (National Insurance) and partly from the Exchequer, which in its turn derives its revenue from direct (mainly income) and indirect (e.g. purchase) taxes. The important factor to note is that direct taxation is based on a progressive scale – i.e. payments relative to the means of the payer – whilst indirect is merely a flat-rate that falls on all who use a particular service or purchase a particular good – i.e. it is a tax on needs. Now, how have Conservatives sought to change welfare?

by making the majority of the beneficiaries pay more, so that in some cases, the State makes a profit on welfare. Making people pay more can be done in any of the following ways:



by cutting the Exchequer grant, and either increasing the National Insurance stamp, or letting a smaller service be paid for by a larger proportion of contributions.
 
by changing the progression of the income tax scale or enlarging the group exempted from surtax etc.
 
by increasing the volume of revenue received from indirect taxes relative to direct taxes.
 
by imposing specific charges on particular items in the service (viz. health). Labour first imposed such charges on health in 1949 (just after the service had started) to pay for rearmament. Charges rose again in 1951 and 1952 in response to specific crises; the Conservatives waited, their electoral strength not yet safe enough to begin the real shift – that came after their second electoral victory when weekly contributions were doubled in 1957; another increase in 1958, and 1960 and 1961 – the long counter-revolution is with us.



by straight amendment or abolition of necessary parts of welfare – thus subsidies on food, housing and rent either have been stopped or are in the process of being stopped, and the prices of the nationalized industries are being allowed to rise so that consumers pay the same sort of prices as were paid in 1939 before nationalization and welfare. In thus raising the cost of living for the working-class they are again taxing needs not means.
 
by allowing most benefits other than National Assistance to decline with inflation, and pushing those in need on to National Assistance (e.g. the old age pensioners). The important aspect of this is that, with the same stigma as old Poor Law charity, National Assistance involves a restrictive means test to cut down the numbers of beneficiaries (unlike pensions which are issued to anyone over a certain age). Beveridge envisaged National Assistance as the very last resort of those living on an adequate pension or other specific benefits: now (cf. The Economist, 11 March 1961) the trend is to place entire reliance on NA (which can be denied to those requesting it). In addition, the means test is now estimated to be harsher in many respects than that existing in 1932. [11]
 
by making both contributions and benefits hierachic, ie formerly universal schemes are now correlated with income at the lower ranges (within the working-class only). Thus the new Conservative pension scheme has graduated contributions between £9 and £15 per week – this will be discussed later. Suffice it here to note how the size of payments (compare differential rent schemes) tends to fragment any solidarity existing between low and medium paid workers, while allowing maximum extortion from each isolated income stratum.
 
by changing what is free and what is paid for. The imposition of specific charges on those who need items the most has already been mentioned. However, members of the Bow Group, a sensitive if extreme barometer of Conservative trends, have called for the extension of payments to cover education and school meals (Crossbow, New Year 1961, p.51), and for the abolition of school milk. Also, they have called for an extension of free services upwards where some relative advantage is still retained by the working-class – thus the demand for the extension of free drugs to fee-paying patients (Times, November 28, 1960) and the abolition of the means test for university education.
 
by shifting the emphasis from subsidized State services to private firms’ insurance schemes. Combined with the trend to large monopolistic units, the social scene is becoming transformed into the corporative state: within each medieval corporation, all possible life needs of each individual are to be encompassed. Initially, large firms today have instituted welfare schemes for salaried and managerial staff, but such has been the success in giving these disguised forms of pay-rise in evading the tax-man, that they are now being extended to wage labour also. At the highest level, such schemes can involve such things as: pensions, tax-free lump sums on retirement, grants for loss of position, season tickets, meal vouchers, expense accounts, holiday expenses, entertainment, life assurance, sick pay, school fees and higher education grants, housing, cars, petrol, free-clothing, travel, etc. Few of these extend beyond the managerial stratum. Durham [12] estimated in 1958 that the cost per employee for staff pension schemes was 700 percent larger than for work pension schemes, which adequately illustrates where the emphases of private welfare fall. At the upper end, figures become astronomical – £40,000 lump sums on retirement, £60,000 grant and £4,000 pa pension for loss of office (Times, 22 Jun, 1959). AEI have just purchased a house for their managing-director, Lord Chandos, for which he pays £500 p.a. rent: the price of the house has not been disclosed for obvious reasons, but it was purchased in 1947 when property values were half what they are now, at a price of £200,000. In the first instance, all such schemes are a means of pumping up managerial incomes while avoiding income-tax – but as they extend lower down the income-scale, they are a means used by big firms to attract scarce and specialized labour (so getting a competitive edge on smaller firms) while avoiding the full taxable labour cost – in addition, the prospect of a pension or gratuity on retirement curtails rebellion and any tendency to leave the firm if good behaviour is a precondition of getting benefits. Tax allowances subsidize occupational welfare to a high degree – the Exchequer contribution on this score is estimated at about £1,500 million while the general schemes themselves cost employers between £550 and £880 million (looked at in another way: Exchequer allowances contribute about £170 million to private occupational pension schemes, while National Insurance pensions cost about £80 million).

At the moment occupational pensions cover about half of the non-agricultural male working population but they are spreading rapidly. The schemes are profitable to all concerned except the ordinary taxpayer or people not in the schemes – so much are they approved on high that the Phillips Committee favoured an increasing reliance on private pension schemes as against the State scheme – the new Tory pension plan explicitly allows for people to contract out of the State scheme in favour of their works arrangement (some 4½ million did so).
All of the elements mentioned above may change together – or just a few: the overall impression being, perhaps, that benefits have in fact risen. National Assistance rates increased in 1959, but were more than offset by the removal of food and housing subsidies, the loss of the tobacco concession to pensioners [13], increased health charges and raised transport fares. The overall effect on particular items is fairly clear – for example, in 1957-8, the Exchequer contributed 77 percent of National Health Service expenditure and contributions some 9 percent (the rest came from charges, 5 percent, payments for superannuation schemes, 5 percent, and local rates, 4 percent). All other elements remained the same in 1958-9, except that the Exchequer contribution went down to 72 percent and contributions (NI stamp) went up to 14 percent: a straight shift of 5 percent onto a regressive form of financing. [14]
The general aim of the Conservatives is fairly clear – not to destroy ‘the Welfare State’, but to ensure it has no re-distributive aspects. It is to make a system involving two elements – (i) for services which all will use, all will pay for on an equal flat rate – numbers will subsidise means, (ii) for services which only the poor are likely to use, the working-class will pay through a scheme of internal class transfer payments – the upper working-class will carry the lower. Finally, whatever of either elements can be shifted on to private welfare schemes, the State will give active encouragement. Summing up, G. Howe of the Bow Group made the point: ‘Over the whole field of social policy our firm aim should be ... a reduction in the role of the State’.
The above is correct however only if we restrict our view to direct cash benefits and to the period since the War. If we widen the picture, the balance turns much more firmly against the working-class. Before the War, Abel Smith [15] says, the working-class were the main beneficiaries, receiving dole, pension and sickness benefits considerably superior in value to those now given – benefits have approximately doubled and now go to all, while prices have nearly trebled and wages gone up fourfold. The non-working-class add to their incomes from unemployment and pension benefits; all but 4 percent of them are educated through the State educational system, attend Universities which derive only about one fifth of their income from direct fees (the rest derives from the Exchequer in one way or another) – so much so that John Vaizey (The Cost of Education) estimated that a parent earning between £500 and £2,000 per annum gained about 80 percent more from the educational system than one with an income below £500 p.a. Abel Smith concludes: ‘The Middle Classes get the lion’s share of the public social services, the elephant’s share of occupational welfare privileges, and in addition can claim generous allowances to reduce their tax liability. Who has a Welfare State?’ Titmuss confirms: ‘Those who have benefited most are those who have needed it least’. [16]
Only a full survey of class relations in relation to taxation, inflation, cost-of-living etc. could show the entire picture, and it is not possible here to even attempt an approximation – suffice it to note the income escape clause of tax allowances benefits the non-working-class almost entirely. In any case, the straight cost of just social security (unemployment, sickness, maternity, pension benefits) is more than adequately covered by contributions: ‘the present national contribution, taking the employer’s and employee’s part together (without Exchequer assistance) will pay for 2½ percent more than the cost of all benefits’. [17] ‘It is still true that nobody – or practically nobody – gets anything for nothing’ (Economist, 1950). [18]
How far has welfare measured up to its claims to help? The excellent recent survey by PEP [19] sets out to answer this question – it unfortunately is now well out of date (1957) and is concerned only with families with dependent children. Even so it gives some impression of what has been achieved – apart from 49 percent of those surveyed who either had not heard of or who had no idea of the meaning of the phrase ‘the Welfare State’, for all classes, the health service was praised most highly, followed by family allowances. People complained most of housing policy, national insurance charges and education. Maximum impact was felt in terms of help just off the bottom – about a quarter of the unskilled operatives had been on National Assistance at some time or another, but no one really thought it of decisive help. The situation is somewhat clearer if we look at a few specific services:
1) Housing. Housing is the ugliest problem in Britain today. Its history is one of struggle, politically, between private owners and builders and Local Authorities. Increasingly, the private sector has become victorious and now bids fair to achieving maximum exploitation through the market to remedy what Enoch Powell called ‘immoral and socially damaging’ public housing.
Between the Wars, some 4 million houses were put up, and ¾ million cleared in slum areas. However, in 1945, ¾ of a million had either been destroyed or rendered scarcely habitable. Apart from this, the Girdwood Committee in 1951 estimated that 60 percent of the houses in England and Wales were built before World War I, and so were increasingly obsolescent. Cullingworth (The Guardian, March 24, 1961) recently added to this – we have 2 million houses over 110 years old (out of 15-16 million) and 2 million over 80 years old – such that in many cities, the rate of slum clearance never quite overtakes the rate of slum creation. Even given no creation, at present rates of clearance, Birmingham will take 25 years to clear existing slums, Manchester 45 years, Liverpool 60 years. The 1951 census correlated these factors, showing 2 million households without piped water, 6½ million without a fixed bath, 3 million without a WC (in Glasgow, it is estimated that nearly half the households have no WC). To this we can add a 1955 survey showing 24.6 percent of the population living more than two to a room, 3.2 percent living 4 to a room. More up-to-date information shows that trends are getting worse – of the 13.4 households in England, surveyed by the recent Rowntree Trust Housing Survey [20], 56 percent had no fixed bath, renovations being made are minimal, and virtually no new private dwellings for rent are being built. The impact of this is primarily on newly created households with children in the unskilled worker category – in London ‘the price ... (is) ... so high that accommodation can no longer be found on the open market by an unskilled worker who is a family man’ [21] – even with absolute cramming of existing housing, three families a day become absolutely homeless in the London area and are shunted off into the grim prisons of LCC relief institutions [22] until they can bear it no longer and will allow their families to be broken up. The 1957 PEP survey [23] confirms the overall impression from the subjective – one third of their families had a housing problem, and a quarter of them a very serious one.
The 1945 government estimated that 34 million houses would be built in the following ten years (in fact, only 2 million were built), and set afoot in 1946 a building programme in which the Exchequer gave three quarters of the cost plus a special ‘needs’ grant where demanded. The program lasted until 1947 when the first balance of payments crisis put heavy pressure on raw material imports. Building was held at 200,000 per year. In 1949, the distinction between classes of building disappeared and private tenants could get government help, although still of second priority beside Council housing. A process of diluting minimum standards ,to save materials, also began – and was continued by the Conservatives (thus minimum space area fell from 1,050 square feet in 1951 to 901 square feet in 1958). In 1953, the first stage in rent decontrol was introduced along with the decontrol of the selling price of houses built under government licence. In 1954, the licensing of house building ceased (so unleashing private demand on the raw material, labour and site markets), and most rating authorities revalued local sites so that rents were compelled to rise (they are estimated to have doubled in London). In 1955, the government directly restricted housing expenditure by Local Authorities and ordered the freeing of 100,000 requisitioned houses by 1960 – up to 5 times the annual rent was to be paid to owners to encourage them to keep on existing tenancies. Some Councils had either to abandon the tenants or buy up the derequisitioned property at very inflated prices with their already depleted precious housing allowances. 1955 saw also the abolition of the general needs housing subsidy, housing allocations, and an instruction to Councils to set their building programs in future in relation to interest rates on the open money market: all of which measures cut the Council building program by half. 1956 increased the scramble for decontrol and continued the penalization of councils – improvement grants were extended to private owners and landlords, and increased scope given to landlords to increase rents. 1957 tied [24] the whole process into a neat legislative bundle, involving the staggered decontrol of rents, or, as a backbencher put it, ‘the removal of the injustices of forty years’.
The impact of these complicated and ad hoc moves was to destroy Council housing and make private building the main source of accommodation – a table has been added to show the relevant relationships. [25]
Overall, the building performance is poor by world standards (see note [26]), but within that performance, private house building has forged ahead: 15 percent (1952), 28 percent (1954), 45 percent (1956), 51 percent (1959), 60 percent (1961). The boom has been such that, in mere figures (i.e. regardless of the class distribution of new housing), we are nearing the realization of the 1945 target – or as Dr Charles Hill has it ‘A national housing shortage no longer exists’. Duncan Sandys threw back at Labour a quotation from Bevan: ‘We are not very far from the total amount of accommodation which the nation requires’. Alongside such confidence, we can put the one and a half million families on Council waiting lists (England and Wales only, March 1959), amongst which there are two million people in very urgent need, or the National Housing and Town Planning Council’s Report for 1959: ‘the housing situation is generally as bad now as it has been since records were instituted.’
The simple reason being that new housing is almost entirely concentrated in the middle and upper income brackets: private building erected 1,000 new blocks in the London County in 1959, of which The Economist (21 November, 1959) estimates the vast majority were luxury flats.
But the process is by no means ended. For the last general election, the Government promised a five years delay in full decontrol, and also that tenants could sue for 12 months stay of eviction order to ‘ease the pains’, but we can be sure there will be no delay after that. Rents have already risen some 60 percent, in the 150,000 decontrolled houses in London. The process now, having killed the extension of public housing, is to extract the maximum from what council housing is left through differential rent schemes (or, as the Conservatives put it, ‘rent rebate schemes’), and shift working-class areas out of central urban regions to cheap housing on the outskirts (in London, this means recovering rent increases through fares into the city). Labour finds difficulty in combating the first trend – Crossbow (Autumn, 1960, p.7) throws back at them their own statements: ‘Rent relief should be given only for those who need it and only for so long as they need it’ (1929), and the 1956 NEC had ‘no objection in principle to schemes designed primarily to give relief to lower paid council house tenants’. The last Government White Paper (15 February, 1961) outlines the means to introduce rent differentials, with subsidies to give Councils an incentive. With it, a mere £25 million goes to non-profit-making building associations to build working-class housing (whipping us back to Peabody), and permission to landlords to raise rents from 8½ percent to 12½ percent of value.
2) Health. Townsend’s [27] ‘submerged fifth’ are said to consist of 5 million pensioners, half a million widows and persons with large families and low incomes, 300,000 in mental hospitals, 2 million war pensioners, quarter of a million industrially disabled, half a million unemployed (1957), on whom depend a further million and a half. As a side note on the ‘affluent society’, the point has been adequately enough made by Townsend. Sickness finds its surest basis in this section of the population. This country has seen a startling improvement in the general standard of health – the infant mortality rate has dropped from 151 per 1,000 in 1901 to 22.5 (England and Wales). Comparative weights and heights of children have improved, some diseases been almost totally wiped out (e.g. rickets), more people survive to old age. It is true as well that there are new diseases – an increase in coronary heart disease, diabetes, duodenal ulcers, an increasing injury rate (especially from road accidents), and increasing psychiatric troubles; in addition, if correlated, an increasing crime rate, especially in relationship to crimes committed with violence or sexual intent of some kind. Overall, the British record in health is not by any means superior to comparable countries – the 1959 Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer of Health concludes from a survey of mortality rates amongst males of over 65 in eight countries (including Canada and US) that Britain has the highest rate of all (Pt II, Cmd 1207).
However, for us, the decisive factor in relation to the National Health Service is the class distribution of bad health. The figures are difficult to obtain, but the general conclusion seems to be that relative standards of health between top and bottom (ignoring the important improvements in the majority in the middle) have either not changed significantly or even deteriorated. Certain diseases are in any case much commoner amongst the working class than elsewhere – notably tuberculosis, pneumonia, bronchitis, rheumatic heart disease, cancer of the stomach (on the other hand, Class I has the highest rate for coronary heart disease). Margot Jeffries [28] concludes that a comparison with 1921 ‘shows that relative differences between classes are as great today as they were then’. But other facts can be suggested to show that relative differences between top and bottom (or between the majority and the margin of poor) are even sharper: thus, the mortality rate for unskilled workers, aged 20 to 64, given that the rest of the population is constant at 100 is – 125 (1921-3), 111 (1930-2), 118 (1949-53). For infant mortality, the figures are even more dramatic: 122.6 (1921-3), 125.2 (1930-2), and 138.2 (1949-53). That is, considerably fewer people are dying at earlier ages, but more and more of those who do die come from the unskilled workers. The Economist (15 March 1958) sums up: ‘an infant born into Class V (unskilled workers) is twice as likely to die as one born into Class I (managerial-professional). If neonatal (i.e. 0-4 weeks old) deaths ... are excluded, the chances of a Class V infant dying are four times as high as those of an infant born into Class I’.
So far as diet is concerned, sharp differences continue. P.W.B. Douglas and J.M. Bloomfield made a survey of 5,000 children born in 1946, and decided that one quarter of all families with children under five, were unable to provide an adequate diet. The children themselves were shorter than the national average and weighed less. They also concluded that diet deficiencies had steadily increased since 1950 in the lowest group (i.e. those with under £10 per week in 1956). Another Report (Domestic Food Consumption and Expenditure: Annual Reports of the National Survey Food Committee for 1950 and 1956) showed that the average deficiency in the same group (on British Medical Association minimum standards) were: 6 percent in energy value, 19 percent in total protein, 15 percent in calcium, 6 percent in iron, 14 percent in riboflavin. They suggested that a quarter of the children in the country had over 10 percent deficiencies in at least two of the BMA categories. The problem, quite simply, was one of income – the PEP survey [29] mentioned earlier, found in 1957, that 22 percent of the families it questioned earned not more than £10 per week.
These figures suggest that insofar as welfare benefits were to ensure a basic minimum standard, they have failed; insofar as they were universal, they have not changed relative standards. Most of the points on the financing of the system have been made earlier. As with housing, the service started promisingly – hospitals were taken over although not the drug sources (so ensuring that the drug manufacturers would combine to bleed the Exchequer, and the national insurance payer). Immediately after the beginning of the service, the project to institute health centres throughout the country was abandoned and the hospital building program cut – the last item never quite recovered, and only two hospitals have been built since 1939 (the health service share of gross fixed capital formation amounted to 0.8 percent in 1958, compared to 1.7 percent in 1938-39). Charges were introduced on most essentials in 1949, and continued to climb from there until the last hammer blow in April 1961 when prescription charges were doubled, 10d put on the insurance stamp, increased charges put on teeth and spectacles, and welfare foods sold at cost price. Since 1951, the health charge has increased 260 percent, against a 74 percent increase in wages. The April changes were excused as a means of financing a new £5 million hospital building program – in fact, the new charges are estimated to realise an increase in Government revenue of £65 million.
3) Direct Benefits. In any week, the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance now pays out about 12 million benefits and allowances. The last annual report (Cmd 1458) shows that last year some 3½ million families were getting family allowances, and 5½ million pensioners drawing pensions. The Economist (August 26, 1961) estimates from the figures that about one out of every two households in Britain is getting its income supplemented each week under one or another of the schemes. On top of this, the National Assistance Board paid out 1,857,000 weekly grants last year, over a million of which went to pensioners.
National Assistance has now become the most important system of direct payments – as has been mentioned, it was originally intended as the very last resort, but as other welfare benefits have been allowed to devalue (benefits given without a means test as a universal right), so people have been shoved into NA which is governed by a means test. The 1961 Report of the NAB (Cmd 1410) shows to whom the benefits went: 1.3 million old people (23.5 percent of all OAPs), quarter of a million sick (13.3 percent of these getting sickness benefits), and 130,000 unemployed (17.5 percent of all those unemployed). The people concerned included some 130,000 people owning their own homes; of the total, the NAB prosecuted only 88 for idling or getting money under false pretences – despite the Director of the Conservative Political Centre (The Future of the Welfare State, 1958) who attacked the Government for ‘squandering public money on providing indiscriminate benefits for citizens, many of whom do not need them and some of whom do not want them’.
The importance of National Assistance, given full employment, is mainly in relationship to pensioners (apart from relatively temporary needs). Like most earlier welfare benefits, pensions were primarily intended to help the poor only and to be financed from the Exchequer as a consequence. In 1925, Churchill began the long process of converting the pensions part of the 1911 Act into a contributory one – a trend continued through until today: the new Tory pension scheme is merely a means of extorting more money to pay back to the retired, the State taking no financial part.
Labour, as mentioned, made a crucial change en route in universalizing the system, so destroying any relative advantage and adding much incentive to the Tories to let the scheme run down under inflation. The Exchequer paid 50 percent of the cost before 1948; in 1954, they paid 17 percent. The numbers of pensioners receiving national assistance considerably understates the numbers needing it – Townsend [30] in his survey of Bethnal Green estimates that 20-25 percent of those retired there would have been immediately entitled to assistance but did not draw it – which, with the earlier figure, suggests that something like half the pensioners in the country are living below the accepted minimum subsistence line. This fact can be put alongside earlier ones cited on the existence of private pension schemes – the Exchequer allows tax concessions of £200 million on private pensions, which is more than its contribution to National Insurance. The means of financing the State scheme, as has been suggested, is horizontally, from young to old, not from rich to poor. The new Conservative scheme clarifies the nature of the trend in pensions by making it directly financed by recipients, and in the £10-15 per week income range, graded in both benefits and contributions according to income. The scheme is still not based on a sliding scale, and so any pension under it will be steadily eroded by inflation. No increases of significance in the actual pension are to be made [31], but the Exchequer contribution is cut – its liability declined by 28 percent in 1961-2. The increase in the National Insurance fund in the same year is estimated at about 14 percent – contributions have been raised 33 percent. The Economist (18 October 1958), as always, saw the point: ‘The main feature of the scheme, in some ways its whole essence, is that it is expected to save the Exchequer £99 million in its first year of operation, rising to no less than £428 million in 1981-2’.
Other benefits come in as pale shadows of those mentioned earlier – almost totally destroyed by inflation. That both sickness and unemployment benefits are totally inadequate does not need to be emphasized. A Bristol University survey found that ‘benefits and allowances... were insufficient for all reasonable needs of those whose main source of income they were’. Of the sample, 61 percent of the families interviewed were forced onto National Assistance within six months. Although grants in kind increased during the Labour period, cash benefits never caught up with inflation so that ‘The individual payments to adult workers for sickness and unemployment are worth less today than before the Second World War.’ [32] Relative to earnings, the benefits are smaller than at any time since 1912.
The crucial criterion of any system of welfare today for Socialists is its impact on working-class incomes and its function in redistributing incomes. As humanitarians, we must support measures to try and help the sheer misery of the poor, but this support does not of itself change society or relate directly to our aims as socialists. On socialist criteria, the Welfare State was never a State: it failed both in conception (in leaving untouched the basic problems) and in subsequent execution. The measures concerned were not transitional ameliorative ones, and certainly not remedial (i.e. getting rid of the causes of poverty) – they were, paternalistic ends in themselves. Inflation has done more damage than anything else, but even without inflation, the balance of advantage would have tilted. The Belgians had their Loi Unique in one document, and fought it in a General Strike; we are having ours spread over fifteen years.

Notes
1. The Welfare State – John Saville, in New Reasoner 3, Winter 1957-8.
cf. also the replies by Dorothy Thompson and Stephen Hatch, NR 4, Spring 1958, and The Pensions Plan, by Dorothy Cole, NR 8, Spring 1959.
2. The Decline and Fall of British Capitalism – Keith Hutchison, (Cape, 1951) quoted p.188.
3. Comparison of Earnings and Social Security charges in W. Europe:



Country


Av. hrly
earnings
1954
(UK: 100)


Obligatory social
charges as % of
assessable wages
1 Jan. 1956


Cost to employers
of days off
with pay,
% of wages
1952-3


Wages +
social charges
+ days off
(UK: 100)


Social security
receipts as % of
national income,
1948




Sweden


148


  2.2


  6.0


145


11.6




Finland


125


  6.0


  4.5


126


10.6




Denmark


118


  7.5


  6.5


123


  9.2




Norway


115


  3.7


  6.0


115


  9.2




Switzerland


114


  3.9


  6.0


114


  8.8




UK


100


  2.7


  6.0


100


12.9




Belgium


  85


17.7


11.6


100


14.1




France


  83


29.8


  7.2


104


13.9




W. Germany


  77


11.7


  9.8


  85


18.6




Ireland


  68


  1.7


  4.6


  66


  7.3




Netherland


  61


19.0


  7.2


  70


  9.4




Austria


  58


19.0


10.1


  68


15.0




Italy


  55


53.5


14.2


  83


11.5




Sources: Freer Trade in EuropeHMSO, 1957, and Comparative Analysis of the Cost of Social Security, International Labour Review, 1953.
Quoted in The Welfare State by John Saville (cf. note 1 above).



4. Labour costs:



 


total
per hour


paid
as wages


paid in
social charges




s.  d.


s.  d.


s.  d.




USA


19.  2


15.11


3.  3




Sweden


  7.  6


  6.  8


0.10




UK


  5.  7


  4.11


0.  8




Switzerland


  5.  7


  4.11


0.  8




W. Germany


  5.  6


  3.10


1.  8




Belgium


  5.  4


  4.  0


1.  4




France


  5.  1


  3.  5


1.  8




Italy


  4.  5


  2.  6


1.11




Holland


  4.  2


  3.  2


1.  0




Source: A. Shonfield – Welfare and Wages, Observer, Jan. 22, 1961.



5. Essays on the Welfare State – R.M. Titmuss, 1958.
6. State Intervention in Great Britain, 1914-19 – Samuel J. Hurwitz – Columbia, 1949.
7. History of the Ministry of Munitions, V, Pt.III, p.12.
8. Report on Social Insurance and Allied Services – Sir William Beveridge, HMSO, 1942, p.71.
9. Manchester Guardian, Feb. 19, 1943.
10. J. Saville, op. cit. (see note 1).
11. R. Titmuss, op. cit. (see note 5).
12. The LSD of Welfare – W. Durham, 1958. [originally note 10]
13. For other examples of incomprehensibly mean measures, see Casualties of the Welfare State – A. Harvey, Fabian Society, 1960. [originally note 11]
14. Health Services in Britain – COI No.20, HMSO 1960. [originally note 12]
15. Whose Welfare State? – Brian Abel Smith, in Conviction, MacGibbon and Kee, 1958. [originally note 13]
16. The Irresponsible Society – R.M. Titmuss, Fabian Society, 1960. [originally note 14]
17. Smith, op. cit. (see note 15)
18. ‘The working-class pay for their own social security benefits by compulsory contributions and a high level of indirect taxation’ (Saville: New Reasoner above). [originally note 15] Saville also quotes Findlay Weaver in the Review of Economics and Statistics (Aug. 1950):
‘The outstanding feature of the postwar growth in redistribution is not that of taking from the “classes” and giving to the “masses”. The main feature is that the benefits of redistribution cut across income groups and are largely related to consumption. As a general proposition the working-class pays enough additional in beer, tobacco, and purchase taxes, and other indirect levies to meet the increased cost of the food subsidies and health and education expenditures, while the increase in direct taxes they pay covers the rise in their transfer money receipts ... Most of the post-war increase in personal taxes has been levied indirectly on consumption and has fallen on those who smoke and drink or consume non-utility clothing and household goods. The incidence of these regressive taxes mainly on the working-class who are also the chief recipients of the benefits of redistributive governmental expenditures’.
19. Family Needs and the Social Services – Political and Economic Planning – Allen and Unwin, 1961. [originally note 16]
20. Housing since the Rent Act – D.V. Donnison, C. Cockburn, T. Corlett, 1961. [originally note 17]
21. Families without a Home (Gaps in the Welfare State) – Jeremy Sandford, Observer, Sept. 17, 1961. [originally note 18]
22. op cit. Families without a Home. cf. ‘Of all the ones I visited, Norwood House by Gipsy Hill was perhaps the least luxurious. Mothers and children here live in stalls of seven-foot high hardboard, without ceilings, in a great hall, and with curtains across the entrance’. [originally note 19]
23. PEP, op. cit. (see note 19)
24. Saville, op. cit. (see note 1)
25. Houses in Progress in England and Wales (in ’000s of houses) [originally note 20]
New permanent houses built by:



 


Local
authorities


Housing
Associations


Government
departments


Private
builders


Total




April 1st–
Dec. 31st,


1945


    1


–


–


    1


    2




 


1946


  21


X


X


  30


  51




1947


  87


  1


X


  40


128




1948


171


  2


3


  31


206




1949


142


  1


4


  25


172




1950


139


  2


5


  27


172




1951


142


  2


7


  21


172




1952


167


  2


9


  32


209




1953


203


  8


8


  61


279




1954


200


15


7


  88


309




1955


163


  4


6


110


283




1956


140


  3


7


120


269




1957


138


  2


6


123


169




1958


113


  1


3


124


242




1959


  99


  1


2


146


249




 


X: less than 500




Source: Housing Policy since the War – D.V. Donnison (Occasional Papers in Social Administration, 1960)



26. 1954 was the highest year for house building in Britain since the War, but it was still a lower rate than in Italy, Denmark, Sweden or Norway. Houses built per 1,000 of the population, 1945-57: France: 5.4; W. Germany: 11; UK: 6; Soviet Union: 8; US: 7.4. Source: L’Allegmagne Sans Miracle – Heinz Abosh, Editions Minuit, 1960. [originally note 21]
27. A Society for People – Peter Townsend, in Conviction (cf. above). [originally numbered 20, but actually note 22]
28. Health and Social Class I – Margot Jeffries, Universities and Left Review, Summer 1957. [originally note 23]
29. PEP, op.cit. (see note 19)
30. The Family Life of Old People – Peter Townsend, Routledge. [originally note 24]
31. Increases are correlated with earning power to come. For example, a 60 year old at present getting £11 per week, if he continues to get it until 65, will get 1/- increase per week on retirement. An 18 year old who earns £15 for the rest of his working life (till the year 2008), not allowing for deductions for periods of sickness or unemployment, will draw the princely sum of 41s extra. [originally note 25]
32. Titmuss, op. cit. (see note 5)
 



The British General Election of 1959
Butler and Rose
Macmillan. 15s.
Nuffield election studies are fast becoming definitive statements of General Elections. The present one assembles a vast amount of work, not all of it always in the most interesting direction. The study, however, serves to confirm or reject much of the post-election speculation and mythology. Labour’s ‘fighting chance’ is measured, the multitude of cross-currents assessed, and the impact of nearly two millions pounds-worth of anti-Labour propaganda analysed. The study is balanced, and within its assumptions,, more objective than many who have spoken since the election. It illustrates Labour’s whole approach, accepting the framework of Conservative assumptions, while fighting vigorously for some variation in content; attempting to mesh with current grievances, without challenging the status quo producing them.
Where political controversy is shallow, the job of a political analyst is to compare the relative outputs of gimmicks, the marginal inflections of the mass media, the minute ripples on the Gallup Poll pond. Butler and Rose admit the shallowness of the electoral controversy, and, by implication, the monumental boredom of a majority of the electorate. The crucial determinant of electoral behaviour is left out of politicians’ equations: society at large, the level of employment and consumption, the type and pattern of that consumption, and conditions on the shop floor.
 



The Rebels
Brian Crozier
Chatto & Windus. 21s.
Mr Crozier has done us disservice. He has taken a theme which ought to have been fascinating – the development, causes and result of rebellions since the war. The result is pedestrian. He has managed to make the subject not only dull, but also misleadingly superficial, because he insists on seeing rebellions as things created by individuals (either nasty rebels suffering from unspecified neuroses, or nasty government ministers who just don’t understand how to manipulate people). The background – squalor, poverty, brutal repression – is played down. These things, as is well known, occur mainly in non-British territories. One may be critical about Kenya (the government didn’t understand the specific weirdness of the Kikuyu), but Malaya and Cyprus were obviously the result of wicked plotters. Algeria and Indo-China can be attributed directly to French silliness. And as for Hungary and East Berlin – well, what can you expect when Communists rule a country.
So we have a smug, cosy, liberal-minded handbook, full of little tips on how to rule a subject country and balance the utilitarian odds. True, ‘the Labour Government in 1947 did not avoid bloodshed; but the blood was not shed by British soldiers, and the odium, inconvenience and expense of several colonial wars were avoided’. Mr. Crozier has written an instruction book on how to retain the substance of imperialism while yielding the forms. Actions are generalized in an attempt to find surface resemblances, issues are generalised and are kept firmly in the background – thus trivialising the whole. Do thousands of men really go out to destroy a government just because of ‘personal’ frustrations? Either they do, and the observation is trite, or else they don’t and it is false. Mr. Crozier’s rebellions are content-less, about nothing in particular. The author recommends to those in authority to deflate ‘frustration’ by superficial concessions – because, after all, ‘violence troubles the calm which alone enables the voice of reason to be heard’ (through whose mouth?). Concessions must ensure ‘non-violence for rebels, statesmanship for those in authority’ and should be through the channel of a ‘responsible alternative government’. With enlightened management and gentle workers, Platonic reason will induce harmony. The ‘mentality of rebels’, the crucial issue, can be adjusted gently to the status quo, even that of Mr. Crozier’s own ‘arch-plotters and masterminds’.
The result of Mr. Crozier’s industry is myopia – a close focus is concentrated on the least interesting aspects of each rebellion; the economic and social background is, at best, a fortuitous circumstance, a lucky break for the master-minds. Of course, the brilliant cunning of the ‘international communist conspiracy’ is thrown in for good measure. What a pity so fascinating a theme had to be so pathetically bungled.
 



The Organization Man
William H. Whyte
Penguin Books. 2s 6d.
Here, republished as an anniversary volume, is a classic statement about the face of contemporary capitalism.
Within the limits Whyte sets himself, his is a sensitive and readable account. How true it is as a long-term view, it is impossible to assess. Certainly the decay of individualism, contingent upon the decay of the individual firm and entrepreneur, and the rise in ‘group cohesiveness’, destroying individual deviation or autonomy, implies an increase in class-solidarity and mechanical conformity to class demands. Whyte notes at one point that ‘The group is tyrant; so also is it a friend, and it is both at once. The two qualities cannot easily be separated, for what gives the group power over the men is the same cohesion that gives it its warmth. This is the duality that confuses choice’.
Whyte’s account explains some of the particular ideological forms that class-defence adopts today: the reliance on the expert, the diversion of crucial political questions into the realm of technique rather than of political choice (‘bipartisan’ foreign policies for instance), the theological emphasis on ‘fact’, on rigorously precise but trivial research, the implication that there is, after all, only one real political truth, and that it is common to all ‘responsible’ parties.
The group ethic has also brought to light the interesting discovery that ‘adjustment’ for individuals is a better political course than reform – ‘public opinion’ in America, as in Russia, is a potent and destructive force towards all ‘deviants’ (the word itself has unpleasant undertones). No longer is it feasible to manipulate society for the benefit of individuals within it, the reverse procedure is accomplished without government intervention by the mere working of the cohesive organisation group.
Mr Whyte’s book should be read by all interested in understanding an ideology that is becoming more and more pervasive in our own society and is likely to become its dominant motif (cf. the change wrought in the Conservative Party propaganda since the War). It is also likely to be suggested as first candidate to replace socialism – after all, individualism, like free competition, is outdated.
 



Science, Faith and Scepticism
John Lewis
Lawrence & Wishart 13s. 6d.
Kolakowski in a recent article in Stadia Filozoficzne (1959, 2), extracts of which are translated and reprinted in Soviet Survey (April-June 1960) draws attention to what he thinks are differences in implication between Marx’s 1844 Manuscripts and later philosophic works written by Engels. The crux of the divergence, he thinks, is that the young Marx saw nature as made up of particular categories, as an ‘artificial’ creation arising from man’s practical needs and his effort to master nature. The young Marx saw nature and man interacting in the process of ‘creating’ consciousness. Schaff’s reply to Kolakowski’s article is a pure hatchet job written on behalf of the Party. It reveals quite clearly the brutal Compteian positivism that is the philosophic garb of Stalinism. The world is ‘out there’ and science is the process of drawing increasingly accurate pictures of a pre-set reality. In Stalinist philosophy, direct correspondence (theory must ‘mirror’ the facts) is the sole acknowledged means of verification. Lewis has written a further philosophic footnote to the arid sequence that started with Stalin’s Chapter IV of the History of the CPSU(B). This trail runs very close to classical empiricism.
As long as Lewis stays on the safe ground of examining popular (and less popular) mythology, we can stay with him – it is when he explores the more esoteric waters of ‘truth’ that his craft is seen to be rotten. We then see how Stalinism remains a straight-jacket for philosophy, how it has chained philosophy to a determinate picture of the world, the ‘correct’ picture, as defined by the General Secretary. The essence of Marxism, ‘practice’, the fusion of aim and reality in action, is missing. We are hived off into the academic waters of polite jousts with bourgeois philosophers. As Marcuse notes about Stalinism in general, the dialectic is missing. In Stalinism Russian philosophy has returned to its roots: the common superstitions of class-ridden society.
 



THE LEADERSHIP of the Chinese Communist Party is an endless source of surprises. Is it possible that all those slogans of the Cultural Revolution ‘Bombard the Party headquarters’, ‘Down with responsible persons in positions of authority taking the capitalist road’ – could so swiftly have been replaced by ‘Peasants, enrich yourselves’ and ‘Learn from capitalism’.
Yet consider the latest straws in the wind:


A number of state companies have issued shares for general sale to private buyers.
Shanghai municipality has proposed the creation of a stock exchange by 1987 to trade in shares.
Foreign companies may now own one hundred per cent of the stock of any Chinese subsidiaries
The state is relinquishing its monopoly of foreign trade to competing publicly owned companies
The state is reducing its participation by privatising the housing stock.
The People’s Liberation Army has recently been urged to modernise by borrowing, entering joint ventures to manufacture consumer goods, and trading.


It is a programme that, on the face of it, is more drastic than Mrs Thatcher’s who has not so far suggested privatising the Grenadier Guards.
The history of the People’s Republic of China is one of a constant interaction between two contrary imperatives – the maximum rate of accumulation on the one hand, and the need to retain a monopoly of power in the hands of the party on the other. The interaction has taken place in conditions of grave external threats and great domestic poverty – two outside forces that threaten at each stage to jeopardise the imperatives. The ideological commitments flow from this struggle rather than being its source.
Thus, the establishment of party control dominated the first phase, after 1949, in the social elimination of the landlords and the move to collective forms of agriculture. The Korean war forced greater centralisation and the slow expropriation of private business. Simultaneously, the rate of economic growth was extraordinarily high until the economy had made up the losses of the pre-1949 period and reached the limits of capacity by 1956. No outside help – from the Russians – was forthcoming to escape the limits, so for a dizzy six months, Mao and his associates launched the cadres upon China to force an expansion of output by brute strength: the Great Leap Forward.
 
Deep slump
The leap failed: party control destroyed accumulation, since workers produced vast increases, but mainly of rubbish. Peasants hid their crops from party expropriation. Between 1958 and 1962 the country was in deep slump, brought on by the party. There was evidence of famine, armed revolts and, in the northwestern province, mass flight into the Soviet Union. The retreat of the party allowed the re-establishment of rich peasant control on the land in alliance with the rural cadres, and it was here the party began a purge in 1962. Whereas in the preceding four years, the issue of party control had been subordinate to economic survival, now the struggle to restore control took priority over most other issues.
This was the so-called Cultural Revolution.
The second four year phase embodied the struggle of one section of the leadership to establish its – and the party’s – total power. Just as the peasants stopped the Great Leap Forward in 1958/59, the Russians stopped the Cultural Revolution in 1969 with armed clashes on the northern border. From then to the death of Mao in 1976, the party leadership endeavoured to secure external protection (through the United States) and internal modernisation of the armed forces to counter the Russian threat, but the process was constantly paralysed by the unresolved political issues of the Cultural Revolution. The death of Mao resolved the paralysis.
For two years after Mao’s death, there was an interregnum in which the leadership tried to expand the economy without reforms. From 1979, the policy has been one of increasingly radical reforms and an embrace of market mechanisms to force the pace of accumulation. But unlike the years before 1979, for the first time, the stress of accumulation has not been upon the growth of heavy industry, but the growth of agricultural and light industrial output. In retrospect, the Cultural Revolution has become a bad dream.
What have been the key changes since 1979? The most dramatic has been in agriculture which occupies the majority of Chinese. The ‘production responsibility system’ has broken up the old communes in order to lease land to, in the main, cultivating households. Originally the lease period was for three years, but this has now been extended to fifteen. In all but name, this is the official re-establishment of a private peasantry after over thirty years of its disappearance in collectives. The price for agricultural goods paid to cultivators has been sharply increased, and public procurements cut. Peasants are now increasingly able to decide what they will grow and what prices they will try to get in the increasing number of private rural markets.
In industry, the government is moving towards freeing all enterprises to produce what they will at whatever prices they can get, except in heavy industry.
However, the government has not yet ended all subsidies nor decontrolled consumer prices nor allowed enterprises to be shut down as the result of running deficits. Nor have they yet conceded the right to managers to freely hire and fire or set wages levels as they Wish (although the vastly expanded bonus system goes a long way towards achieving this). But there is to be a major wage reform this year.
The incentives to foreign capital to invest in China have been considerably increased, and joint ventures are now permitted to compete with Chinese operations.
The performance of the economy during the same six years has been remarkable.
Agricultural output, blessed with good harvests, has expanded by about six per cent per year, and foodstuffs by 10 to 12 per cent (grain yields rose between 1979 and 1983 from 2,947 kgs, per hectare to 3,655, one of the highest levels in the world.) Industrial output increased by some seven per sent per year – 3.3 per cent for heavy industry (compared to 13 per cent, 1952–79) and 11.9 per cent for light (compared to 9 per cent). Incomes in urban areas are said to have gone up by nearly 5 per cent per year in the towns, and half as much again in the rural areas. Urban unemployment is said to have fallen from 15 per cent in 1979 to two or three per cent. In 1984, there was again a great surge in output, increasing by 14 per cent (against the target of 4-5 per cent).
Visitors universally testify to the prosperity that has become apparent. How patchy it is remains unclear – but it seems the process must have considerably widened differences both between rich and poor and between advanced and backward areas. Furthermore, the state has found its control slipping. Inflation has officially risen to 5 per cent, but it is said to be 50 per cent for some commodities because wages have expanded so much faster than output.
 
Corruption
The banks competed to lend, and so overlent. Furthermore, corruption seems to have become endemic. There were 36,000 arrests and 5,000 executions for economic crimes between 1983 and 1984 – ranging from speculating in raw materials, bribery, levying special taxes or commissions, to the sale of illegal imports and visas to Hong Kong. The splendid Auditor General Yu Mingtao is said to have ‘lost’ the equivalent of 1.67 billion US dollars in 1984.
The use of the market to expand output (and secure peasant loyalties) is not new. There were versions of this in China between 1959 and 1962 (after the Great Leap) and 1969 and 1973 (after the Cultural Revolution). But these were strictly temporary and for limited purposes. What is happening in China now is much more far reaching, and short of a major break in the leadership group, unlikely to be reversed. This does not seem just another zig in the tortuous zigzags of the party.
The supporters of the old Gang of Four (known as widowists in some quarters, after Mao’s widow) say that the new order represents counter-revolution, a restoration of capitalism. This is phrasemongering to imply socialism existed under Mao – particular great heroes have one or other word attached as a sort of shadow. But there has been no radical change in the social structure of China, only some changes in the leadership clique. If China was socialist before, it must be so now; if it is now capitalist, it must always have been so. In fact, the Chinese ruling order has been consistently dominated by the task of capital accumulation since 1949, although not always with the same intensity or in the same form. The factional dispute in China is not about ending capital accumulation, the ‘abolition of the wage system’ but about whether accumulation should take place through state direction or a market (or rather what ought to be the precise mixture of each).
The process of economic liberalisation in China is only part of a much wider world change affecting not only the Third World, but as much, Mrs Thatcher and Reagan. The Chinese have been slightly more radical than the Hungarians, slightly less so than the Yugoslavs. The Poles tried and came a cropper. Virtually all Third World countries are doing something similar – not least in India with a new liberalising prime minister and Seventh Plan.
In retrospect, we can see that what was called ‘socialism’, the autarchy and state dominated planning of the newly independent countries in the fifties, was no more than a phase in primitive accumulation: both forced on the backward countries by the world market, and embraced by them as the means to defend their newly won political independence. Once that phase was over, continued accumulation demanded reintegration in the system. It is a return to the world economy, to world capitalism, now that the first phase of accumulation has been accomplished.
There were special problems in China. The condition for working class passivity in 1949 and the intensified exploitation that followed was the promise of a guaranteed if austere standard of living, the ‘iron rice bowl’. But moderating the insecurity of a wage system inhibits the possibility of increasing exploitation and sustaining accumulation. The party tried many tricks to make up – campaigns (with considerable intimidation), sending workers down to rural areas, diluting urban labour with peasant lads – but none could do more than have a temporary effect, particularly when wages were very low as well. The party is now employing the world market to achieve a change in the balance of class power, to end the ‘iron rice bowl’ and thus its neutralisation of the working class.
 
Petit bourgeoisie
The party leadership can begin the process, but insofar as they are successful in freeing the market, they become victims of events. Not only is the nakedness of class relations exposed – particularly with reference to urban workers – but also they permit the emergence of China’s overwhelmingly largest class, the petit bourgeoisie. The rich and middle peasants dominate here, but in the cities, the new policies promote the creation of a significant class of self-employed artisans, petty traders, small businessmen, many of them fashioned out of the Cultural Revolution warriors who marched off to the countryside with messianic hopes and have now slunk back illegally into the cities.
It will be difficult to restore the old forms of party control or authority in such circumstances. The party tries to match its economic liberalisation with tight ideological control – over meetings, posters, publications, speech, culture – but the one will inevitably erode the other, even if in the short term this only produces deep mass cynicism. Given that external challenges have by no means ended, that the weather and other natural hazards still affect agriculture, that the domestic class struggle is likely to increase, China in the future will produce no fewer surprises than in the past.
 



I WAS ill – trapped in bed, the fan clanking overhead and, outside in humid Madras, the temperature at over 100°. Each morning, the newspapers flunked on the bed, flashing their headlines: ‘Tamils kill 150 in reprisal for army killing 75’; ‘Over 100 slaughtered by upper caste militants in Ahmedabad’; ‘50 or more killed in Gujerat police rampage’; ‘41 murdered in Sikh bombing wave in Delhi’; ‘Shiva Sena win Bombay: expel all immigrants since 1970’.
It was dispiriting.
The latest round in the endless and unscrupulous struggle of one or other fragment of India’s lower middle class to do down the rest is a kind of revolt of the privileged. Some of it echoes distantly the shouts of the brigade of bloodies in the Tory and Republican parties.
It is not restricted to India. The northern Tamils of Sri Lanka (not to be confused with the poor Tamil labourers of the tea plantations) are much over-represented in the business and professional classes of the country, and traditionally have dominated higher education.
In Gujerat, the rebellion is of the upper castes against the lower. And the Sikhs of the Punjab are likewise among the better off. It is what in the United States was called a white backlash.
Take some of the best known cases:
 
The Sikhs
The income per head of the Punjab, the main concentration of Sikhs, is Rs 2,768 per year. This is very far from being princely, but is fully 76 percent above the all-India level. The Green Revolution of the late sixties and a high emigration rate (producing a high inflow of remittances to the province) have transformed the area and made possible an unusual prosperity.
With under 2 percent of India’s population, the Sikhs produce a disproportionate share of agricultural output (at high guaranteed prices); they are 8 percent of central government employees, 6 percent of the top civil service cadre, 5 percent of the Indian Police Service, and 7.5 percent of the army; the President of India, the Chief of the Air Force, the Governor of the Reserve Bank (India’s central bank) and a clutch of generals are all Sikhs; furthermore, Sikhs constitute a major part of India’s business class. The majority of Sikhs, like the majority of Indians, are poor, but it is stretching matters to propose that the Sikhs as a community are an oppressed national minority.
Yet that is exactly what the Sikh militants say, demanding the right of national self-determination and the creation of an independent ‘Khalistan’. In north India, Hinduism is the great surrounding sea of the little Sikh island, and it constantly threatens to engulf the minority, pulling into the Punjab non-Sikh farm labour to work on Sikh farms. Despite the creation of the Punjab as a Sikh state (56 percent Sikh in 1966 when the new state was formed), the Sikh proportion peaked at 61 percent in 1971; by 1981 it was down to 52 percent and still falling.
Not that these issues concerned all Sikhs. Urban Sikhs – artisans, small business, shopkeepers (the Sikh castes of the Khatris, the Auroras and Ramgarhias) – remained indifferent to the demands of the Sikh ultras. The Sikh untouchables, the Mazhabis, were positively hostile. Between them, these two must contribute the 10 percent of the state’s vote that goes to one or other Communist Party.
It was the peasant caste, the Jhats, that provided the main support for the Sikh communal party, the Akali, as well as popular support for the political priests that lead the national movement. Nonetheless, throughout, the Akali captured only a minority of the Sikh vote, despite their claim to speak for all Sikhs. The ruling Congress (I) always won a substantial vote.
It was the late Prime Minister, Mrs Gandhi, who started the current phase by patronising the priest, Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, as a means to split the Akali to the gain of Congress (I). Split them he did and in all directions, but by creating a new monster to defeat Congress (I) on the demand for an independent Khalistan to be achieved by terrorism.
Terror – invoking reprisals throughout India – was to force home the Sikh diaspora and establish the domination of the Sikh priesthood in a politically independent Khalistan. After all, Khomeini did no less in Iran. And in 1947 Jinnah, Bombay Muslim businessman and Uttar Pradesh Muslim landlords did the same thing to establish an independent Pakistan.
The rest is known. The Akalis became irrelevant in the duel between the Amritsar Golden Temple and Delhi. Bhindranwale’s martyrdom produced the murder of Mrs Gandhi produced the Hindu slaughter of Delhi Sikhs (with the police leading, encouraging or tolerating the assault on rich Sikhs) produced the wave of Sikh bombings produced... Of the first three arrests for the bombings, the first died ‘in police custody’; the other two were battered to a pulp when produced before, the magistrate.
The political leadership on both sides could hardly be more rotten. Congress (I) is soaked in communalism. With a sly nod and a wink, the Sikhs as a whole can be identified as violent and traitorous, so any assault upon any of them is tolerable. The government has continually mixed violent repression with weak concessions. The Akali, like a flock of sheep, ran in all directions as soon as the priest with a gun appeared. Most of the leadership are now madly flirting with the call for Khalistan just to save their necks.
But the majority of Sikhs and Hindus have not moved. The Sikhs at large have not retreated to the Punjab. Also Delhi would rafter kill all Sikhs than concede independence to the Punjab, a precedent that threatens the whole of India, especially for a province on the border with Pakistan.
 
Gujerat
Since anybody can remember, the Patels have run Gujerat. In 1980, for the first time, Congress (I) put up a candidate for state Chief Minister, Solanki, who was not from this or any other upper caste. His main voting support came from a new coalition of four castes, KHAM – Kshatriyas, Harijans (Untouchables), Adivasis (tribal peoples) and Muslims.
When Solanki won, his reward was in conformity with national policy – amid riots he reserved 21 percent of places in engineering and medical colleges for ‘Scheduled Castes and Tribes’ (the Untouchables) and 10 percent for ‘Backward Castes’.
With new elections in February, Solanki tried to anchor his electoral base by announcing that the backward castes would now have an increase in their reservations of 18 percent. Thus 49 percent of all places would now be reserved (the 30 percent of Gujerat’s population that consist of upper castes would still have access to 61 percent of the places).
The riots, this time by the upper castes, swept/the state with violence on the demand for an end to all reservations. The struggle produced a collapse on all fronts – murderous assaults on the lower castes, Hindu attacks on Muslims, and a general strike of all state employees (against reservations). The violence seemed endless, with possibly two or three hundred dead at the end of it. Solanki climbed down and withdrew the February increase in reservations.
The army moved in when the police collapsed into an attack on everyone. One policeman was killed in the riots, so the following day the police set out to punish the population. Officially, 41 people were killed and an unknown number injured. The police held up the fire brigades at gunpoint while they set light to some 800 houses and 100 vehicles. Two thousand bicycles were destroyed. Newspaper offices were a prime target for gutting because of their criticisms of the police.
The Ahmedabad City Police Commissioner was understanding: ‘My boys have been on their toes for the last couple of months, and this could be a natural reaction to their frustration.’ This was surreal since hardly a day passes in India without a report of police atrocities – 19 injured in Tamilnadu; 22 wounded in Delhi; 5 prisoners with tied hands shot dead in Andhra; 15 tribals murdered in Bihar; and any number of rapes and assaults.
It was the British who started reservations – of seats in provincial assemblies, supposedly to ‘protect minorities’, but an amazingly efficient method of setting one community against another. By these means, Muslim and Hindu were manipulated to keep the jewel in the crown for a long time – before the whole show collapsed in partition. Delhi’s need to divide and rule is no less than London’s used to be. What is depressing is that so many Indians allow themselves to be so manipulated. In the increasingly bloody battles of the Indian lower middle class, the poor are always losers; and the state gains.
 
Bombay
The Shiva Sena has been an active political movement for 20-odd years. Bombay is in the state of Maharashtra where the majority of people are Marathas, and the cry of the Shiva Sena and its dictatorial leader, Bal Thackery, is: ‘Bombay for the Marathas’. Effectively, this is an anti-southerner slogan, since the majority of the poor inmigrants to the city are Tamil (and Thackery is not too worried about the rich Gujeratis).
The Shiva Sena won 70 of the 170 seats on Bombay corporation (on a 40 percent poll), and this gave it control. Thackery promptly demanded the expulsion of all inmigrants to the city that had arrived since 1974 (‘or 1970’, he threw in for good measure), and the introduction of a South African-style pass system for all new entrants.
You might have thought someone would have pointed out that Bombay’s population is not growing fast, that inmigration is a very small and declining element in that increase, and that, in any case, if the city water supply is bad that is because a corrupt and incompetent city administration has failed to invest enough in water, not because there are too many people.
But the Chief Minister of Maharashtra said Thackery’s idea was interesting but he needed a formal application to act. Certainly, he went on, something needed to be done to stop Bombay ‘collapsing’, and mentioned China’s migration controls with approval.
Last year’s appalling savageries against Muslims in Bhiwandi, a suburb of Bombay, will be matched sooner or later by assaults on the Tamils. Meanwhile, posters appeared in the southern city of Coimbatore promising that if one Tamil in Bombay were hurt, ‘all north Indians’ in Coimbatore would get it. Here we go again. Those whom the Gods wish to destroy, they first make Shiva Sena.
A civil war implies only two or three sides. But there are hundreds of sides in India – a thousand dragons, as the Chinese call it. The issues are open running sores, without any hope of healing. Punjab, Gujerat, Bombay are currently in the news. But Assam is still not settled. The Sri Lanka issue threatens to spill over into Indian Tamiland. Bihar continues as the epitome of violence and corruption. There will probably be Hindu-Muslim riots in Hyderabad shortly. And on and on. No sooner is one leak staunched than many more are sprung. The gangsters, the politicians and the police, the trinity governing India, work within riots to ensure survival and prosperity. Only the army grows. In the 23 years prior to 1974, the military were called to settle civil disputes 476 times; in the last ten years, 376 times.
Daily life in India is a nightmare. The ruling class, to keep power, manipulates all the evils – communalism, caste-ism, racialism. And its lower minions play back the same prejudices in exaggerated form, just as the petty bourgeois Nazis played back as serious intent the idle anti-Semitic snobberies of Europe’s establishment. Meanwhile, the world market slowly begins to assume the direction of the domestic economy as the state liberalises. This will almost certainly speed the pace of accumulation, and release precisely those furies which, without an alternative politics, fuel the endless bloodletting. The class struggle is still a very soft background theme in the cacophony.
 






President Marcos of the Philippines has called an election to pre-empt opposition to himself. What is the background to this?



* * *
HOW LONG can the Philippines hold? All the reports suggest a relentless decay in the cities – unfinished buildings, pot holes in the roads, queues, waves of violence, assassinations, police shoot-outs. Inflation (at 25 percent) is pushing the unemployed into starvation.
Like South Africa, the mass of the population – including the business class – are pitched against their rulers in an apparently unending struggle. Unlike South Africa, the army is seriously divided, incompetent and corrupt.
The Philippines was one of the first less-developed countries to pursue export promotion vigorously from the mid-sixties, solidly backed by the World Bank. In 1972, President Marcos introduced martial law and ran the country as a dictatorship, which he still does (although martial law was ended in 1981) – no politics were allowed to get in the way of expanding exports. All the tricks were tried – generous concessions to foreign companies, liberalised imports, export processing zones, deliberate lowering of wages (wages fell between 20 and 30 percent in the late seventies). There was a ban on strikes, picketing and assembly.
 
Fall in growth
Export promotion included labour, the ‘export of warm bodies’ as the Filipinos call it. Some two million workers abroad now contribute about two billion dollars to the country’s foreign exchange earnings. Maids and cleaners in London, Cairo, Lagos and many more places contribute, as did the women discovered imprisoned in a textile mill in Rochdale (for two years) by the millowner a few years ago.
Imports always increased faster than exports. For a time, borrowing abroad covered the gap. But as the debt rose – to 26 billion in 1983 (with the highest servicing ratio in Asia) – Marcos was obliged to cut imports. Growth fell and finally went into reverse.
Consider the vivid index of the growth rate, running at 6 percent per year in the seventies: −2.5 percent (1981), −2.8 percent (1982) 1.4 percent (1983) (or 6.8 percent in dollar terms if you allow for the devaluation of that year); −5.5 percent (1984), −2.5 to −3.3 percent (estimated official for 1985; others estimate between −5 percent and −6 percent).
Marcos tried to protect himself politically by increasing public spending, but that only fuelled inflation. He also protected his friends, the ‘cronies’ as they are known (or ‘crony capitalism’) by taking
into the public sector their businesses when they were faced with bankruptcy – to the fury of the mass of businessmen outside the charmed circle. The big state banks freely financed the cronies. By 1984, 75 percent of the loans of the two leading banks were said to be dud.
What those bare figures mean for the poor emerge from time to time.
A 1984 survey showed that 29 million Filipinos (out of 54 million) suffer from malnutrition, and 70 percent were below the local poverty line.
On the island of Negros, the heart of the sugar industry, there has been a sharp rise in the infant mortality rate, with an estimated 7 percent of children suffering from third degree malnutrition. There are 300,000 cane cutters unemployed.
The British ambassador, Robin McLaren, recently delivered £30,000 aid to feed 140,000 children that were starving, remarking, ‘The crisis in the sugar industry has caused real problems of adjustment for the poor.’ He did not mention that one of the reasons for the low world price of sugar was because the world’s largest sugar exporter, the European Common Market, massively subsidises exports, dumping them on the markets for Filipino sugar exports. In July 1984, the cost of production of European sugar was, £346.50, and its export price £93.50 per tonne (the subsidy of £253, provided by the European consumers, is the source of the starving Negrenses).
The economic decline has gone with a rising scale of opposition. Most recently, officially the most destructive massacre has taken place – 27 demonstrators were killed and 24 injured in the Negros town of Escalante in September. Many more are murdered on the streets individually – some 700 in Davao City on Mindanao island this year (six of them in the general strike in September).
The deaths are part of the government’s attempts to retain power, particularly against what must be at the moment the largest guerilla movement in the world. The National People’s Army, according to the CIA, has 12-15,000 full time guerillas and 35,000 part-time, and controls about 13 percent of the 41,000 local government units in the country. The NPA, military, arm of the Communist Party of the Philippines (with, on American estimates, 30-60,000 members and one million supporters), has existed for ten years.
The more hysterical accounts argue that, at its present rate of growth, it will be able to confront directly the national army of 210,000 troops within the next five years.
The CPP’s politics are homegrown Maoism, a mixture of populism and nationalism.
 
Murdered by military
Simultaneously, the old parliamentary opposition has been revived and is racing to get power before the NPA. But despite much support – it won a third of the seats in last year’s election – it has little unity, and very little to say about the material problems facing most Filipinos. The most likely leader, Aquino; was murdered on his return from exile in the United States in 1983. A section of the military, including Marcos’ former chauffeur-bodyguard, Ver, were implicated. The third strand of opposition, the strike waves, has no independent political leadership. But it has made some striking advances. Examples include the assaults that shut down the Bataan export processing zone in 1982 (and revealed that since Marcos had promised foreign companies they need pay only 75 percent of the national minimum wage for the first six months of employment, the companies sacked their workforce every six months), to the wave of Manila strikes last June.
In Washington there is mild hysteria. This is no Central American mini-state, but a second Vietnam. It contains the two largest US bases outside the United States, employing 39,000 Filipinos. The Philippines, a former US colony, has been a satellite of Washington since it became independent. Successive emissaries from Reagan have failed to achieve reforms.
Senator Paul Laxalt, chairman of the Republican Party, brought a private letter from Reagan to Marcos in mid October to warn that, if Marcos reinstated Ver, Congress would cut off aid to the Philippines.
But what can be done? Marcos is corrupt and incompetent, surrounded by his cronies and his wife, Imelda (the power in the government and ‘Iron Butterfly’ as she is popularly called), with an army paralysed by incompetence and corruption.
Reagan could not tolerate the move to power of the NPA, and yet must know increasingly that Marcos is the main obstacle to the survival of the Filipino ruling class. Perhaps the deal – between the more conservative elements of the opposition and a segment of the army (under the new chief of staff, Ramos) – to murder Marcos and instate a reforming regime that will get rid of the cronies – is already in place. But surgery of this kind is very dangerous and has been known to kill the patient.
Watch out for world crises.
 



THE RAINS appear to be more promising and already the newspapers have passed on to other things; that is, until the next famine arrives. The horror of Ethiopia, Sudan, Chad, Mali, Niger, Mozambique and the others, joins a fitting series that began with Hiroshima, and so recently has passed through Kampuchea, Bangladesh, the Boat People, Biafra, Bhopal.
The film of Mohammed Amin which, last autumn, dropped the starving of Ethiopia into every sitting room, was an uncanny replay. For in 1974, Jonathan Dimbleby’s The Hidden Hunger showed no lesser horrors in Ethiopia, and was one element in the overthrow of the emperor, Hailie Selassie (but not before 200,000 had died). In March, the United Nations Conference on Famine in Africa likewise mimicked the 1974 Rome World Food Conference. This time round, Mrs Thatcher refused any increase in aid (only a redistribution between aided countries). Last time, the unlovely Fred Peart, Labour Minister of Agriculture, told his Roman audience: ‘I believe a lot of people in Britain are not eating enough. I do not want malnutrition to appear in Britain.’ Watch this space for the 1994 headlines.
We should be grateful for the film even if the warnings came long before. In 1980, one in four of the world’s population ate too little for good health; every ninth suffered chronic hunger; every 73rd died from the effects of malnutrition; twelve million children died from protein deficiency. Since 1973 the income per head in most of Africa has been falling. Between the late sixties and the early eighties, food production per head in Africa has declined by 21 per cent – 32 per cent for Mozambique and 18 per cent for Ethiopia. In 1981, 29 countries of Africa were notified as at risk of famine, but Western governments paid little attention.
Without Mohammed Amin’s film, few people would have been any wiser. It linked genuine compassion to the razzamattazz of commercial exploitation, a media event with a cast of thousands: charity is the heart of a heartless world, even when the heart is made of plastic. The Sun can always be relied to transform the tragic into the banal, to vulgarise the horror, and this time was no exception with its slogan, ‘Give a tiddler to save a toddler’. On the other side, the Mirror shifted gear from a one million pound bingo game to a one million pound ‘mercy mission’ (‘Thank God You’ve Come!’ was the absurd headline when the British, unable to send food, sent instead Robert Maxwell). And everyone visited – Charles Heston, Edward Kennedy, Cardinal Basil Hume and a clutch of others.
This was merely the surface froth. Underneath, the real horror penetrated a mass audience with astonishing speed, and released a flood of spontaneous generosity. Very little was raised in Britain up to the time of the film, then £25 million in two months. A Cambridge farmer appealed for one tonne of wheat per farmer and raised 1,000 tonnes in November. In the United States the average contribution was $40 per head.
The mass compassion is sharply contrasted with the vicious parsimony and hypocrisy of the governments. Just as Hailie Selassie denied there was a famine in 1974 (and used his army to drive the dying out of Addis Ababa beyond the range of the cameras), so did Russia this time. That gave an opportunity to Washington (and the little yes-woman in London) to exploit the opportunity to discredit Russia and Ethiopia. The press settled down to identifying the military government as the real villain even though it had done far more than Hailie Selassie.
The key issue is that Western Europe and North America control seventy five per cent of the world grain trade. It is a degree of control far greater than that exercised over any other commodity (much greater for example, than OPEC’s share of the world oil trade). Everyone knows of the mountains of decaying cereals held in stock in Europe – 8.7 million tonnes last year. But Brussels offered only to divert grain supplies from Bangladesh and Egypt to Ethiopia. Mrs Thatcher did the same.
Famine relief is one thing. More important in the medium term is the Common Agricultural Policy of the EEC. It has wrecked markets for agricultural exports from Third World countries. The EEC charges high food prices in Europe to subsidise the purchase of food, its processing and storage, and finally its export. Through massive subsidies, it has tripled its share of food exports in the last decade. In July 1984 the cost of producing sugar in the EEC was £346.50 per tonne and EEC sugar exports were priced at £93.50. A subsidy of £253 wrecks the markets of all Third World sugar producers. If the subsidies had affected cereals in 1984, it would have done far more to feed Ethiopia’s hungry than any of the relief. But grain prices stayed high up until it was clear 1984 was a bumper harvest.
There was no shortage of food in the world. Per head of the world’s population, more food is available in 1985 than ever before in the history of the world. And the estimates suggest continued growth to the end of the century, well ahead of the growth of population. The real problems are elsewhere – 12 million Americans in ill health because of inadequate food intake, while American farmers are bankrupted by high debts and US agricultural banks stumble.
American farmers, like Ethiopia, have not been bankrupted by a shortage of food, but rather by rising interest rates, declining commodity prices, and rising import (or input) prices. Africa – with a level of debt equal to 58 per cent of its gross product – is financing the advanced capitalist world with its interest payments. The problem of Ethiopia, like the farmers’, is one of slump, not food production.
The function of slump is to ‘restore incentives’. That means raising profit rates for capital by bankrupting segments of capital, cutting capacity and labour costs. For workers, it means enforcing the disciplines of work through the enhanced fears of unemployment, cutting back welfare and trade union protections. And famine is part of that process. Slump is a time when the rate of return on the sale of some forms of labour power falls below the minimum socially necessary income required to secure survival. The physical elimination of firms is paralleled by the physical elimination of part of the world’s labour force.
Famine also shifts the balance of class power. Domestically, it redistributes land, equipment, livestock and cash to the rich, and it cuts wages. Internationally, the dominant powers in the world are able to force their wishes on the governments of hungry countries. One US aid official expressed the view succinctly: ‘In a sense, we’re talking about a kind of recolonisation – about sending smart white boys to tell them how to run their countries.’
The causes of famine have little to do with a shortage of food. And its results likewise produce no abundance.
 



AS CHINA has opened up to the world system, it has increasingly related to the Japanese economy. Japan’s exports to China have increased rapidly in the eighties. They are 50 percent up in 1984/85 alone (compared to an increase in overall Chinese imports of 38 percent).
Increased imports reflect both the close attention to China paid by the Japanese government and the energetic efforts of Japanese companies – some 250 are represented in Peking (ten times the representation of British companies). The exports are mainly consumer goods, pouring in to meet the great hunger for durables of newly prosperous Chinese consumers. China is now Japan’s largest export market for colour television sets and fridges. It is Japan’s second largest market for vehicles, and in 1985, overtook the United States as the largest volume buyer of Japanese steel.
The Chinese government aims to increase per capita gross national product up to the year 2,000 from about 300 to 800 US dollars. Japanese traders thus foresee a continuous expansion in the Chinese demand for their offerings, with a possible market of ten million television sets per year for forty years (the current Japanese output is about 15 million sets per year).
Do these short term economic changes represent any long term political trends? Some people in Japan see the Sino/Japanese relationship as the basis for continued Japanese growth in the face of world slump and stagnation (in the same sort of way as the South African government appealed to the rest of Africa to close ranks with it in the mid seventies against world slump). The combination of unlimited cheap Chinese labour with Japanese capital and technology could, it is said, be the heart of a regionally self-sufficient economic bloc, especially if it came to include the oil of Indonesia.
 
Economic insurance
In the thirties, the creation of this regional ‘Co-Prosperity Sphere’ under the control of Tokyo was the declared aim of Japanese imperialism. More modestly, others think China could supply an economic insurance policy against the risk of import controls directed to keep out of North America and Europe Japanese exports.
However, this year the expansion of Sino/Japanese trade has begun to reach its limits. At one stage, Peking was talking of a possible 18 billion dollar trade deficit – a third of it due to imports from Japan. China’s foreign reserves are said to be about ten billion dollars, so the limit on its importing capacity is severe. The Japanese have tried to ease matters by lending to China and by increasing their import of Chinese goods.
Japanese grain traders have started to sign long term agreements to import Chinese corn – to the chagrin of United States companies that supplied 13.7 million tonnes in 1984, the largest US export to Japan (97 per cent of Japan’s imports and 28 per cent of US corn exports). American suppliers reckon their share of Japanese imports could fall to 75 percent this year as the result of imports from China of 2.5 million tonnes. Furthermore, Chinese corn this year is slightly more expensive than American, so Washington believes these are politically motivated imports.
The same situation operates in the case of cotton. The United States share of Japanese imports, 51 percent in 1984, is expected to fall to 25 percent this year as the result of expanded Chinese exports. China is also expanding its export of vegetables, particularly hitting US exports of soya bean to Japan.
However, even if China could expand (and so pay for increased imports from Japan), is there any possibility of the Sino/Japanese economic relationship becoming a real counterweight to Japan’s relationships to North America and Europe? It seems most unlikely in the foreseeable future for the two economics arc wildly different in scale.
For example, some 56 percent of Japanese exports are ‘Machinery and Transport Equipment’. China’s imports in this category was about 4.4 percent of Japan’s supply in 1983 (the last year for which there are figures). There is no way China could sustain the mighty Japanese economy on present levels of income.
 
Combined imports
Even if we throw in the rest of East and South East Asia (South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, Philippines, Indonesia, Singapore, Vietnam) and assume Japan’s exports exactly fit what those countries require, their combined imports with those of China still only reach 46 percent of Japan’s exports in this field. Japan depends very heavily on markets in North America and Europe. And this leaves out of account Japan’s dependence for raw material imports in Australia and North and South America.
Could the Japanese government and banks pump funds into China to buy Japanese exports? In the late forties, Washington’s Marshall Aid Plan is supposed to have achieved this purpose in Europe, injecting finance which set going the long boom. In fact, Marshall Aid seems to have been too small and too short lived to achieve this purpose; but United States military spending in Europe following the outbreak of the cold war did.
However, US funds were injected into countries with a skilled labour force and, despite destruction, a developed infrastructure. In China’s case, not only is the scale much larger – China’s imports are only 14 percent of Japan’s exports – but China’s capacity to expand is much more limited. It still has to train its workers and develop infrastructure.
In any case, Japan’s companies are contesting for world domination, and for that, they need to be abreast of the latest technical changes. Even a partial dependence on a backward market is likely to stultify the technical capacity of Japanese companies – as the existence of the British empire partly stultified the technical competence of British companies trading there. However, this is a small argument in comparison to the limited capacity of China to absorb Japanese exports, let along pay for them.
The age of the self-sufficient regional empire is past. It is now too late to recreate the old imperialism, even in the case of Japan which is the most nationally separate component of world capital. The dominant powers have gone well beyond that. The international companies are swiftly being obliged to copy the same tendency.
 



THE state of Chihuahua runs along the northern border with the United States. It is large – slightly bigger than Britain. It has been dominated for nearly a century by the Terrazas-Creels and an oligarchy of nineteen other families.
They always worked closely with interests over the border in Arizona and Texas. The revolution (1910 to 1920) expropriated most of the land. The great revolutionary general, Pancho Villa, distributed the land among his generals. But the families kept and expanded the rest of the economy.
In 1982, the last government of Mexico (that of President Lopez Portillo) nationalised the banks, and their private industrial holdings. He did it, in order to back the banks’ overseas debts with the credits of the federal government, and he hoped, stop the flight of capital from Mexico. But private business was appalled.
The leading representative of business has been stomping the country since then ‘in defence of liberty’ and against ‘the anarchy of the state’. The 46th Congress of the employers’ federation has just ended, with a resounding call for a rollback of the public sector and the subordination of state enterprises to ‘the rule of law’ (meaning the market).
It is odd because successive governments have done business a lot of favours. And Mexico has become a major industrial power. Also the President has announced that state corporations will be subject to profit and loss calculations, and loss making units will be closed.
 
One party state
In Chihuahua – like the neighbouring northern states of Sonora and Nuevo Leon – the opposition has taken a more overt political form. In the municipal elections of 1983, 15 of Chihuahua’s leading families came out publicly in support of the right wing opposition party, PAN (the National Action Party).
Mexico is a one party state. The PRI – the Party of Institutionalised Revolution – is slightly less reactionary than the Russian Communist Party, but not much. It beheaded what was left of the great peasant revolution of 1910, and fashioned by brute force a new ruling class for the country. It cannot be overthrown – short of civil war. Nonetheless, the cadres were alarmed in 1983.
Only by the most gross fraud and corruption could the books be cooked to ensure the PRI held the north.
The opposition parties were furious. There were sporadic riots and demonstrations in many towns, and particularly Coahuila. In Piedras Negras, the police opened fire – two were killed and forty-two injured before the PAN militants were driven over the border at Eagle Pass. The army was moved in to take over the city. Elsewhere, town halls were burned, cars sacked, and in one place a police chief stoned to death.
There were calls for a legal ban on PAN and the employers’ federation. The Church was denounced – and all three accused of being in the pay of the US Republican Party. New president De la Madrid accused the conspiracy of treason – ‘There are still people outside Mexico and some inside who think Mexico does not deserve to be independent and would like to see us under the domination of a foreign power.’
In March, there was an unseemly scramble for nominations of the PRI candidates for the elections to the Assembly and for seven state governerships in July. The Assembly is a tame body that meets for four months per year only and is overwhelmingly dominated by the PRI. The PRI election campaign began in January and the walls are already covered with giant, if vacuous slogans:



‘Each time we are more responsible’
‘Our commitment is to Mexico alone’
‘55 years of social peace’



Ministers are already touring the country, bombasting dutifully dragooned crowds. The majority stand silently and watch, as always bemused, by the fantasies of their rulers.
If the alliance of PAN and the northern ruling classes is beginning to shake the confidence of PRI, the alliance of the socialist parties and the urban working class in the south is regrettably much less developed.
The leading party, the PSUM (the Unified Mexican Socialist Party), a Euro-Communist coalition of parties dominated by the old Mexican Communist Party, has a following, but like most of the other leftist parties, it is mainly among the intelligentsia.
The PRT, the most important section of the Fourth International, is a public competitor and has just nominated its slate of candidates, headed by the redoubtable woman trade union leader, Rosario Ibarra.
The trade unions are overwhelmingly dominated by the official PRI unions, led by the famous Fidel Velasquez, now in his eighties.
Velasquez, on the point of retirement, has done more service lately for Mexico’s ruling order than probably in the rest of his long life. He and his lieutenants have loyally patrolled the class perimeter, grim-jawed at the sacrifices they are obliged to ask workers to make if Mexico’s revolution is to be preserved for the bourgeoisie.
The three years since 1982 have been economically the worst in Mexico’s post-revolutionary history.
To keep Mexico cheap for foreign tourists and exports while inflation is high requires that the devaluation of the peso must get faster and faster. It is now devaluing by 21 cents per day.
The press record tiny items of reality – the 40,000 children who die of diarrhoea each year; the land seizures; the strikes. And on street corners, increasingly youths jostle each other, vying for the attention of motorists stopped at the traffic lights – fire eaters, melancholy clowns and jugglers, silent Indian women with children tied to their backs mutely offering chewing gum.
And alongside that, the press is still advertising luxury holidays in the south of France, trips to Singapore and Japan. The fashionable restaurants are crowded and noisy. The highways of Mexico City are still packed with expensive cars. In Reforma, the nearest thing to the Champs Elysées in the Americas, bustles with finely-cut suits and exclusive gowns.
Even the corruption issue has gone quiet. The former head of the national oil company has gone down for lifting 30 million dollars. The ex-Chief of Police of Mexico City is being held in Los Angeles while the government seeks his extradition; his greatest crime was to deduct a chunk of the wages of every policeman in the city to provide proper burials for those killed on duty – and then he didn’t bury them.
The former President himself, Lopez Portillo, who swore in 1982 to defend the peso ‘like a dog’, has kept his ‘dog palaces’, the four gracious mansions he had built at the expense of the government high above the city in the west.
 
Left divided
For the left, for a moment, the miners’ strike in Britain offered a spark of hope. The press coverage was extensive. Even Excelsior, the leading conservative daily, had four long articles, summarising interviews in the coalfields. There were, they said, three forces at stake: Mrs Thatcher and McGregor, ‘the Lenin of Yorkshire’, and ‘those in the middle, the strikebreakers’; it is quite quaint how the middle classes see strike breaking as, like themselves, being in the middle.
In the run-up to the elections in July, there is a chance for the left. The worst of the crisis has been absorbed and now the economy is looking up. Wages have become firmer, and employment started to increase.
The left is heavily divided and few of the lessons of recent years have been learned. But history unfortunately does not wait until we are ready.
 



A regular new column by Nigel Harris
EMANUELA De Marzo, eight and a half years old, worked in a bakery – from 7.00 till 8.30 in the morning, and 1.00 to 10.00 in the afternoon and evening, with school in between from 8.30 to 12.30. His hours – and conditions – of work came to light only because he reported to hospital after three of his fingers were sliced off in one of the bakery’s machines.
The case of Salvatore Cazzolino, aged eight, came to light in the same way; he reported to hospital after his right forearm was severed under the roller of a planing machine in the timber factory where he worked.
There are perhaps one to two million children employed illegally in Italy. Because they are illegal, they have no rights; they work long hours, some on the night shift, and without holidays. A 1971 Ministry of Labour survey showed that two thirds of those that worked dodged school altogether (and only just over a third qualified for the five year certificate of elementary education).
They worked in small scale factories – engineering, textiles and garments, footwear, and petty assembly operations (ball point pens, padlocks, toys). Some worked at home in cottage trades; some went to factories to help their mothers; some were in loading and packing in the fish docks, in agriculture or markets.
The numbers are quite small in Italy, tiny in comparison to the uncounted millions in India – from building labourers, street sellers, scavengers and sweat shop workers. In Sivakasi town in Tamilnadu State, 45,000 children work in tiny print shops, fireworks and matchmaking factories – ‘the largest single concentration of child labour in the world’ as a recent report describes it.
Most are aged 10 to 14, but the youngest the survey found was four. They work on piece rates – in matchmaking – for up to twelve hours in dark sheds. They live up to 45 kilometres from the workplaces and are collected by buses at 4.00 a.m. and returned home at between 6 and 8.00 p.m., for a twelve hour working day. ‘If we don’t make the specified number (of matches),’ one boy says, ‘sometimes we are not allowed to get into the buses that take us home’.
The top daily wage is ten rupees (about 83p). Of course, the Indian Constitution guarantees that ‘no child shall be employed in any factory or mill or be engaged in any other hazardous employment’. And the 1948 Factory Act says that employment can only be legally taken after completion of the fourteenth year.
In Thailand, parents – especially the poor in the north-east – are often forced to sell their young to labour brokers, who ship them to the factories and brothels of Bangkok (as John Pilger showed a few years ago in the Daily Mirror when be bought a young girl). In a 1979 case, fifteen girls aged under sixteen were rescued from a factory suffering from malnutrition; they worked from 5.00 a.m. to 9.00 p.m. and had done so for two years.
In Moroccan carpet factories, the Anti Slavery Society found seven-year-olds, working up to 72 hours a week without pay; their parents accepted this in order that their kids could learn a trade and be paid wages as from the age of twelve.
It is so unlike the family life of our own dear Queen, far away from the green and pleasant land. In fact, child employment never died out in Britain – kids always delivered the newspapers, some of the milk and ran errands or made tea. And British capital has a record as proud as any in making the little children suffer – employing toddlers in the mines of early Victorian England to crawl down passageways too narrow for adults.
Even now, the more successful the government is in creating a competitive labour market, in cutting restrictions (Wages Councils, the inspectorates), in encouraging small firms (always the biggest employers of minors) and home production, the more employers will try to dilute their workforce. And the higher adult unemployment, the more part-time jobs for children and women become the only means to keep up family income.
The illegal employment of children eats into the legal employment of young people – as youth unemployment rises, so does the employment of under-16s. And that is a mechanism for cutting real wages, just what Tebbit wants.
The Low Pay Unit which does excellent work in mapping out the sweated trades has done a survey of child labour in Bedfordshire, Luton and London. Between a quarter and a third of school-aged children worked, half of them under the age of thirteen; 40 percent worked during the school term in paid employment, excluding odd jobs like babysitting, running errands etc.
Of the children working one in ten had more than one job, and of these, half had more than two jobs. A third delivered papers; one in five served in shops; 13 percent worked as cleaners, and another 13 percent in hotels and restaurants; others were painters and decorators, sewed garments, did clerical work or ran market stalls. And there must be a legion of others, unrecorded, working in tiny illegal sweatshops in the backstreets.
Generally the work was part time. The majority worked less than 16 hours a week (but with school, that works out as a 51 hour week), or roughly the same paid employment as nearly half all the married women who work. Some did not get off so lightly. The record-holder, a boy in London, put in 47 hours serving in a family take away; a working week including school (if he went to school) of 82 hours, not bad for Tebbitland.
Tebbit would be impressed also by the downwardly ‘flexible’ wages. For 12 percent of girls and 20 percent of boys, hourly earnings were under 50p. 36 percent of girls and 45 percent of boys were paid between 51p and one pound an hour.
Because the jobs were illegal, workers were paid outside the firm’s normal accounts and in cash. No tax or insurance was paid. The children had no normal rights – against unfair dismissal; they did not get properly specified pay slips, nor sick pay; they had no right to industrial accident compensation (indeed, parents were held liable if their children were illegally employed). The child worker is in essence in the same position as an illegal immigrant.
As in the Italian case, the problem was not the law. There are lots of statutes already available in Britain to prevent child labour. Furthermore, twelve years ago an Act was passed to tighten the regulations and fill loopholes, but the regulations have never been put into force. But with one Health and Safety inspector for every one thousand manufacturing establishments, and 119 Wages Inspectors for the whole country, it is unlikely the working kids can ever be found.
Only the accidents illuminate the reality, whether these are the damage of industrial injuries, or conscientious teachers trying to trace truants to source or find out why so many kids appear exhausted, always yawning and inattentive.
There is no regular count or estimate of the numbers of minors at work. We can only guess at how the slow evolution of the system restores the full power of the market over labour, and brings back all those good old days of the Victorian spirit.
 



The popular picture of the right wing orientation of government policy sees it as the result of the coming to power of Mrs Thatcher in this country and President Reagan in the United States.
We know this is not true since the real change occurred in the preceding administration – under Callaghan and Healey in 1977 in Britain, and under Carter in the United States.
Indeed, in general, major changes of economic policy do not coincide with changes of government. All major changes since 1945 in Britain have taken place in the mid term of governments, not between them. That is because such changes are the result of change in the objective circumstances facing the whole ruling class, (changes in external competition, war rivalries, the domestic class struggle). The rhythms of the economy do not coincide with the timing of elections.
But the shift to the right in economic policy is not just a matter of timing. A major change in the dominant economic theory has also occurred over the last fifteen years.
That has coincided with a long drawn out change in the policy standpoint of almost all the governments in the world. In retrospect, the Chilean coup can now be seen as the beginning of that change.
The most dramatic change is in economic theory. Forms of Keynesianism dominated almost totally in the fifties. By the seventies it was neoclassical economics (of which Friedman’s monetarism is one variety).
Economic theory is a sensitive reflection of the combination of the objective evolution of the system and the changing policy options facing different dominant interests – governments, national ruling classes, sections of the world capital. A major shift of opinion of the kind that has occurred suggests either a simultaneous change in the dominant factions within most of the national ruling classes of the world, or a change in the structure of the world system affecting most governments in similar ways.
The change is most easily seen in economic policy. This is especially so in the Third World which remained committed far longer than the industrialised countries to the strongest forms of Keynesianism (hardly distinguishable from Stalinism in many cases). What are some of the issues?
In the fifties, it was universally believed that it was impossible for the Third World to export manufactured goods. They could only develop by depending on the domestic market and excluding imports.
Today, there are hardly any governments not committed to the most rapid growth of manufactured exports. Note that this changes the target, ‘economic development’ from being a fully diversified national economy depending on its internal market, to a highly specialised contributor to a world product.
Foreign capital in the fifties was seen as ‘capitalism’ and solely exploitative. Today, most Third World governments are hotly competing in bribes to foreign capital to induce investment. The most dramatic cases are Vietnam and North Korea, among the front runners in offering concessions. The Philippines government has defeated the constitution by making land exclusively available to foreign businessmen. Mexico has effectively ended the rule that foreign business can hold only up to 49 percent of Mexican assets.
Foreign borrowing used to be anathema, but is today universal. In the early eighties, the Indian left protested vigorously at the terms of India’s borrowing from the IMF.
Not many had read the sixth Five Year Plan which, long before the loan was considered, had laid out the same terms, as Indian government policy.
In the fifties imports were to be reduced to the bare minimum. They are now seen as the only spur to improving domestic output so that exports can be increased.
In the fifties, the state could be an unlimited substitute for private capital, and could guarantee certain services regardless of cost. Today, everywhere public welfare and health systems are under attack. The Chinese are privatising both health services and housing. And most governments are selling off or planning to sell off major parts of public sector industry; privatisation is the universal fashion. There is a general campaign against subsidiaries, a shift from direct to indirect taxation, and a subordination of all elements of working class consumption to the ‘market’.
There are many different routes and stages in the change – the violent coups in Chile and Turkey, the slow reform in India (accelerating in the sixth and seventh Plans), the faster pace in China. Financial crisis is forcing Mexico and Brazil in the same direction. Declining oil prices are pushing Indonesia and Nigeria.
Others have resisted (like Egypt, made possible by dollar subventions). Yet others have been major failures – Chile, Uruguay, Argentina, Philippines.
In the fifties, the commitment of the Third World to state capitalism was embodied in a legion of local ‘socialisms’ – Arab, African, Cambodian, Burmese, Indian. Every new ruling class had its local variant. It is still a slight shock to hear that Tanzania is socialist, but encouraging ‘capitalism’, or that what is still the ‘socialist republic’ of Sri Lanka is busily bribing multinationals.
The shift to the right in economic thought is part of a much broader change. The great interwar slump – and the military rivalries that culminated in the Second World War – pushed most of the world into one or other form of state or managed capitalism. From Roosevelt’s New Deal to the Nazi organisation of the German economy, ruling classes everywhere could see their only defence as state intervention.
In Britain, the Tories in the thirties were committed to the control of imports, currency and the organisation of state monopolies in major industries. They nationalised airways, electricity, and even tried to take over the coal mines. This commitment to state direction remained intact until the fifties when a new and quite unanticipated boom began the erosion of controls (what had been a defence against slump now appeared as inhibiting growth), including making sterling convertible.
The unwinding of the structure of controls took a very long time for different political interests had grown up around them. Heath came to power in 1970 – a rehearsal for Mrs Thatcher in 1979 – on a programme of all-out assault on restrictions to the market. He was politically defeated. But Labour had learned lessons. The failure of the Wilson government in 1967 to prevent the devaluation of sterling vividly illustrated to Labour’s leaders that a ‘socialist Britain’ could not control its currency.
Working class confidence blocked Heath’s attempt to derestrict the economy, but once that confidence weakened (and the scale of objective problems grew even greater), it was a Labour government that returned to the task – with Healey’s commitment to monetarism in 1977.
In the Third World, the process was more mixed. Four Asian countries – South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore – demonstrated the possibility of successful manufactured exports in the sixties, but they did so with an opportunistic mixture of state capitalism. There were a host of imitators, but it took the economic crises of the seventies to push most governments to begin the changes.
Mrs Thatcher’s rhetoric is unusual in the Tory tradition, which has always stressed the importance of a strong state for the defence of the ruling class. The change is reflected in her fringe militants, the university students who lean towards a Utopian anti-statism. This is very different from the old crypto-fascist right who believed in a powerful state.
The same shift – from the traditional authoritarian and statist right wing of Europe, to the new ‘let the market decide everything’ can also be seen in France where the Gaullist right has swung very sharply against the state and for markets. There is a contradiction in the militant position, for they are also aggressive nationalists, racialists, and for nastier prisons: that is, they need a powerful state to hit foreigners, blacks, women.
What does the change in economic policy in the Third World represent? First, the arrival of new national capitals that, through the forced capital accumulation of the fifties and sixties, are now in a position to compete in the world market. The Third World countries with significant manufacturing are now crossing over from a defensive state capitalism to an offensive private capitalism (albeit, still employing much support from the state). Sections of business in particular countries resist the shift for they lack the confidence to compete, but the trend is against them.
Second, the system has changed. In the fifties, the market in the industrialised countries was defended against imports, and most Third World countries had not developed the capacity to produce competitive goods. By the eighties, the markets were opened, the capacity developed.
Third, the slump – and the need to increase export revenues to purchase imports and service loans – has driven all to market. They are urged on by the World Bank, the IMF and sundry others, but this would not be effective if it did not go with the grain.
Fourth, the more developed are using access to their market as a bargaining lever to gain access to Third World markets.
Finally, but of greatest importance, the world system has become integrated to the point where the effectiveness of national economic policy is increasingly in doubt except where it conforms or exploits the world market. It is this change in structure which has forced both the change in economic theory and in economic policy, and which means that the trends are likely to continue. The shift to the right is not simply rhetoric, nor a function of eccentric individuals.
The new right thus reflects a new phase in the system, world capitalism, or rather, does so in its economic thought. The social and political components are, however, archaic, reflecting a past world of state, empire and race.
The contradiction reflects the contradictory position of a national ruling class. On the one hand, it is obliged to integrate economically in the world as the condition for survival and growth. On the other, it is dependent upon one national group, one population, the ideological cement of which is aggressive nationalism and racialism. An adventure in the Malvinas is part of the strategy of assuring international capital its assets are safe in Britain – nationalism is the guarantee of internationalism.
There will be no return to the past, to the good old days of Wilsonite social democracy, the green years of Mitterrand. Whether Mrs Thatcher is defeated in the next election or not, it will not put the clock back for the world has already moved on. The crisis for the left is thus not about this electoral battle or that, but about the crumbling of a whole world of theory.
Those who called themselves socialists have been allied to the imperatives of state capitalism for many decades, but that is now being superseded. For many it is frightening. Yet it makes possible a real rethinking about what socialism was supposed to mean – the self-emancipation of the working class, not the liberation of the state.
 



‘WHAT CAN we do? We can do much! we can inject the voice of reason into world affairs. We can mobilise all the spiritual, all the moral, all the political strength of Asia and Africa on the side of peace. Yes, we! we, the peoples of Asia and Africa; 1,400,000,000 strong, far more than half the human population of the world, we can mobilise what I have called the Moral Violence of Nations in favour of peace.’
President Sukarno of Indonesia, Opening Address to the Asia-Africa Conference, Bandung (Indonesia), 18 April 1955.
It is Sunday. The train is not crowded. It climbs slowly towards Bandung, chugging between the terraces of flooded brown paddy, stepped up to the summit of the hills.
Beyond them and higher lie the tea estates, regimented like formal gardens. Bamboo irrigation pipes funnel brown water down the fields. There are five crops in two years here. A volcano or two smoke evilly above.
A plastic toy rolls across the carriage floor between our ankles. It is a black military jeep, an appropriate plaything for a land overshadowed by military-industrial baronies. The iron fist has a glove of prodigious corruption. The police are mean in khaki and brilliant white helmets.
Republic proclaimed
Mean or not, the tangible evidence of their power – and the effects of a decade or more of oil revenue – are all around. The villages of West Java are prosperous; mopeds pop down the rural tarmac roads. There are no ancient thatched huts left, few traditional clothes or bare feet. The soil is very rich for those with access to it.
1985 is the fortieth anniversary of the proclamation of the Indonesian Republic, and the picture of President Suharto, now ‘father of the nation’, beams down from all the walls.
The proclamation was courtesy of the occupying Japanese, so it was not very real. It took three years of bitter and barbarous war to make the Republic stick. The British – Mountbatten and Churchill – held the door open to let the Dutch back in to recreate the ‘Netherlands East Indies’, and they scorched the red earth of Java to destroy the independence movement.
Only ten years later, there was yet another illustrious anniversary, in Bandung itself. In the former Dutch Pension Fund Building, a dull 1930s cement thing, the first Asia-Africa conference met. It was the foundation of the ‘Third World’, although they had not invented the phrase then.
The great names were all there – Sukarno, Nehru, Tito, Nkrumah, Ben Bella, Chou En-lai. And they embodied an idea: there was a third alternative to Washington and Moscow, to capitalism and Stalinism, to the terrors of nuclear Cold War.
It was a heroic moment, but when it rained, the Indonesian Ministers had to mop the floors for, as Nehru proclaimed, ‘Bandung is the capital city of Asia-Africa’ and there must be no puddles. In April of this year, there was a ceremony of commemoration, but the world has moved on. They don’t have puddles now, and the delegates all stayed at the Jakarta Hilton.
That was 40 years and 30 years ago. But hang on, wasn’t there another anniversary, 20 years ago? On 30 September 1965, Lieutenant Untung with a group of young officers attempted to murder the senior generals of the army.
The generals escaped, and launched a devastating counter-attack that slaughtered anything up to three quarters of a million people – including almost the entire Communist Party (the PKI, the largest Communist party in the world after China and Russia). Children played football with the heads. The rivers ran scarlet instead of brown.
That’s where President Suharto came to power as General Suharto. You would think he would want to remember the time when he overthrew Sukarno. You would think in Bandung they would especially remember. For Sukarno was the most famous graduate from the Institute of Technology Bandung. And the city is the headquarters of the Siliwangi Division, the one that the head of the army, General Nasution, relied upon as one of the few loyal units that could be summoned to Jakarta in early October, two decades ago, to begin the slaughter. It announced the opening of that terrible year of the long knives.
But the kindly avuncular Suharto who gazes down from the walls does not like to remember. Perhaps he is ashamed to recall the abattoir from which he snatched his crown. And the left doesn’t care to remember either.
For the destruction of the PKI was not only a terrible defeat, but an even more massive rejection of the politics of class collaboration than that which took place in Chile eight years later, or in Shanghai in 1927.
The strategy of the PKI had been collaboration, on a programme of mild reform. The President, Sukarno, needed the PKI to counter-balance the army – and offered the Communist leaders high state office in return for their loyalty.
Almost certainly the PKI were not involved in Untung’s adventure. It was not their style to be so daring. But, so unstable was the structure, the removal of only one brick brought the whole gigantic building to the ground. The PKI were smeared with being pro-China, and thus became the object of all the anti-capitalist feeling of Indonesians (capital was heavily concentrated in the hands of Chinese Indonesians).
 
Bandung spirit
Furthermore, under Sukarno the country was plunged into a series of adventures and a scale of economic mismanagement which reduced the mass of the population to extremes of poverty. The PKI raised no protest.
1965 was the end of the ‘Bandung Spirit’, as well as of Sukarno. But the new military regime kept the windy slogans, the litanies and catechisms – the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
The pansila is still the official intonation, drilled into yawning civil servants and school kids.
It is all long ago, marked now only in the cyphers on the regimental banners, in the melancholic memories of old men in Beijing, in nightmares of the winners in Jakarta. The old emperors have long retired to the history books and now hardly anyone remembers. Just as 1965 smothered 1955 in blood, so 1985 has buried much of 1965.
The train chugs on, reliable, clean and comfortable in reaching the place, Bandung, but it cannot take you to the idea. The famous ‘spirit of Bandung’ has joined the world of spirits, downed in many a draught in many a bar. It took more than talk to turn the world round, to end the nuclear blocs.
But the spirit lives on in something Suharto and his cronies would not appreciate. For the years of boom that transformed those villages in West Java, and plumped the children’s cheeks and showed how corrupt and bloody dictatorships did so much better than incompetent leftist ones, also spread Jakarta into a giant industrial city. And in the industrial areas, the fever of liberty that distantly excited those gentlemen (there were very few ladies) in Bandung so long ago, that seemed horribly crushed in 1965, is as vigorous as ever.
In the waves of strikes in the early eighties, the new industrial working class of Indonesia began to flex its muscles. The stirrings are still too small to perturb President Suharto, but he may live to learn.
 



Joe Moore
Japanese Workers and the Struggle for Power, 1945–1947
University of Wisconsin Press, London & Madison 1983
The Japanese ruling class is probably the world’s most accomplished in presenting their people as a single unified block, without serious internal divisions. Only rarely is this piece of nonsense exposed so that we catch a glimpse of the rich reality beneath the myth – whether the reality of a Prime Minister caught with his hand in the till or a workers’ struggle or a peasants’ riot. Furthermore, it is in the interests of most of the other national ruling classes to aid and abet the Japanese establishment in fomenting the myth, for by this means they aim to terrify their respective populations with the threat of the fearful unity of the Japanese people – here, they say, is a people that never ceases to work hard for its rulers, never flinches in its total loyalty to Emperor and employer, and will never be taken alive in the defence of the ruling class.
We are now exceedingly privileged to have this long and detailed account of one of those moments when the myth collapsed, and the Japanese ruling order came within sight of working class revolution. It is a remarkable story, and it is very rare to have it told not only in scholarly detail, but also from a political standpoint so close to that of this journal. The struggle for workers’ power is the single thread which binds this large and complex account together.
In 1945, a basic preoccupation of Japan’s rulers was the fear that, in defeat, the Japanese workers would overthrow the system which had inflicted such a catastrophe upon them. They sought by all means to preserve the existing structure of power against American efforts to destroy it. They even defended themselves against the charge that they had led Japan to defeat with the preposterous doctrine that the Japanese people were collectively guilty of defeat (a proposition that was not so absurd that a large number of Americans and Europeans did not share it!) However, to a profound psychological shock at the military disaster – with millions of Japanese streaming home after years of extreme hardship – was added a vengeful occupation force, determined to revolutionise Japanese institutions on a liberal American model, and conditions of extraordinary deprivation and destruction in Japan itself. Capital was on strike, the economy ruined, and food supplies incapable of sustaining even the most austere standard of subsistence for all.
In August 1946, the index of industrial production was about 30% of its 1935–37 average. The Tokyo consumer price index (1935–37 = 100) rose to 17,482 – the national wage index was a mere 3,213. Those lucky enough to have some work – an estimated one third of the labour force was unemployed – received in real terms about ten per cent of their pre-war pay. The food shortage led to a flight of people from the cities in search of village grain, so that the 1944 urban population of 30 million is said to have dropped to 19 million by November 1945. A quarter of the housing stock – and half of the housing stock in the cities – had been destroyed by the endless waves of extraordinarily dense US bombing; some 22 million were homeless. Furthermore the 1945 rice harvest was poor and the public procurement system in ruin; hoarding and speculation were rife; farmers refused to sell when there was nothing to buy with a rapidly depreciating currency; starvation deaths in the streets were commonplace.
This was only half the picture. The American occupation forces ordered the release of thousands of political prisoners to the understandable horror of the Japanese authorities; millions of Japanese returned home from the wrecked empire, for the first time free of the baleful authority of the infallible Emperor system; masses of Japanese workers realised that, despite years of self-sacrifice and deprivation in keeping the war machine going, their leaders had led them to an appalling defeat. The demand arose on all sides for a settling of accounts. The Americans called for democratisation, the liquidation of the great business empires, the zaibatsu, the end of the military oligarchic system, and there was a remarkable echo among the masses of ordinary Japanese. Beginning in the Hokkaido mines – where the 140,000 foreign miners (out of a total of 400,000) began occupations to force their own repatriation – to the famous seizure of the Yomiuri newspaper by its workers, democratisation rapidly exceeded the boundaries implied in the American occupation policy. Factory managers had colluded with the fascist state, and furthermore, hoarded foodstuffs and scarce goods for sale on the black market. The call went up for them to be tried in people’s courts; offices must be seized to open the archives; warehouses opened to popular inspection. Company managers were put on the stage and tried or negotiated with in front of the entire workforce. Industrial trade unions spread with astonishing speed – 2.5% of miners were unionised in October 1945; 92% by December 1946. Nationally trade union membership rose from nothing to six million by late 1947. ‘Production Control’ – seizing the factories and operating them – was the workers’ reaction to the collapsed economy and the unwillingness of employers to restart production. Strikes would only make the famine of goods worse. What began as a tactic, almost stumbled upon, rapidly became something much more thoroughgoing as workers were obliged to create the institutions for collective self-government. The parallel with events in Petrograd, Berlin and Turin after World War I are underlined by the author. By the spring of 1946, some 40,000 workers were involved in struggles to expand production under workers’ control.
The famine of goods forced the workers to reconsider the most important priorities for production. For example, at Toyo Gosei chemical plant, the workers converted production to fertilisers for the farmers; they made barter arrangements with other factories for raw materials, and with the railway workers to ship the goods. Simultaneously, the farmers developed associations to fight the landlords, demand the purge of fascists from the rural administration and an end to compulsory rice procurements by local corrupt officials who then supplied the black market. The struggle to control the rice distribution system led to the seizure of warehouses and local rationing systems.
The process of attempting to seize control of production could not take place in political isolation. Workers’ control became an element in popular mobilisations: railway workers and truck drivers began offering free transport to the cities for demonstrations, which may account for the fact that the first May Day after the war in 1946 attracted two million in the country as a whole and half a million in Tokyo. Outside the Imperial Palace a speaker to the massed thousands won gigantic applause for the daring slogan ‘Down with the Emperor!’ Twelve days later, 113 people broke into the palace to inspect the Emperor’s food supplies and denounce the singular privileges of the Imperial family in conditions of mass starvation (seven days later another group broke into the palace for the same purpose). 50,000 marched on the house of the prime minister, Shidehara, surrounded it and were, only stopped from attack by the timely appearance of the US military police. A delegation was permitted to march in to see Shidehara; an American correspondent witnessing it said: ‘They were, most of them, earthy and untutored men with callouses on their hands ...They called Shidehara a cheat and a liar’ (p. 176). The prime minister fled. So much for the inveterate respect for authority invariably displayed by the Japanese!
While the old order struggled to survive and persuade the US occupation forces to defend them, both old political discredited right-wing nationalists to the right-wing Social Democrats (who had collaborated with the wartime governments) – and the new – the Socialist and the Communist parties – sought to regroup. The Communist Party (JCP) was dedicated to the familiar proposition that the coming revolution would not be a working class and a socialist one, but a ‘democratic’ revolution based upon a ‘broad popular alliance’ to achieve a ‘People’s Republic’ The new order would not be based on the emerging workers’ councils, but would consist of no more than the achievement of a left wing majority in the existing parliament. The JCP however could not just ignore the real world, so it attempted to ride both horses, equivocating between workers’ councils and national trade unions, embracing production control but redefining it simply as a dispute tactic rather than the class basis of revolution.
The author observes:
‘In the final analysis, production control could no more co-exist with unions bent on exercising the maximum authority over labor’s rank and file than it could with employers determined to safeguard property rights and their control over labor’.
At the 5th Congress of the JCP in February 1946 – just as the mass movement was moving swiftly leftwards – the Party moved to the right. It raised the slogans ‘loveable Communist Party’ and ‘For a peaceful democratic revolution’. The Party’s new programme shifted the emphasis ‘from workers’ control to workers’ participation, from production control struggle committees to joint labour-management councils and industrial unions’ (p. 125). Indeed, the Party reproached the Social Democrats for extremism. While the Party was putting its primary efforts into building a popular front of parliamentary forces designed to create a leftist coalition, the mass movement tended to overtake the Party on the left. In the late spring of 1946, as links between farmers and workers grew and local neighbourhood committees were created to control food supplies, ‘the rudimentary outlines of the local soviet’ began to appear. ‘Now if ever was the time for the national left-wing leaders to call for the formation of soviets everywhere’ (p. 128).
They did not and the moment was lost. MacArthur and the Supreme Command of the Allied Powers (SCAP) swung hard over to the right as they began to realise what a monster had been conjured up by the call for democratisation. The Japanese establishment must at all costs be defended now lest Moscow foment yet another victory. The story is long and complex, with many reverses, but in essence the process of restoring the position of the Japanese old order had begun. Yomiuri, the most consistent champion of full democratisation and opposition to the oligarchy of the military, the zaibatsu and the landlords was purged along with all other newspapers; censorship was imposed through a restoration of the powers of owners and editors. The US accelerated food imports to take a bit of the edge off mass hardship.
When government workers called a general strike for February 1st 1947 (preceded by massive demonstrations the previous December), SCAP intervened to declare illegal any strike in essential services and to threaten the full force of military repression for any infringement. This did not seem to deter the workers, so on January 30th MacArthur issued an order cancelling the strike on pain of ‘action of the most drastic nature against individual and organised labor’s interests’ (p. 239), while seizing and holding the trade union leaders in SCAP headquarters.
The movement was already much weaker. It had gone so far without a revolutionary party, strategy or unified leadership. Now what began as a check to the movement became a rout. By 1950, Japanese employers had not only stopped the growth of industrial unions, they had replaced them with plant unions, most of the ‘yellow’ variety. The Japanese working class was driven back into silence.
A short review inevitably makes a complex, detailed work crude and oversimplified. The divisions within Japanese business circles (and their fight over alternate strategies), within SCAP and on the left are an important part of this complex and fascinating story which we must omit here. This is a rare work about a remarkable time. The only regret is that as an academic tome, it is priced for libraries, and well beyond the reach of most pockets – certainly of those who most need to read it. Perhaps some left-wing publisher can be induced to buy the paperback rights, or the author – whose heart is so clearly in the right place – can be induced to write a cheap and more popular version, so that many more people can see yet another example of what heroic accomplishments are possible when men and women fight to be free.
 



India and China, Studies in Comparative Development
Kuan-I Chen and Joginder S. Uppal
Free Press – Collier-Macmillan, £5.95
Hundred Day War: The Cultural Revolution at Tsinghua University
William Hinton
Monthly Review Press, £3.15
The Long Revolution
Edgar Snow
Hutchinson, 1973
The Chinese Cultural Revolution
Adrian Hsia
Orbach and Chambers, £1.45 paperback
To most people, even asking the question: ‘Has Chinese economic growth been faster than Indian?’ is absurd. Everyone knows that China’s record is one of glorious and ever advancing success, India’s of periodic famine, gloom and failure.
Such is the power of propaganda. For India, the facts and figures are abundant. For China, they are very scarce indeed (there has been no published census of the population since 1953, for example), and that scarcity is not because China’s economic success is so remarkable.
Chen and Uppal have put together some of the main authoritative accounts of both economies (virtually all the pieces are fairly easily available elsewhere). They give some very rough and ready idea of the relative performance of each. For example, we can see – on one set of estimates – that between 1952 and 1967, Chinese production of foodgrains (the overwhelmingly largest single output of both economies) increased by 1.9 per cent per year, and Indian by 1.7. If we exclude the two worst years in each country’s case, the growth rates are the same: 2.5 per cent (barely a hairsbreadth in front of the probable increase in population).
In industrial production, China’s overall record is better than India’s, although with some qualifications. China started with much more unused capacity, and – apparently – a significantly richer economy. Unlike grain output, industrial production is not easily compared – we need to compare not just, for example, gross steel output, but also the variety of steels produced. Technically, the modern Indian economy is much more sophisticated than the Chinese (a wider range of special steels, but poorer gross steel output).
When we add up all the different items and make allowance for all the peculiarities, while social conditions seem very different in the two countries, the long-term economic performance is not that different. The Chinese economy expands much faster than the Indian when it expands, but its contractions have been much more violent as well (the opposite of what is normally supposed as a crucial difference between ‘socialism’ and capitalism). This impression may now be changing since much of the book was written well before the onset of the stubborn stagnation now gripping India’s economy.
This book sheds some light on these questions. But it has no unified view (the editors’ introductions and notes do not pull it together). Much of the material is monstrously out-of-date. For example, the item on India’s future economic prospects was originally published in 1962, nine years before this book appeared. As a result, the blandest irrelevance is substituted for the catastrophes that afflicted the Indian economy in the second half of the sixties.
But this factor is only part of a general irrelevance in the volume. Neither author wants to face the question whether India or China have any serious prospect of developing at all. Neither has anything useful to say about a whole range of vital economic determinants – the balance of political power, the class struggle, the effectiveness of the administration, defence expenditure, and so on. The real comparative work has still to be done.
The three other volumes are rather dreadful. The authors come to praise, not to analyse. Two of the books are products of that influential school of thought, the Maoist Liberals (Roosevelt’s New Deal, Keynes, Scandinavian Social Democracy, Mao and Stalin are or were all ‘progressive’ forces). Hsia has higher aspirations and tries to clothe his account in Marxist jargon. But all three evade or miss all the serious political questions in recent events in China.
Hinton’s tale, of the Cultural Revolution in Tsinghua University, has all the heavy moral – and boring – coloration of a nineteenth century fable for the young. There is never any doubt that Good and Virtue will triumph in the end. Fortunately, the book was written after the fall of Lin Piao, so the author was not caught looking silly on the wrong swing of the roundabout.
Edgar Snow, the sort of journalist described by the newspapers as ‘doyen of the old China hands’, momentarily became much more significant than the quality of this book might suggest. He found himself the swallow for Nixon’s Peking spring. His account of his last trip to China – just before he died – is strictly for Sinophiles and those who enjoy sycophantic but respectful anecdotes about the great of history. There are no surprises.
Adrian Hsia has higher pretensions. But his political insensitivity makes it impossible for him to do much better. For him, the Cultural Revolution was an exercise in something he calls ideology (i.e. the rhetoric of propaganda statements), and he approaches his subject with a breathtaking innocence (‘by the end of this two year period (1955-6) ... China had become a socialist state in all essential respects’; ‘In theory ... the workers are the true leaders of the Chinese people’s dictatorship. In practice, they take their lead from the party, which represents their interests and acts on their behalf’).
Unlike Hinton, he gets caught praising Lin Piao fulsomely. Nor does he even get his facts right. At one stage he argues that Mao’s notion of permanent revolution is almost identical to Trotsky’s, and quotes in support a passage he says is from Trotsky’s Permanent Revolution. It is not, and in style and content appears not to be by Trotsky at all.
Such tiresome trivialities should not deflect those in search of heroic romance or academic advancement. The real China is another matter.
 



In Asia today, the case for state capitalism depends upon China
putting up an economic performance that is dramatically superior to
that of other countries. Very often it seems that the gap is so
great, the case is hardly worth arguing. Anything that questions
China’s excellent economic record must be CIA propaganda.
Economic growth does not, of course, necessarily mean economic
development. Output can grow at the same time as most people remain
unaffected – remain, for example, employed in agriculture.
Again, output can grow while conditions for the majority even get
worse.
For anyone familiar with Calcutta who visits Canton or Shanghai,
the contrast is very sharp – on the one hand, the appalling
conditions of a very large proportion of people and the ostentatious
luxury of a minority; on the other, austerity but apparently an
adequate diet and considerable equality.
For many people that is enough. For many liberals sympathetic to
China, it is enough that China appears a fairer society than India
(although they would not accept that, on similar criteria, British
capitalism is ‘fairer’ than either). But for a poor man
in India this consideration is – in the absence of any other
alternative – decisive.
Unfortunately, it is not enough. We need to know how secure is
China’s achievement – can it continue to raise the
condition of its people, industrialise and defend its borders?
In the 1960s, the backward countries increased defence spending by
114 per cent; Asia by 84 per cent; China by 161 per cent. The
appalling burden of defence on an economy as poor as China’s is
the requirement of survival in an imperialist dominated world. If
defence is crippling the industrialisation of other backward
countries, why will it not do so in China? It is not enough just to
stand still.
The original claim of Stalinist state capitalism was not merely to
a fairer distribution system, but to world power – the
‘proletarian base’ would grow to engulf capitalism
itself, not just create a more decent regime at home.
This means that, among other things, the gap between China and the
industrialised countries must be closing to the point where the
People’s Republic can unequivocally show that its system is the
only way forward for the peoples of the world.
If we leave aside all other aspects of present-day China, however,
what has been the record in terms of economic growth? How does it
measure against the performance of the only country that comes
anywhere near it in size, India? Unfortunately, the statistics are
far from reliable. India’s economy is known in some detail and
with some accuracy. China’s cannot be.
No continuous series of statistics on the national economy or
particular sectors have been published by Peking since 1959. The
population figures date from the census of 1953 (since when there
have been two complete censuses in India, 1961 and 1971), which was
itself not very reliable. This means that nobody really knows the
size of China’s population (the possible range is enormous),
and therefore, how far – say – grain output is capable of
feeding it.
The Chinese government itself uses different estimates – the
Ministry of Commerce seems to use the figure of 830 million people;
the Ministry of Food 800 million; the planning department ‘less
than 750 million’ – a range of 80 million! In 1972 Chou
En-lai spoke vaguely of the present rate of growth of population as
‘around two per cent’, which could represent a change
from 1953 to under two per cent or something virtually the same as
India’s 2.47 per cent (1971 census).
The position is not everywhere as bad however. The figures
published up to 1959, plus some of the recent issued statistics, plus
what is known about the rough proportions of the Chinese economy,
some hints, isolated facts and so on, provide a rough guide.
Some of the sources for particular years are American, for US
imperialism has the most powerful interest in identifying what is
happening in China. We are not dealing here with the wild prejudices
of the popular press, but with careful estimates, some of them
exceedingly favourable to China (since there are many pro-China
American sinologists). They are no more lies than Chinese government
claims are lies.
The Peking government refuses to publish its own account, we have
to rely on what sources there are – while always checking the
Chinese basis for those sources.
India and China began from very different base points. China is
much larger – its population may be 40 to 50 per cent above
that of India – and its agriculture has always been much
richer. Agriculture is overwhelmingly the most important activity in
both countries, and within agriculture, the production of food
grains.
Given the higher Chinese productivity – some say it has been
consistently higher since the tenth century [1]
– the overall output per head in the Chinese economy as a whole
would be significantly higher. [2] On the
other hand, the military needs of British imperialism in India
resulted in a much more extensive network of roads and railways,
covering a much smaller land area, and that factor is important in
the speed of growth.
Taking the main areas of the economy, what is the picture? 
1. Agriculture
Food grains production dominates agriculture in both countries. So
the annual grain harvest is the most significant single index of the
performance of the economy. The graph shows the respective output of
China and India. The Indian figures are official. The Chinese
contain, for particular periods, different estimates.
The figures are difficult to compare. Normally Chinese grain
statistics are for unhusked rice and include for example –
unlike the Indian – potatoes. Nevertheless the direction of the
graphs is not affected by this factor (the Chinese figures are
adjusted to allow for dehusking).
If we compare the first and last years for both countries, we get
a rate of increase per year of 1.8 per cent for India and 2.6 for
China, but this is distorted by the peculiarity of the two years –
had we taken, for example, 1970-71 for India and 1971 for China, the
annual rate of growth would be 3.9 per cent for India and 3.3 for
China. To flatten out the accidents of particular years, we can
compare the first five and the last five years:



 


India


China


Per cent superiorityof China’s output




Average, first 5 years(million metric tons)


  69.2


      134.4  


94    per cent




Average, last 5 years(million metric tons)


101.2 


 (i)189.0  (ii)195.02


86.9 per cent92.7 per cent




Per cent increase


  46.2 (annual rate: 2.2%)


 (i)  40.6 (annual rate: 1.9%)(ii)  45.1 (annual rate:
			2.1%)


 




(2 estimates have been provided for China’s last five
			years, a high and a low – cf. the figures in the sources for
			the graph)



We can alter the assumptions and estimates, and get slight
variations in these figures [3], but the
overall conclusion remains – the rate of growth of food grains
output of both countries has been much the same averaging, over a
quarter of a century’s sustained development effort, something
around two per cent per year – perhaps just about keeping level
with the rate of growth of population. The gap between Indian and
Chinese total output remains roughly constant – with perhaps a
very small tendency for it to decrease.






Notes to the graphFoodgrains output – million metric
			tons, husked




India


    


China




 


 


 i)


ii)




1952


 125


 




1952/53


  62


1953


 127




1953/54


  72


1954


 130




1954/55


  71


1955


 142




1955/56


  69


1956


 148




1956/57


  72


1957


 150




1957/58


  67


1958


 165–6




1958/59


  79


1959


 138


129.6




1959/60


  77


1960


 122–30


121.5




1960/61


  82


1961


 131


121.5




1961/62


  83


1962


 141–6


121.5




1962/63


  80


1963


 148


137.7




1963/64


  81


1964


 154–62


149.9




1964/65


  89


1965


 162


153.9




1965/66


  72


1966


 164–78


170.1




1966/67


  74


1967


 154–86


184.7




1967/68


  95


1968


(155–62)


187.9




1968/69


  94


1969


 194


191.2




1969/70


100


1970


 199


199




1970/71


108


1971


 203


 




1971/72


104


1972


 194




1972/73


100


 




(estimate)






SourcesIndia:
1. 1952–3 to 1960–61, the officially revised index
			(rounded), cited by Pranap Bardhan, Recent Development in
			Chinese and Indian Agriculture, in Kuan-I Chen and Jogindar S.
			Uppal, India and China, Studies in Comparative Development,
			London, 1971, Table 1, p. 45.2. 1960–61 to 1970–71, from Economic Survey,
			1971–72, Delhi 1972, table 1.5, p. 80.3. 1971–2 – the provisional official figure; 1972–3
			– a guess from Economic and Political Weekly
			(Bombay), Feb. 17, 1973, p. 366.
China: (series i)
1. 1952–67 – derived from estimates of unhusked
			grain by the use of a reduction factor of 0.81 (the factor used by
			Ishikawa in Factors affecting China’s Agriculture in the
			Coming Decade, 1967) by Bardhan, op. cit., from the
			following sources: 1952–1957: from Ten Great Years,
			State Statistical Bureau, Peking 1960. 1958–1965: from E.F.
			Jones, The Emerging Pattern of China’s Economic
			Revolution, in An Economic Profile of Mainland China,
			Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, 1967. 1965 figure
			officially confirmed. 1966 – from Han Suyin, China in the
			Year 2000, London 1967, p. 54 (220 million tons) 1967 –
			from Anne Louise Strong, Letter from China, Jan. 15, 19682. 1968 and 1969 – the least reliable figures –
			estimates made by China Association, London (reported Financial
			Times, May 28, 1969) and Tanjug report, Peking.3. 1970 –– Edgar Snow reports from interview with
			Chou En-lai, Ciu En-lai ci parla della potenza Cinese,
			Epoca (Milan), 28 Feb. 1971, p. 21. 1971 –
			Peking Review, 1, 1972, p. 10, and New China News
			Agency, Jan. 1, 1971, 1972 – Chou En-lai to delegation
			Scandinavian journalists, reported China Quarterly 58,
			p. 169.
(series ii):
1. 1959, 1968–9: from Bruce Macfarlane, Economic
			Policy and Economic Growth in Communist China, seminar paper,
			April 1971.2. 1960–67: from D. T. Healey, Chinese Real Output,
			1950–70, Bulletin of the Institute of Development
			Studies (University of Sussex), 4/2–3 June 1972.An alternative series has been constructed by Werner Klatt,
			1958–1967 – cf. China Quarterly 35, July–Sept.
			1968.



Of course, from the graph we can see that the performance in
detail has striking contrasts. The fluctuations in Chinese output are
much greater than in India. When Chinese grain output expands, it
does so much more rapidly, but it also falls much more drastically.
Indeed, paradoxically, the economic fluctuations of ‘socialism’
are much greater than those of capitalism on this evidence.
In non-food grain items of agricultural output, India’s
performance seems to have been better (presumably, the price
incentive of private capitalism for commercial crops has affected
this). Since 1957, it seems, India’s total agricultural output
has grown by about three per cent per year and China’s by just
over two per cent. [4]
Again, it has to be stressed that the importance of these figures
is not that they can be relied upon (or rather the Chinese figures
cannot be relied upon) but that the evidence does not suggest China’s
performance is much better than India’s. This is particularly
odd given what is known about China’s massive efforts to
develop agriculture.
For example, the output of China’s chemical fertiliser
industry is said to have been 17 million metric tons in 1971; in
India, consumption of chemical fertiliser barely reached 5½
million tons (the figures are not strictly comparable, since the
Chinese figures include eight million tons from the ‘traditional
sector’, whereas the Indian figures cover only the ‘modern
sector’).
The number of tractors in use in China was said to have reached
135,000 in 1956, but only 31,000 in India by 1961. The failure of the
land reform of India, the continuation of small fragmented holdings,
must have impeded the expansion of output and further exaggerated
India’s relative disadvantage.
Chinese land has always been more intensively cultivated, the
irrigated area proportionately larger, and the per hectare yield
consistently higher. The explanation for China’s relatively
poor performance lies in the interruptions suffered by production
rather than its potential for growth. Indeed, given the
interruptions, the sheer superiority of Chinese agriculture is shown
in its ability to achieve nevertheless the same performance as India.
If expansion had been sustained, China surely would have drawn much
further ahead of India.
Agriculture usually provides the main source of surplus for
capital accumulation in an industrialising backward country. The
possibility of industrial growth is closely related to agriculture’s
growth and fluctuations in the fortunes of agriculture can have a
powerful effect on the industrial sector.
Both the Indian and Chinese governments have in practice been
forced to subordinate their respective economies to the short-run
performance of agriculture, to the power of dominant rural groups.
[5]
This was made necessary by the relative stagnation of agriculture,
the very low level of livelihood of the rural population (a higher
rate of exploitation would have led to mass refusal to work or to
starvation), and the lack of any alternative source of capital.
Defence is also a major drain on what surplus there is. The
industrial sector has to be seen against this backcloth. 
2. Industry
China’s industrial growth has an even more extreme pattern
of fluctuation than its agriculture. The official index of industrial
production (including handicrafts) rose from 100 in 1956 to a claimed
258 in 1959 (and, from one official source, 332 in 1960) only to fall
back to 184 in 1963 and 212 in 1964. [6]
A revision of this index [7] moderates
the size of changes so that 1959 becomes 189 and 1962 110
(1963: 121). In the machine building sector, Cheng has
constructed an index (1957: 100) which registered a dizzy 305 in
1960 and 122 in 1962.
By contrast, India’s progress has been much slower but has
suffered less drastic drops. The 1956:100 index fell only once prior
to 1970 (in 1966, by 0.7 per cent) although output has been extremely
sluggish in some years. India’s overall rate of growth, 1957 to
1970, is put at some six per cent per year (6.6 per cent for the
modern sector; 4 per cent if the small-scale sector is included). The
real growth phase – through the second and third plans –
disintegrated in the later sixties and has still not recovered.
China also experienced its highest rates of growth in the fifties
– some 19 per cent per year during the first five year plan.
This very high figure was partly the result of much unused capacity
available after the war – whereas India’s industrial
capacity had been over-utilised without proper replacement –
the boom that came with the Korean war and the attempt to meet
China’s needs from its home resources rather than imports.
Since then China’s growth rate has declined to something around
six per cent. [8]
This is no ‘new model’, but merely an accommodation to
a particularly forbidding material reality. The propaganda of the
Chinese regime suggests that, once imperialism is expelled, internal
organisation and morale are the keys to development.
No amount of morale, however, can make up for the gross shortage
of resources. Decentralisation is the result of a relatively poor
long-term economic performance (relative, that is, to what is
required to shift the structure of employment), a response to
stagnant employment, rather than the reason for what growth takes
place.
In fact, decentralisation positively restricts the full potential
of the economy by dispersing scarce resources – although it may
make for a quieter political life at the local level. [And] it also
makes it almost impossible to have a serious national plan, and state
planning has been one of the casualties of economic stagnation in
both India and China.
The immediate prospects for each economy are different. Industrial
output in India is only very sluggishly climbing out of a long drawn
out recession, and agriculture in Western India is in severe crisis
(although because the area is in any case poor, this will not have
such great effects on the overall figures).
China’s industrial output is expanding rapidly, but
agriculture has been checked quite sharply in some areas (China’s
purchase of grain abroad is one factor in pushing the world price
up). If the agricultural performance remains poor in both countries,
sooner or later it will lead to a cutback in industry.
But the picture could be changed very quickly. Both countries try
to use the world market as a means of compensating for difficulties
at home – China has now expanded its foreign trade to the same
sort of size as India’s (China’s foreign trade is valued
at about 4,200 million US dollars; India’s – on the
latest figures (1970–71) – at 4,164 million US dollars).
Of course, India’s past external borrowing has reached the
stage where it is a crippling burden on its foreign trade now,
whereas China does not bear such a burden. Almost certainly, however,
the Chinese government will move towards trying to use the resources
of foreign capitalism for China’s development – by
accepting credits and loans to make up for domestic shortages with
foreign imports.
Imperialism dominates the world market. Its forces compel the
defence expenditure which is a major burden upon China’s
economy and to a lesser extent upon India’s. Backwardness and
the price of development today reduce the massive efforts made in
both countries to little more than standing still in development
terms.
Everyone knows that Indian capitalism is rotten to the core and
has no serious perspective of development. The lack of any
perspective, however, also afflicts China. Stalin’s aim of
‘socialism in one country’ became in the 1950s
‘development in one country’; but even that is now
impossible.
Development can only take place on a world scale – unlocking
the accumulated resources of world imperialism for the development of
the whole world. The reformist-nationalist alternative –
gradual economic development in one country – has become
Utopian. It can no longer be a substitute for world revolution.
Both countries have made important advances. Both have programmes,
for example, in the fields of aerospace and nuclear energy, in
electronics and computers. In both, the engineering and petrochemical
industries have had strikingly high rates of growth.
China still depends on imports for much of its needs in heavy
vehicles, special steels, ocean shipping, modern aircraft, chemical,
metallurgical and oil refining equipment (although it meets 80 per
cent of its needs for machinery at home, in comparison to 15 per cent
in the fifties).
India’s dependence on imports of complete units is less than
China’s, but is much greater on imported components for a much
wider field of manufacturing. Technically, India’s productive
capacity is almost certainly more advanced than China’s, and
the modern units on a much larger scale; as a result, the diversity
of output is greater and more sophisticated.
But in absolute terms, China’s output is, in many fields,
much larger than India’s. In steel the contrast is most
dramatic – China’s output in the modern sector is some 14
million tons, with another seven from the ‘traditional’
sector; India’s total output is about seven million tons.
This says nothing about the quality or diversity of steels
produced, nor about the base point: China’s peak steel output
during the Second World War was 13 million tons, whereas India’s
probably never went much over one million. [9]
At its most optimistic, China’s performance is considerably
better than India’s, and on the less optimistic, slightly
better. But in both cases, there is nothing which distinguishes
China’s growth today over some 25 years as the Soviet Union was
distinguished between 1928 and 1953.
China started from a far lower base point than did Russia (China’s
grain output per head in 1952 was less than half that in the Soviet
Union in 1928 [10], and the price of
development is now incomparably higher. The Russian rulers pillaged
agriculture and robbed the industrial workers to maintain a breakneck
pace of industrialization. In neither China nor India is this
possible. 
3. Development
In any case, the growth of output today does not show changes in
employment (and that is what constitutes development). It is here
that the ruling classes of India and China have grounds for real
pessimism. Neither economy has shown any sustained ability to employ
its available labour force.
Peking’s emphasis on labour productivity in Chinese
factories – despite other efforts to increase employment in the
countryside – have the same effect as in India. The Chinese
leadership has been much more ruthless than the Indian in using the
rural areas as places of exile for surplus urban labour – in
order to minimise urban labour costs and preserve low prices of
industrial output. The maintenance of strictest police controls round
China’s cities to prevent people getting in to them shows how
far the mass of the rural population willingly accept this state of
affairs. [11]
There are no useful estimates of unemployment in either country
since ‘unemployment’ only makes sense where everyone goes
through labour exchanges for jobs and a job means something clear and
measurable.
Yet the growth of the population entails a certain growth in the
labour force; and the growth in industrial and agricultural
output entails a certain increase in the number of jobs. And
on any evidence, the first is wildly larger than the second.
Both countries are large enough to mobilise resources on a scale
sufficient to change the overall output of their respective
economies. But not by any new methods. China’s leadership is
committed to building heavy industry – as its leaders readily
admit [12] – but cannot do so
except by first trying slowly to improve agriculture. [13]

Notes
1. J.L. Buck, Land Utilisation in
China, New York 1937.
2. ‘per capita income (in
China) in the 1930s and 1950s was well above that in India in the
1950s ... In particular, grain output per capita in China in
the twentieth century was roughly comparable to that in the
grain-surplus countries of South-East Asia’ – D.H.
Perkins, in China in Crisis (edited by Ping-ti Ho and Tang
Tsou), Chicago, 1968, 1, 1, p. 200.
3. Sinha (The Times, 4
December, 1972) argues for compound rates of growth of ‘food
production’, 1957 to 1970, of 1.3 per cent for China and 2.7
per cent for India. Bardhan (Pranap, Recent Developments in
Chinese and Indian Agriculture, in Comparative Development of
India and China, edited by Kuan-I Chen and J.S. Uppal, Londo,
1971, p. 46), 1952 to 1967, proposes an annual rate for China of
1.9 per cent, and India 1.7 per cent. Because in both countries the
trend is heavily influenced by two bad years, he calculates the trend
excluding those years – and gets 2.5 per cent per year for both
countries. See also Rawski, cited later.
4. Bardhan (see last note) estimates
the annual compound growth rate for agricultural output, 1953 to
1965, at 3 per cent for both countries. Rawski (Thomas, Recent
Trends in the Chinese Economy, China Quarterly 53,
January–March 1973, p. 3), using the figures for grain and
cotton, estimates China’s average annual rate of growth of
agricultural production, 1957 to 1971, at 2.1 per cent (or 1.2 per
cent, 1957 to 1965, and 3.4 per cent, 1965 to 1971). Ashbrook (A.G.,
China: Economic Policy and Economic Results, 1949–71, in
People’s Republic of China, Economic Assessment, US
Congress, May 18, 1972) offers for 1957 to 1965, 0.1 per cent, and
for 1965 to 1971, 2.2 per cent.
5. See my forthcoming book,
India-China: Underdevelopment and Revolution, Delhi, and
articles International Socialism 35, 52, 53 and 55.
6. See Ten Great Years, State
Statistical Bureau, Peking, 1960, pp. 84 and 87; for 1956–8
and thereafter, from various official sources, compiled by Robert
Michael Field, Chinese Communist Industrial Production, in Economic
Profile of Mainland China, Studies prepared for the Joint
Economic Committee of Congress, Washington 1967, Vol. 1, p. 273.
7. Field’s index, ibid.
8. Richman (Barry M., Industrial
Society in Communist China, New York 1969, p. 596) estimates
Chinese industrial growth, 1957 to 1966, at between 5.5 and 6.5 per
cent per year. Field (see note 6), 1957 to 1965, at 5–6 per
cent, and 1957 to 1970, 5.4 to 6.6 per cent. Rawski (see note 4),
1957 to 1965, 9 to 10.8 per cent, and 1965 to 1971, 9.9 per cent.
9. Cited by Kuan-I Chen, The
Outlook for China’s Economy, Current History, Sept.
1972, p. 103.
10. Bardhan, op. cit. See
also Alexander Eckstein, Economic Development Prospects and
Problems in China, The Annals, July 1972, p. 107.
11. See the Chinese Minister of
Agriculture’s comment (7 September 1966): ‘Everyone wants
to go to the towns. There a man can earn 30 to 40 yuan a month just
by sweeping the streets, whereas in the country he can earn no more
than 200 to 300 yuan a year, or 20 yuan a month. Among those present
here, who are there who would voluntarily become peasants?’
(reported. Red Flag of Science and Technology, 6 March 1967,
and cited by Jan Deleyne, The Chinese Economy, London 1973,
p. 58). Policies of urban control are discussed in my review
article, China’s Cities, Economy and Society,
1/1, February 1972.
12. See, for example, China’s
Path to Socialist Industrialisation, Red Flag journal,
October 1969.
13. See Tony Cliff’s article in IS
29, and mine in IS 55.
 



The face which the Chinese regime presents to the world is truly an astonishing one. At one moment we are told China is rotten with resurgent capitalism, the decay reaching as high as the top leadership of the Communist Party. A short time later, the capitalists turn out to be the tiniest group of people, easily excised to leave a kind of Methodist Sunday school (no wage pressure, no strikes, so appealing to Denis Healey of the Labour Party leadership on his recent visit there).
At one moment, continuous political discussion is the only way of saving China; all remains of private enterprise must be rooted out; Red rebels in the factories must revolt against all who want to impose ‘capitalist’ norms. At another, the People’s Daily calls for an end of time-wasting meetings and discussions (23 October, 1972), praises the peasants’ private plots (22 October), and demands punishment for those who resist managerial authority and discipline in the factories (30 May).
However, the casualties of this zigzag policy are numerous; not all are able to move in so short a time from ‘ultra-left’ to right. Prominent leaders have proved insufficiently ‘flexible’ – there are only two effective members surviving from the 1969 five-man standing committee of the Politbureau (Mao and Chou). A third of the Politbureau itself seems to have been purged in the past 18 months, and of the remaining 14 members only eight are active (that is, neither very aged nor ill).
Many millions of young Chinese who believed Mao’s promises have now been betrayed. They did not inherit power; they have been whipped back to school or exiled to remote rural areas. The rate of illegal immigration to Hong Kong is now higher than in any year since the famine exodus of 1962; half the swimmers are young people banished to rural areas, and a quarter regular young farm workers.
The key factor in the period since the end of the Cultural Revolution has been the behaviour of the Soviet Union. In 1968, Russia invaded Czechoslovakia. In 1969, it launched border attacks on China in the North [1], and for a time looked as though it might push matters to war. At that stage, the Chinese army was ensnared in administering China after the destruction of the Communist Party in the Cultural Revolution. [2] The first priority was to restore the army to its military functions and rapidly increase defence expenditure. To do these things, the party had to be restored, trade expanded (to import materials for stockpiling and defence production), and civil State expenditure radically reduced to make room for an enlarged defence budget.
 
The Economy
The Government has radically cut its non-military financial obligations. The State bureaucracy has been heavily purged, and many sent to rural areas where the communes will have to support them (at much lower rates of pay and without the customary welfare provisions safeguarding urban workers). The Red Guards were similarly broken up and despatched to the countryside – some 10 to 20 million of them (Wuhan, a city of three million people, claims to have sent 220,000 of its young people to the countryside over the past three years).
Second, the State has drastically cut its expenditure on education, health and culture (a quarter of the central budget in the 1950s). Length of compulsory schooling has been cut from 10 to seven years; all pupils must simultaneously work in a factory or on the land, and their education is subordinate to the demands of their work. More important, education must now be financed by the production brigades in the villages, and the factories in the cities (formerly, it was financed by the central Ministry of Education). The same is true for health services, culture and administration. Inevitably, this will mean backward areas will have backward services, for the subsidies which formerly came from richer areas (through the central budget) will be at an end. In higher education, no-one can now go from school to university without a few year’s work.
Third, communes have been told to meet their own needs for simple light industrial and consumer goods out of their own resources. The Government claims that this ‘local industry’ is now a major component in the economy – producing 60 per cent of the national output of chemical fertilizer, 40 per cent of cement, a third of steel. This saves the State a lot of money, tapping commune savings that might otherwise not finance investment. On the other hand – as in the Great Leap Forward of 1958 – it is very wasteful of scarce raw materials, diverts investment into uneconomic and badly-run plants (badly-run because the skills of the peasants are not suitable), and produces goods which, helped by the commune’s regulations, compete with the output of national industry. Each commune becomes its own little country, producing everything even though it would be cheaper to produce some things elsewhere and specialise.
‘Excessive’ decentralisation has now been denounced in a drive to economize on raw materials. Yet the checks did not, occur before the policy had been rationalised into an ideology. Mao went so far as to say to Edgar Snow in his last interview:
‘China must learn from the way America developed, by decentralizing and spreading responsibility and wealth among 50 states’ (as a comment on US capitalism and imperialism, that must take the prize).
Peking has alleviated some of the financial strain on local bodies by leaving more of the tax revenue in the hands of rural communes and raising public revenue almost entirely from urban areas. This intensifies the policy, pursued since 1958, of exploiting factory labour rather than the peasantry. The Finance Ministry recently claimed that whereas in the early 1950s, the central Government took 13.2 per cent of farm incomes, now it takes around six per cent. Of course, that only gives the figure for the centre – not the provincial Government or the commune. And it concerns only taxes, not the drain out of the commune arising from compulsory State grain procurements, indirect taxes etc. The Government does claim to have increased the prices of farm produce while lowering industrial prices, which must have accured to the benefit of the communes. But it is also true that still a sizeable part of Government revenue comes from profits and taxes on the processing or sale of agricultural products. However, it seems – ironically enough – that the general burden of the central budget on the peasants in terms of direct taxation may even be as low as it is in India.
Leaving more in the hands of the communes, restoring material incentives for work, allowing the peasants to cultivate private plots and sell the produce for profit, all are by way of soothing the commune leadership after the ‘ultra-left’ excesses of the Cultural Revolution. Perhaps this is also the reason why – despite the continued calls for austerity, discipline and increased savings – there seems to be more colour in the cities, a modest revival in music and the opera, and the end of some of the sillier slogans (e.g. the Red Guard cry: ‘Making love is a mental disease which wastes time and energy’).
Strengthening the peasant market certainly forms part of the general Bukharinist economic strategy [3] said to be embodied; in the unpublished Fourth Five Year Plan that began on 1 January 1971. There has been a debate about economic strategy: whether defence should be the main element, and within this, what sort of defence – ordinary men and munitions, or technically sophisticated weapons, missiles etc; whether agricultural mechanisation or light industry serving agriculture should be the key priority. In July 1971 Red Flag was arguing, almost word for word, Bukharin’s case – that only agricultural prosperity could create the market for industrial goods and the supply of raw materials for industry. Light industry serving agriculture should be the key ling transmitting peasant demand into the growth of heavy industry. Unlike Bukharin, the paper did not point out that such a strategy held out no hope at all of development at any speed. (Bukharin argued: ‘We shall move at a snail’s pace, but we shall be building socialism’).
The central aim of the leadership in the Cultural Revolution – to restore tight central control so that resources could at the maximum rate, be drained into accumulation – has now clearly been abandoned. Accummulation – economic development – is to be sacrificed on the one hand to defence, on the other to standing still at a politically tolerable level. But even the latter depends upon the weather. The harvests in 1970 and 1971 were good, but the 1972 output was severely affected by droughts and floods. With the population increasing by nearly 15 million each year, a quirk of the weather can spell disaster. Even in good years, the increase in grain is hardly a hairsbreadth ahead of the increase in population. The room to manoeuvre is very small. The defence budget and the weather are the two central factors which determine the operation of the modern Chinese economy and its rate of economic development.
 
Foreign Policy
The 1969 attack made the Sovet Union China’s ‘Number One Enemy’ and revealed to Peking how far its diplomatic isolation had gone during the Cultural Revolution. The regime set out to find friends, anywhere and everywhere. This sudden flurry of activity coincided with US efforts to escape from the Vietnamese war. So the two could collaborate to mutual advantage. (Remember Foreign Minister Chen Yi’s 1965 declaration? ‘Peaceful coexistence with US imperialism, which is pushing ahead its policies of aggression and war, is out of the question’). As a result, all other Cold Wan, relationships changed – China entered the UN, the Foreign Ministers of Britain, West Germany and France dutifully followed Nixon to Peking, and agreement was reached with Japan.
In 1964-5, the Chinese leadership tried to build an alliance in the ‘intermediate zone’ – that is, all countries between itself and the United States. As Mao put it to a startled French parliamentary delegation in 1965: ‘France itself, Germany, Italy, Great Britain – provided the latter stops being courtier of the United States – Japan and we ourselves: there you have the Third World.’ By 1973, the US is no longer the main enemy, and the revived intermediate zone is now directed against Russia and Russian influence. To this end, Chou En-lai has offered public support to the European Common Market (and British entry) as a counterweight to Soviet influence, and opposes the security talks between the European powers and the Soviet Union lest they reach an agreement. He has even gone so far as to approve the five-power Commonwealth security arrangements for policing South-East Asia, and the US military presence in Asia (excluding Vietnam) as a means of keeping Russian influence out.
 
The Party
Despite massive efforts, the new provincial administrations are still dominated by the army. They are supported by ‘rehabilitated’ party leaders; the rebels of the Cultural Revolution have hardly any role in the effective administration.
At the centre, the situation is little short of disastrous. It is astonishing enough that the second-in-command of the regime, head of State and party leader for many decades Liu Shao-chi, should be found to be secretly scheming to introduce capitalism again. Yet hardly has a successor been appointed – Lin Piao a man notorious for his slavish devotion to Mao – than he too turns out to be a traitor. Lin Piao was the named in the 1969 constitution as only legitimate heir to Mao. Now, what is left of the politbureau dare not reconvene another party congress to ratify the destruction of Lin. Nor have replacements been appointed to those purged – Head of State, Secretary to the Party, Minister of Defence, Chief of the General Staff (General Huang Yung-sheng), Commander of the Air Force (Wu Fa-tsien), Political Commissar to the Navy (Li Tsa-pang) and many other senior officers. If it is true that these men, along with politbureau member, Mrs Lin, were in the plane which crashed in Mongolia in September 1971, it is a staggering comment on the stability and integrity of the Chinese regime that the top leadership of the armed forces and the party had fled to the Soviet Union. Chen Po-ta, for 35 years Mao’s private secretary and appointed by him chairman of the Cultural Revolution group that superseded the politbureau between 1966 and 1968 (and fourth in precedence in the leadership) has also apparently been purged.
In contrast to Stalin in the 1930s, Mao has been able to rid himself of his rivals, but not to appoint successors, nor ratify the changes legally. Apparently he cannot summon the Fourth National People’s Congress (scheduled for 1969). Even the gaps in the leadership line up on Tien-an-Min Gate are too embarrassing – so the leadership has ignored the traditional national parades (May Day, 1 July anniversary of the foundation of the party, 1 October National Day). All the leading bodies of the party are in disarray, and despite the border clash, only the army is the thin line between the ruling class and chaos. The Government is not much better – only a quarter of the Ministers and Vice Ministers of 1966 survived through to 1969.
Economically the country is standing still; politically it is in stalemate. This is in vivid contrast to the picture presented by some western journalists visiting China recently, as if they were Columbus just discovering America (and finding it, to their surprise, not populated by monsters). Indeed, the gap between domestic reality and the external image of the country has probably never been greater.
It is the domestic stalemate which will determine future reactions by the leadership. It will make necessary further campaigns against both ‘revisionists’ who are apparently, after all the events of the past eight years, still operating in the party, and the ‘ultra-left’ that resists the army-old party carve up. The current relaxation positively encourages people to seek private solutions – speculation, embezzling, profiteering, black marketeering, are current targets for press attacks. So many hopes of a new deal were raised in the Cultural Revolution, that it will now prove extremely difficult to hammer them out of people. Cynicism and bitterness are their likely responses.
The retreat forced on the leadership by the collapse of the party and the Russian attack leave unsettled all the outstanding issues. The more Peking restores the old party bosses and relies on them, the less flexibility there is, and the less possibility of a real mobilisation of resources for development. That is the reason why Mao or whoever it is who runs China will be forced to make the present pause temporary. Then the attack will have to begin again. Watch the Western liberals jump yet again on the new swing of the roundabout. The real target for their attention ought to be world imperialism, that subordinates the struggle of the Chinese to the needs of the Soviet Union and the United States. But that means opposing the ruling class here and now instead of basking in myths.

Notes
1. See China and the Russian Offensive, IS 41, Dec.-Jan. 1969-70.
2. For the development of this point in detail, see China: Let a Hundred Flowers Bloom, IS 35, Winter 1968-9.
3. For an explanation of ‘Bukharinism’ and its relationship to Chinese economic policy, see Tony Cliff, Crisis in China, IS 29, Summer 1967.



Marx Engels Lenin: Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism
Progress Publishers, Moscow 1972, 387pp. 90p
The difficulty in discussing anarchism is its incoherence. There are writings by individual anarchists – Bakunin, Kropotkin, Tolstoy, Malatesta, Gandhi and so on – but they disagree with each other at least as much as they agree. In practice, anarchism is more important as a mood than a creed, and men who call themselves anarchists range all the way from the utopian designers of the perfect school, the ideal community, the wistful reconstruction of a preindustrial village (Ebenezer Howard and his wretched New Towns belong here), through the bomb throwers to the serious but misguided working class militant.
Today, the overwhelming majority of anarchists would not recognise themselves under the label. For everyone who calls himself an anarchist, there are ten others who do not, but nevertheless share the same ideas and call themselves Marxist-Leninists. Maoism, as it exists outside China, Fidelismo outside Cuba, both important elements in the vague populism on the Left today, are equally vehicles of anarchist traditions. So muddled has the whole discussion become, that few know how savagely Marx, Engels and Lenin attacked as anarchism the ‘Marxism-Leninism’ so popular today. The publication of this book is therefore – as they say – ‘timely’, except that most of those who would gain from it will not read it. Only events can be their teacher.
Anarchist ideas have been popular throughout the ‘sixties for exactly the same sorts of reasons as anarcho-syndicalism flourished before the first World War. Then as now, objective conditions were moving towards a revolutionary crisis which, in the ‘sixties, affected the backward countries first. Yet in both cases, a revolutionary political alternative did not exist. Then as now, the parties which claimed to lead the revolutionary tradition (the Social Democrats then, the Communist Party now) were not revolutionary, but reformist and bureaucratic. They claimed a monopoly of authentic revolutionary theory, but entirely lacked revolutionary spirit, initiative or action.
As a result of this impasse, whole new movements embodying revolutionary struggle grew up outside the ranks of those who claimed to be the leadership of the proletariat. Whether explicitly (as with the anarcho-syndicalists before 1914) or implicitly (as with the advocates of pure rural guerilla warfare today), in rejecting the established Left parties, they also rejected Marxism. However, although the anarcho-syndicalists rejected Marxism, they nevertheless identified themselves completely with the industrial working class. The new rebels while claiming to be Marxists, nevertheless identified themselves not with workers but with peasants, students or lumpen proletarians. It took the October revolution of 1917 to restore the validity of Marxism in the eyes of the many anarcho-syndicalists who later joined the Communist International. Only an event of comparable importance would restore the unity of theory and practice for the majority of guerilla rebels.
 
1. The Argument
The anarchist revolt against the established leadership of the Left is natural and, in the first instance, healthy. Because the official Communist parties are reformist but claim to be revolutionary, their centralised organisation and bureaucracy are systematically deployed to channel the revolutionary aspirations of working people into reformist paths. It seems to many revolutionaries that all that is needed to revive the revolutionary struggle is spontaneity, a refusal to be trapped in argument or red tape: militancy.
Yet we have to develop the argument further. In particular, we have to explain why the established leadership is reformist if we want to avoid the same degeneration in the future. It is at, this point that the anarchist argument leads off in entirely wrong directions. Degenerate politics, it is argued, are the sole source of the betrayal of the movement, and occur wherever a centralised organisation creates an authority over and above the rank and file. Betrayal is intrinsic to the nature of leadership and organised power (all power corrupts etc.).
Anarchist solutions to the problem are various. Some oppose all forms of organisation; others refuse to allow any question to be decided without their active involvement, an attitude which paralyses any action if taken seriously. Yet others are concerned with organisational experiments which will prevent the concentration of power – co-operatives, communes, a federal system. Again, such decentralised units decisively weaken working class organisation. They can also be the pretext for the operation of secret elites. Bakunin’s ‘secret, brotherhood’ depended on there being no formal structures to control the leadership at all. Often the worst elitists come from the ranks of anarchism.
Yet others emphasise that immediate and continuous action will offset the tendency to degenerate. In the energy and drive of the revolutionaries, in their sheer flair, lie the safeguards. All is urgency and blind application until exhaustion sets in or the policeman trips the rebel.
The more conservative anarchists find the curb to corruption in an absolute code of morality, in ‘principles’. If the principles are clear enough, it is suggested, if they are absolute, no compromise or concession should ever be possible. Yet others, more modestly, retire to reform the educational system so that the young will not learn the degeneracy of this society. The self-dependent commune, an isolated community, provides another retreat from corruption. But whatever the exit, all must oppose authority from wherever it comes, oppose centralised organisation and direction.
 
2. Anarchism and Marxism
At the risk of amalgamating different anarchist cases, let us take some of these points in turn, illustrating the Marxist comments from this book. For the anarchist, the source of evil is not the nature of class power and capitalism, but the psychology of the rulers. Conversely, the source of revolt is the morality and psychology of the rebels, not the structure of capitalist society (’The basis of Bakunin’s social revolution is the will, and not the economic conditions’, Marx, p. 149). The personal characteristics of the revolutionaries are therefore of decisive importance, not their class identification or involvement. Heroes – like Che Guevara – replace the working class, and individual heroic acts are substituted for the long slow task of building class organisations. The acts may be designed to kill key members of the ruling class or wreak terror upon society. Or they may be a kind of pacifist terrorism, self-destruction, as in the fasts of Gandhi or the sit-downs of the Committee of 100. In both cases, they substitute for the development of self-dependent and self-conscious collective action by workers.
Some anarchists have believed that only violence guarantees the purity of morality of the revolutionary. The bomb, the knife, the revolver then become the instruments for attaining purity. The exclusion of politics in favour of military technique – witness the rash of books by Latin American revolutionaries on guerilla warfare – follows a similar path. The fragmentary nature of the battle, guerilla warfare, forced on the revolutionaries by their own weakness, now becomes raised to being a singular virtue. Even those who do not actually take up arms, emphasise the need to free themselves in morality from the corrupting practices of ‘bourgeois’ society:
’All the depravities in which the life of declassed persons ejected from the upper strata of society must inevitably became involved, are proclaimed to be so many ultra-revolutionary virtues’ (Marx and Engels, p. 121).
If the moral stature of the revolutionaries is the sole factor of importance in the revolution, their deterioration can restore or create class society all over again in the post revolutionary situation. According to anarchists there is no structure of power which will ensure mass control. Only the abolition of power can achieve that. For much of the Left, the Chinese Cultural Revolution gained its charm precisely from these anarchist themes – the attempt to change men’s morality independently of material circumstances, to create organisations which would be decentralised enough to prevent corruption. In practice, these themes were no more than the froth on a naked struggle for power, but they were effective among romantics. The same can be said of the debate over moral incentives in Cuba.
In neither China nor Cuba was the division of labour characteristic of a poverty-stricken society seriously jeopardised. For to do that is to transform an anarchist myth into a radical threat to any society. To abolish the power of society, to make each man his own master, each petty community self-governing, is to abolish the possibility of life itself for the majority. The world cannot feed its population on the basis of each his own farm. Only the collective – and centralised – economy, the division of labour, organised and directed how you will, can do that. The division of labour is undoubtedly tyrannical:
’If man, by dint of his knowledge and inventive genius, has subdued the forces of nature, the latter avenge themselves upon him by subjecting him, in so far as he employs them, to a veritable despotism independent of all social organisation. Wanting to abolish authority in large-scale industry is tantamount to wanting to abolish industry itself, to destroy the power loom in order to return to the spinning wheel’ (Engels, p. 102).
The anarchist line of thought leads to reactionary conclusions precisely because the objective world has been left outside. The source of the degeneration of working-class leadership lies not in some Original Sin that forces every person, by reason of being a leader, to sell out. Betrayal is only possible because of the nature of the system as a whole and its specific history. Where capitalism is able to meet some of the demands of the workers, where it booms and expands, collective power tends to disintegrate in private hopes; and worker leadership is free to do what it will. The analysis of reformism must be an analysis of the system as a whole and its history. That means ‘theory’ as well as practice: talk, argument and writing as well as militancy. Unless that takes place, the revolutionaries will miss the real opportunities that arise.
If all centralised organisation and leadership is bad, then the working class can never use the only power it has: its collective strength. In this case, the whole idea of a working class revolution becomes nonsensical. A revolutionary party, in addition, is crucial in the long process of building working class power:
’It is to enable the mass of a definite class to learn to understand its own interests and its position, to learn to conduct its own policy, that there must be an organisation of the advanced elements of the class, immediately and at all costs, even though at first these elements constitute only a tiny fraction of the class’ (Lenin, p. 252).
Any serious organisation requires discipline, and discipline does not at all come easily, particularly when it is not located in the collective discipline of the factory. It is not enough to have ‘the right polities’: one also has to have a serious practical orientation, and willingness to submit, in the ordinary course of events, to organisational discipline. The party is not at all the model of a future socialist society, not at all some kind of attempt at a commune, but a fighting organisation in conditions of combat not laid down by the party itself but by the ruling class. Centralisation, leadership, discipline are the preconditions for fighting this fight. Bakunin argued that the first International should be the model of the future society, and quite rightly Engels scorned the notion: ‘just now when we have to defend ourselves with all means at our disposal, the proletariat is told to organise not in accordance with the requirements of the struggle it is daily and hourly compelled to wage, but according to the vague notions of a future society entertained by some dreamers’ (p. 63).
 
3. Principles
As for the code of morality, the absolute principles, this is a wisp of bourgeois mist to curb a hurricane. Yet the recurrent idea of a set of principles that are over and above the demands of the class struggle is very powerful on the Left despite its clear ancestry in Liberalism. ‘We can see the claim to absolute principles in a whole range of disputes on the Left – not least in the Brest Litovsk or trade union debates of the Bolshevik party. Yet Marxists have no ten commandments such as served Christians for so many hundreds of years provided they averted their gaze (Thou Shalt Not Kill, except in wartime or if you are the boss or if you have to, etc.). A set of principles only makes one ‘safe’ from corruption if one is in no way involved in real struggle. To grapple with real problems inevitably involves compromises and concessions from the crystal clear principles revolutionaries are supposed to have. The fighters invariably have to settle for less than the full claim this side of the socialist revolution, settle for a compromise. Marx is full of scorn for Bakunin’s claimed refusal to compromise – The workers must make no effort to establish a legal limit to the working day, since this is like making compromises with the bosses, who could then only exploit them for ten to twelve hours instead of fourteen to sixteen’ (p. 9). Of course ‘all the arms to fight with must be taken from existing society’ (p. 96). The same issues arose again over whether or not revolutionaries should participate in parliament
fundamentals of parliamentary tactics’, Lenin argues in praising the German Social Democrat, Bebel, ‘for German (and international) Social-Democracy, tactics that never yield an inch to the enemy, never miss the slightest opportunity to achieve even small improvements (emphasis added) for the workers and are at the same time implacable on questions of principle and always directed to the accomplishment of the final aim – the fundamentals of these tactics were elaborated by Bebel’ (p. 248).
Marxists have no general universal principles, only a set of specific historical aims. Being ‘unprincipled’ means, if correctly used, betraying those future aims for illusory short term gains, not contradicting some universal law. The aims embody the interests and hopes of a class of people, the workers, not some individual morality. Revolutionary struggle is not one simply to transform psychologies, but is a struggle for power. The power of the ruling class depends upon its power to organise and centralise as well as its influence over men’s minds. While the revolutionaries remain simply at the level of trying to change minds, of making propaganda, they are no permanent threat to the ruling class. The rulers are threatened materially, not by opinions, but by an alternative power, stronger than their own.
These points bring out the basic individualism of anarchist thought. It is the Liberalism of the early capitalist class taken to its logical extreme, an extreme that is self-destructive both for the anarchists and any working class movement. Declassed elements reach instinctively, even as they reject society, for the kernel of bourgeois ideology. With characteristic force, Lenin diagnoses the source:
’Marxist theory has established – and the experience of all European revolutions and revolutionary movements has fully confirmed – that the petty proprietor, the small master ... who, under capitalism, always suffers oppression and very frequently a most acute and rapid deterioration in his conditions of life, and even ruin, easily goes to revolutionary extremes, but is incapable of perseverance, organisation, discipline and steadfastness. A petty bourgeois driven to frenzy by the horrors of capitalism is a social phenomenon which, like anarchism, is characteristic of all capitalist countries. The instability of such revolutionism, its barrenness, and its tendency to turn rapidly into submission, apathy, phantasms, and even a frenzied infatuation with one bourgeois fad or another – all this is common knowledge. However, a theoretical or abstract recognition of these truths does not at all rid revolutionary parties of old errors, which always crop up at unexpected occasions, in somewhat new forms ...’ (pp. 304–5).
Moscow has published this volume for no good reasons – to protect the reformism of its Communist parties against revolutionary challenge. The notes illustrate the predilections of the publisher. But it is a valuable collection and well worth reading. For a hardback, it is also very cheap. It is a must for those who want to understand the Left today and the recurrence of the same arguments all over again.
 



Nigel Harris writes: Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s Awami League should win comfortably the first Bangladesh general elections on March 7th. Yet the Government is taking no chances: violence and corruption are its main instruments in campaigning.
A January demonstration on Vietnam led to the police killing two students and injuring seven others. Bands of pro-Government gangsters are said to have kidnapped 17 opposition candidates to prevent them filing nomination papers, fired on opposition meetings and rallies, and beaten up parry workers. On February 4th, the opposition claims 50 jute workers were killed and 150 injured in a Government attempt to force the workers to vote for its union as main ‘bargaining agent’ (officially, 12 were killed and 31 injured by unidentified ‘miscreants’). The Sheikh has allowed himself to be nominated as candidate in seven constituencies (including the 4 Dacca seats) where the opposition might be strong.
The Awami League is right to be nervous. Conditions for the majority of people have deteriorated remarkably over the first fifteen months of Independence (and things started from a very low point after 9 months looting by the Pakistani army). Inflation in the price of essentials (rice, kerosene, cloth) is biting into consumption. The price for 2 pounds of rice has moved from 0.75 takas (March 1971) to 1.40 (Jan. 1972) to 2.30 last November; meat from 1.50 to 4.00 to 7.00; cotton shirts from 15 to 50 to 70 takas each. Average annual income per head is about 513 takas, and about 190 takas for the poorest fifth of the population.
The failure of the last monsoon harvest – after three years of poor crops – makes prospects even grimmer. Peasants who can afford to (in collaboration with local Awami League politicians) are hoarding grain to push the price up, or smuggling it out of the country to Calcutta where prices are higher (because of the gross over valuation of the taka relative to the Indian rupee). The new ruling class is increasingly seen to be steeped in corruption; dealers now regularly add 5 to 10 per cent to every account to cover bribes all the way up from the clerk to the Minister.
The Sheikh’s response to all this wobbles between rhetoric – the new Constitution lays it down that ‘It shall be a fundamental responsibility of the State to emancipate the toiling masses, the peasants and the workers and backward sections of the people, from all forms of exploitation’ – occasional irritability (he recently ‘dismissed’ 19 AL Assembly members), but basically toleration of the sins of his friends. Towards opponents, however, he is quite unsqueamish. The notorious Collaborators’ Order gives the police local power to gaol for up to 6 months without trial anyone they dislike on the simple charge that the accused collaborated with the Pakistani army in 1971. Local Awami League men have set up a lucrative protection racket on the basic of this order.
However, what the Sheikh loses does not accrue automatically to the opposition. The Left is full of revolutionaries, including four Communist Parties, but none has been able to break out of the sterile rhetoric of lower middle class grievances into serious class politics. The two main electoral opposition forces are a Left coalition, the All Party Action Committee of Maulana Bashani, and a Left-wing breakway from the Awami League, the National Socialist Party (Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal). The APAC combines six groups or parties, including two Communist Parties, but is mainly a vehicle for the revival of Bashani’s fortunes (his group, NAP(B), claims 200 of the 242 candidates being put up by APAC). The NSP, equally full of sound and fury, is the creation of two former AL student leaders and a former Liberation guerilla; it claims to be putting up candidates in all 300 constituencies. In both cases, despite lofty disclaimers, it is clear that the polls are the main raison d’être for the groups concerned. Their mutual rivalry will ensure a much greater victory for the Awami League.
Meanwhile the urban workers are increasingly hostile.
The drift towards dictatorship is inexorable in such circumstances unless the the opposition can break out of the Dacca salons into the jute mills. There are few signs that it will do so.



Economic Development and Social Change in South India
T. Scarlett Epstein
Manchester University Press. 42s.
Indian Political Thought: The Nationalist Movement
D. Mackenzie Brown
University of California Press (Cambridge). 12s.6d.
The brief limits of a review do not allow adequate justice to be done to Dr Epstein’s excellent contribution to knowledge of Indian rural life and, more important, the impact upon it of differing sorts of economic change. Dr Epstein has examined the impact of irrigation upon two Mysore villages – the one directly irrigated, the second close to an irrigation system in which it could not share. The results are the reverse of what might be expected – irrigation in the first, Wangala, while increasing absolute income and existing differentials, basically strengthened the existing rural situation and tied peasants more closely into the autonomous and traditional life of the village. Non-irrigation in the second, Dalena, stimulated entrepreneurship, closer village integration into the region, town employment of the villagers, and the beginning of the breakdown of the traditional structure of village life. In recounting this divergence, the basic starting point of development, the author in turn examines the economic, ritual, familial, political and social organization with great illumination, fully demonstrating how economic stimulation can merely result in a strengthening of the existing structure, even though it may alter detail of village life. An unfortunate tendency to excessive repetition should not detract from the value of this book, the underlying assumptions of which are a considerable advance on much that is written about development. Professor Brown’s book is a collection of Indian political documents, woven together into a continuous narrative relating the development of the Nationalist movement. Professor Brown’s account is rather more interesting than the relative dull, and pious meanderings of politicians off-duty: most of what is included is significant only within its historical context, rather than as a contribution to eternal wisdom. Indeed, reading such pieces leaves one wondering how it was that the writers included managed to reach such eminence, until one reflects that eminence is rather more a function of social context than innate wisdom. However, the book provides a preface to the study of Indian political history.



The Fundamental Forms of Social Thought
Werner Stark
Routledge and Kegan Paul. 32s.
The publication of one of Dr Stark’s numerous books is always a welcome event.
He combines an astonishing erudition with ease pf style and lucidity which is enviable. In the current volume, he is concerned to prove that only three basic-conceptions of society have been employed by social theorists – an organic model (society is a sort of animal, the individual merely a cell), a mechanistic model (individuals alone are real, society is hypothetical or merely an aggregate) and a cultural model (individual and society are equal and necessarily inter-dependent within a cultural whole). This may appear recondite? and obscure, but Dr Stark succeeds in recounting his case with humour and clarify which makes the subject interesting and absorbing.
However, whatever the merits of his classification, there are important criticisms to be made. Firstly, Dr Stark is more a philosopher than historian or sociologist: that is, he is less concerned with understanding why certain theories were put forward and what social function they played, and almost wholly devoted to assessing how far such theories ‘correspond’ to ‘the real world’. This is, in itself, philosophically a very clumsy approach, and also abstracts entirely from history – Rousseau’s interest lies rather more in what he represented in his ag« and for the French Revolution than in whether in fact there ‘really’ is a ‘General Will’. Dr Stark does not agree that ‘knowledge’ is part of ‘ideology’. Correlatively, he accuses theorists with whom he does not agree with all varieties of ‘prejudice’ and ‘stupidity’, which in a somewhat fruitless approach – for example, the major theorists of classical capitalism were certainly neither of these two things in general, although they may be wrong. The accusation of stupidity usually serves to illuminate the rightness of the accuser: and that rightness needs a solid justification which Dr Stark does not give; his assumption of a cosy world of common-sense chaps who have at last got things sorted out just will not do instead. Secondly, given the somewhat barren nature of the pursuit (Dr Stark relaxes momentarily and fruitfully on pages 101-2, 196-7, and 264, on the relationship of organicism to long-term economic changes), it is not clear whether his thesis is proved. For example, his treatment of Rousseau seems selective; Hegel is almost completely ignored, and his treatment of Marx is unfair to the point of scholarly irresponsibility. In addition, the analytic clarity he employs in his categories ill accords with the wider complexity of the writings he examines.
Dr Stark then ignores the vital dimension of society – and in doing so, he cannot see the role which his theorists play in society, and therefore their importance. It is very welcome that there is a writer in this field who spreads his view so wide (cf. his fascinating digression on classical economics) – it is a pity that this erudition could not have been applied to really extending our horizons and illuminating the social function of doctrine.



Nigel Harris (see IS7) is now 27; has received his PhD from the London School of Economics and is currently motoring to India.
I.
The British Conservative Party has been historically a sensitive and reliable index of the balance of power within the British ruling-class: the views of Conservatives as a group are not distinguished in any significant way from broad opinion within that class. Over time. Party attitudes reflect the changing structure of the British economy and its place in the world; only relatively rarely, has a declining section of the ruling class monopolized power in the Party, so prompting open political conflict. The reasons for this historical flexibility by the Party, the ease with which it absorbs rising sections of the class, are fundamental to the history of Britain – the much-lauded ‘continuity’ of the Constitution is only one of the most obvious results of this flexibility.
Since the eighteenth century, the British rulers have absorbed without disastrous conflict two major groups-entrepreneurs and managers. Each time there was considerable strain culminating in a period of radical Government (the 1906 Liberal and 1945 Labour Governments) that to many seemed to widen the conflict to include non-ruling class pressures. Each time, the incoming group clearly shifted the emphasis of ruling-class attitudes, but was also itself very much changed by accession to power. The mutual changes resulted in a new public ethos.
British Parliamentary history since 1800 has covered the fortunes of three major ruling groups: the class of 1800, while including elements such as bankers and merchants, was solidly built around the owners of land; to them were added through the nineteenth century. Victorian entrepreneurs; and finally, after the first World War, managers increasingly sought to combine with the ruling-class existing at that time. The first group, landed aristocrats and squires, had complete monopoly of political, and initially economic, power, was rooted in a relatively static agriculture and refined an ideology that sought to cover the entirety of national life and make it dependent on landowners as a class; the second group, entrepreneurs, in opposition to the existing power-holders, founded their claims on their individual abilities and, correlatively, on what they owned as individuals – industrial property – and stressed competition, progress, conflict and change; finally, the third group sought to marry stability and security to the progress ethic of the entrepreneurs, to create a changing society that did not generate conflict. Each group created around these central attitudes ideological emphases to defend themselves or attack their opponents. Whig-Toryism, the creed of 1800, was threatened by entrepreneurial Liberalism; the resulting marriage, Liberal-Conservatism, was threatened in the present century by corporatism.
This piece of wildly over-simplified history is not intended to do more than give historical depth to what follows. Each of these three ideological tendencies, themselves representative of social and economic changes in Britain (and, in their turn, the cause of further changes), incorporated an attitude towards working-class organization, which, it is hoped, will be discussed in a later article. The first two tendencies were at different times violently opposed to any form of working-class organization. The Whig-Tory view affirmed the correctness of the ruling-class on all issues: the lower classes were capable only of evil unless controlled by the rulers, and ruling-class supremacy must be ensured through the use of physical force. This attitude was possible only where the ruling-class had a complete monopoly of all social, political and economic power, was not bound by traditional legal norms, did not have to face the revolutionary impact of violent economic change (a necessary concomitant of economic progress under capitalism), and where workers were not organized by employers in large and disciplined aggregates and did not have outlets for challenge (viz. universal suffrage). Under later capitalism, such a ruling-class attitude could be no more than an open incitement to civil war. The heyday of this attitude, in conflict with developing capitalism, produced ruthless counter-measures to root out attempts by workers to defend themselves – the Combination Acts, the Spa Field Riots, Peterloo and the Six Acts are only the most notorious landmarks of that period. Later Governments occasionally resorted to force, but decreasingly. and with much more clearly limited intentions since the real struggle had become one of ideology.
The second tendency, Liberalism, was pitted against Whig-Toryism and the status quo until the middle of the nineteenth century. The Tory Party, the representatives of landed power, through Peel and Disraeli, slowly adopted itself to an industrial society – shedding its most reactionary elements, and seeking to merge landed and industrial power. The Liberals’ monopoly of the entrepreneurial vote, however, seriously threatened the survival of the Tories if the landed interest was in decay. For a brief time, the Tories looked to the lower middle and upper-working class for an alternative social basis, and offered as inducements a Reform Bill which increased the suffrage, various welfare measures to improve working-class conditions, and reforms to remove the disabilities preventing trade union developments. Such was the volume of legislation that one of the first ‘working-men MPs’, Alexander Macdonald, was prompted to say that the Tories had done more for the working-class in their period of office up to 1874 than the Liberal Party had done in a quarter of a century.
However, Tory initiative in this field was only part of a downward auction – both parties racing to capture the vote. Even while the Tories were beginning to become reformers, businessmen, growing more critical in the face of foreign competition of the Liberal centre-piece – Free-Trade and competition – were moving out of the Liberal Party into the Conservative. The social basis of the Liberal Party drained away, and just as the Tories earlier had been forced by this phenomenon to bid for working-class support, so the Liberals were impelled in the same direction. The details of the final collapse of the Liberal Party cannot concern us here: suffice it to note that by 1925, ruling-class opinion was virtually unanimous in supporting the Conservative Party, and the traditional two-party system was at an end. Henceforth, conflicts within the ruling-class had, perforce, to be fought out within the Conservative Party rather than between two ruling-class parties.. Whether the Labour Party will in the future succeed in becoming a representative of a section of ruling-class opinion .is not clear, but even if it does, this does not detract from the verdict on’the period from 1925 to 1962 when, apart from six years, the Conservatives were in office.
The period up to 1925 saw the reconciliation of the ruling-class to the existence of trade unions. This was partly because, as we have seen, of the need to assimilate sections of the working-class into governing political loyalties. It was stressed that the unions were purely industrial organizations, necessary to strengthen the weak position of labour vis-a-vis capital, and, after 1925, to increase the efficiency of management in saving labour. The Conservative response to the 1926 General Strike, the 1927 Trade Disputes Act. illustrated this approach. The State, it was emphasized, did not oppose the unions, only their political interests. That the unions and the Labour Party were already too strong was demonstrated by the fact that the Government did not positively forbid political affiliation, but merely made it slightly more difficult. At the same time, some sections of opinion were developing a different approach, namely, one which positively supported trade unions as a useful adjunct to managerial organization of the factory. The unions, it was urged, should be invited to take over more responsibilities for labour, provided that the unions accepted more willingly managerial determination of broad policy. Collaboration should be not just on the factory-floor, but nationally in some form of ‘Industrial Parliament’ where employers and trade union leaders would meet continuously and help to shape State policy. [1] In the final corporatist doctrine, such a body, incorporating all major economic corporations – labour, managers and capital – with State representatives would supersede Parliament and itself become the State.
The sections of society, measured in existing power rather than by heads, merge so that, theoretically, class conflict is impossible. At this point, the trade unions become merely one of the State institutions for controlling the working-class, rather than defending it.
In the Liberal view, unions were instruments of the market, representing the relative strength of labour as a commodity. Economic ‘law’ should be supreme, and political intervention nothing. The corporatist view, by contrast, stressed the possibility of shaping the economy, planning and directing it in particular directions. While Liberals saw economic conflict as necessary and beneficial, corporatists sought consistently to eliminate such conflict and to subordinate all interests to those of the State.
Between the first World War and the Second, British capitalism was divided by the struggle between what has earlier been called the Liberal-Conservative ruling-class and a rising group called here ‘managers’. To call the aspirant group ‘managers’ is not particularly accurate, since while it did stress managerialism, it had other characteristics of greater interest. The ‘managers’ represented a new highly-technological, capital-intensive section of industry, composed of firms of very great size, controlled rather more by functionaries than by Victorian entrepreneurs, and devoted to the creation of planned monopolies rather than competition in open markets. As in each industry, they sought supremacy for one firm (nationalized or private), so they were eager to close the entire domestic economy and end free trade and the free movement of capital – a necessary means of focussing domestic finance upon British capital-intensive industry. Since managers were seen as the impartial authority which welded together capital and labour in the factory, so the State was seen as the impartial authority which would weld together the old bourgeoisie and .the working-class; just as the individual monopoly planned an entire industry, so the State would plan the entire economy. Equilibrium between competing producers would give way to co-ordinated and functional production by single producers, bargaining would give way to ‘co-operation’. Alongside this new conception of an industrial economy, old traditional industry continued to stress the attitudes which had built British industrial supremacy in the nineteenth century and which opposed State intervention as the last indignity. It required the great slump to qualify those attitudes, and introduce ‘protection’ of British markets from foreign competition. This included State control of capital exports, but it did not allow the State to plan so that all domestic industry was focussed in a single onslaught on foreign markets. Numerous efforts were made to force the old basic industries to amalgamate and reconstruct themselves, but most of these efforts were blocked by the stout opposition of the industries concerned. It required a Labour Government with an overwhelming majority as well as a world war to force through the crucial changes needed to establish corporate monopolies in .the major traditional industries and break the power of the old Liberals. The .crucial stimulant of this internal struggle within capitalism was slump and long-term secular change in the economy. Liberalism had been the expression of an expanding capitalism, optimistic and aggressive. Corporatism, both the development and the contradiction of Liberalism, was a much more restricted, defensive and relatively pessimistic response to a crowded world market. Corporatism itself spanned different shades of emphasis – the pluralist varieties were positively content if economic stagnation was the price of stability; the étatiste versions were less concerned with stability, and more with forced progress through State direction.
These trends were reflected within the Conservative Party between the Wars. It was a Conservative Government which sought to force the coal industry into amalgamations and nationalize the land on which pits stood; it was Conservative radicals like Harold Macmillan [2] who urged it on to nationalize, for example, basic industry, finance and food industries; it was Conservative MPs who blocked attempts to force amalgamations and begin introducing planning devices. The War ended abruptly the ideological flux, and established a planned and State directed economy. After the War, the tempo of the economy was quite different. – After 1947, indefinite expansion seemed possible, and ‘freeing the economy’ became more necessary to business than reorganizing it. As a result, despite the corporatists in power within the Conservative Party, the ideological emphasis shifted decisively to Liberalism once more, and stayed there until-the stresses of the mid-fifties and the intensification of international competition produced a reversion to étatiste corporatist attitudes.
These changes produced parallel shifts in the Tory attitude to the trade unions. The Liberals attacked all attempts at State intervention in industrial relations, ridiculed exhortations to wage restraint and opposed any move towards a wages policy. The only action permitted to the State was through means that did not redistribute power between different sections of society – through broad credit influence, deflationary and stimulatory, through monetary and fiscal policy. By contrast, the corporatists urged the State to intervene even more, to prepare a general plan, the centrepiece of which should be a clear wages policy. As reward for accepting this, the unions should be incorporated in the Constitution .given sole responsibility for labour, including the ‘closed shop’, and consulted as of right on all industrial issues. Some Tories, however, were fully aware that the more the unions were absorbed into the status quo, the more they would become discredited amongst their membership – the need to support union leadership and keep it powerful was always a vital moderating influence upon the pure corporatist aspirations.
With expansion, then, State intervention and heavily regulating restrictive unions became a burden on industry which needed a flexible wage structure and high labour mobility. Competition, the opportunity to seize a larger part of an expanding market, swept away the carefully assembled fortifications of the depression period – as much in State welfare provisions as ‘restrictive practices’ on the factory-floor. Conflict and struggle .instability and change, became suddenly vital for that expansion, whereas before they had been anathema, the stimulants of revolution.
 
II.
Up to 1947, the Conservatives, clearly in Opposition for at least five years for the first time since 1915, were concerned with internal Party struggles. The Election had overwhelmingly rejected the interwar record, and removed (with retirements) some sixty per cent of the pre-Election Parliamentary Party. This decisively broke the power within the Party of the old interwar ‘Liberal’ elements. The distribution of power within the Party conformed more closely to the actual distribution of power within the ruling-class. The corporatist radicals, representatives of large-scale technological industry and led by Butler and Macmillan, took over major influence. At the same time, however, the Party was flooded with new recruits, fresh from five years’ war service. They initially supported the radicals, but as the economic climate of the country changed they had less compunction than the corporatists about greeting the ideological companion of that change: a revival of Liberalism clearer and more principled than at any time since the first World War. Paradoxically, after major Party reforms (symbolized in the 1947 Industrial Charter and Woolton reorganization), the Conservatives seemed more, not less, ‘diehard’ in 1950 than they had been in 1945. The Party which had been very lukewarm about State planning in 1945, had accepted it wholeheartedly and enthusiastically in 1947, by 1950 had developed a principled and consistent opposition to planning.
What did these changes represent for the trade unions? First, the Party was concerned to try and recruit working-class support – both through setting-up a Party organization for trade unionists (the primary function of which was to encourage ‘contracting out’ of the political levy), and through angling its propaganda at workers, warning them of the dangers of the boss (the State), and the union leaders conniving to exploit the rank-and-file of the unions. This line of attack, fundamentally Liberal and anti-corporatist, was used extensively, but at the same time the Party stressed the importance of trade union leadership and attacked both State and rank-and-file interference in that leadership. As a consequence of this last tactic, the leadership played down Conservative criticism of particular union practices lest these embarrass the unions and make collaboration more difficult.
On the more fundamental problem, the reconciliation of free wage bargaining with full employment and a stable currency, the continuing split between corporatists and Liberals came out sharply – with the first increasingly dominant up to 1947, and the second up to 1950. The Tory radicals attacked Labour for not planning, and for not having a full wages policy, the key element, they said, in any attempt to plan and needed to strengthen the union leadership when facing the rank-and-file. By contrast, the arch-Liberal Hudson (a Shadow Minister) announced firmly:
’We believe in the system of private enterprise. Under such a system an individual trade union is free to negotiate with the employer concerned, and reach such a settlement as their respective strengths allow them to reach ... Under such a system of private enterprise no Government wages policy is essential’. [3]
The corporatists scoffed at the possibility of entirely free trade unionism with full employment – unions, employers and State must create a ‘partnership’. The Industrial Charter (1947), was mainly concerned with this notion of ‘partnership’.
The victory was short-lived. Shortly after the Charter, Churchill asserted unequivocally: ‘We believe in collective bargaining and the right to strike. We believe in the independence of the Trade Union Movement from Government policy’ [4] If the economy were ‘freed’, it was argued, expansion would be so fast that any union claims could be accommodated within the rate of growth without inflation or unemployment. [5] Thereafter, the Tories posed as Liberal champions of free trade unionism. They attacked wage restraint and freeze, and urged that wages be allowed to rise ‘naturally’ both to increase incentives and so output, and stimulate the domestic market. The relationship of the Labour Government to the unions was attacked for eroding the defences of the working-class, as the dangerous first step to State Company-Unionism and totalitarianism on the Russian model.
 
III.
Power posed different problems for the Tories. While their general economic case seemed confirmed by the expansion of the economy up to 1955 (prompting an even more extreme development of neo-Liberalism), they never risked pushing the Liberal case too far in the field of organized labour. In general, however, they favoured the Liberal view of the economy as the crucial determinant of wage-levels, while stressing the need for collaboration – ‘restraint’ was always stressed as desirable, and ‘responsibility’ by the unions as its precondition.
Corporatist theory necessarily assumes society is harmonious. The vast majority accept the existing leadership, its definition of problems and proposed solutions. Thus if the leadership is criticised or unpopular this must be the result of ‘failures of communication’ between leaders and led. Lost by-elections lead to an improvement by the Government of its public relations. Strikes are regarded as a criticism of the management’s propaganda. If Government or management explained itself properly, showed how basically just and right they were, the problem would disappear and the basic loyalty of all reassert itself. The Industrial Parliament notion was an attempt, by implicating trade union leaders in the formation of policy, to convince workers of the justice of that policy (as well as to detach the leaders of the unions from their rank-and-file). However, the union leaders were well aware that workers were less innocent than portrayed in Tory mythology, and would not follow union leadership anywhere. Their resistance to formal collaboration at national level compelled the Tories to set up a series of independent public relations bodies to explain Government policy, to represent the ‘national will’ ‘impartially’ and define industrial problems for everybody. Successive Courts of Industry, the Cohen Council, the ‘Three Wise Men’, and, finally, the National Incomes Commission (NIC), were all such attempts to institutionalize a ‘national will’ independent of the Government, but one which always accepted the Government’s point of view. If the unions defied ‘restraint’ as recommended by these worthies, they defied the ‘national will’. The failure of the earlier of these institutions, along with inflationary and payments crises, twice compelled the Government to intervene to enforce its own policy – in 1957 and in 1961.
The Government, then, rode both horses – a general deflationary policy on Liberal lines, along with less effective attempts to defeat the implications of free collective bargaining by persuading the unions to carry out Government policy themselves through ‘restraint’. Both elements of policy were attacked by supporters of the opposite view. The Liberals attacked ‘restraint’ as economically inefficient (since it distorted the labour market), as eroding the authority of trade union leadership, and as, above all, ineffective against inflation. Maurice Macmillan, for example, declared: ‘It is no good appealing for wage restraint... Employers will continue to pay higher wages so long as they are able to sell their goods successfully and at a profit, and the unions and employees will rightly continue to press for a higher share of these profits. The function of the Chancellor is to create a situation in which it is impossible for private persons to achieve either a higher profit margin or a higher wage rate than can be tolerated by the national economy’ [6] On the other side, corporatists stressed the disastrous effects of deflationary policies on the investment level. Wages were, they argued, the key element in causing inflation, and must be dealt with directly: ‘It is not possible’, Horobin maintained, ‘in 1957 with the Government so much in it as employer, paymaster, and controlled, for them not to have a wages policy’. [7] Since direct wage control was politically and administratively impossible, the unions must be persuaded to refrain from using collective bargaining fully, guided by a broad State wages policy. In other words, the working-class must bear an increasing share of the cost of expansion or of world fluctuations as foreign competition intensified. Since unemployment, the traditional way of paying that cost, was no longer possible, wages must take the strain. Various measures were suggested at different times to sugar this pill. The creation of ‘impartial authorities’ has already been noted. [8] A capital gains tax was frequently suggested from Tory benches as a means of persuading the unions that the rich were paying too, [9] and in 1952, Butler introduced an Excess Profits Levy with the same purpose of buying goodwill. (Business was sufficiently irritated by the measure for the Government to give it substantial compensatory concessions in the 1953 budget). Welfare measures to regulate working conditions were also seen as an inducement to ‘cooperation’, but to a declining extent since larger firms preferred to be responsible for factory welfare themselves. Allowing payment of wages by cheque, the long discussed ‘contract of service’ (originally proposed in the twenties, suggested again in the Industrial Charter, and a favourite formula for tired backbenchers throughout the fifties) which was finally produced in late 1962, and to some extent, the creation of the National Economic Development Council (NEDC), were all part of the campaign to persuade the unions that they should control global wage levels in accordance with economic policy.
None of these rather trivial inducements produced the desired effect, and at various times, the State was compelled to intervene more forcefully. The 1951 crisis prompted the Minister of Labour to refer back two lots of Wage Council recommendations, but this was only a gesture, since he ratified them when submitted again unchanged. The Government as a whole, eager to gain union goodwill, refrained from provocation, and firmly repudiated as the worst sin possible any aspiration to a wages policy. In 1954, just before the Liberal tide began to break, Ministers began to grope towards some more positive suggestions. One said that much more information was needed to help wage negotiators frame their proposals in the national interest, but firmly repudiated a wages policy; the Chancellor suggested that a tripartite body (unions, employers, State) should be created to survey global wage levels, but union opposition killed the idea. At the same time, the Government restricted its direct action to avoiding trouble by being relatively generous where called upon to intervene (the steady expansion of the economy permitted a wider margin of manoeuvre than later), or appointing impartial Courts of Inquiry. Two of these in 1954 suggested that an impartial body should be created to survey the economy and specify clear criteria for wage increases.
These were, however, little more than straws in the wind. While the enonomy boomed, labour problems were subsidiary to production at almost any cost. At the end of 1954, the signs of inflationary strain began to appear and broke the spell that Liberalism had seemed to create. However, through the first waves of inflation, the Government held fast to its approach, mainly relying on general financial controls although the tone of its warnings and threats to the unions grew rather more harsh. However, through 1955 and 1956, the use of general financial controls grew more selective and discriminatory, and, as a consequence, less Liberal. In the spring of 1956, the Government, using the nationalized industries as price leaders, sought to enforce a ‘price plateau’, a commitment by employers to hold their prices stable ,so ensuring among other things that the maintenance of constant profit margins would force employers to fight labour rather than compete for a scarce labour supply. While employers were prepared, with explicit Government support, to put up slightly tougher resistance than earlier, they were not prepared to pay the cost of Government policy alone. The cheapening of the products of nationalized industry was a partial inducement to them. When Cousins in the autumn of 1956 led the TUC to an unequivocal stand against Government policy, employers were warned of how high the cost might be. General and disriminatory financial measures were a safer weapon for the Government, but the tone of Ministerial statements grew very much harsher as well in the autumn of 1957. ‘Although no-one welcomes strikes’, MacLeod said, ‘we must not be afraid of them’ [10]; to which the Chancellor added: ‘A stable pound is the prerequisite of full employment. We must therefore put it first’. [11] This counterposing of the currency and employment was an echo of 1931, and at times Ministers argued that their job was not to maintain full employment, but guard the pound, leaving it to the ‘responsibility’ of the unions to decide by their restraint what the level of domestic employment was to be. TUC national work-sharing at lower pay would keep employment high, but pressing individual wage claims to the limit would ensure unemployment ‘self-imposed’ by the unions.
The improvement of the economy allowed the Government to withdraw from this politically disastrous limb, but that it had been driven so far is significant. In late 1957 the public sector was again used as ‘wage-leader’ for the whole economy but this required the centralization of wage negotiations in the public sector on the State. The State accordingly instructed all negotiators in public employment that no pay increases should be granted without commensurate economies in the service concerned. The use of public industry to keep prices down entailed the State intervening to depress the prices of nationalized industry ‘artificially’, so making those industries dependent upon the State to meet the consequent deficits incurred or the increased capital requirements no longer met from earnings. With the kitty not so much empty, as under the immediate control of the State, wage negotiations in the public sector became subject to State, not managerial decision. Moreover the public sector was dominated by old and declining industries where wage rates were constantly tending to fall behind national ones. All these factors combined to make the public sector the crucial area for conflict. Workers in public employment were asked to take the strain for the entire economy. The whole carefully constructed facade of Liberalism was in ruins. The public sector, the largest employer in the economy, was abandoning the traditional negotiating structure and centralizing wage negotiations directly upon the State. Henceforth, all disputes were a conflict between workers and State, a political dispute, not, as Liberals had wished to see, merely the expression of economic forces derived from the market.
The first casualty was one of the weakest participants – the Government refused the recommendation of the Whitley Council governing pay for National Health Service employees – a case identical in essentials to that of the teachers’ Burnham Committee in 1962. Somewhat crudely, the Minister explained why, for the first time, the State had repudiated the decision of one of its accredited negotiating authorities – the managers on the Council were not footing the bill: the unions were merely pipers to the State tune. Other claims (notably, those of the Civil Service and BBC) were rejected in the same way.
The first fruits of the policy were seen in the following year (1958) when claims in three major public sectors coincided – the miners, railwaymen and London busmen. The improving economic situation allowed more room for manoeuvre than earlier, but the Government was still determined to prove its political supremacy with the minimum political losses. Accordingly, the different treatment of these three claims is of particular interest. If all three groups had struck, the kernel of a General Strike would have been created. Economically the impact on fuel supplies and commucations would have been decisive. The busmen, economically the least important industrial group involved, were, as will be remembered, part of the Transport and General Workers’ Union, led by Cousins, the most notorious opponent of Government policy. Thus all the factors were favourable to making an example of the busmen, and the Government concentrated on settling the two major claims with minimum losses to itself, and daring the busmen to strike alone. The course of the railway claim was not smooth, and, indeed, in late April a national rail stoppage seemed possible; but suddenly the Prime Minister invited railway union leaders to private talks which ultimately resulted in a three percent increase. Admittedly this was qualified by the pious assurance that the railways would make commensurate economies, but thre was no way of checking that this was done: The Economist was quite sure that the settlement was ‘for the country, a partial economic defeat’. [12] Meanwhile, the miners’ claim filtered through negotiation, and in May achieved an arbitration award of two of the three main demands with the proviso of an autumn review. In September, the miners were given a straight four per cent increase, ‘another large hole in the principle’ of no wage increases without matching economies. [13]
In this way, the two major sections in the opposition were detached, and the busmen isolated. The details of this long and bitter strike are too well-known to be repeated here, but for our purposes, the skill of the Government should be noted in dividing its opponents, and its shrewdness in assessing both the lack of solidarity between the unions involved and within the TUC, when it was realised that the busmen had been selected as scapegoats for the entire trade union movement. Sadly, the unions did not learn by the experience, nor attempt to take the initiative instead reacting passively to Government initiative. The only other Government innovation during this crisis was the creation of the long-promised impartial authority: the Cohen Council. By the time of its first report, it was already redundant as a public relations body, because the economy and the Government attitude had changed. However, it reiterated the main slogans. By the time of the busmen’s strike, the signs of an improved payments situation were already clearly visible, and. with an election already visible, the Goevrnment devoted itself to spreading more light and joy. Suggestions of more profit-sharing, co-partnership schemes, even a capital gains tax, were made from Tory benches, and the Government, as if nothing had happened, reverted to a Liberal defense of trade union independence and the sanctity of the existing negotiation machinery.
The breathing space was short-lived. This time, however, when balance of payments strain became apparent, the pressure for direct State intervention in industrial relations was much greater than before. The 1961 Budget introduced a payroll tax to stiffen employers’ resistance to retaining under-employed labour as well as to new wage claims (without corresponding restrictions to prevent employers from passing the tax on in price increases). Pressure was such, however, that by early summer, it was clear that stronger measures were needed. At the same time, there were sharp business criticisms of fluctuations in Government policy which made it impossible for big firms to plan ahead and restricted investment (to the loss of future competitive ability abroad). Government policy changes, it was alleged, were responsible for the stagnation in the British economy and ils decline relative to its nearest foreign rivals. Direct pressure from the FBI was brought upon the Government to impel it towards a more consistent application of a policy which did not affect business.
The problem was the same as it had always been at the point where international competition became sharpest. Business was not amenable, however, as things had previously been, to the orthodox solutions which curtailed its future prospects. The main height of the attack on inflation fell necessarily on labour. To make this shift of emphasis more acceptable to the unions and lessen its electoral impact, some major change of policy was required to demonstrate to the unions that the ‘national interest’ really was at stake. This demand for an attractive packaging coincided with business pressure for much greater control over total State expenditure and investment, and for more co-ordination between the different elements of national expenditure and between State and business policy – in a word, for planning. As a result, the National Economic Development Council was created, and with it came the ‘pause’ – an explicit instruction to all those concerned with wage negotiations to prevent wage increases rising above two and a half per cent. Henceforth, not the market for labour, but the State would determine the share of the national income accruing to the working class. Adherence to full employment, the ending of unemployment as the ‘natural’ discipline of wage negotiations, had at long last achieved its logical result.
The policy was admittedly only temporary, a stop-gap while the Government worked out ‘a sensible long-term relationship between increases in incomes of all sorts and increases in productivity" [14] means whereby the State could shine a ‘guiding light’ in the faces of wage negotiators so that, in effect, they would execute Government policy rather than reflect the market or even be sincere proponents of the ‘fair wage’.
This was, clearly, a wages policy (or an ‘incomes policy’ as the Government euphemistically preferred to call it), but the crucial problems of a wages policy were unsolved. First, there was no way of establishing differentials between wage levels, and the problem of leap-frogging between different sections of workers remained unsolved. Second, the TUC was not unanimously inclined, nor even equipped, to translate the global limits into detailed negotiations. It could not guarantee the behaviour of its sections. Third, in a boom with relatively scarce labour, employers needed flexible payment methods to maintain output, not the rigidity resulting from Government intervention. Finally, and most important ,the Government had no means of enforcing its will. Verbally, it might press on into the marsh of a wages policy, abandon its own Liberal propaganda, and even suggest the desirability of a system where the unions represented less the workers to the employer than the State to the workers (where unions became departments of State), but ultimately the political obstacles prevented the Government taking powers commensurate with its aim.
Government reliance merely on propaganda had predictable results. Its defeat only further discredited its policy and made it less likely that union leaders would take it seriously. In November, an award to electricity workers was double that permitted under the Pause; in February the following year, the railwaymen received a half a per cent increase above the Pause; and in May, dockers were given an increase several times above that permitted by their ‘increase in productivity’. The Chairman of the Port Employers, justifiying this last award, said dock employers refused to pay the costs of Government policy on their own. [15] A little later, The Times published a list of seventy-seven industries awarded an increase above that permitted by the ‘guiding light’. [16] However, the attempt by the State to impose certain wage levels had led, as in 1957, to the scrapping of the existing negotiating machinery. As the Chancellor innocently put it: ‘The Government... as employer intends the normal machinery to work to the greatest possible extent consistent with the pause’, going on to add that ‘It is not the powers (of the existing machinery) but the use to be made of them which I believe is really important.’ [17] He suggested that the negotiating machinery for teachers’ pay needed radical revision to prevent the Burnham Committee from reaching decisions the Government did not like. However, the failure of the long-term policy was clearly exhibited. In July, 1962, the Government’s solution was announced – a second Cohen Council, the National Incomes Commission, along with a series of trivial demonstrations of Government good-will (measures for consumer protection, a contract of service, reforms in the apprenticeship system, and in monopolies and restrictive practices legislation). The new body was not to cover the public sector, it needed Government initiative to set it going and it was merely retrospective. Indeed, it was so hedged about with qualifications that it was clear the Government felt itself on dangerous ground. ‘A Government which establishes a Royal Commission is usually uncertain of itself; a Government which establishes a body like NIC is weak.’ [18]
Emphasis was rather more firmly placed upon NEDC. Its expert bureaucracy, it was assumed, would make clear recommendations to which the trade unionists on the Council would be morally bound, and it would thus effectively enforce union ‘restraint’. However, the key problems in the entire approach remained – including the problem of the maintenance of the authority of union leadership.
 
IV.
The problems involved in a wages policy make full control of wages impossible, except where impelled by some major national crisis. However, in the interim, the slow shift from bargaining to collaboration continues. The stalemate in relations between the State and the unions since 1926 has concealed the changes that have gone on: the unions cannot win except by a continuous forward advance. Where that advance is checked, the trade union leadership necessarily becomes increasingly assimilated into the structure of social authority. Yet, despite itself, it cannot go very far, for the changes in the economy periodically reawaken powerful rank and file movements to use unions for their original function. In the meantime, unofficial strikes are the warning that check the sense of ‘responsibility’ of trade union leadership. These generalizations, of course, are not meant to apply to those trade union leaders who seek to go against the prevailing trends. That trend is the reflection of the general decline in the labour movement which no longer provides a clear and coherent alternative to collaboration.
On the Government side, the trends are concealed by the twists and turns of policy in relation to the balance of payments situation, itself a partial reflection of British successs in foreign markets. After 1955, the golden age of British capital, the resurgence of European competition increasingly limited British aspirations. That foreign threat, plus the irritation of British business at Government solutions which restricted investment, pushed the Tories out of their Liberal pose, back into the corporatist and State capitalist tradition. The State was to centralize and discipline the economy as the market was supposed to do. The division between Liberals and corporatists within the Tories continued to reflect the division of British capital – a division of declining importance, since the opposition to corporatsm was far less powerful than it had been before.
The conclusions from this account are wide, but it will suffice to pinpoint a few. First, the danger to the trade union movement in Britain is less from defeat (although this is a danger too) than from the assimilation of its leadership into the bourgeoisie. Second, the fluctuations in Tory policy are likely to continue as international pressures change, but increasingly attempts will be made to dismantle the existing negotiating machinery (which strives for a ‘fair wage’) and substitute a centralized system of State controlled global wage levels (to achieve an ‘economic wage’). In the short-term, adopting a Liberal attitude might seem progressive – to defend the existing machinery of negotiation. But it is certainly not enough, for the present structure increasingly conflicts with the difficulties British capitalism faces in the world, this conflict is only part of a similar situation in all major industrial countries where labour costs are becoming the crucial target, the variable which can be used to lower home prices abroad. Those who defend the existing system alone have to say how Britain can survive economically in such a situation, how can prices be lowered to ensure the continued expansion of the economy? When the metaphysics of ‘co-operation’ are wiped away, there is no answer.
The only real answer lies in a world system where expansion can be accommodated without the working-class being coerced into supporting the cost – in a system without classes. That is the alternative which the Labour Movement should be offering. This account has stressed the intelligence and shrewdness of the Tories, simply because too many Socialists try to escape problems by assuming the stupidity or irrationality of their opponents. The alternative must be posed, around which workers in all major industrial countries can strive – to counter the present trends – an alternative which goes beyond the ‘fair wage’ to challenge the wage system, which goes beyond defending the traditional machinery and challenges directly the entire distribution of income and power in class society.
 



Parties and Politics in Contemporary Japan
Robert. A Scalapino and Junno-suke Masumi
University of California (Cambridge UP). 30s.
The 1960 opposition to the ratification of a security treaty with the US provides the main demonstration of the detail of this book, as well as being one of the major occurrences which brought Japanese domestic politics to the British national press. Japanese politics are bewilderingly complex, and some helping hand is needed to comprehend the severe strains exhibited periodically in Japanese society. So far as formal Diet politics are concerned, this new book provides a clear and excellently documented analysis: a sort of handbook both to the divisions between and within the parties, their social composition and postwar history, and the Gallup Poll attitudes of the Japanese electorate. Occasionally the book is shrewd, and always moderately sensible and factual.
However, one is left with a confused impression, since the authors limit their subject so severely. Wider economic and social change is referred to only in passing, rather than as a powerful determinant of political conflicts, and the meaning of political conflicts is not analyzed—the enumeration of the factions within, say, the Liberal-Democratic Party is scarcely of interest, even when their social composition is cited, unless one can comprehend the issues dividing those factions in a light other than that in terms of ‘powerful individuals’.
The account of the Socialist Party is similarly rather flat, although there are useful statistics and a citation of most of the relevant literature – in particular, the book focusses sharply the role of intellectuals in revolutionary politics, as well as their total reliance in the left-wing Trade Union Federation. But the authors do not explain why the contextual determinants of Japanese politics are as they are – why is Marxism in one or another of its forms still as strong as it is? why is Sohyo left-wing, in contrast to its Western European brethren?
The book then is a preface to the subject, a Baedeker approach, that, at best, hints at real answers, but is mainly devoted to the rather dull results of the political process rather than its social roots. This is a pity since Japan’s development is of profound importance and interest.






The argument over import controls is becoming one of the central political arguments facing socialists. As the second great recession in five years is closing down factories wholesale and forcing tens of thousands of new workers into the dole queues, the demand to control imports is often, the first to which people turn.
It is a demand currently very much associated with the left, since it stands at the centre of the Alternative Economic Policy preached by Tony Benn, the left trade union leaders, Tribune and the Communist Party. Yet historically, it was in the first third of this century the rallying cry of the Tory Party and already some voices of the Tory right wing are raising it again – as are, of course, the fascist National Front. And in the last few months several sections of big business have been demanding selective measures to protect their own particular industries from foreign competition.
The Socialist Workers Party has always opposed the agitation for import controls. Our objection is primarily political: the agitation is based on the assumption that workers and employers have a common interest in fighting to protect British capitalist concerns from the capitalist concerns of other countries; it preaches a form of class collaboration, whereas our standpoint is unrelenting class warfare.
However, our view is often dismissed by non-revolutionaries as ‘idealistic’, ‘impractical’ and ‘purist’, because, they claim, through import controls there can be an improvement in the conditions of workers in this country. In this article, Nigel Harris looks at these specifically ‘economic’ arguments, and shows how they are wrong, even in their own terms.



* * *
Let’s start with the experience of the past.
In 1931 the British government broke with its past policy of ‘free trade’, which allowed free entry of imports and free movement of British capital. In its place full scale ‘protection’ was introduced to limit severely imports, especially in what were then known as the basic industries – coal, iron and steel, shipbuilding and textiles.
In 1929, two years before the introduction of protection, employment in these industries was 2.3 million workers. Ten years later, after eight years of protection, employment was 1.8 million. Total unemployment in the country, running at 1.5 million in 1929 (or 12.2 per cent of the labour force), reached its peak after the introduction of protection at 3 million in 1932–33 (or 23 per cent of the labour force). In the basic industries, the rate of unemployment was double the average level for the country as a whole, and remained very high throughout the thirties.
If we take one example, textile and clothing manufacture, it seems employment declined during the period of protection (by 28 per cent between 1923 and 1938), and increased with more or less “free trade” after World War II. Thus, employment was around one million in the 1920s, declined through the 1930s, rose in the second World War to reach 840,000 in 1946, and then increased to 1,089,000 in 1950. It declined again to 840,000 during the 1950s, and then rose again to 1,086,000 in 1965 (when employers were complaining of shortage of capacity!)
Or take another example. Agriculture is the most heavily protected activity in all advanced capitalist countries. In this country, the protectionism of the 1930s and the Second World War period was never dismantled after the war. These are the figures for agricultural employment:



‘Free trade’ years


 


employed




1901


2,243,000




1920


1,553,000




1930


1,340,000




‘Protection’ years




1940


 


1,128,000




1946


1,240,000




1950


1,258,000




1960


1,062,000




1970


   784,000




1976


   656,000



A superficial reading of these figures might even lead you to believe that free trade creates jobs, while import controls destroy them. In fact, such a reading would obscure the real cause of the changes in employment in pre-war and post-war Britain.
The whole world was affected by an unprecedented slump in the 1930s and participated in a world boom from the 1940s through to the early 1970s. Unemployment shot upwards in the 1930s and import controls could do nothing to stop that. It fell in the 1940s and 1950s and was not prevented from doing so by the successive dismantling of import controls. It has been rising again the last 10 years, especially since the world recession of 1974–5, and import controls cannot and will not prevent a further rise. To argue in terms of ‘import controls’ versus ‘free trade’ is to ignore the real causes of the crisis, internationally and in Britain – the capitalist organisation of production. It is to suggest an attempt at tampering with the system which will not work but which will deflect attention from any real struggle to revolutionise society.
Import controls do not simply leave capitalism as it is. If adopted on any scale they push production backwards, and make the crisis of the system worse.
This is because capitalism has developed the world economy to a point where the forces of production in one country are, inextricably linked to the forces of production in others. The more advanced an economy is, the more it is dependent on trade with others. The more backward an economy is, the more the mass of the population can be relatively self-sufficient – at an extremely low level of living (and what goes with it, a high rate of infant deaths, of deaths to women in childbirth, of disease and disability). The myth of self-sufficiency in an advanced capitalist country is essentially ‘reactionary’: that is, it harks back to a more primitive stage of development.
No single country, not even the giant United States, can produce within its national boundaries anything like the right combination of output to sustain the domestic standard of living. Every country must exchange what it can produce most cheaply for what can be produced most cheaply in other countries. To cut or to weaken the links which make such exchange possible is to impoverish the individual national economies.
The call for import controls is a call to cut back those links and to produce such impoverishment just so that some capitalists can increase their relative strength as against others. If the current protectionist pressures are successful, the end result will be, as in the 1930s, to break the world economy up into competing trading blocks, to push backwards the world wide forces of production and to make the economic crisis worse.
Of course, the present links that bind international economies together are organised, as are those economies themselves, along capitalist lines. They involve all the cheating, oppression, bullying and savageries of the system. They reflect the fact that the present level of economic development internationally has been attained within an increasingly irrational and anarchic capitalist framework. But you cannot overcome that by calling upon the group of capitalists of the country in which you happen to live to cut off their links with capitalists elsewhere, so pushing backwards the world-wide level of economic development.
The way out of the world crisis is a reorganisation of the international organisation of production along socialist lines. That cannot be achieved without a revolutionary process, which liberates the forces of human production from the archaic, crippling, nationally based capitalist relations in which they have grown up. That liberation will involve revolutionary upheavals that begin within national boundaries and spread out from these. It cannot be furthered by linking up with particular capitalists to reinforce the archaic, national capitalist structure which cripples production.
 
The Extent of Interdependence
Most people do not see how dependent production and employment in one country is upon what takes place elsewhere. For example, in Britain some people complain that “we should keep our own. oil for our own use and not sell it to foreigners”. It is a childish argument. First, it is not “our” oil at all, but the property of the giant companies, British and foreign-owned, who pump it out, and do so solely on the basis of profit. Second, even if the North Sea oil belonged to the British State, it could not meet the needs of the British economy. The complex of grades and types of oil products – everything from lubricating oils to kerosenes – used in Britain does not at all match the quality of crude taken out of the North Sea. Every oil producing country has surplus and deficit grades, depending on the type of crude it has in the ground, and only trade can swap the excess heavy oils in one country for the excess light oils in another. And oil is a fairly simple commodity.
Again, take the example of three industries that perpetually complain about being crushed by imports in Britain – textiles, clothing and footwear, and vehicles:



Exports as a production of total sales
(percentages)




 


1968


 


1971


 


1974


 


1976




textiles


17.8


20.3


25.6


28.0




clothing and footwear


  8.7


  9.3


11.3


15.0




vehicles


33.7


36.5


40.5


44.0



Generally, when imports rise, so also do exports. Thus, between the first half of 1975 and the first half of 1978, British imports increased 14 per cent – but exports increased 23 per cent. It was not simply the result of increased oil exports from the North Sea. The British share of the manufactured exports of the advanced capitalist bloc increased – from 8.8 percent between 1968 and 1974 to 9.4 per cent in 1977.
British exports are some other country’s imports. Selective cuts in British imports will then provoke the governments of those countries that import British goods to retaliate with selective cuts – then the crisis of those British industries affected by imports is spread to those British industries that export. Furthermore, countries prevented from earning revenue by selling to Britain have no funds to purchase British exports. Beggar thy neighbour might sound good on the surface for British capitalists but finally it impoverishes people at both ends of the trade relationship.
The impoverishment directly hits British workers. For they are not simply producers, they are also buyers. British textile mills do not produce cheap mass consumption goods; they are specialized in high value goods, much of it for export. If they were obliged to produce for mass consumption in Britain, where they have severe disadvantages, the prices would soar, the prices of shirts, underwear and the rest. As a result, working class families would have to pay out far more for basic clothing – and would be able to spend far less on other items. And the result of that would be increased unemployment in industries producing for mass consumption, goods other than textiles. So far as working class consumption is concerned, cheap imports raise the standard of living. Without them, inflation, is accelerated, unemployment increased – the slump is made much worse.
There is another element involved. Imports prevent British capitalists charging the highest prices possible. If they do this then foreign capitalists will scoop the market and bankrupt them. If imports, are banned, this control will disappear, and prices for workers in Britain will rise even more than they would otherwise.
 
The Main Cause of Job Losses
Of course, increased imports do lead to the lay-off of workers in industries affected. But imports are by no means the most important source of sackings. A British government survey of 24 industries most affected by imports found the job losses of 428,000 distributed in the following proportions:



1. Loss of jobs as result of increased imports:


 




a) from backward countries:


11.0%




b) from other industrialised countries:


21.6%




 


32.6%









2. Loss of jobs due to loss of export markets:


 




a) in backward countries:


  0.2%




b) in other industrialised countries:


  4.9%




 


  5.1%









3. Loss of jobs due to declining demand in Britain:


12.3%









4. Loss of jobs due to ‘rationalisation’ of production:


50.04%



Thus, just over half the job losses resulted from the deliberate decision of employers to substitute capital for labour. The struggle for profits ensured that employers sacked, regardless of any other considerations. And such sackings would continue – and indeed increase – if businessmen were protected from foreign competition.
 
Blaming the Third World
The argument for protection frequently has a powerful thread of racialism in it, as well as chauvinism. Most imports into Britain come from Europe and the United States, yet it is always Japan or the Third World countries which are accused of “destroying British jobs”. This is especially true in textiles. Yet, it is the main European textile manufacturers, themselves in decline, who threaten British millowners in the lines of production that Britain specializes in, just as British textiles threaten European textile business in their home markets. Right at the moment, the millowners are up in arms about textile imports from the United States – synthetic fibres and carpet imports. By and large, British mills are not competing at all with imports in the cheap clothing sectors, so they are not threatened by it. Third World manufacturing imports take only 3 per cent of the British market. And for every £1 of imports, Britain supplies to the Third World nearly £4 of exports. The textile industry may suffer from imports, but the engineering industry gains by exports. In the United States, where there are continual complaints about imports from the backward countries, one job in 20 depends on making exports for the Third World.
In the British case, for the first half of the 1970s, if we subtract the jobs lost as a result of imports from those created by exports, then Britain gained on balance a net increase in jobs of 3,000–4,000. And, to repeat, the imports to Britain provided backward countries with part of the earnings with which they could then purchase British exports.
In any case, talk of “imports” as if these were produced by “foreigners” is misleading. About 30 per cent of world trade is not “imports” or “exports” in the ordinary sense, but the internal transactions of international companies (the multinationals). Nobody knows the real value, because internal transactions are not valued in the ordinary way. In the case of Britain, about a quarter of both exports and imports are movements of goods between units of multinational companies. In this case, any reduction in “imports” produces an exact equivalent reduction in “exports”.
 
Who Gains?
For British workers, then, ‘protection’ or import controls can only be a disaster, producing higher levels of unemployment and far higher prices than would otherwise be true. For small business, protection usually means their destruction at the hands of big business, now, by an act of state, created as monopolies.
Who gains? In a severe slump, big business is able to purchase the survival of its profits at the cost of everyone else. Its control of the domestic market gives it great bargaining power abroad with other national monopolies, and, in the 1930s, led to the creation of international cartels that agreed not to compete and divided up the whole world market into spheres of influence. Without the same degree of competition, prices were higher both at home and abroad – and the world’s peoples were poorer as a result. Protectionism in the 1930s held down the world economy in slump. It was the first act of economic warfare that culminated in the real warfare of 1939. Insofar as each national working class accepted the economic warfare of their ruling classes, they brought real warfare that much closer.
The political debate about protectionism should not hide the fact that the world is already well on the way to protectionism. The leading states have, on a piecemeal basis, taken continuing steps to ban the imports of particular countries, impose quotas or prohibitive tariffs. For all its blather about “free markets”, Mrs Thatcher’s government has not resisted the trend; it has imposed restrictions on imports of textiles and fibres from the United States, on steel imports from selected countries (making cars more expensive, for example), on footwear, on consumer electronic goods, and many more. But it is still piecemeal, and supposedly “temporary”.
All states try to cheat on the rules of world trade, but all are wary of general protection because they know that it would replace one disaster by general catastrophe. But dangerous precedents are set by creeping protection, and by the trade warfare now in train (for example, the battle between European steel exports to the US and US textile exports to Europe).
Protectionism is not about the protection of British workers at all. It is about the protection of British profits, protection of the ruling class, at the expense of both the British working class and the world’s productive system. It shows the despair in the ruling order for they know that protectionism will make slump much more catastrophic even if it also secures their power. That power is embodied in the slogan: only British capitalists have the right to exploit British workers!
 
Internationalism
Protectionism raises in a stark and unavoidable form the contradiction between those who believe in a world working class, in the aim of a world workers’ republic, and those who in crisis, always side with their own national ruling class – thus making competition and conflict even more severe. It is usually the national trade union leadership who, in a political crisis, side with the employers against the demand to break a world order of national states.
Take a concrete example. On Mexico’s side of the border with the United States there are enclaves of US business known as In-Bond Plants. Here, American business manufactures goods for export to the US market, using cheap Mexican labour. The American trade union federation, the AFL-CIO, has constantly denounced this activity. Not because the trade union leaders are outraged at the grotesque exploitation of their fellow workers in Mexico, but because “Mexico is stealing American jobs”. The reaction of a serious trade union ought to be to defend its members, and to do so by recruiting all those employed in the given trade – that is, by helping to organise the workers of the In-Bond Plants, using the resources of the US labour movement to fuel the struggle of Mexican workers to achieve parity of wages with comparable workers in the United States. In that way, the attempt of US business to play off one group of workers against another would be neutralized.
By bleating about “American jobs”, the AFL-CIO aids and abets US business in exploiting Mexican workers. It shores up the power of the US ruling class, at the cost of both American and Mexican workers. It makes that reaction even more extreme by being the leading campaigner for the expulsion of Mexican workers from the United States itself. Protectionism and tight immigration controls go together, and together they destroy the possibility of the working class defending itself against the depredations of capital. Worker fights worker, and capital, as they say, laughs all the way to the bank.
If the British textile unions are so worried about Korean competition, let them use the power of their trade union organisation to help Korean workers fight back. If British Leyland workers are so scared of Japanese car imports, let them bend all efforts to help the organisation of Honda, of Mazda, of Toyota. Capital is international and it can only be beaten internationally. National loyalty, loyalty to the local ruling class, is a disastrous weakness in that contest.
 



Underdeveloped Europe, Studies in Core-Periphery Relations
Institute of Development Studies, edited by Dudley Seers, Bernard Schaffer and Marja-Liisa Kiljunen
Harvester Press, 1979
That section of the Left popularly known as ‘Third Worldists’ argue that the real divisions in the world are geographical. The ‘first world’ of Europe, North America and Japan constitutes the world’s ruling class, the ‘Third World’, the proletariat and peasantry.
It follows that each segment of First and Third Worlds is socially homogeneous – the poor in the First and the rich in the Third are marginal (and often the poor in the First are seen simply as immigrants, really from the Third World after all). This notion – ‘proletarian’ States versus ‘bourgeois’ States – is a distant descendant of Stalinism, based upon the idea of a ‘proletarian State’ confronting a bourgeois world order. It is quite contrary to the Marxist tradition where proletariat and bourgeoisie confront each other in each segment of space: factory, district or country.
Of course, the idea has a half truth – Europe and the United States are the heartlands of the world bourgeoisie. But they are also the heartlands of the world proletariat as well. In fact, what the Third World argument is about is a conflict within the world ruling class – between the ruling classes of the backward capitalist countries and those of the advanced capitalist countries.
The Third World case is an explicit and extreme form of an assumption held by the ruling classes of the backward countries and by most of those who spend their lives working on these questions in the Economic Development Industry (heavily represented in the aid programmes of advanced capitalist countries, the United Nations, the World Bank and many others.)
The idea surfaces in a number of concepts, for example that of ‘dependency’, so popular among the Latin American intelligentsia. It occurs also in the use of a pair of concepts, ‘core’ and ‘periphery’. This proposes that core economic areas – for example, Europe and the United States – necessarily and invariably reduce all other areas to being peripheral, to supplying tribute. Used carefully, the idea can illumine some of the relationships involved in the spatial concentration of production and population, provided it is not used to make the core seem bourgeois and the periphery proletarian.
Both in the world system and each national part, the process of capital accumulation causes and is enhanced by an enormous centralization of the means of production – in terms of the size of production units, the ownership of those units and in the spatial concentration of modern activity. The processes are very similar, whether they mean concentration of production in the hands of a small group of advanced capitalist States in the world or of one leading region in a country.
This picture has always been true for developed capitalism, and in no way affects the socialist political strategy, Nonetheless, the use of the territorial argument in conditions where the Marxist tradition is weak or non-existent aligns the Left with the interests of the ruling class of the ‘periphery’ against those of the ‘core’.
In such a context, the idea of imperialism degenerates to meaning the relationship between the dominant world capitalists and the relatively backward capitalists, hot the relationship between world capitalism (big and small) and the world working class (now represented in all countries, regardless of the relative degree of economic development). The perspectives of world proletarian revolution disappear into the aspirations for ‘A new world economic order’ (the current United Nations demand), imperialism becomes ‘dependency’.
A group of specialists in problems of national economic development at the Institute of Development Studies (at the University of Sussex), have put together a volume of studies which try to apply the ‘core-periphery’ distinction to the internal relationships in Europe itself.
The contributors fortunately do not take too seriously the ostensible theme of the book, so that a number of the pieces are useful. But the theoretical fuzziness at the heart of the book means ‘core-periphery’ comes to mean anything you want it to mean.
 



The world economy is a topic more frequently mentioned than clearly identified. [1] Almost all writers on the subject, left and right, are preoccupied with a particular national interest or group of interests – the interests of the predominant political form of power, the State, or a group of States (“the Third World”). The statistical information is likewise governed by the relationship of particular States to the world system. As a result, we lack a properly founded independent view of the system. By default, the world economy becomes no more than the external transactions, as officially recorded, of the some 140 States of the world. The external transactions are big enough, binding States together in an elaborate net of interactions, a $1,000 billion [2] per year flow of commodities, $300 or $400 billions worth of services, and the vast arena of financial flows. It is a miracle of collective and capitalist ingenuity, the more miraculous because it is without a guiding centre. Yet it is still only the external relationships, treating States as if they were somehow independent economic islands instead of corks on the wave, as much preoccupied with governing the domestic changes induced independently by external influences as with direct external dealings.
States are not an adequate basis for dealing with the system for many reasons. Their power is severely circumscribed; they are not the starting point for autonomous action, and, much of the time, are merely reactive. They are not comparable with each other. Each is a unique configuration of activities, with an appropriately unique relationship to the world system. Some are giants with major influence abroad, some Lilliputian. More importantly, they are only partially in control; only partially influential over the activities undertaken within their frontiers.
None of the active participants in the world economy is much wiser. Geniuses they may be in their little corner, but outside it, they are reduced to guesses and hunches about why things happen exactly as they do. Explaining the weather, well known for not being foolproof, is by comparison child’s play. Unlike the weather, the perception of world capitalism is dominated overwhelmingly by a fog of unseen interests, of empty moralizing, of taking credit or blaming others for incidentally caused accidents. The decline of the pound sterling in 1976 led to the Indian Rupee being permitted to float upwards, so wiping out any price advantage in the black market for foreign exchange; but Mrs Gandhi claimed it as a victory for her mild campaign against currency speculators! The result of the conflict of interests of the dominant classes of the world is confusion, a confusion that incidentally protects the existing status quo from critical scrutiny, protects States, and in particular, the core of the world system, the advanced capitalist powers: the 24 members of the OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the club of the advanced capitalist States), and within that, the most powerful seven countries. It is this group and its experience since the first major postwar economic crisis of 1973–74 that is the concern of this article – but we are obliged to deal with States rather than “the system”.
The importance of an independent view of the world system is precisely because the period of crisis since 1974 is marked by increasing contradiction between the world political system, territorial units governed by States, and the world economy, as well as the contradiction between States as they struggle to defend control of their domestic territories and their areas of external domination.
It is not a stable conflict, nor one that increases at the same pace. It varies in essence with the fluctuations in world economic activity, but each State can rise and fall relative to others on apparently quite accidental grounds. The central contradiction is at its most dangerous with a sharp downturn – the years between 1973 and 1975 in the first instance, and now, 1980–82. At such times, each ruling class is to a greater or lesser degree tempted to secure its domestic political survival by reducing or rupturing some of its links with the world system – it tries to purchase political survival at the cost of economic survival. To break down some of the links is to damage severely the world economy and so drive down even further the State which makes the first move. The medicine can be worse than the original illness. But ruling classes move in this direction precisely in desperation, calculating that it is better to keep power than feed their population.
The fabric of the world system at the moment creaks; there are small tears under the strain of the rivalries of the dominant powers, but none of the major States dares begin a process that can destroy them. Nonetheless, we can already dimly perceive the forms of the warring blocs that could emerge – a dollar zone, a rouble zone, a yen zone, and a squabbling deutsche mark zone, with the rest of the world, victims of war, grouped loosely around each, the prizes over which the warlords fight. To reach such a stage would be catastrophe, an Orwellian 1984 nightmare where the interests of States had been secured at the cost of the livelihood of humanity and with the permanent threat of war.
 
Surviving last time round
The period of stagnation, interspersed by “recessions”, is governed by the low level of the world profit rate. This low level does not rule out patterns of high growth for some participants, but it entails for most, a slow or rapid deterioration.
To restore the world profit rate and so world investment, requires a massive collapse of capital values – the destruction of production units, the writing off of the great overhang of domestic and international debt, and, what would be involved in this, a wave of bankruptcies. Today it cannot be done since the political consequences of permitting the bankruptcy of the now very large units of capital would jeopardize the position of many existing States (and, where elections are held, wipe out particular party contenders for leadership of the local ruling class).
In the period since the first major downturn, the first crisis of the profit rate in the current period, 1974–75, the central problem has been made worse rather than alleviated by the actions of States. Despite the sharp reduction in some sectors of production – for example, in European steel (particularly the British Steel Corporation), or European and Japanese shipbuilding – world productive capacity has continued to be expanded. This arises not merely because the planned investment of the 1960s comes on stream in the 1970s, but also because none of the existing producers can trust the others to cut capacity, so that to do so oneself becomes an act of unilateral self-destruction. Furthermore, the investment that has taken place is “capital deepening”; that is, it expands capacity while radically reducing employment (existing capacity is continually transformed to cheapen output so that the company concerned can capture what little market there is left).
States have refused to permit the scale of bankruptcies required, both because to do so would be to jeopardise future national capacity to compete if the world economy resumed growth and because, in some cases, the fear of the political and electoral consequences of permitting sudden rapid increases in unemployment. In general, States used public revenues to protect their major public and private industries, and, in many cases, raided investment to hold up current levels of activity. Public revenue is extracted from current consumption through taxes and other means, so that it reduces the market for the rest of capitalism – lowering the local profit rate and thereby making even more difficult a resumption of growth.
The public disputes over the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR) in part reflect this concern (although not exactly, since the PSBR does not indicate total public revenue, nor is it extended solely as subsidies to ailing businesses). Take the example of Italy. The 1979 PSBR required, it is said, to fund both the staggering cumulative debts of public sector corporations and Italy’s welfare system, was equal to about 18% of the Italian gross domestic product (Britain’s was, in the same year, about 5.9%), or some 65% of the credit officially available in the country. Such a high demand by the State for funding made general finance expensive: interest rates for borrowing were high enough to exacerbate the failure of business to invest. High levels of taxation persuaded a greater or lesser proportion of the workforce to “contract out” of the official legal economy in favour of the illegal “black” economy, this in turn produced the paradox of a thriving prosperous petty capitalism alongside the bankruptcy of the capitalist State.
Italy’s example is extreme, but comparable elements occurred in most of the major capitalist countries in the last half of the ’70s. The disproportionate growth of public expenditure to salvage bankrupt segments of capital and to sustain the domestic economy was a general phenomenon. Japan, with possibly the lowest proportion of public spending of the OECD group in the 1960s, pushed up its spending to equal a quarter of the Japanese gross national product in 1979 (that is, on one definition of “public expenditure”, the definition which puts US public spending at 35%, and British at 44½%). It is still quite low compared to its nearest rivals (public employment in Japan is at 4½ per 100 population, compared to 8 in the US and 10 in Britain) – but has continued rising when most of the leading powers are seeking to lower their own proportion of public spending. In 1979, Japan had the largest budget deficit of any State in the OECD group, equal to 8% of gross national product, and to the combined budget deficits of the US, West Germany, Britain and France together.
The expansion in public spending thus stabilized the political power of particular States at the cost of the world and local profit rates and so hindered the resumption of growth. However, things were not worse than they were because of the appearance of an unlikely saviour. The core of the system was able to achieve some growth of output through a vast extension of debt, routed through the Less Developed Countries (LDCs) [3] and the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc. Among others, the OPEC countries “surplus” contributed to this vast expansion of credit, initially to cover the Payments deficits of the LDCs and Eastern Bloc as a result of the oil price increase and stagnating export markets there for the LDCs in the OECD group. Domestically within each of the major powers there was a comparably vast expansion of debt to sustain activity. [4] The United States, still the dominant element in the OECD group’ (contributing some 40% of the combined output) was particularly important in this respect, running enormous budget deficits in the mid-70s in order to expand the US economy. This produced in 1976 and 1977 some modest resumption of growth at the cost of rising inflation and an inexorably declining dollar. The expansion reached West Germany and Japan in 1978 and 1979 when the US had already returned to stagnation.
 
The change of direction
For nearly four years, the ruling classes of the OECD group kept up their morale, hoping that the patterns of modest expansion would sooner or later lift the profit rate high enough to spark off an investment boom. The use of Public expenditure and private debt was tolerable as a temporary response to overcome a temporary downturn; after all, the OECD itself set 1980 as the year of return to full employment and sustained growth in the world economy. Once the normality of growth was resumed, the debts could be repaid, public expenditure could return to normal, a testimony to the effectiveness of Keynesian counter cyclical policy.
Between 1978 and 1980, the realization occurred that the crisis was not temporary; credit could not indefinitely be extended without risking a collapse in the financial rate of return, without dangerously increasing the vulnerability of the system to a repeat performance of the 1929 slump. Perhaps one of the first signals of the change was the Barre plan in France (1978), heralding successive attempts in the seven leading capitalist countries to shift from holding up the domestic market to cutting consumption directly so that reduced real wages (and in particular, the social wage) would make possible increased profits – even if associated changes, in turn, bankrupted some sections of capital. Mrs Thatcher is only our local version of this attempt.
However, the assault on working class living standards was, as before, constrained by political and electoral considerations (that is, the politics of ruling class stability, and the electoral standing of particular parties). President Carter, for example, endeavoured to reduce the US budget deficit and use high interest rates to squeeze the domestic economy, but with the 1980 approach of a Presidential election has increasingly abandoned these efforts lest they affect his vote even more disastrously than his own personal incompetence. Mrs Thatcher, despite much brave talk, has not permitted British Leyland and the British Steel Corporation to go bankrupt, and the current battles over local authority spending show the difficulties involved in implementing a “Chilean turn” without a prior military coup. In Italy, the “stabilization plan” to reduce and eliminate the debt of public corporation and cut real wages was originally formulated by Treasury minister Pandolfi in September 1978, but could never be implemented because of the erratic fortunes of the Christian Democrat governments; the plan has now resurfaced (July 1980) in the Cossiga government; but still the authorities have not dared to propose the ending of the “threshold agreement” wage system in the largest companies (the scala mobile).
Government policy is only the political focus of the change, and the signal to employers to adopt comparably aggressive tactics. Debt can no longer be incurred to cover temporarily the saving of jobs, nor labour costs increased to avoid temporary stoppages. From Edwardes’ treatment of Robinson and British Leyland to Fiat’s abrupt sacking of 61 militants last October, or the use of the mass lockout by Swedish employers and West German engineering bosses, capital has generally assumed the offensive in the class war. And if such a remarkable rejection of the Social Democratic verities of class collaboration is tolerable in the core, the new style will spread rapidly elsewhere.
The specific measures require a general ideological counter attack, whether this is embodied in a general scorn of the “permissive society”, a rejection of “permissive education” and the millions of “scroungers” on Social Security, opposition to abortion, calls for “law and order” and more deliberate cruelty inflicted on those caught by the police, or the unrelenting campaign to restore the thousands of threads that sustain ‘national identity’ (that is, loyalty to the local State) – from “being proud to be British” because the SAS can kill, people can win races at the Olympic games, or the Queen Mother can manage to survive for 80 years. All problems are to be attributed either to foreigners (their “unfair” competition, their floods of immigrants), or to victims (the unemployed are responsible for not having jobs because they will not work etc.). The issues of import controls and immigration controls are only the political cutting edge of this restoration of hysterical chauvinism.
 
Issues between the States
Insofar as States are able to conquer their domestic environment, they thereby throw an increased weight of competition on international rivalry. Of the multiplicity of collisions at any one moment, the current struggle of the Japanese ruling class to establish hegemony of world manufacturing looms among the most important, and will be used increasingly to whip up national solidarity in the other six of the leading OECD powers.
In the first half of 1980, motor companies in Japan produced 5.6 million vehicles, 1.4 million more than the first half year output of the hitherto largest world manufacturer of vehicles, the United States. Japanese companies also manufactured more steel than the United States, becoming at least for a moment, the second largest steel producer in the world after Russia. And, depending on which Yen-dollar exchange rate you take, the Japanese income per head attained roughly the same level as that of the United States. In the same period, Japanese shipbuilding yards took fully half the new ship orders in the world. And seven Japanese watchmaking companies produced 59.7 million watches, substantially more than the 50 million marketed by 867 Swiss companies.
One half year swallow does not make it spring, but were Japanese capital to keep up this rate of relative performance, it would be seen in historical retrospect as of the significance of the US and Germany overtaking British steel output in the 1890s. For the embattled US ruling class, such achievements, even if temporary, are the fuel of hysteria, the index of the possible course of future American decline, confined to agriculture, services and military production while Japan captures – as is the declared aim of the Japanese ruling class – overwhelming domination of all the most advanced forms of manufacturing.
The hysteria becomes very specific in the vehicle market. Sales of the four major US vehicle companies dropped 37% in the first half of 1980 (the worst out-turn for two decades), producing 320,000 layoffs and combined losses of $1.1 billion for the three largest manufacturers. At the same time, Japanese vehicle imports supplied 23% of the US domestic market, and Toyota announced world profits of $1.25 billion (Nissan: $831 million; Honda: $222 million). Of course, imports are heavy while the major investment programme of the US companies labours on to produce a small fuel-economic car, just the speciality of the Japanese importers. By 1983, the picture may look different.
But the long term fears are not simply the squeals of rage of American capitalists today. They reflect the amazing capacity for self-transformation in Japanese capitalism; its speed in catching up in existing lines of production matched by the speed of innovation in future lines of production. Japan has passed in two decades through successive phases of industrial development that took the existing industrialized powers much of this century – put crudely, from silk (textiles, clothing) to steel (steel, cars, ships) and now to silicon (semi-conductors, computers, industrial robots, information systems). [5] Today, there are no other manufacturers of, for example, video tape equipment, and in many of the most modern fields, the main competition is between Japanese companies. The target of the Japanese State is to replace its position in vehicles with one of equal strength in machine tools and electronic equipment, and begin the contest with the United States in those fields where there is at present overwhelming American domination: large computers, nuclear technology and aerospace.
A peculiar feature of the Japanese economy to which we will return later is that it has remained uniquely “national” in comparison with the rest of the OECD group. The government has consistently prevented the establishment of wholly or majority-owned manufacturing plants in Japan, and until the early ’70s, prevented Japanese companies setting up manufacturing abroad (in this respect, Britain is almost the exact opposite, with possibly – in investment terms – the most international national economy in the OECD group). Japan is the least “multinational”, and as a result, more dangerous to its rivals.
However, the enormous strength of US manufacturing – not to mention West Germany – is not defeated so easily. More importantly, the US has other very considerable powers. For example, US policies on interest rates and foreign borrowing (40% of US government debt is taken up abroad), as well as the oil price rise (oil is traded in US dollars), undercut the growing relative strength in Japanese manufacturing in 1979, as it did also that of West Germany. A declining dollar cheapens US exports relative to its competitors and forces those that trade with the US to accept its debts, the only country of which this is true. A rising dollar increases the price of oil imports to the competitors of the US (affecting particularly Japan, dependent for 90% of its energy consumption on imports, the most extreme case in the OECD group) as well as the price of US agricultural and arms exports, many of them not easily replaceable. Both West Germany and Japan rode out the 1973-75 slump by expanding exports to cover the increased deficit on the oil account (in other words, they used the US market to bail themselves out, to “transfer the oil debt” to the US). But in 1979, both moved into a trade deficit:



 


Balance of Payments




1973–75


1975–77


1978


1979


1980




West Germany (current
account in Deutsche Marks
N.B. The 1978 figure includes
a trade surplus of 41.2 bn)


+25.5 bn


+8.9 bn


+17.6 bn


−9 bn


−23 bn




 


1977


 




Japan (current account
in US$, with trade
account in brackets)


 


+11 bn
(+20 bn)


−4.5 bn
(+20 bn)


−22 bn
(−2.5 bn)


 



The change in the trade balance reflects both the changes in the price of oil, as well as the relative performance of exports with first rising and then declining deutsche mark and yen values in comparison to the dollar. The current account includes the large and rising deficit in services, of which the US has a very large surplus (1978: $70 billion). [6]
The deficits have produced some important changes of direction. Both governments are now promoting the use of their currencies and international reserves to offset their reliance on the dollar (and oblige foreign traders to accept their debts, as the United States has hitherto done), to actively pursue an increased share of the OPEC surpluses and to encourage foreign investment in their domestic economies. They have also both made a shift in favour of the Palestine Liberation Organisation to assist their aims in the Middle East. The surpluses resulting from the 1979 increase in oil prices – put at $115–130 billion this year, possibly $87 billion in 1981 – have had a much more powerful effect this time round than in 1973–74. As a result the cumulative deficit on external account of the OECD group is likely to be, according to the IMF, about $17 billion, and of the LDCs, $78 billion. A mass of countries will face extreme difficulty in covering this deficit in conditions of world slump – in particular, the smaller OECD countries (Denmark, Sweden, Belgium, Austria) and, with much more potentially catastrophic results, the mass of non-oil producing LDCs (of which, the Philippines and South Korea, countries with a large cumulative debt relative to their export revenues, are at risk, as well as the better known cases currently causing spasms of fear in the financial press: Turkey, Jamaica, Tanzania, Zambia). In the Eastern bloc, Poland is in a comparable position, with an estimated 70% of its hard currency earnings devoted to servicing a $19 billion cumulative debt in 1979, the worst performance of its economy since 1945, and it was the attempt to make its workers pay for this crisis that gave rise to the huge and successful strike wave in the summer of 1980.
Sudden political eruptions in these cases can produce financial panic. The sudden interest in the fortunes of Mr Manley or Mr Ecevit in the financial press betokens no sudden charm with Jamaican or Turkish culture. Actions taken for other reasons can similarly affect the debt climate – the freezing of Iranian assets by the US which affected the large outstanding loans to Tehran; the US reaction to the Russian invasion of Afghanistan which affected Russia’s capacity to continue borrowing (the banks did not mind the invasion, but they worry that a war might produce a Russian refusal to pay.) The instability and the dangers can only increase.
 
The current downturn
Opinions differ as to whether the 1980–82 crisis will be more or less severe than that of 1973–75. President Carter, faced with an election, endlessly bleats that the recession will be shallower and more short-lived, a point almost consistently contradicted so far with each month’s figures. However, the reasons for believing the verse of Carter’s estimate are substantial:
1. 1973–75 came at the end of a period of relatively high levels of investment, and the completion of these investment programmes contained activity in some sectors through the worst years of 1974 and 1975. This time, the slump breaks on a world that in the major part of the core has experienced low levels of investment for a long period of time; the capital structure in the US and Europe is ageing, and therefore increasingly vulnerable to attack in particular sectors by other powers (whether Japan or the more advanced section of the LDCs, what are called the ‘Newly Industrialising Countries’ or NICs).
2. All governments of the major OECD powers are now dedicated to cutting imports and expanding exports, a recipe for collective disaster. Most governments are now attempting to cut public expenditure and domestic demand, so flattening the market even further.
3. The Eastern Bloc, alarmed at the growing volume of export revenue required to service its existing debts to OECD banks (and at the stagnating level of export revenue as OECD markets sag), is dedicated to reducing both debts and imports.
4. The non-oil producing LDCs are now heavily burdened with cumulative debt, and therefore much less financially able to borrow to sustain the growth of their imports (that is, the exports of the OECD group in the main, although internal trading within the LDC group has also grown rapidly). In 1973–74, the LDC cumulative debt of $73.1 bn (16% of it was borrowing from banks on commercial terms) took annual servicing of about $9 billion per year. In 1979, the debt was $321.5 bn (39% commercial loans), taking $50 billion in annual servicing, given higher interest rates. The debt is projected to reach $384 billion in 1980, and $440 billion in 1981; 70% of the commercial debt falls due for repayment in 1981–82. A third of the debt is owned by just five countries (Brazil, Mexico, South Korea, Argentina, the Philippines).
Thus, although the thirty international banks involved in lending are falling all over themselves at the moment to lend (and dangerously gambling with risks to do so), much of the borrowing that takes place will be merely to cover existing debts, rather than expand demand. The cumulative debt makes it much less likely this time that the banks will be so willing to meet external payments deficits since there seems no prospect of these deficits being covered, given long term stagnation, without domestic cuts. The combined payments deficit of the LDCs was about $7 billion between 1970 and 1973 (most of it covered by official government aid from the OECD group); $ 31 billion between 1974 and 1978; $45 billion in 1979, and is projected to reach possibly $78 billion in 1981. The decline of official government aid only exacerbates the problem.
5. The deficit, a simple projection of the impact of the increased price of oil (for every $1 increase in the price per barrel, the LDC group must find an extra $2 billion), is made much worse by the stagnating demand for LDC exports within the OECD group, stiffened by increasing import controls. Their ability to help get world capitalism going again between 1975 and 1979 seems now disastrously weakened.
6. Finally, in terms of the most vivid index of the failure of the system in the OECD countries, unemployment, the starting point this time round is very much worse than last time. Indeed, levels of unemployment in the OECD group during the “miniboom” of 1979 were higher than at the depth of the slump in 1974–75. The policies of the OECD States are now combining to maximise unemployment levels, nowhere more extremely than in Britain.
 
The sweated trades
Crisis expresses itself in increasing disproportionalities: between sectors of production – between the production of the means of consumption and the means of production – between consumption and profits, between public and private. The stable structure of growth, the frame of the house, does not just move, each element moves disproportionately and unpredictably relative to the rest. What was formerly an accepted division of labour, now becomes an arbitrary imposition. The frames of reference – for example, stable exchange rates – change so swiftly and apparently randomly, long term calculation becomes impossible. A rise in the value of the Yen staunches the flow of Japanese car exports to the US when informed opinion had assumed it impossible for the car flow to be ended; after years of the “US invasion of Europe”, a fall in the value of the dollar suddenly promotes foreign capital to raid the US economy, and for the first time, pushes those pillars of stability, West Germany and Japan, into large deficit.
One feature of the disproportionalities which is worth mentioning is the very poor profitability record of many large-scale corporations, especially those in the public sector, in comparison to the growth of some (but only some) sectors of petty production, of the sweated trades and the black economy. Here, the disproportionality between profits and the cost of labour is dramatically ‘readjusted’ relative to the large scale corporation, governed by legally enforceable or trade union backed wage rates, by a frequently large burden of additional labour costs (social security deductions, pension payments etc.) and by the tightest form of tax deductions. The petty and black economy wipes out the structure of additional costs – it spreads what is known as the lump the building trades to significant segments of manufacturing.
It is not necessarily possible in all sectors of production. Indeed, often the sweated trades depend on the provision of manufactured materials and machinery from the ‘unprofitable’ large scale This phenomenon can perhaps be seen in an number of apparently diverse issues:
1. The increasing competitiveness of some sectors of LDC production in the world market since 1973–75 is well known. Indeed, a new concept has been framed to describe those eight countries which are defined as having been able to attack the market position of the OECD countries in some lines of production (textiles, clothing, electronic components, leather goods, construction): the ‘Newly Industrialising Countries’ (NICs), including four in the Far East (South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore), two in Latin America (Mexico, Brazil) and two others (Yugoslavia, India). Many of these countries not only kept up their rates of growth after 1973, but in some cases, accelerated, and did so on the basis of exports to the markets of the OECD group. Of course, the OECD States have an interest in exaggerating the significance of this, for the NICs are still marginal in world trade – taking some 8 to 10% of world manufacturing trade, and around one per cent only of the OECD market for manufactured goods. Nonetheless, their performance is exploited to justify import controls, and in some sectors and geographical areas of OECD production, their impact appears much greater than these figures would suggest. For example, Japan is particularly affected by the growth of Far Eastern production, some but not all of which is in the hands of Japanese overseas companies (as indeed, some of the imported textiles to Britain are sent by British companies overseas). Imports to Japan from the Far East increased from about 4.5% of total exports at the end of the 1960s to over 20% in 1976–77. The Japanese government estimated that synthetic fibre import prices from Korea and Taiwan were some 30% below Japanese prices; predictably, like their close comrades in arms in Europe and the US, Japanese textile bosses accused foreign suppliers of unfair competition and dumping and appealed for special duties to stop the inflow. The same phenomenon is appearing in certain sectors of cheap electronic products and general shipbuilding.
2. Perhaps there has been a change in the relationship between well-known branded sellers of goods and the mass of units which manufacture under subcontract for the selling company. It appears that in textiles and the glove and shoe trades there may have been some expansion in the subcontracting sector, to the point where cottage industries (the ‘putting out’ system) have become important in some countries. In the cottage sector, labour costs are well below the official norm, and indeed, the use of unpaid family labour can make possible astonishingly low labour costs. In India, for example where Bata operates as a major shoe manufacturing and selling company, it is said that the company has in in the main given up manufacture in favour of subcontracting to merchants who finance and buy the output of home workers. In a way that is not so dissimilar, Thorns assemble television sets in London from parts manufactured in Taiwan. And almost all the watches exported by Switzerland are actually also made in Taiwan under subcontract. Japanese large companies have always been much more dependent upon subcontracting than their rivals in Europe and the US, and there is some evidence that they have been increasing the subcontracting share as a method of lowering total labour costs.
3. The last phenomenon is not very clearly distinguished from the growth of what in Italy is boldly called “Third World Production” – that is, the growth of petty capitalism, normally associated with the LDCs, but now in the heartlands of the system and, in some cases, operated by immigrants from the Third World. Again, the garment and leather trades are of particular importance whether in Lancashire household production or in Paris garment trade cellars – as well as food processing and catering operations in London and some parts of the United States. [7]
However, one of the most extreme cases is that presented by Italy. A recent Textile Workers’ Federation report estimated that some 800,000 “clandestine” workers – out of 3 million employed in home based piece work – operated in Italy in the textile, clothing and footwear trades. The contribution of these workers as well as others in the unrecognised small scale engineering and steel trades are said to contribute an extra 20 to 30% to Italy’s gross domestic product that is not recorded in official statistics (the official statistical agency finally conceded something to its critics by revising the 1978 net output figures upwards by 10% for the black economy). The massive debts of the faltering large scale sector seem to imply; that Italy is in a slump; but, it is said, the sweated trades – half the output of which is exported – gave Italy the highest European rate of growth in 1979 (5%) and look likely to do much the same this year. They have helped to bring Italy the fourth highest official reserves in the world (some $40 billion – compare Japan’s $20 billion) compared to $9 billion in 1977.
The Social Research Institute, Censis, estimates that in 1979, what it called ‘the parallel economy’ provided between four and seven million jobs (both second jobs and part time home work as well as full time employment). The existence of the sector went some way to explain a number of recurrent paradoxes – the powerful performance of the Italian economy despite the bankruptcy of the large scale sector (particularly the large public sector industries, covering most of heavy industry); the appearance of high levels of prosperity alongside official stagnation; or, for example, the steady rate of increase in the demand for electrical power when official industrial output was stagnating. This year the Italian performance has begun to falter, and the trade balance looks like being in deficit as the result of the oil price increase; it could well be that the parallel economy will expand as a result, eating away at the base of the large scale sector.
The sweated trades, the original brutal face of capitalism, are the inspiration for a number of policy measures to accelerate growth – from some forms of the ‘export processing zone’ idea to the British government’s notion of new ‘enterprise zones’. The Tory suggestion to make the unemployed work free could open the door to an even more massive ‘readjustment’ of labour costs in favour of profits.
But what is gained in one hand is lost in the other. The extensions of petty capitalism make it impossible for the state to control the economy as a whole. In Italy for instance, the Brescia small steel makers have regularly wrecked efforts to stabilize quota market shares for European steel companies under the Eurofer cartel agreements, so immeasurably exacerbating the ‘crisis of overproduction’.
 
Integration
However, this increased differentiation between the sweated trades and large scale production is also matched by elements of increased homogenisation. Both relative newcomers to the big capitalist league, Japan and the USSR, are subject to great pressures to bring their economies increasingly into line with the dominant mode within the OECD. Thus the largest powers have increasingly pressed the Japanese government to expand the public sector proportionately, to expand defence spending, to open its economy to foreign capital and to increase investment abroad by Japanese capital, all in order to reduce some of the relative advantages of Japanese capitalism vis-a-vis the rest. They have had some measure of success, although for reasons other than the pressure itself. Public spending has been increasing much faster than in the rest of the OECD group to keep up domestic demand; given that many in the OECD are simultaneously seeking to reduce the share of public spending, there could be some narrowing of the differences. Defence spending is being increased both in response to the alleged growing threat” of Russia in the north-east Pacific area, out of fears that US military protection is becoming unreliable in the palsied hands of President Carter, and because increased defence spending is an important element in stimulating research in key elements of future civil competition – in computers, aerospace and aircraft technology etc. The government still resists wholly owned foreign manufacturing subsidiaries in Japan, but it has supported a growing movement of Japanese capital overseas, as will be discussed later. The spread abroad of Japanese capital was one temporary response to offset the results of enormous balance of payments surpluses, to utilize the advantages of a strong Yen and a weak dollar, and a panic reaction to secure safe supplies of crude oil and other raw materials.
In the case of the USSR, a startling degree of relative integration in the world market has emerged in the past decade and a half. Of course, Russia began from a remarkably low base point in terms of integration, so that while the changes appear relatively dramatic they are still well below the degree of integration of the OECD members. Nonetheless, the increasing purchase of plant, machinery and raw materials (including periodic grain purchases) abroad, [8] and the need for large-scale borrowing from international banks to keep up the flow of imports, has produced an unprecedented degree of commercial integration of the Russian economy in the world market. This necessarily affects the domestic distribution of investment – towards forms of production which can be exported for hard currency earnings – as well as the USSR’s economic relationships with the Eastern bloc countries and the LDCs, all now part of a growing relationship with the OECD group (and in particular, West Germany). It is most curious that just as many LDCs moved from import substitution paths of industrialization to export-promotion ones, to what is known as “liberalizing”, so also the Eastern Bloc should have followed the same direction. The results are acknowledged in this citation from a speech by the Russian Foreign Trade Minister in 1978:
“Today it would be difficult to find an economic sector in the USSR that is not connected with foreign trade to some extent, or does not receive effective practical aid in its further development. To put it figuratively, foreign trade has become an important artery in the blood circulation of the Soviet economic organism.” [9]
Thus these manifold commercial linkages connect Russia to the world system not merely indirectly through competition in armaments, but directly to the ‘law of value’ of the world market.
However, these manifold commercial linkages are still commercial. They do not conform to a particular integrating feature of much of the OECD group, the integration of investment. That requires separate discussion.
 
Capital Raiding
The period since 1973–75 has witnessed on an increasing scale the acquisition by companies of assets overseas. If the 1950s were marked by a strong dollar and the raids by US capital on European manufacturing assets, the sixties and seventies have seen a major counter-attack by European capital on assets in the US. The period of crisis has quickened this process, and, for the first time, drawn in Japanese capital – and, far, far behind, Russian.
The dispersion of ‘national’ capital is frequently quite irrational in terms of the needs of world capital accumulation considered as a whole. There is no reason in principle why Japan should not produce all the world’s cars if they can be produced there more cheaply than anywhere else; competition between Japanese companies is as at least as ferocious as between Japanese and non-Japanese. But world capitalism in fact consists of competing capitals, owned or protected by rival states, and it is this latter agency, the State, which makes the threat of a Japanese monopoly of car production intolerable. The power of the State depends in part upon its direct command of a segment of the world’s productive capacity, and in a world of warfare, safe command requires location in areas directly administered by the State concerned, and ownership by its nationals.
The scale of costs required to sustain the interests of the State are staggering. Take only one example from Britain. If British Leyland’s productivity per worker is a quarter of Japan’s (although there are very different levels of labour productivity within Japan’s vehicle manufacturing companies too), and the Japanese companies aim to double the assembly line productivity in the next five years, then BL will have to increase its output per worker by eight times over to be competitive, and do so with a comparable record of no strikes, wage cuts in bad years, complete job mobility etc. In a rational world order there should be no need to endure such a staggering scale of depredation upon the British workforce for no better reason than to secure the pretensions of the British state and relieve it of responsibility for finding new work or paying the former British Leyland workers.
To protect “its own” companies, the State maintains an increasing number of restrictions on the flow of imports, and an increasing number of aids to exports. These restrictions in turn oblige exporters abroad to move manufacturing facilities behind the restrictions, within the territory of the importing state. This is the process of the “uneconomic” dispersion of production, entailing higher costs per unit of output; foreign capital is obliged to raid the assets of its rivals in order to secure its foreign markets. Then the competition in trade internationally is reimported back within national boundaries – the ‘safe home market’ is no longer safe.
Different states adopt different approaches to foreign investment. Some, pretending for political reasons to achieve something in terms of increased local investment, go out of their way to bribe foreign investment. Ireland and Britain are prime examples in this respect; in the British case, laying the national-market open to foreign raiding goes with the massive export of activity abroad. In contrast, as mentioned earlier, Japan legally proscribes majority-owned manufacturing subsidiaries of foreign firms in Japan. [10] This raises other acute problems. For example, the Japanese government has held down the share of domestic oil refining owned by foreign companies (and in particular the ‘seven sisters’ oil multinationals) to below 50%. As a result, during the oil shortages of 1979, the foreign oil majors refused to sell crude to the Japanese refinery companies; they in turn scrambled to buy “spot” priced oil in Rotterdam, sending the price soaring, to the severe disadvantage of Japanese purchasers. The shortages also drove the Japanese government to redouble its efforts to secure safe oil sources through so far unrewarding prospecting in the seas around Japan, financing Gulf prospecting, and reaching direct government-to-government agreements with oil producing countries (Iran, India, China and Mexico.) In the dissolution of the existing world order, it could produce also a Japanese military strike on Indonesia.
France has, with some exceptions, also tried to block foreign acquisition of key sectors of its economy – as British Petroleum, Lucas and Thorn have discovered. Thorn’s bid for Locatel prompted the French government to push two French companies, Thomson and CGE, to make a joint counter-bid. On the other hand, the government supports strongly efforts by Thomson to buy up electronic companies outside France, or Peugeot and Michelin to raid the assets of capitalists overseas.
Even where the local State is favourably disposed to foreign capital – as the French government wooed Ford for its new engine plant to go to Alsace Lorraine – local companies (even if their headquarters are in fact abroad) may seek to block what a recent advertisement by British Leyland calls ‘Trojan Horses’ (i.e. foreign capital; in the advert, BL is talking nicely of Vauxhall-General Motors, Chrysler-Talbot-Peugeot, and Ford UK). Renault and Peugeot protested vigorously against the proposed Ford investment in Alsace, as they subsequently did against the proposed British Leyland-Honda deal (on the grounds that this admitted Japanese capital into the tariff-free zone of the Common Market). The opposition to Japanese car investment parallels the unofficial import restrictions operated by France to hold down the Japanese share of the French market to around 3%. Fiat likewise opposed strongly Nissan’s purchase of Motor Iberica, the Spanish truck manufacturing plant, a danger when Spain enters the Common Market. It has furiously tried to prevent the deal between Nissan 3 and Alfa Romeo for joint manufacture of a medium size car, and will no doubt also oppose the recent decision by the Innocenti car group to import 150,000 Japanese engines annually. And no wonder, since Japanese car imports to Italy have been held down to 1,200 per annum, a singular privilege for Fiat. But even in the British case where maintaining a Welcome mat for foreign manufacturing capital is the quid pro quo for British capital to raid assets abroad (particularly in the service sector, rather than manufacturing), local companies try to block their rivals; “British” television manufacturers, shamefully supported by the trade unions, led to Hitachi withdrawing its proposal for a factory in the north east; and ICI is currently waging a campaign to prevent Dow Chemicals of the US building a plant in Scotland.
Nonetheless, despite all the open or covert attempts to block foreign investment, the internationalization of capital has accelerated, with a multiplicity of elaborate linkages developing to the point where what belongs to what country is, despite the confidence of some writers on the left, totally unclear. The different national origins of international companies and their “incestuous” denaturalization has thus reduced the former hysteria about US-based multinationals. Now there are even LDC multinationals competing effectively for chemical plant construction, for Middle Eastern construction contracts, for textile manufacture in Europe and the US etc.
In the last half of the 1970s, the declining value of the dollar induced a considerable movement of foreign investment to the US, with West Germany (followed by Japan and Canada) leading the way in manufacturing (particularly, electrical and electronic products, non-electrical machinery, chemicals, energy) and the British in services (particularly banking, wholesale and retail trade). Simultaneously, British investment has begun a major movement to West Germany after its conquests in trade and food products in France.
The late arrivers to the big capitalist league, Japan and the USSR, again show interesting features. Japanese companies were prevented from setting up manufacturing subsidiaries abroad until the early 1970s. Then the spread of Japanese capital took place with moderate speed up to 1976. By then, however, assets abroad were still relatively small in comparison to the rest of the OECD group; Japanese cumulative investment was roughly equal to a third of its gross national product or 27% of the value of its exports, in comparison with the comparable figures of Britain, 16% and 88%. Furthermore, most Japanese investment overseas was in trading and banking activities to assist Japanese exports (a third of Japanese overseas investment then was in manufacturing, compared to three quarters of West Germany’s; the current Japanese figure is 44%).
Similarly, a major part of subsequent Japanese investment abroad as directed to securing raw materials to service the Japanese economy – coal and iron sources in Australia, iron ore sources in Brazil etc. That is, much of the overseas investment was strictly to service the national capital unit of Japan, rather than undertake multinational activities proper. Nonetheless, the scale of capital export has increased substantially:



Japan: Long Term Capital Exports
(average annuals value US dollars) [11]




1965–1970


:


  1.243 bn




1971–1975


:


  4.635 bn




1976–1978


:


  8.216 bn




1978


:


14.827 bn




1979


:


16.605 bn



Yet even in 1979, of the total, only $2.9 bn represented direct investment in manufacturing, the strict ‘capital raiding’ of assets of foreign ruling classes.
Two themes appear in Japanese overseas manufacturing investment. The first is the establishment of genuine multinational production lines in the geographically proximate areas of Japan and in sectors dependent upon cheap labour for competitiveness, sectors being increasingly phased out in Japan proper. It is an international form of subcontracting. Thus, Toray, the Japanese textile company, has established integrated production lines encompassing Thailand, the Philippines and Malaysia. Other Japanese companies operate in South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Indonesia; and now, on an increasing scale, the People’s Republic of China is being drawn into the offshore manufacturing network of Japan. In essence, this is the restoration of the economic sinews of the old pre-war Co-Prosperity Sphere of Japanese imperialism.
The second, of increasing importance in the late 1970s, is investment in manufacturing in major markets overseas to escape actual or threatened controls on Japanese imports. This process began in the early ’70s with the first major investment abroad by Sony in television manufacture at San Diego, California; by 1978, Japanese television set manufacture in the US was larger in output than Japanese television imports to the States for the first time. In Europe, there have been more difficulties, particularly because both France and Italy have resisted the entry of Japanese investment nearly as manfully as Japan has resisted foreign investment in its home patch. Ireland has made much more lavish offers of subsidies to foreign investment – in order to try to catch up with its more advanced neighbours in the Common Market – and has been rewarded with the largest share of Japanese investment (some £80 to 100 millions). Britain – perhaps the home to more foreign investment than any other European power, the most “denaturalized” – has started to raise its bid to compete with Ireland, but so far can have gained not much more than £30–35 million (mainly in South Wales and the North East). However, the figures are a little suspect since there are many more collaboration agreements with giant British companies than is possible in Ireland (given the relative weakness of its native capitalism) – for example, Toshiba-Rank, British Leyland-Honda, Sharp-GEC, etc.
The growing pressure to use Japanese vehicle imports as the prime scapegoat for the poor and incompetent investment record of the US and European car companies means that there will be increasing restrictions on trade, so stimulating the tendency for the export of Japanese capital in vehicle manufacture. Some of the deals in Britain, Italy and Spain have been mentioned, and Japanese capital has been active in joint agreements with West German machine tool companies. Honda is the first Japanese company to announce direct investment in car making facilities abroad, to begin production in 1983 at Marysville, Ohio. Toyota is involved in discussions with Ford over possible collaboration; and now that the US government has raised the import tariff on pick-up trucks from 4 to 25%, Nissan has announced it will begin truck manufacture in the US.
The Japanese cumulative total is still relatively small compared to the big foreign investors, and is so for reasons specific to Japan’s late industrialization path. Nonetheless, the Japanese total is still far larger than that of the USSR. Russia has some 500 companies established in the countries of the OECD group, most of them set up since 1970 and primarily directed, as in the case of Japan, to servicing Russian exports, imports and associated financial activities. However, the total includes 22 companies engaged in manufacture and assembly, and insofar as protectionism increases in the OECD group (and, for example, Polish car exports are one of the targets of Western import controls), Russian manufacturing abroad will be obliged to expand to keep up Russia’s hard currency earnings (from repatriated profits as opposed to export revenue). None of Russia’s manufacturing units abroad yet operate as multinationals – that is, with integrated production lines located in several countries – but that is a promise for the future. By contrast, the Moscow Narodny Bank has long operated as a simple international bank, albeit a small one, speculating in commodities, currency and gold, and in a famous scandal, in the Singapore company and property market.
If we view the world system as a simple collision of clearly identified national capitals – a view which is, for reasons already numerated, very much a half-truth – then the special features of the dominant national powers become apparent. The world was dominated by US capital in almost all fields in the 1950s much as British capital dominated much of the nineteenth century. Few people now remember the hysterical accounts of the “Dollar problem” produced in Europe in the early fifties, demonstrating conclusively how the Europeans could never prevent the indefinite decline in the face of the overwhelming strength of the US economy. The decline of British manufacturing has accompanied an expansion in its international servicing and financing roles particularly in banking (which accounts for the paradoxical 1979 achievement of Barclay’s becoming the largest, and National Westminster the second largest, commercial banks in the world in terms of net earnings; Midland and Lloyds are fifth and sixth after Bank of America and Citicorp of US). In the case of the US, there is a similar phenomenon, although on a much larger scale because of the far greater size of the US economy and its very powerful world position in agricultural trade, armaments and many other fields. By contrast, the new rivals to the powers of the past, Japan and West Germany, have made their major advances in manufacturing, and are now in their turn threatened by even newer manufacturing powers in key sectors of current production.
The pattern of investment overseas is conceptually muddy. For part of West Germany’s manufacturing strength is produced by US-based companies operating in West Germany, just as US output includes that of foreign-based companies in the States. This is to leave out the entirely ambiguous areas of joint collaboration agreements between companies of different national origins.
A state driven to reduce its links with the world economy in the interests of domestic political stability would be obliged to curb or control those segments of local assets owned by foreign-based companies, to restrict the export of profits in favour of domestic investment. It could only do so by risking foreign States taking reprisals against its own assets abroad. There is no end to the problems – each drive to restrict imports produces the reverse phenomenon of foreign investment, which merely re-establishes world competition back in the domestic economy.
 
Protectionism
As the OECD group of States moves into the most severe economic downturn since the 1930s, the issue of import controls becomes of increasing political importance. The aim as most frequently presented is, for reasons already partly presented, both Utopian – it cannot be realized – and reactionary. Selective import controls on particular commodities are even less practicable except on a publicly announced temporary basis, for what is one capitalist’s advantage is always another’s loss. A ban on the import of cheap coking coal (from the US, Australia, Poland) entails higher costs for British Steel Corporation because of the enforced necessity to buy higher priced British coke – and therefore a price advantage to foreign steelmakers who are able to use the cheapest coking coal available. A ban on the import of cheaper foreign steel entails the costs of British car manufacture increase; what British Steel Corporation gains, British Leyland loses.
Thus, to make import controls work requires massive State intervention to subsidize export production at the cost of the home market – otherwise, all exports become increasingly uncompetitive. Such intervention is only acceptable to the capitalists if the state of crisis is so severe, they fear for their very survival and are willing to accept the destruction of some of their numbers in favour of others. It is tolerable also only if the likely effect on export markets and the operations of capital overseas are not affected in reprisal. All this is true despite the growing chorus of demands in Britain (and the US) for import controls. The ruling order is fully aware of the problems even if it is willing to tolerate the demands – it is part of the hypocrisy. It is perhaps worth remembering how long it took last time round to achieve import controls even though substantial sections of ruling class opinion favoured them – demands for controls were strong at the turn of the century, and produced a majority vote in favour at the Conservative Party conference of 1907, but general import controls were not introduced until 1931.
The political froth should not mislead us as to the strength of opposition, nor to the fact that all OECD States today are involved in operating a network of controls on imports and subsidies to exports, barriers to the expansion of world trade. Whether it is Italy’s straight ban on Japanese car imports, French administrative restrictions, or the British subsidy to exporters through the export credit guarantee system (worth some £500 million per year, or about half the British contribution to the Common Market or two thirds of the aid programme [12]), or the reservation of public ordering for local companies, all add up to greater or lesser attempts to manipulate the terms of trade in favour of one state.
The capacity of a State to cheat on the principles of free trade is a function of its relative strength in the world market, how far it is able to intimidate those that trade with its nationals into accepting the cheating without taking reprisals. Reprisals are taken. The most recent example of the potential of reprisals is in the Australian government’s reaction to the EEC. The pretext was the proposal of the EEC to include sheep meat in the Common Agricultural Policy, but the underlying cause is the dumping of heavily subsidized European agricultural surpluses in third markets, the markets for Australian exports (in sugar, beef, dairy products, flour). The Australians claim to have lost to the EEC a market for 200,000 tonnes of beef in the Middle East and Eastern Europe. Queensland produces sugar exports for its geographically close neighbour, Papua-New Guinea, or rather did so until the EEC dumped subsidized sugar and captured the market. There is no way of determining the truth of the issue, nor does it matter very much what the truth is, but in reprisal, Australia now threatens to end about a third of its trade with the EEC (1979 value, £489 million), covering defence, aircraft and telecommunications equipment. Britain is the most threatened since it holds about a half of the outstanding contracts. As was quickly pointed out in Brussels, Australia is becoming the major supplier of cheap coal to the world market and controls 17% of the world’s uranium reserves, so it was thought unwise to offend the country. We shall see whether the EEC will climb down (and how it will rejig the CAP to accommodate Australia) or call Australia’s bluff.
The test is between the relative economic strengths of the two participants. It is thus not at all accidental that the United States has most frequently resorted to import controls. Its aggression is protected by the size of its domestic market (and the need of foreign exporters to get into that market) and the relatively irreplaceable character of some of its exports. US industry has regularly invoked the power of the State to curb imports in favour of the profits of all declining segment of industry except in periods of high boom – even as the US government has been the most consistent public advocate of free trade and the urgent necessity to keep foreign markets open for US capital. Whether it is the elaborate hypocrisy of ‘voluntary export restraints’ in the late 1960s (i.e. bullying foreign exporters to withhold their supplies under the threat of closing the US market to them altogether), or the current innumerable restrictions on television sets, steel, shoes, textiles etc.
In fact the restrictions give no real indication of what the actual effect is. Japanese steel exports to the EEC might be ‘restrained’ to a set figure and then reappear as “Swedish steel” (without even the knowledge of the Japanese steel exporters). Restriction of imports to the home market might work, but produce intensified competition in third markets – the Japanese cars kept out of Europe then wipe out European car exports to Australia, the Middle East or South East Asia (and, in the final assessment, the loss in third markets might be considerably greater than any gains in the home market). Or excluded Japanese textiles reappear as Korean textiles; Japanese cars resurface as German car components. Or as Japanese car exporters are fond of repeating, the ‘restraint’ forced upon them by the British government (the Japanese share of domestic British car registrations has remained, contrary to the hysterical press reports, between 10.61 and 10.96% of the British market since 1977) has merely provided an opportunity for mainland Europe’s car manufacturers, aided by those of Eastern Europe (total car imports, 1977–80, increased as a share of the British market from 45.38 to 57.68%). That entails that British car buyers have been denied lower cost Japanese cars – and resulting increased costs of vehicles has reduced the market for other goods.
The underlying problem is that capital has only a contingent nationality, an alignment with the State only under certain conditions. There are no products which are ‘British’ or ‘German’ ‘Japanese’, only products, commodities. The contingent nationality of capital is important, but limited and by no means to be taken for granted. In the real flows of trade, finance and services, nationality means no more than the passport of the businessman – except where major political crisis obliges chunks of the world’s capital to align itself for survival with one or other State.
However, to force the alignment of capital ruptures the world system and thereby the economic basis of the States themselves. It is possible only if the State can subordinate domestic competition to external competition, which in turn means the formation of domestic cartels and monopolies by State fiat. In today’s conditions, such a change is impossible, which is a good illustration of the hypocrisy wrapped up in the debate on import controls – it is a demand that flows from the politics of controlling mass support in one patch of the globe, even though it collides directly with economic reality.
In the EEC context, there are even greater problems because there is no effective single state to enforce conformity, and none of the constituent States is willing to police the capacity reducing proposals of Brussels lest it thereby jeopardise its relative standing vis-à-vis other member States. The EEC scheme to enforce a common control of steel prices and quota production for each nation foundered on the mistrust of all the companies involved; on the unwillingness of the Italian State to risk its exports by curbing the Brescia small steelmakers; on the refusal of Spain to scrap its investment plans for steel for its growing car industry; and so on.
The import controls which are practical possibilities are no more than tinkering on the margin so far as the OECD group are concerned. Where the controls are damaging is for the LDCs, lacking the world-wide capacity to switch their exports between markets. Here the OECD is able to off load its crisis on the shoulders of the LDCs, but only at the cost of the LDC demand for OECD exports. The slackening of growth in South Korea is attributed by the Koreans to increased import restrictions in the OECD markets.
Increased imports are a symptom, not a cause, of the problem, as most of the capitalists know. The importance of the import control issue is entirely political – to structure the myth of ‘national entity’ against the myth of the foreigner, to keep the world’s peoples carefully corralled in national ghettoes where the States can retain the right to herd them as they will.
 
Conclusion
This article has been limited to a discussion of a number of issues affecting the central core of the world system – as seen through the distorting mirror of the relationships between the dominant power of the OECD group, the advanced western capitalist Stated Inevitably, this entails speaking of capital as if it were mere national chunks of a world whole, playing back the perceptions embodied in the categories by which international statistics are normally organized. In such an account, the world’s population becomes merely onlookers, victims of the play, even though at key points we see the sudden effect of mass intervention in the affairs of world capitalism – in Iran, in South Africa, or in the strikes in Poland or Brazil. The closer we get to the concrete, the more powerful that influence becomes.
Nor has the article dealt with other aspects of the crisis of great importance – corruption and violence, arms spending and the prospects for famine. As in 1974, famine on a mass scale is again returning to the system, and for very similar reasons which have nothing to do with the accident of the weather, and everything to do with the world profit level and its relationship to agricultural markets.
The world system is not in collapse, nor is it immediately faced with a slump on the scale of 1929 to 33, but it edges closer to it with each downward movement. In such circumstances, what seem small events can suddenly have dramatic consequences. The illegal strike of 65,000 car workers in Sao Paulo can stop the financial life-support system from international banks to Brazil, which in turn produces a scale of military repression in Brazil which brings the regime down; and if the new order is obliged to refuse to honour the cumulative debt of its predecessor – some $50 to 60 billions – then a major financial catastrophe is fed back into New York and Europe.
However, all this is in the realm of “accident” rather than conscious political action. Revolt continues in the system, but it is harder and tougher, the stakes much higher, ruling classes much more ruthless in their attempts to control their respective patches of territory.
Yet mere control solves nothing. Indeed, the actions of States only make the central problem worse. The system was saved last time by the “accident” of the LDCs expansion, not by the deliberate combined efforts of the OECD States. Nor are they likely this time to be able to combine for common action – on the contrary, the downturn splits them apart as rivals rather than brings them together. And no one power can ‘solve’ the domestic question without the close collaboration of all the rest. It was so in the last time round, in the 1930s. Despite all the efforts of States – including the endless international conferences and agreements – the world economy remained basically in slump until the Second World War. Import controls, cartelization, measures of national planning in fact if not name, did not shift the profit rate. In contrast to nineteenth century capitalism, only war had the capacity to wipe out a chunk of capital large enough to restore the profit rate. In this case, Britain and the United States were temporarily able to wipe out their closest rivals, Germany and Japan, so ensuring the US hegemony of the 1950s.
The 1930s were, paradoxically, safer, because the world was dominated by the decaying empires of France and Britain, with the rest divided up. Protectionism was not confined to the petty British market, but included the vast captive market of the empire where British capital could stagnate protected by the military truncheon. Today, there are a vast number of newcomers which, despite slump, can redirect and concentrate their much smaller resources on capturing one part of world manufacturing. Indeed, paradoxically, the world system today has some resemblance to the hey day of Victorian capitalism with its multiplicity of competitors, ungovernable precisely because of the multiplicity. With a difference that today a large number of the new competitors are married to the territorial interests of an LDC State.
War is not an option as a solution, despite the rhetoric to rivet ‘national identity’ of the captive peoples of the States, for world war could liquidate the territorial rivals altogether. Then the restoration of the profit rate would console no-one. Which leaves virtually indefinite stagnation as the sole option, a stagnation masking the expansion and contraction of different sectors and relatively rapid changes in the power and standing of particular States. It is a perspective we need, for without it there will be no opportunity to build a real mass alternative, to replace blind revolt with conscious revolution.

Notes
1. This article is designed to try and minimise repetition of the issues discussed in World Crisis and the System, IS 100 (old series), July 1977. That article pays much more attention to issues of debt and the backward countries.
2. $ and dollar here refer to US dollars, and billion and bn. mean 1,000 million.
3. The current euphemism for the backward countries, covering two-thirds of the world’s population, is ‘Less Developed Countries’ or LDCs. Within that group, an advanced stratum is identified as Newly Industrialising Countries or NICs.
4. Consider in the British case, the growth of liabilities of selected financial institutions, compound annual per cent rates of growth:



 


1960–65


1965–70


1970–75


1975–78




Major deposit banks


  4.54


  2.60


16.47


11.26




National Savings Bank


  1,28


−0.78 


  4.09


11.93




Trustee Savings Bank


  8.72


  4.22


  8.13


13.34




Finance houses


10.32


  1.98


−0.38 


20.07




Building societies


11.87


14.43


17.37


17.70




Insurance offices


  9.23


  9.39


12.54


18.85




Pension funds


10.23


  7.59


11.99


28.37




Source: Table 1, Mervyn Lewis, Lloyds Bank Review, No. 137, July 1980



5. The structure of Japanese exports partly illustrates the changing structure of the economy. Total export value, in current terms, increased from about 8 to 100 billion dollars. But while machinery was only 25% of exports in 1960, it rose to 61.8% in 1977. During the same period cars rose from 2% to 14.4% and textiles fell from 30% to 6%.
6. The US and Britain regularly take the largest share of service income, reflecting the strength of their external investments, banking and financial services, shipping and commerce. Service incomes have been rising faster than manufacturing (with higher rates of profit in Britain and the US). In 1978, “invisible trade” increased 16.4%, twice as fast as visible trade. It broke down into: 31.6% investment income; 22.8% transport; 19.3% travel and tourism; 26.3% ‘other services’. Japan’s 1978 deficit on invisible trade was $8.2 billion, and West Germany’s $11.7 billion. The US had a surplus of $70 bn on invisible trade, or half the size of the value of its visible exports (as was also true of Britain).
7. This discussion is contained in more detail in my The New Untouchables, International Socialism 2 : 8, Spring 1980.
8. Consider these estimates, from Western trade sources, of Russian imports of machinery and transport equipment from the OECD group, 1955–77:



 
 


1955–59


1965–69


1975–77




1. Average current value, US$m
 


134.2


549.2


4,341.3




2. Average annual value, 1969
Rouble prices, millions


 
177.4


 
608.6


 
2,284.5
(2 years only)




3. Imports as per cent of domestic
machinery investment in the
following year (annual average)


 
 
2.0


 
 
2.76


 
 
5.55
(2 years only)



The table excludes non-machinery items (for example, large diameter pipes, silicon chips etc.), as well as raw materials and grain.
Derived from: Table 2.1, Philip Hanson, The Imports of Western Technology, in Archie Brown and Michael Kaser (eds.), The Soviet Union since the fall of Kruschev, London 1978, p. 31.
9. N.S. Patolichev, Foreign Trade, Moscow, No. 6, 1978, p. 3.
10. Which is why, for example, the largest three US motor companies have only; minority holdings in Japan – General Motors, 30% holding in Isuzu; Chrysler, 15% holding in Mitsubishi (vehicles); and Ford, an interest in Toyo Kogyo.
11. Toshike Yoshino, in World Economy, 2/4, Feb. 1980, Amsterdam, p. 441.
12. See Subsidising Export Credit, Policy Studies Unit, Royal Institute of International Affairs, Chatham House, 1980.
 



A spectre is haunting the treasuries of the advanced capitalist countries. It is not yet, regrettably, the spectre of proletarian revolution, but of the obsolescence of capitalism itself, or rather of its great productive engine, industry. In Britain, the trend is known as ‘deindustrialization’. Elsewhere, less alarmed commentators speak glibly of the advent of ‘post industrial society’; but the scale of the problem is revealed in some of the recent figures:



Percentage Change of the Labour Force Employed in Industry




 


(1961)


1974


1978




Belgium


 


41.2


36.7




Holland


35.6


32.5




France


39.6


37.1




Britain


(47.5)


42.3


39.7




West Germany


 


47.3


45.1




Italy


39.4


38.3



In West Germany’s case, the full decline in these four years is concealed by the fact that the total German labour force was simultaneously declining – by 600,000 – so that the absolute loss of jobs in industry is a full 913,000, larger than any other Common Market country. In sum, the European Economic Community has lost 2.5 million jobs in industry, and gained 3 million in services (since the labour force has been increasing faster than the small increase in jobs in most of these countries, there has been a simultaneous increase in unemployment).
Changes taking place in four years of world slump would not necessarily indicate a structural decline in industry. For that, we would need a longer period of time. Comparing the past record for the major capitalist powers with 1975–76, what is the picture?
Three countries expanded the size of the manufacturing labour force:

Japan. Manufacturing workers in Japan reached a total of 8.5 million in 1957 (or roughly the same as the peak in Britain, 8.6 million in 1961), 10.1 million in 1961 and 13.5 million in 1975. As a proportion of the Japanese labour force, these three years recorded: 19.8%; 22.5%; and 25.8% (that is, still below the British proportion of 1976: 30%).
 
West Germany reached 8.4 million in 1958, 9 million in 1961, and then declined very slightly to 8.9 million in 1975. As a proportion of the German labour force in these three years, the figures are: 33.4%; 34.7%; and 35.9% (these figures are for manufacturing employment; in earlier ones were for industrial employment, so the two are not comparable).
 
Italy, a late starter in the advanced capitalist league, increased its manufacturing labour force from 5.5 million in 1961 to 6.1 million in 1975; the proportions were respectively, 27.7 and 32.6%.

Of the rest of the advanced capitalist countries, most experienced decline:

Belgium’s peak manufacturing employment – 1.2 million – came in 1965, and from there it declined slightly to 1.1 million in 1975. The proportion declined more sharply, from 33.9 to 30.1%.
 
France peaked at 5.9 million in 1974, and then began a slow decline; as a proportion, from 28.1 to 27.9%.
 
Holland reached its largest manufacturing employment in 1965, at 1.2 million, and then declined slightly to 1.1 million in 1975; from 28.2 to 24%.
 
Sweden’s highpoint, 1.2 million, came in 1965, followed by a slight decline to 1975,1.1 million; from 32.4 to 28%.
 
The United States manufacturing jobs increased from 22 million in 1961 to 26.7 million in 1973, thereafter tending to decline – from 32.5% to 31.6%, and in 1975, 29%.

On the latest figures, it seems that West Germany and Italy have also joined the downward trend.
Rising labour productivity, however, can ensure that while manufacturing employment declines both absolutely and relatively, the value of manufacturing output is frequently increasing. For example, the value of manufacturing output as a proportion of Gross Domestic Product increased in Belgium from 31.4% (1965) to 34.5% (1975); in Holland in the same period, from 39.1 to 41.8%. In the United Sates, by contrast, the proportion fell from between 27 and 29% in much of the 1960s to 26% in 1975.
* * *
What are the reasons for the decline? It is difficult to separate the effects of at least four processes taking place: changes in the relationship between ‘productive’ and ancillary labour; the effects of world slump from 1973–4, with particularly severe effects on heavy industry (steel, coal, shipbuilding, heavy engineering etc.); the relative obsolescence of existing core industries, and the relocation of manufacturing areas geographically; the increasing centralization of the system. To take these elements in turn:
The relative decline of productive employment – while labour productivity increases – has massive implications for agitational work against the system, but none for the system as a whole in economic terms. Much of what is called “unproductive labour” is vital in making possible “productive labour”, and much of productive labour produces waste. The relationship between the two fluctuates constantly, and a relative decline throughout the world system in and of itself has no particular significance, it constitutes a redistribution of activities within the working class, part of efforts to increase the rate of exploitation, and, for us, a hint of the promise of the mastery of labour in the system.
The world slump has had the most dramatic effects on old heavy industry. Increased competition for a stagnating market has threatened all marginal producers, kept alive where they have survived by protection and subsidies from the local State on a purely temporary basis. The devastation of the Western steel industry is well known, from the closures in Alsace Lorraine, the threats in Benelux, Sweden, in Britain and the Indiana-Ohio area of the States; the same is also familiar in the massive destruction of shipbuilding. The job losses in ‘manufacturing’ have been most marked in this area. The key geographical regions present a similar picture. Take for example the old heartland of German capitalism, the Ruhr. Since 1966, 400,000 jobs have lost been in the region, 330,000 people have left the region, and still the regional unemployment rate is double the national average.
Capitalism is a system that, in its process of change, effects areas very differently. Thus, the transition from the industrial core of the late nineteenth century (textiles, iron and steel, coal, shipbuilding etc.) to that of the period after the second World War (vehicles, light engineering, petrochemicals) was also a shift in location. In Britain, it involved a shift from the old industrial centres in the north-east, the north-west, Scotland and northern Ireland, to the West Midlands and the South East. The system follows the same principles as that involved in open cast mining or a plague of locusts – the devastation of an area takes place for a given period, then industry moves on. Now, it is said, the postwar core of industry is increasingly obsolete. Those areas dependent upon this set of industries will increasingly decline: this is the death sentence for the old West Midlands, based upon vehicles and engineering. The process in Britain is complicated by the decline of light manufacturing in the urban areas, producing another phenomenon, the “inner city crisis”.
New areas, it is proposed, will generate the next core of industries to push the system forward. In the United States, the decline in the north east (and now also the north) is contrasted to the developments in California in the west, and the explosive growth in the south, Texas and Georgia among others. The core industries proposed are already well known, electronic products, petrochemical products, marine biology products etc. It is not usually mentioned in this connection that the last major transition of the system, from 1914 to 1945, involved mass unemployment, Nazism in Germany, two World Wars and various other ‘transitional factors’.
Most of the last three factors are presented frequently by commentators on the question. There is however another element that gives meaning to all three, the differential effects of slump and structural change on the leading competitors. The different degrees of ‘deindustrialization’ on different countries reflects the savagery with which the world competitive struggle is now being fought. Implicit in deindustrialization is an increased centralization of the system, increased dominance and control by a smaller and smaller group of powers. The hysteria arises, not from some common process, but because of the unequal distribution of the process between countries, so that some advanced capitalist countries are being shoved out of the competition.
Changes in the share of exports of the twelve leading manufacturing exporters – not the most accurate guide – gives us some crude index of this centralization process. Three countries – the United States, Japan and West Germany – had a combined share of these exports of about 38% in 1952; by 1970, they held 50%, and on average, 52% between 1972 and 1977. the United States is one of the countries in relative decline in manufacturing terms, and this is partly reflected in the export figures. West Germany’s share of the exports of the twelve leading manufacturing countries increased from 15% in the early 1960s to over 20% in the mid-70s. Japan expanded from 9% to over 15%, while the United States declined from 22 to 16% (Britain, incidentally, with a share very close to the United States in 1950, 26%, declined to 16% in 1960 and between 8 and 9% in the mid 70s). While there is much talk of some backward countries securing the part of world manufacturing, in this, the top league, there is no room for them to compete except on the margins.
* * *
Before looking at Britain in greater detail, it is useful to note in passing not only the common decline in manufacturing employment, but also the general rise in the size of the labour force and in the service sector. The most important factor in the increase has been the entry of married women to the labour force. In Britain, the female labour force increased from 2.7 million in 1951, to 5 million in 1966, 5.8 million in 1971 and 6.7 million in 1976. Between 1971 and 1976, years registering the impact of major crisis in the world system, the British male labour force declined by 123,000 while the female labour force increased by 786,000.
Figures for the main advanced capitalist countries show a general increase in women’s employment, and particularly for the employment of married women (with the notable exception of Japan):



Participation Rates for Married Women, Percentages




United States:


(1960)


30.5%


    


(1973)


42.2%




West Germany:


(1962)


33.5   


(1972)


39.1   




Britain:


(1963)


34.4   


(1972)


40.1   




Japan:


(1963)


50.1   


(1973)


47.1   




Sweden:


(1963)


47.0   


(1975)


66.2   



The trend is also marked in the participation rate of women in the main reproductive years. The participation rate for married women in their twenties is between 50 and 60% in the main industrialized countries (for Britain, the figures in the mid-70s were 59–60% for the 20 to 24 years of age group, and 49% for the 25 to 29 years of age group). [1]
The reasons for this remarkable expansion are not at all self-evident, but the increased supply of women workers accounts for a major part of the expansion of the labour force and its redistribution. Possibly, the adult male wage has been steadily declining relative to the rising family costs of the reproduction of fewer children at competitively higher standards, and this may have been a powerful factor in expelling an increasing proportion of married women from household work. The ending of immigration and the decline of hours worked – in Britain, from an actual average of 46.3 hours in 1951 to 43.2 in 1971 and 42.6 in 1976 would have meant that, even without changes in productivity or fluctuation in activity, an increased number of workers would be required to produced the same output. The impact of slump, from 1973-74, seems to have increased the number of married women entering work as if to try and keep up household income at a time when stagnating or declining real male wages, unemployment and an increasing tax “bite” from gross pay were affecting incomes.
Married women were also induced to work by a remarkable expansion in traditional “female jobs” at, of course, lower rates of pay – in community, social and personal services (employing around 41% of all employed women); in wholesale and retail trades, hotels and restaurants (21% of all employed women). [2] The work is frequently part time – part time work increased in, for example, Britain to reach about 17% of all jobs in 1975 (in terms of employed women, some 40.1% work in part time jobs). In all cases, the pay is frequently so low, that relatively high rates of unemployment coincide with high rates of unfilled vacancies, as we can see at the moment in the dispute over the lack of catering staff to provide midday meals in schools. Considerable scarcities of labour exist in skilled or semi-skilled sectors of “female employment” – nurses, typists, sewing machinists, catering staff etc. ... In some of these cases, pay is so low it does not induce a supply of workers of the required skills; the pay is low in part from a general narrowing of skilled pay differentials, the effects of incomes policy in holding down skill differentials and the weak organizational power of the workers concerned.
Put crudely then, the expansion of “welfare” sectors, services, has partly compensated for the decline in manufacturing employment and has constituted a shift between male and female employment (but since the increase in the supply of women workers has been higher than the creation of jobs, female unemployment rates are often still above male rates). The change is so widespread in the advanced capitalist countries, it implies a common structural shift and a change in both the role of women (and the significance of the family) – independently of whatever brand of political rhetoric governs the local State.
* * *
Britain shows a much more exaggerated form of the general trend of deindustrialization, and it is this which underlies the sporadic hysteria of the British ruling class – the relative decline in the capacity to compete of this bit of the world system. In this sense, the terrors of deindustrialization are not at all new, but link to the growing obsession with survival that has dominated the British ruling class since the mid-1950s. For much of this period, the immediate preoccupation has been with the balance of payments, but for essentially the same reasons.
British manufacturing employment fell from 8.6 million in 1961 (36% of total employment) to 7.4 million in 1976 (or 30.1 %). Manufacturing was not at all the sole loser. If we compare average employment figures between 1961 and 1966 (to eliminate short term variations) with those for 1976, the break down of declining job sectors was as follows:



Job Losses (1961–66 Compared to 1976)




1. Agriculture, forestry, fishing:


384,000


 


(or 40%);




2. Mining and quarrying:


327,000


(or 48.4%);




3. Manufacturing:


1,199,000


(or 14%);




4. Construction:


5,000


(or 0.3%);




5. Gas, electricity, water:


51,000


(or 12.7%);




6. Transport and communications:


164,000


(or 9.6%);




7. Distributive trades:


202,000


(or 6.0%);




Total loss:


2,332,000


(of which, manufacturing provided 51.4%).



Thus, while the proportionate decline in manufacturing was not at all the worst – that position is held by the mines, followed by agriculture – its absolute size is more than half of the total job loss. At the same time, other sectors generated a larger number of jobs:



Job Gains




8. Insurance, banking, finance:


403,000


 


(or 51.8%);




9. Professional and scientific:


1,377,000


(or 55.8%);




10. Miscellaneous services:


381,000


(or 17%);




11. Public administration and defence:


275,000


(or 20%);




Total gain:


2,436,000


(of which, professional and scientific provided 56.5%).



The net addition of jobs was 104,000, far too small to take up the expansion of the labour force, even if we could assume that sixty year old miners or toolmakers could convert to being Social Security clerical staff.
Simplifying the figures, we can see a net shift between manufacturing and professional and scientific; between 1961 and 1976, the first declined by 1.3 million, the second increased by 1.5 million; between 1971 and 1976, to put it another way, ‘production industries’ lost just over half a million jobs, and ‘other industries’ put on just under a million. The changes reflect an overall tendency for British capitalism to become converted to a servicing centre in the world system. Given British capitalism’s consistently higher orientation to foreign financial activities, it could be argued that at long last Lenin’s Bondholder State is emerging.
What are the reasons for the industrial decline? Since at least the mid 1950s, British capitalism has apparently had a consistent tendency for profit rates in domestic industry to be low relative to its nearest rivals. [3] Immediately after the second World War, only British and US industry remained intact, and profit rates were high in supplying the devastated rivals in Europe and, for the US, Japan. The returns to British capitalism were not used to renovate the old depreciated stock, or at least not on the scale adequate to compete with the leading overseas rivals. Some went abroad, some into services, and an important chunk into the very substantial military spending Programme. Defence spending was – when added to the much larger US programme – vital for the stabilization of world capitalism, and served the external purposes of British imperialism, but its effect on British manufacturing was disastrous.
The cumulative effect of a sustained failure to invest is at the heart of the growing crisis of British capitalism. By now, the British workforce is, relative to the workforce in other advanced capitalist countries, required to work increasingly hard, for longer hours for lower pay, and, because of the relatively low capital per worker, at disastrously low levels of productivity: at some 40% below the levels of Germany and France in manufacturing in the mid-1970s.
Low profit rates induce poor investment performances. Since the early 1950s, both British and US capitalism have had the lowest rates of investment of the advanced capitalist countries. The US level hovered around 17 to 18% (investment as a proportion of Gross Domestic Production) in the 1960s, declining to 15% in 1975. Britain’s 15% rate in the 1960s rose very slightly to 18% in 1975. Most recently, Italy’s former rates of around 22% have declined to 18%. Compare these proportions to West Germany’s 25 to 27% (although by the mid 1970s, the German rate had declined to 23%) or the spectacular performance of Japan, rising from 24% in 1960 to 37% (1973), and still hovering around 32%.
British employers have annually created the lowest level of gross fixed capital per head of the population (but Britain has been overtaken over the past decade by Italy). Gross fixed capital formation per worker in manufacturing has run at about a quarter of the US figures and a third of its other nearest rivals.
All elements of the central strategy of British capitalism have become subordinated to this question, which in its turn flows from the past structure of British imperialism. Thus, the programme of scientific and technology research has been wilfully twisted to defence questions, producing far fewer innovations for civil industry to develop. Government finance, the major part of research and development spending, has been directed to improve aircraft, particular military prototypes, to aero-space and military electronics; that is, the British ruling class has endeavoured to compete with the leading rivals in the system, the US and the Soviet Union, but with nothing like the industrial base to support such activities. By contrast, the much lower levels of Research and Development spending in West Germany have been devoted heavily to civil industry; as a result, the value per ton weight of German machinery exports is about double that of Britain. Expenditure on training workers has followed the same direction, so that now Britain has one of the lowest rates of participation in full time education in the 16 to 18 years old group. The numbers completing engineering apprenticeships fell by one third in the 1970s.
But the most dramatic and recurring demonstration of the incapacity of British industrial capitalism to compete with its rivals is the external balance of trade. When British capitalism expands, imports rise much more sharply than exports – that is, British industrial capacity cannot meet home demand, nor can it export enough to cover the cost of imports. This produced throughout the 1950s and 1960s the familiar lurching of ‘Stop-Go’, a mild expansion, followed by a payments crisis and the braking of expansion. The payments problem is just as severe now in trade terms but masked by the arrival of oil exports.
Take four key sectors of manufacturing, at the heart of the engineering industry. By 1976, imports took – of the domestic market – 53% in instrument engineering, 32% of electrical engineering, 42% of shipbuilding and marine engineering, and 31% of vehicle production. In the case of vehicles, the downward trend has been very long in the making and very rapid in its final results. 4.5% of the domestic market was taken by imports in 1963, 11.5% in 1970, and now – nearly 60%. In fact, exports now are limited in the main to a narrow range of luxury cars and the internal transactions of multinationals (General Motors, Ford, Chrysler-Citroen). Only a couple of years ago, car component manufacturers consoled themselves that, for every £1 of assembled car imports, there were £2 of car component exports. In the first half of 1979, however, for the first time, the exports of cars and components failed to cover the deficit on the import of vehicles (£210 millions).
The high value of sterling acted as the final straw. In textiles, the trade deficit has nearly doubled, in the past year. Chemicals, which recorded massive export surpluses In the 1960s, is now threatened with massive imports. Finally, services themselves have begun to show signs of weakness as well.
The balance between imports and exports is not the most accurate index of the performance of British capitalism. The structure of informal State controls, domestic monopolies, public subsidies (whether direct or through tax concessions, credit terms etc.) changes any simple reading of the meaning of the trade balance. To a greater or lesser extent, all advanced capitalist countries cheat the spirit of the formal rules of international trade to push up exports, robbing the domestic population to subsidise foreign buyers. So that as imports have ‘invaded’ Britain so British manufacturing sold abroad has risen from 15% in 1966 to 19% in 1971 and 22% in 1974. In the case of the four engineering sectors mentioned earlier, they are also the sectors with highest share of output going to exports – 55% for instrument engineering, 37% for electrical engineering, 34% for shipbuilding and marine engineering, and 44% for vehicle production. In addition, 45% of mechanical engineering output is exported. But the total value of exports does not rise as rapidly as the value of imports nonetheless.
* * *
The ‘deindustrialization’ thesis is thus indeed a cause for hysteria, particularly for that segment of capitalism operating in Britain that is stuck with Britain as a source of its profits. For the world system, however, there is not going to be any sort of self-liquidation of capitalism by slow decline.
The hysteria is under careful control in Deindustrialization, [4] a set of conference papers published by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research. Some of the country’s leading economists take a cool look at the process, providing a wealth of most valuable information. [5] However, while some of the authors are effectively able to demolish some of the arguments about what the causes of the process are, there is no general diagnosis, no analysis showing what the Government should or can do. It is understandable. Many of the authors have been advisers to successive governments, and no doubt have the bruises to show for it: the problem is far more intractable than can be tackled by governments anxious to survive politically.
Evidence is available in the book to indicate that Mrs Thatcher’s simple assault on ‘public expenditure’ is largely irrelevant to the core problem, whatever it may do to stiffen the social power of the State. Between 1960 and 1975, public sector employment increased 5.5%, most of the increase being expanded local authority jobs, particularly in health and education. If we combine the figures for employment in housing, education, National Health Service and Social Security, the increase in the proportion of public sector jobs in these sectors rose from 16.4% (1960) to 22.4% (1970) and 27% (1975) – that is, the most rapid increase came during the Heath Government. But the absolute figures involved are relatively small, and even smaller if compared to employment in comparable sectors in Britain’s leading rivals. In practice, Mrs Thatcher will not do much to lower public spending, but rather to redistribute it towards police and defence and lower real wages to finance what is left. The central aim is political rather than tackling the problems of British capitalism’s survival.
The hysteria that periodically infects the ruling class has its most useful effects for the nationalist Left of the Labour and Communist parties. The argument that British capitalists have failed British capitalism could evoke considerable response in the coming period, and the data in this book, as also in the work of the Cambridge economists who are here represented, would seem to back it up. If only the Left can be permitted to run this bit of the system, British capitalism can be made to work. The argument has credibility only so long as one does not probe the figures too deeply. Once one does, then the scale of obsolescence can be seen to be so gigantic that much more than a reformist government will be required to change it. The Cambridge CEPG estimates that, to restore British capitalism to a competitive position, would require a 50% increase in manufacturing investment over the past trend rate, sustained for at least ten years. That would require the complete destruction of the trade union movement (or, the same thing, its complete incorporation into the State), the radical reduction of the welfare-education segments of the State, and still a sharp cut in real wages. For that, the nationalist Left would need a police State.
For us, the figures show the scale of the mess, the necessarily bitter and harsh struggles ahead, and how the issues of reform disappear for the ruling class into the question of its very survival. Britain, like Italy, is in a relatively unique position. It is one of the big capitalist economies, yet it is necessarily being strangled by the world crisis. Because of the crisis, its nearest rivals can afford little in the way of help, even though the decline of such large bits of the system jeopardizes the position of the whole ruling order of the world. We are among the ‘weak links’ in the chain. Our task is not to concentrate on the single link, but to see the British crisis as the crisis of capitalism itself: the only solutions lie in the destruction of the world system.

Notes
1. The increase in the employment of married women has pushed up the figures for women’s participation (as a per cent of the labour force) to a high of 46.8% n Finland and a low of 27.5% in Greece (among the countries of the OECD). Britain and the US have a common range of 38–39%.
2. The expansion by sector can also be seen in the occupational distribution – the expansion of traditional women’s occupations – clerks, typists, nurses, health care workers, teachers, child care workers, social workers, cleaning and household service workers, sales clerks, etc.
3. Gross rates of return (gross property income as a proportion of total or tangible assets or ‘gross capital stock’) have been consistently low in Britain, as also in recent years in Sweden and Italy. In the 1970s, British rates declined from 3.6 to 2.0% (1975), Sweden’s hovered around 5%, and Italy’s sank from 4.9 to 3.0%.
4. Deindustrialization, edited by Frank Blackaby, National Institute of Economic and Social Research and Heinemann, 1978.
5. Particularly the statistical annex, Deindustrialization in the UK: Background Statistics, by J.J.F. Brown and T.D. Sheriff, Discussion Paper No. 23 (mimeo), 1978.
 



The rise of imperialism is also the rise of the modern State. The manifestation of the power of the State is in the first instance its tight control of one patch of very clearly defined territory and the population trapped within its boundaries. The imposition of this pattern on humanity by the first group of modern States, those of Europe, produced a defensive reaction by the ruling classes of the rest of the world. They in turn were obliged to establish the same type of tight control over whatever territories could be appropriated. The pattern which emerged is reminiscent of the enclosure movement in Britain: the appropriation of common lands by private owners to the point where all territory within Britain was officially parcelled up among a category of “owners”. The process both within the territory of any given State and internationally eliminated all “free lands” and all free men and women: all who do not officially belong to one or other local ruling class (and can, in principle, acquire a valid passport to prove that they actually exist).
By now almost all inhabitable territory in the world has been demarcated, and humanity corralled within licensed national pens. Indeed, the division is so all-embracing, its sheer novelty is no longer apparent; most people cannot conceive of a world not divided into national patches, not dominated by baronial fiefs.
The development of the internal control of States over their respective territories and populations – the increased “nationalization” of the globe – is the other side of the coin to increased “internationalization”. For what is meant by internationalization is increased interaction between increasingly defined national patches. The growth of the one necessarily presupposes the increase in the other.
Now, each national patch is almost equally related in economic terms to every other one – a condition in sharp contrast to the imperatives of political or military interaction where geographical proximity is of primary significance. This interaction ensures increased synchronization of the world system, or rather, its increased subordination to the dominant centres of world power. Yet such subordination should not conceal the necessary parallel process of “internal colonization”, the attempt by particular States to subordinate all areas within their control to a single centre, usually the capital city.
Thus, the obverse of increased nationalization of the areas of the world is increased interdependence of the national patches. It is a contradictory process, for the interests of individual States are in collision with the imperatives of a world economy, with capital accumulation on a world scale.
The State’s primary interest is in retaining and extending its territorial control, not assisting the development of an international economic order outside its control. In slump, the contradiction emerges so sharply, the accumulation is sacrificed to the maintenance of the power of the State, of the local ruling class, over its inhabitants.
The “internationalisation” of labour is one element in these processes. Throughout the history of capitalism, workers have moved in search of work, or been driven to work, in areas other than those where they were raised. This common phenomenon however becomes remarkable only when national boundaries are laid down and become of sufficient importance to impede, block or shape the international movement of workers. That is, political controls are imposed in the attempt to break a movement impelled by the operation of a world labour market. To put it in another way, growth in the world system prompts the ruling classes of growing and dominant economies to despatch raiding parties to capture part of the labour force, belonging to a weaker ruling class. Then the passport and visa, with the whole complex of subsidiary controls, become an instrument for the control and direction of the marginal labour force. [1]
Whether the system is expanding or contracting determines the precise form of the contradiction between the interests of the State and those of the world economy. In expansion, the world labour market acts like acid upon territorial controls, other things being equal; either ruling classes are obliged to dismantle trade, finance and labour movement controls, or black markets in each area threaten the structures of control: “liberalization” is the product, rather than – as is frequently claimed – the cause of expansion. Nonetheless, although in the 1950s and 1960s many labour importing countries liberalized entry procedures, the essential formal controls were retained, and with the onset of contraction, strengthened. Protectionism in trade was matched by a protectionism in labour, and both exaggerate the severity of contraction.
The unprecedented expansion in the world economy after 1948 was a highly uneven process, producing disproportionate growth at certain key points in the advanced capitalist countries as well as in particular regions in the backward countries. This disproportionate growth was reflected in an increased concentration of the demand for labour. The two most important centres of the world system, the core zones of the American and European economies, attracted a sustained inflow of workers from abroad. But many other smaller centres, at various times, also attracted inflows – in the 1970s, the Middle Eastern oil producing States; South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Venezuela, Singapore etc. The legal movement was accompanied to a greater or lesser extent, depending upon the restrictions in force and the powers of the local State to enforce them, by both a black market in labour, illegal migration, and the “unscheduled” movements of refugees – for example, the large scale movements in Africa, the flight of Cubans, Argentinians, Cambodians, Vietnamese, Bengalis, and now Afghanis.
The concept of a crude undifferentiated “labour” is quite inadequate to understand the process of official worker movement. Those who move tend to be in the most active age groups, eighteen to thirty five years of age, and in terms of ability and skills, to be above the average for the sending area. The jobs they move to are restricted, although they range across the spectrum from temporary seasonal work to permanent highly skilled jobs (for example, doctors). Each stratum of occupations has a separate dynamic.
For relatively unskilled workers, the areas of recruitment have often been geographically close – Eire for Britain, the Mediterranean countries for Germany and France, Mexico and Central America for the United States. But it is also true that European labour demand stretches far into West Africa, to Turkey and Iran, British demand to India, Malaysia and the Philippines, and American to Korea, Taiwan and the Philippines on the opposite side of the Pacific. Territorially, each national labour market expands and contracts geographically with the rhythms of growth. There are also countries now which supply unskilled or semi skilled labour globally; for example, the Philippines. As the level of skill in demand rises, so the extent of the catchment area expands, until a world labour market operates, as for example with doctors.
Where labour exporting countries are geographically close to the place where labour demand is increasing rapidly and the controls on movement are weak, the emigration of workers can be proportionally very large. North Yemen, adjacent to Saudi Arabia, has some 44 per cent of its adult labour force working abroad. Lesotho supplies to South Africa some 21 per cent of its domestic labour force; Algeria and Tunisia at one time had between 11 and 12 per cent of their workers abroad. In the heyday of movement, emigration amounted to 70 per cent of the increase in Portugal’s labour force, and, before 1962, to over 100 per cent of Eire’s.
Since emigrants are not drawn uniformly from a country as a whole but from particular districts, these national figures conceal the much greater effect on particular sending districts. For example, Indian migration to Britain is drawn from one medium sized state State, Gujerat, and a small State, Punjab, and within Punjab, largely from one district, Jullundur; Indian migration to the Gulf is drawn mainly from another small State, Kerala, while the largest State in India, Uttar Pradesh (with a population of around 100 million) provides few emigrants.
The movement is not just one way. Most countries export and import labour at the same time. Greece, with over two million workers abroad, imports workers from Egypt and Pakistan. Jordan, a major supplier of Palestinian labour to the oil producing countries, uses labour also from Egypt and Pakistan. Sicilians move to North Italy and Germany, leaving their harvests to be collected by Senegalese. Mexicans move north for the harvest in the United States, while Guatemalans enter southern Mexico for the harvest there. The United States and Britain supply highly skilled labour to the Middle East. The movement of labour is thus an exchange of skills, a continual redistribution of a margin of each national labour force in response to changes in the geography of capital accumulation.
 
The price of labour power
The orthodox explanations of worker movement usually turn on the “overproduction” of labour in some countries (the backward) and a “scarcity” of labour in others. [2] But there is never a “scarcity” of labour, only a scarcity of workers willing to sell their labour at a given price. In so called “population surplus” countries, there is rarely a real surplus; for example, in both India and China, a good harvest produces full employment, a “labour scarcity” and rising agricultural day labourers’ wages. The problem is employing people at an adequate wage all the year round; but so far as the system is concerned, the existing labour force is only the “right size” for producing the existing output.
In the advanced capitalist countries, a number of factors have reduced the physical availability of labour power, the number of labour hours on offer per year, in the postwar period: a decline in the birth rate (reflected fifteen years later in the new entrants to the labour force); a decrease in the number of hours worked per week; an increase in the holidays per year; an increase in the number of years of full time education, or the conversion of apprenticeships to part time education; earlier retirement, and, perhaps, the continued process of the decasualization of the labour force. [3] On the, other hand, there are factors working in the opposite direction – the end of the National Service in Britain or the draft in the United States, the remarkable increase in the number of women entering paid employment, immigration and temporary workers entering work from abroad; at certain times, the considerable increase in part time work by the pensioned (offsetting the earlier retirement); the expansion in second and third jobs (“moonlighting”). How are we to explain these different changes, and the creation of specific “labour scarcities”?
The price of labour power is determined by what Marx calls the socially necessary cost of maintaining and reproducing labour power; by “reproduction”, we mean, not the biological creation of a baby, but the process of creating an adult worker from the age of 0 to, say, between 12 and 15 years of age. Marx’s statement is applicable collectively, not necessarily individually – that is, the return to the working class for its labour power is determined by the costs of maintaining the working class and reproducing it. What is determined here is the value of labour power; actual collective wages may, to a greater or lesser degree diverge from value, but will ultimately remain in some definite relationship to value.
What determines the “socially necessary costs”? There are obviously many factors, but one of the most important for modern capitalism, is the need to attain a given level of productivity by the labour force. Defining what is “necessary” is obviously difficult, for the productivity of labour is a function not simply of the more obvious training and educational inputs, the quality of diet ensuring consistent concentration and discipline, the quality of housing ensuring the worker does not spend much of his or her attention worrying or seeking a roof, the condition of the worker’s family, parents and children, so that he is or she is “free” to work fully, etc. There are factors relating to the possible exhausting or psychologically debilitating results of work – and an adequate level of recreation and leisure, and the facilities to pursue these etc. Which of these elements are necessary, which optional extras?
In some backward countries, levels of productivity in particular plants can be pushed up to roughly the same level as those pertaining in an advanced economy, even though the labour force in the plant does not receive wages remotely comparable to similar workers in an advanced country, nor does he or she have access to anything matching the services available there. Does this mean the wages received and services available in advanced capitalism are not necessary? It does not. For while particular plants may emulate the same level of productivity, the society as a whole cannot; it can utilize a particular range of technical innovations, but it cannot generalize them, nor itself innovate.
Average labour productivity in the advanced capitalist countries has increased enormously over the past century. There has been a substantial but much smaller increase in the absolute level of real wages required to sustain the worker at these rising levels of average productivity. If we took the return to labour as a whole which, today, is much more than simply the wage, we could divide it into two elements: (i) the cost of maintaining the workers at a given level of productivity; and (ii) the cost of reproducing the workers’ children so that, when they enter the labour force, they can attain a given level of productivity. While the first element has increased considerably over the past century, the increase is dwarfed by the growth in the second element. Leaving aside the family-borne cost of rearing, the growth in the public sector inputs – through the expansion in educational, housing, welfare and medical services – has been very considerable, particularly in the postwar period (in practice, of course, it is exceedingly difficult to separate “maintenance” and “reproduction” in looking at the public sector services, and to separate these elements from the costs of the control and supervision of the population).
To deal with the average for a class is misleading. For much of the history of capitalism, the bottom third of the workforce has not been paid enough to meet the costs of reproduction at the average level of productivity then prevailing. Some sections of the workforce have not been paid sufficient to meet the bare minimum costs of reproduction (the infant mortality rate, like the rate of deaths to women in childbirth, is a partial index of this). And at certain times, the wages of the lowest categories of labour has been insufficient even to maintain the worker, a factor producing increasing levels of malnutrition and, during epidemics, a very high death rate.
So far as the world labour force is concerned, this situation has not changed very much. For example, a recent study of Calcutta small firms shows that, if we assume the going day labourer’s wage rate is the minimum subsistence and reproduction price of labour power, then both small capitalists and the family labour employed in their firms receive returns which are some 41 per cent below what they should be – they are, as it were, “committing suicide” by working. [4]
Thus, the labour force is a highly differentiated object. If we could imagine a national capitalism as an unchanging entity – output and employment, both absolutely and relatively, remaining constant – then the hierarchy of skill grades would persist indefinitely. Reproduction would consist in replacing a set number of workers of given skill by exactly the same number with the same skills. If reproduction costs were entirely borne from the wage paid out to the worker through the family, then household incomes would form a hierarchy exactly corresponding to the hierarchy of skills and the hierarchy of productivities. Each skill stratum of workers would reproduce its successors in the stratum at the average costs of reproduction of labour at the level of productivity appropriate to the stratum. Of course, instability would arise at the base of the hierarchy if the price of labour power there was too low to ensure the reproduction of the numbers required. Nonetheless the main idea of a stable pyramid in which maintenance and reproduction expenditures are proportional to the size and productivity of each stratum is the important element. In practice, there are no stable strata; the essence of capitalism is change, the continuous transformation of relationships and productivities so that the literacy of today is the illiteracy of tomorrow.
 
The public sector
The only purpose of the abstract exercise at the end of the last section is to allow us to identify more clearly what happens when the State intervenes to meet a major part of reproduction costs directly. Then the link between the wage received by the worker, the productivity on which we assume the wage is based, and the outlays incurred by the worker’s family to meet reproduction costs is broken. Variations in productivity and wages are no longer directly reflected in variations in family expenditure on reproduction.
By necessity, the State must now set some average minimum standard for the provision of its services to ensure the proper reproduction of the labour force. Leaving aside social and political factors, it can only do so in relationship to some notional average level of productivity for the labour force as a whole. Even if it endeavoured to tailor its services to a more complex structure of productivities, since there is no guarantee that a given worker would work at the trade for which he or she had been raised – and in conditions of rapid change, the trade itself may have disappeared altogether by the time the child enters the labour force – setting an average minimum standard is the sole method available. Alternatively, the State could identify a special category of people for high productivity jobs and concentrate reproduction expenditure here. To a greater or lesser extent, in reality this does happen in particular services (for example, education), but there are political constraints on how far such a discriminatory system can be generalized.
The State assumes this role for a variety of reasons, one of which is that the speed of change and the nature of the skills required mean that the skills can only be transferred collectively, on a standarized basis; as capitalism develops, parents become increasingly poor instruments for transferring skills required in the future.
A powerful factor in determining what average the State chooses is competition. States compete with each other – indeed, the State is the single most important agency of competition in the world system. A factor identified as important in the State’s ability to compete is the quality of its labour force. Public welfare programmes in Britain begin with an official report on the quality of troops recruited for the Boer War – that is, the ability of the British State to compete in military terms with its nearest rivals was jeopardized by the poor physical quality of its young men. [5] In modern times, the output of graduates or toolmakers in the United States or the Soviet Union, as proportions of the labour force of those countries, become standards for all lesser powers. The argument was explicit in the British Labour Party’s propaganda for the 1964 general election, and provided the justification for the Wilson government’s programme to expand higher education rapidly. Thus, the level of labour productivity on the basis of which a programme for higher educational expansion was based was not the actual level of 1964, but an aspired level – the level thought to be necessary to keep up with or overtake the leading industrial powers of the world. Of course, the intention of the State is not the same thing as the actual performance; the British new universities may have been intended to produce engineering graduates, but in fact, produced many more sociologists! Nor does the fact that the State had the intention mean that what it proposed is correct; it can and does make major errors of judgement.
The potential for mistakes when the State endeavours to establish a minimum requirement for reproduction costs is enormous. Such errors are compounded by the conflicts and rivalries rife within the public sector itself, by the competition for funds. For example, educational standards are not simply the product of a cool appraisal of what is required to meet certain levels of productivity (that is difficult enough); they are weapons by which, for example, the Ministry of Education endeavours to capture a larger share of finance and defeat rival agencies. There are pressure groups pressing on all sides: building contractors for hospital construction, universities for expanding higher education, MPs seeking favour for the constituencies, for their brothers and mates. Bribes and threats bend decisions for paradoxical conclusions. And beyond the narrow circle of power, from time to time, the class struggle itself reshapes government priorities.
In periods of growth and relative optimism, the State gambles by setting standards at high levels, even though, on strict calculations, this is not justified relative to the needs of the system at that time. In fact, the decisions may be errors even though expansion continues. In a number of backward countries, decisions to expand higher education in order to expand economic growth have merely produced an excess of graduates and the problem of educated unemployment.
But there are other problems which arise. First, State intervention in this field imposes a rigidity upon the system which renders it much more inflexible when expansion changes into contraction. Expenditure on reproduction could, when the family was the primary spender, be varied with fluctuations in economic activity – wage cuts were reflected in a decline in family nutrition, for example. But public expenditure is an issue of public debate and public employment, issues discussed in conditions for a competitive political party system where, for example, demands for more housing are weapons in the battle to win elections. Large changes in public expenditure to stabilize the profit rate under the pressures of slump cannot be secured speedily without economic disaster, nor without political challenge. There are other rigidities in particular sectors; for example, if workers hang on to their houses when local unemployment rises, even though jobs are available in other areas where housing is not.
Second, the State’s assumption of an average standard for the whole labour force is, from the viewpoint of the interests of the system, enormously wasteful. Advanced capitalist economies exhibit great unevenness of development. Parts of the economy operate at levels of labour productivity far below the average. It follows that the bottom strata of the workforce are “over educated” or physically “over maintained” for their role in the economy. This contradiction receives subjective expression in the unwillingness of workers, trained to work at an approximation to the average level of productivity, to work for wages well below the average. The price of labour power in the sectors where there are vacancies is below the rate of return which is appropriate to the costs of reproduction of the unemployed. For the unemployed to work at such a price would permanently jeopardize the chances of them ever working at the appropriate price. Thus, in the Greater London Council area in 1979, with the unemployment total standing at 130,000, there were severe labour shortages on London Transport, in the clothing, timber, metal goods, and electrical engineering trades, not to mention in the case of school canteen supervisors.
Third, the State institutes regulations to prevent the employment of minors, in part to protect the quality of the subsequently available adult labour force. This in turn reduces the contribution of child labour to household income, thus weakening the economic incentive to families to have children. The introduction of pensions for the aged removes another element in that incentive – that is, reduces the need to have a sufficient number of children to support the worker’s old age. The results of this, in conjunction with the introduction of birth control techniques, have been a decline in average family size – and, in due course, a decline in the number of new entrants to the labour force (this decline has been partly compensated by an increase in the survival rate of children, a decline in infant mortality). There is a further factor, however, in the decline in family size. The intervention of the State produces not only standardization of the publicly borne reproduction costs. The costs have been further increased by the transformation of household activity since the Second World War. The capital intensity of household activity has been advanced very rapidly, enormously boosting the productivity of household labour at the same time as considerably increasing the costs of the family unit. It appears that adult male wages have not increased commensurately with this process, so that today, the adult wage male wage cannot, as it was supposed to do in the nineteenth century, cover the costs of a wife and two children. Two adult wages now appear to be necessary to meet family based reproduction and maintenance costs. One result of this process has been the expulsion of housewives from the home to pursue paid – albeit, very low paid – employment. It should be noted in passing that the family can be no wiser than the State in assessing what is a socially necessary level of costs; parents perforce must, like the State, gamble. “Keeping up with the Jones” is thus not an eccentricity, but a primary mechanism of capitalist competition relative to the household.
In practice, the system heavily qualifies its commitment to an average standard for all. The labour supply to low paid worker sectors is identified by using special social criteria, by instituting a kind of “caste identified” labour supply – certain occupations are reserved as temporary, for “amateur workers” – the aged, school students (for example, newspaper delivery, Saturday morning shop assistants etc.), students on vacation or looking for work, housewives. As is well known, there are whole strata of “women’s jobs”. In the United States, a special category exists of “native immigrants”, that is, those who are by all ordinary legal criteria fully natives, but are treated as if they were not: blacks, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos etc. However, the more sustained the process is to reproduce the whole population to a particular average level of competence, the more such groups resist the typecast employment, preferring to remain unemployed rather than jeopardize their long term job prospects. Nor is this preference simply a function of the availability of social security support for the unemployed. Educated unemployment in Calcutta illustrates that people will fight to the bitter end to prevent their occupational downgrading, preferring starvation to indignity.
 
Sectors of “labour scarcity”
What types of employment are affected by a general upgrading of the labour force? The factors at stake are not simply questions of the price of labour power if by that we mean the take home pay. It is rather the price of labour power relative to the intensity and conditions of work (which includes the danger, the physical hardship, the cleanliness, the noise, the tedium of work, the provision for paid holidays, the hours and shifts, the health and safety conditions, how good local facilities – housing, medical services, schools, creches etc. – are, and so on). Industries with old plants and poor conditions exist everywhere, and survive because the overall costs of upgrading (as opposed to simply investing in a new machine) are higher than the expected rate of profit. Parts of the textile industry and plants in the old areas of engineering exemplify some of these factors.
There are other activities where price competition is severe and the workers poorly organized because of the structural conditions at work. Take, for example, catering, hotels and restaurants. If we assume for the sake of argument that in 1979 Britain, the Supplementary Benefit rate of £55.90 per week for a couple with two children represented a benchmark for the “maintenance and reproduction” costs, a worker would have to earn £61.75 in gross earnings to reach this level. The lowest grade of non-service hotel workers received a weekly minimum rate of £40.40, rising to £42.80 (with, for London workers, an allowance of £2.40). Younger workers, employed on a seasonal basis, could expect £36 for a six day, 40 hour week in London (out of London young cleaners might expect £27.30). There are between half and three quarters of a million workers in this activity, 63 per cent of them full time, with average gross earnings in 1978 of £59.60 per week (or 8.5 per cent below the “socially necessary” level).
In construction and agriculture, seasonal work produces short term demands for labour which cannot be met if the workforce is being simultaneously upgraded. In construction, as in the coalmines in Belgium and West Germany, the key factor is less the price of labour power alone, and more its relationship to the danger and hardship of the work.
At its base, the labour market fades away into outworkers; people, usually housewives, working at home at rates where there is no pretence at all to meet even the lowest maintenance wages, let alone an element for family reproduction. There are estimated to be a quarter of a million home workers in Britain. In Nelson in Lancashire, some 6,000 mainly Asian women sew ribbons and bows for the textile trades at rates equivalent to l0p per hour. Garment workers on a rate of 9 to 35p per garment can expect weekly pay of £20 to £25. Nineteenth century conditions continue to flourish in modern capitalism.
 
Migration
When the system grew rapidly, masses of native workers were drawn into sectors where the price of labour power was relatively higher, sectors we have identified – somewhat oversimply – as those of higher productivity. Thus, agricultural workers in France, Germany, the United States and Japan, moved in the 1950s and 1960s into urban industrial and service jobs. In the sectors vacated, equipment was substituted for labour on a considerable scale but without this eliminating labour scarcities. It is here that labour demand was created for workers from abroad.
Immigrant labour has been reproduced at costs below the average for the destination country. It was therefore subjectively willing, at least initially, to work for wages well below the average, or work at average wages in conditions inferior to the average. The picture is more complicated than this because in many cases, the immigrant worker was drawn from that minority in the backward country which had been reproduced at costs well above the local average. The wages on offer to the worker in his or her home country were fixed relative to the local average level of productivity, but were below those appropriate for his or her costs of reproduction, as assessed by the open world market. Thus, the excesses of the rivalries between States – the underproduction of “low productivity labour” in the advanced, and the overproduction of “high productivity labour” in the backward – receive some partial equilibration by the international movement of workers.
There are also important socio-psychological factors at work. Workers who grow up in a particular social environment, tend to absorb the defensive ethics developed by preceding generations to protect themselves from the ravages of capital. There are jobs they will not do, paces or hours or conditions of work they will not accept, moves from one locality to another that they will not make for the sort of wages and terms on offer. A worker torn out of this environment is much more appropriate to the needs of capital, much more ruthlessly driven to earn at whatever the wages on offer are. Such a worker is less able to support himself or herself during unemployment by borrowing from local networks of relatives and friends, and less likely to have reserves on which to fall back in hard times, less likely to have possessions that can be sold or pawned. Such workers are likely to be much more responsive to differences in wages – regardless of conditions -and, lacking local social ties, much more geographically mobile in response to changes in the labour market. This – as well as overt discrimination – is a factor in the general picture of immigrants working longer hours, working more night shifts, doing more piece-work, with a higher rate of job changing and of geographical mobility than native workers. It is also a factor in explaining what seems to be a more extreme mismatch between the qualifications of immigrant workers and the jobs they actually do. If the natives refuse to be downgraded even if this means the misery of long-term unemployment, the immigrants start in grades well below what the natives, with the same qualifications, would accept (of course, it is also true that at least at first foreign workers are more uninformed about what is locally considered reasonable, what alternatives exist etc.; they may also be consoled by the fact that a poor job in an advanced country offers better returns and conditions often than a good job in a backward country). Some employers recognise this factor: migrants make the best workers; and they always try to recruit new immigrants since those who have lived for some time in the country are likely to have become “spoiled”, i.e. conform to local working class standards.
 
Moveable jobs
The import of labour is necessary where the price of labour power is too low to induce a sufficient number of workers to work in “immoveable” jobs: that is, jobs which cannot, at least in the short term, be relocated abroad. For example, local coal mines cannot be mined abroad, nor can local dustbins be emptied, local houses built, and local soils cultivated abroad, although in almost all cases, alternative supplies from abroad can be found., There is however no permanently fixed boundary between moveable and immoveable jobs; changes in comparative wage costs, in technology and so on can radically shift the boundaries.
Capital can gain access to labour power at prices well below those governing in its home territory where jobs are moveable. Parts of manufacturing (for example, in the recent past, labour intensive links in textiles, electronic components, television sets etc.), some agricultural tasks, tourism, conform to this. States, recognizing the dangers implicit in the dispersion of activity, sometimes impose regulations to prevent jobs moving; the US government, for example, does not permit US aircraft manufacture to move (but does permit imports). Export processing zones in South Korea, Malaysia, Brazil, the Caribbean etc. have attracted industrial activities from the advanced countries, at the same time as these countries have exported labour. On Mexico’s northern border In-Bond plants have been permitted, set up by United States companies to manufacture consumer goods with raw materials and equipment imported from the States and Mexican labour; all the output is exported back to the United States. The In-Bond plant areas have thus been expropriated by the US labour market. At the same time, US nationals have started horticultural farms in northern Mexico to produce foodstuffs for the United States market. Finally, Mexico is a major exporter of labour to the States for farmwork and employment in textiles and services.
There are other examples of this kind, although not on such a large scale. Thus, India exports labour to the Gulf States, and Saudi Arabia finances vegetable farming in the Indian State of Andhra Pradesh, the produce being flown to Riyadh.
Firms with equipment and productivity standards derived from the advanced capitalist countries are able to transplant activities as isolated colonies to backward countries, providing the political context is right. Capital in the backward countries can then emulate the activity. But while productivity in the plants can be sustained at high levels, the general social average remains low. The workers in such plants are, as it were, “home based emigrants”.
 
The theoretical significance
Access to foreign workers makes possible the continued growth of certain national capitals for three main reasons. Firstly it allows more workers to be utilized by a given capital stock: the small farmer in the Punjab produces much more surplus value when he is imported to work in a foundry in Wolverhampton, and in doing so he is benefiting the capitalist class as a whole.
Secondly, the costs of reproduction of such labour are, as we have seen, less than those of the average labour in the advanced countries. Utilizing it enables the capitalist to increase the proportion of the working day that goes in surplus to him rather than in the maintenance of the worker. Ideally then, from the point of view of profit maximization, the native workers would be expelled to permit the lower cost immigrants to take the jobs. The absurdity of this idea illustrates clearly why the State cannot, in slump, pursue directly the accumulation of capital; on the contrary, it must sacrifice accumulation to social stability. The State consists of people, linked by social bonds to the rest of the population. Attempts to expel the natives would involve the State in political self-destruction. On the contrary, the State must do the opposite, stressing the inviolable rights of the natives in order to direct blame at the foreigners.
Finally, apart from the effect of the import of labour on the long run decline in the profit rate, it constitutes a net subsidy from one national capital to another. The sending country bears the cost of reproduction of the worker from its domestic product; the destination country receives adult labour power without the costs that would be needed to raise and train the worker. The higher the skill level, the greater the subsidy involved in the transfer. The subsidy is between national capitals (it could also be called “theft”), between countries. It does not necessarily benefit any individual employer who may employ the immigrant worker at the same rates as native labour. How far the destination country in fact is able to realize the full value of the subsidy varies, in particular with the terms of entry. Immigrants who settle and establish families, who draw on local public “maintenance” services (including ultimately old age pensions) will, in time, reduce the net subsidy. The subsidy is maximized for single adult workers on temporary contracts without any right to participate in local reproduction and maintenance services.
 
Russia and Japan
The framework presented here does not have the same application to all movements of workers internationally. For example, in the oil producing States of the Middle East, some of the relationships are reversed. Backward Saudi Arabia imports labour from more advanced Egypt, as well as from Europe and the United States (but it also imports labour from more backward North Yemen). Reproduction costs for an important part of the Egyptian labour force were certainly much higher than those in Saudi Arabia at the beginning of the migratory movement. The “raiding operation” is much more extreme – the loss to Egypt is the same as it would be in emigration to an advanced country, but the gain to Saudi Arabia is much greater.
The Soviet Union has a very highly educated labour force but poor levels of labour productivity. Does this refute the general argument presented here? First, a high level of reproduction costs is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for attaining high levels of productivity. There are many other factors at stake in productivity, including the volume and quality of equipment available to the workforce, the organization of the capitalists (in this case, the State bureaucracy) and so on. Second, as the earlier discussion noted, the components of the conditions required for sustaining high productivity are very varied and cannot simply be reduced to education; they include adequate and easily available housing conditions, recreational facilities, and perhaps a given measure of “social freedom”, all elements notoriously poor in the Soviet Union. High educational levels alone would not make up for the generalized poor quality of existence for the average Russian worker.
The case of Japan is an interesting one. First, its public services are much inferior to other advanced capitalist countries, but the levels of productivity attained in its leading industries are well in advance of its nearest rivals. Second, its rates of economic growth have been spectacularly high without this generating the sort of specific demands for labour which impel immigration. There is virtually no immigration to Japan, although there is a significant minority of Korean immigrants in the country (left over from the second World War and the partition of Korea, formerly a Japanese imperial possession).
Japan has reached the position of an advanced capitalist country very recently. Far from exhibiting labour scarcities, as recently as the early 1960s, the government was endeavouring to increase Japanese emigration by subsidizing migrants to leave. In the mid-1950s, some 15,000 emigrated each year under agreements between the Japanese government and those of Brazil, Bolivia, Paraguay and Argentina, as well as those who moved to the United States (much as the Netherlands Government encouraged emigration up to the mid-1950s in the belief that the country had too many workers). In the last half of the 1950s, 75,000 departed; in the first half of the sixties, 43,000; in the second half, 25,000 (there are said to be now 630,000 people “of Japanese origin” in the States, 760,000 in Brazil). Second, the reserves of agricultural labour in Japan have remained intact until relatively recently as can be seen in this comparative table:



Percentage of the Labour Force
in the Primary Sector




 


1960
%


1970
%


1975
%




Japan


33


20


12.5




United States


–


  4


  3.8




France


22


14


10.8




West Germany


–


  8


  6.6




USSR


42


26


–




United Kingdom


–


  3


  2.5




(– = not available)



Thirdly, Japan is alone among the advanced capitalist countries in having a decrease in female participation rates as income has risen (from 50.1% in 1963 to 47.1% in 1973). This suggests that Japan has not exhausted its domestic labour reserves to the point where women’s employment begins to increase. The poor level of public services also tends to keep a higher proportion of women at home; home based reproduction services must, replace those of the State. Even today, in many companies women are still expected to retire at the age of 40, or, in some cases, on marriage, indicating that employers are not under pressure to keep women at work.
There are other indications of “relative labour abundance”. Most workers still retire at 55 (although pensions are not payable until the age of 60). There is still a low rate of turnover in the large scale sector – employers are not bidding against each other for scarce skills. To some extent, the decline in labour hours available has not matched the other advanced capitalist countries – between 1960 and 1974, West German hours worked per week in manufacturing declined by 20% (from 48.8 to 39.1), Japan’s by 5% (from 45.7 to 43.3 hours).
Japan’s economy is, in comparison to its rivals, a fractured one between a bloc of very high productivity modern industries of enormous scale, and a fluctuating mass of small enterprises, many of them subcontractors to the large firms, with relatively low productivity, low pay, little security of work and poor conditions. The high growth of the leading companies is purchased at the cost of the small enterprises.
In general, Japanese growth is achieved by a high concentration on certain key sectors, not by attempting to generalize performance on all fronts. The increase in reproduction costs required to support the advanced sector is not spread through society and there is much heavier reliance on the family (but not, of course, in education). The low level of public intervention in the provision of maintenance and reproduction services is thus much more characteristic of a backward economy than an advanced. There is no supplementary benefits system, unemployment pay is very low. Hospital and medical services are notoriously bad for the majority. There are few homes for the invalided or elderly. Housing is very poor and extraordinarily expensive; a 1978 survey showed that a quarter of households lived in tiny one room flats; a quarter of households had no bathroom; ten per cent no running water; and two thirds were not connected to the sewerage system. Parks are rare (London has 22.8 square metres of park per head of the population, Tokyo 2), as are libraries and museums.
In sum then, Japan is still arriving at the state where the State is obliged to seek to guarantee a minimum reproduction standard for the whole labour force. The obligation is also affected by the political context – the class struggle in Japan has never reached the point of forcing standardization as happened in, for example, Britain immediately after the Second World War. The State in Japan has also no doubt delayed embarking upon this transformation as it observes the gambles undertaken in other advanced capitalist countries and their effect on gross investment and thus the overall rate of economic growth. [6]
Low public expenditure in Japan becomes another factor of competition in conditions of slump. The other advanced capitalist countries on the one hand press Japan to raise its public spending; on the other, they are tempted to try to sacrifice reproduction expenditure and lower their own rates of spending to the Japanese level. Meanwhile, South Korea and Taiwan seek to emulate the Japanese trajectory of growth, to Tokyo’s alarm.
There is a final factor worth noting in connection with “moveable” jobs. Japan’s investment abroad – unlike other advanced capitalist countries – is mainly in backward countries. In particular, Japanese companies have invested heavily in certain sectors of production in South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia etc. (in textiles, electronics etc.). To some extent it may have widened its low priced labour pool to a greater extent than its rivals.
There are an enormous number of unanswered questions in examining the relationship between reproduction costs, labour productivity and immigration. But at least on a superficial level, Japan does not seem to defeat the main argument.
 
The functions of immigration in primarily destination countries
When world capitalism expanded, migration to the core zones of the system made possible the performance of low productivity jobs important for the national economies concerned. Perhaps, without the remaining structures of protection, many of those jobs would have been “exported”, or, reshuffling of occupations would have made possible high growth without immigration. Be that as it may, the degree to which immigration was necessary depended upon the size of existing labour reserves (in agriculture, in home labour etc.) and the rate and pattern of growth of the particular national economy concerned.
Native labour moved upwards to jobs, the return to which more closely related to the appropriate return to average levels of productivity. Once immigrant workers had been drawn in, they were able to follow native labour, depending upon how freely they were permitted to change jobs and sectors – out of construction, agriculture, mining, to former native strongholds, metal manufacturing and assembly. This in turn created new vacancies where they had formerly worked, necessitating new immigration. By now, the foreign born are roughly 6 to 7 per cent of the population in most west European countries (the remarkably low figure for Britain – 3.3 per cent – is a mark of the poor growth rate here); and possibly 9 to 10 per cent of the local labour force (but 18.4 per cent of the Swiss population). Between a fifth and a third of the labour force in the metal trades in Switzerland, Holland and Germany are immigrant workers. [7]
The situation in the United States is more complicated since it has the largest minority of “native immigrants” (black people, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos etc.). In the case of black people, there has been a sustained movement over a long period out of southern agriculture to metal manufacturing and steel production in the old industrial centres of the north and north east. Later, the expanding new industries of the west coast, and now the south (aircraft, electronics, science based industries etc.) have attracted white skilled workers from the north and north east. Currently, the expansion of southern industry is for the first time since the Civil War attracting net black immigration. The possibility of immigrant labour moving up the hierarchy cannot be separated from the movement of “native immigrants”.
Seasonal migration by agricultural workers is important in parts of Europe – for example, the movement of casual labour from southern Spain to southern France. [8] It is also important in the United States. The only contract labour system for foreign workers still remaining there brings Caribbean workers to Florida’s apple orchards each year. Elsewhere, illegal seasonal workers from Mexico plug the gaps left by the upgrading of the American labour force. In this case, not only does the farmer not meet annual reproduction costs since the work is paid only in the season of employment, he does not pay annual maintenance costs. In the case of illegal migrants, the farmer can pay wages below the legal minimum by using the threat, if the worker does not accept this, of denouncing him or her to the police and immigration service. Real returns to the workers can scarcely be much above what he or she might expect to earn in Mexican agriculture – if jobs were available. It is hardly surprising that there are too few native Americans willing to work for such pay even when there are high rates of official unemployment in the district concerned. Texan farmers, in trying to strengthen their case to the Government against the imposition of fines on employers taking on illegal migrants, advertised 4,000 farm-hand jobs at the minimum legal hourly rate (then $2.20 per hour). They received only 300 applications from workers with legal status.
In Europe, it has often been argued that, in the absence of strict border controls, the flow of immigrants varies with the level of unemployment in the destination country – as unemployment rises, immigration falls. But this affects only legal movement. There are no useful figures on illegal movement. In the United States, it is argued that illegal migration has increased during the current phase of stagnation since 1974. This could represent a substitution of cheap labour for more expensive native workers. Or it could reflect changes in the structure of the labour market – a sharp contraction in the core metal using industries, without an equivalent decline in labour intensive agriculture, and possibly even an expansion in catering and restaurants (which could result from a big increase in tourism, for example). The same could be happening in Europe in the illegal sectors.
This illustrates that the demand for cheap labour power does not disappear in slump. On the contrary, it can increase. The British Government has pursued policies of deliberate discrimination against black people in the name of its immigration policies, in defiance of the needs of the British economy, but it has made consistent concessions to permit the entry of European workers on work permits. Some 120,000 permits were issued in 1978. Any increase in foreign tourism increases the pressure of the restaurants and catering trades on the Government to permit the import of labour. Nonetheless, last November the Government tightened the regulations to reduce work permits as part of its attempts to bludgeon native workers into accepting low paid jobs. [9]
The French Government has recently cut residence permits for foreign workers from ten to three years, and now to one, affecting between half and one million north and west African workers. This was supposedly done to increase the job opportunities for the native unemployed. Yet a recent official report calculates that for every 150,000 foreign workers sacked, only 13,000 jobs become available for native workers. Indeed, we could go further and infer that, since French workers will not accept the wages on offer for most of these 13,000 jobs, important tasks in the economy will not be performed and one possible result will be an increase in native unemployment in other sectors dependent upon the performance of these tasks. The Government’s policy has little at all to do with unemployment – it is designed to incite racialism on the one hand, and lower public expenditure by reducing the cost of maintaining the unemployed by expelling them from the country on the other.
Immigrants provide a target in slump, a measure of flexibility made necessary precisely because of the rigidity of structure of modern capitalism. The expulsion of immigrants is a substitute for increasing the level of unemployment more dramatically, even though it is deleterious to the economy. [10] Between 1974 and 1977, the number of foreign workers in West Germany fell by 19%, and in France by 16%. Or, take the example of the British merchant fleet between 1976 and 1979. Carrying capacity fell by 20%; the number of British officers fell by 5%, and of British ratings, hardly at all. The number of non-British ratings fell by 20%. Given the difference in wages between British and non-British ratings, this change must have raised labour costs per unit of freight carried – thus, the employers purchased the loyalty of British ratings at the cost of a decline in their capacity to compete internationally.
The function of immigrant labour depends on an accepted level of social discrimination; the exclusion of immigrants from the same rights as the natives is accepted by the natives without protest. It is this which makes possible the harassment of foreign workers by the State. Whether it is the obscene persecution at Heathrow airport, the manhunts in Texas or the border States, or the French police checking everyone with dark skins on the Metro, the aim is the same – to keep open the division between native and foreigner.
In the Middle East, these mechanisms are often more advanced. In Saudi Arabia, the regulations governing the mass of immigrant workers include a ban on strikes; employers are, in theory at least, fined for employing illegal immigrants; immigrants have no right to change their jobs without a passport check (drivers on intercity buses are supposed to check passenger passports). To add terror to the regulations, there are periodic mass expulsions – for example, 30,000 people called by the Government “Pakistanis” were expelled from the country en masse in March 1978. In the United Arab Emirates, under the July 1977 regulations, the government assumed the right to deport any foreign worker who disobeyed the orders of his or her employer, tried to organize a work stoppage, damaged production, assaulted an employer or representative, or committed any other serious misdemeanour.
The aim of such regulations appears to be to force the solidarity of the native population by the continual demonstration of the “disprivilege” of the foreigner. Such demonstrations are particularly required when economic contraction is continually reminding the poorest natives of their own misfortunes. Thus the panoply of intimidatory controls has nothing to do with the specific characteristics of the foreign worker concerned, but rather is related to the need to secure the loyalty of the natives. The argument that immigrants are the cause of the native response is of the same logic as blaming the poor for their poverty, the unemployed for being jobless, and soon.
Controls can work in a slump provided there is sufficient police power. But they do so with paradoxical results. First, they have negative effects for native employment (tending to raise native unempoyment rates, and force natives into poorer paid work) and for the economy as a whole, leaving aside the waste involved in employing a bureaucracy and police force to implement the regulations. But secondly, regulations drastically reduce just that flexibility which is one of the main advantages of immigrant labour to capitalism. For example, in West Germany in the 1960s, sixty per cent of Italian workers stayed for under two years, returning to Italy after that time. If tight border controls are introduced, foreign workers will not return to Italy for fear of not regaining re-entry to Germany – they are forced into permanent settlement, exile. And it then becomes politically difficult to expel them. Similarly, if the United States succeeded in controlling the Rio Grande border with Mexico, it would no doubt curb seasonal migration but increase the numbers permanently resident in the United States.
Singapore, being a very small territory with a powerful State, has apparently succeeded in operating tight controls. The city is an industrialized economy, based upon a mass of cheap labour (but the State maintains possibly the most advanced system of publicly provided reproduction and maintenance services in Asia, restricted to natives). Every expansion in the economy produces a shortage of labour in certain sectors – construction, ship repair (for men), textiles and electronics (for women). Immigrant labour fills the gaps, but under tight control – employers are permitted to recruit abroad, but remain responsible for their labour force. The State, with the close collaboration of the trade unions, ensures control to hold immigrant wages down, to prevent the labour market operating. Immigrants are used as the lever to keep down wages in general in the city for the mass of workers. Foreign workers are permitted to enter in the first instance for six months in construction; others, many of them young women, may not change jobs for three years, hold trade union office, marry or have children; they have no right to public housing, medical services or schools; those that ultimately secure permission to marry do so only on condition of signing a bond to accept sterilization after the birth of their second child. The penalty for disobeying the rules is expulsion.
These regulations apply to those entering the city on work vouchers (granted to those earning below 750 Singapore dollars per month). They do not apply to the highly skilled, professional or business classes who are granted employment vouchers (for those earning 750 Singapore dollars or more). In 1979, the government announced a new policy to reduce or eliminate the island’s dependence on immigrant labour, by trying to force an increase in the capital-intensity of production (that is, substituting equipment for labour by changing the industrial mix of the city’s output). Companies utilizing a great deal of labour are expected to leave the island, locating in the countries from which immigrants are drawn (the Singapore Government is also trying to locate labour intensive industry on the Indonesian island of Batam). To achieve this aim, the Government has proposed increasing wages for three years by 7 per cent, plus 32 Singapore dollars. In fact this is a very small increase to achieve such a change; the Singapore Manufacturers’ Association estimates the wage bill for its members at between 8 and 15 per cent of total costs, so the increase will add only between 1.6 and 3 per cent to costs. Of course, consistent with its record, even this small increase is not to be paid to the workers (lest “they get used to high wages”) but paid into the government Provident Fund. The payments can be stopped if the Singapore leadership decides the policy is in fact jeopardizing the city economy.
In other countries which are expanding, the controls are much weaker. In the Middle East, governments have moved from accepting general immigration to, at least officially, tolerating only temporary project-related entries (and the employer in the project is required to remove the labour force from the country at the end of the project). But the labour market continues to operate. Workers escape from the project or take second jobs. In mid-1978, 5,000 Indians working for Engineering Projects of India went on strike when the company, under government pressure, tried to prevent moonlighting. EPI asked the Ministry of the Interior to deport 250 of its workers, and made a small pay increase to the rest.
In summary then, foreign workers are necessary when the system grows to compensate for the deficiencies of national planning (whether the planning is declared or not), to straddle the contradiction between the development of the State and the growth of capital. In slump, they are also necessary, but this economic function is subsidiary to their social role: they are the anvil upon which the loyalty of the natives to the existing State can be forged.
 
The effects of emigration on primarily sending countries
If a State exports workers, labour power, on a significant scale in competition with other States, then the world labour market would begin to exercise an influence over the domestic production of labour, as the world market guides the domestic production of any other commodity. The more developed the export of labour, the more an exporting State would seek to control the lease or sale of labour power (to become a labour contractor or supervisory agent for labour contractors), to standardize its quality and tailor it to the specific vacancies abroad. To maximize its profits, it would need to minimize the costs of reproduction, ultimately to convert the economy to a manufacturing plant for breeding and raising workers. This might be done directly, or through the medium of the family, with State incentives and services being directed to induce the family to produce and train the numbers required (the family would then become, as it were, a private firm under the supervision of the State). It follows that such a State would have relinquished any ambition to create a diversified national economy in favour of filling one specialized niche in the world system.
At the moment, States “pillage” their domestic labour forces – or permit them to be pillaged by other States – without paying attention to sustaining future supplies, much as capitalism ransacked pre-capitalist sectors in the early phases of its growth. But exporting States do seek to control emigration, to ensure certain levels of pay and remittances, and to supervise their nationals abroad to prevent conflicts which might jeopardize their competitive position. In particular, in east and south Asia, prices are partly set in relationship to competing States in the provision of labour to multinational employers for construction work in the Middle East or merchant seamen’s jobs.
What are some of the immediate crude effects of large scale emigration for work? Some of them can be listed as follows: firstly emigration is drawn from particular districts, so that an important first effect is localised depopulation – as in parts of Eire, northern Portugal, Algeria, Lesotho, North Yemen, etc. Those leaving are workers in the most active age groups, so the effect of departures is magnified in the age group 15 to 35, and often, among the most skilled. Thus, the domestic labour force is stripped of its most decisive elements. Sometimes, emigration draws heavily on one sex, producing a sex imbalance, which has maximum effects on those in the reproductive age groups, reflected in a decline in the marriage and birth rates. Thus, not only is the present generation stripped, the next generation is jeopardized.
Secondly, the resulting shortage of skills can produce considerable labour scarcities in particular trades, and wage inflation. It is reported, for example, that the daily wage rate for masons in Pakistan used to be 15 rupees, but by 1979, under the impact of emigration of building craftsmen to the Middle East as well as a local house building boom financed from the remittances of workers abroad, the daily rate was 40 rupees. In North Yemen, large scale emigration has generated such wage inflation that now child labour can work as drivers at high wages. While this is good for low paid workers, it is catastrophic for local ruling classes with any ambition to speed capital accumulation. More generally it indicates a tendency for emigration to draw wages in the sending country up towards the level in the destination country, to create a single price in an international labour market.
A sequence of events in South Korea also illustrates this. In March 1977, Korean workers were involved in a three day riot at a Hyundai project in Saudi Arabia. President Park of South Korea intervened to raise the minimum pay level to (US)$240 per month. This in turn almost certainly encouraged more workers, particularly drivers, to opt for work in the Middle East. In May 1978, Park was obliged to raise the pay of Pusan bus drivers by 70% to discourage emigration, but without success since shortly afterwards he imposed a temporary ban on the recruitment of drivers for work abroad.
Thirdly, for some exporting countries, remittances from their nationals working abroad have become very important as sources of foreign earnings. Take three countries importing labour to Europe:



Remittances as a Percentage of Export Earnings




 


1970


1973


1974




Greece


54%


58%


35%




Portugal


55%


62%


50%




Turkey


46%


90%


94%



These cases are not as extreme as North Yemen which is said to be able to import one hundred times more than it exports.
Having workers abroad firmly yokes the growth of local incomes to growth in the centres of world production abroad. Contraction in the world system similarly has reverse effects. For example, the virtual end of European recruitment of Turkish workers – as well as a flourishing black market in remittance payments to Turkey – was a powerful element in the severity of the crisis in Turkey. Official remittances peaked at (US)$1.42 billion in 1974, and fell to $0.98 billion in 1978 (unofficial payments, 1973 to 1978, are put at just over $2 billion). The pressure of the Turkish government to be admitted to the Common Market and the EEC provisions for the free movement of labour are a measure of the despair of the Turkish ruling class – only by leasing its labour for exploitation by foreign capital can it retain its hold on Turkey.
Fourthly, while in theory remittances make possible industrial imports to accelerate domestic growth; in practice States have to offer incentives to persuade their nationals to return part of their earnings through the official markets. That means that the exchange rate must either give special advantages to those wishing to return remittances or permit the currency to float so that any advantage in operating on the black market is removed. Such measures make it extremely difficult to control national finance in the interests of capital accumulation. Furthermore, since workers abroad can buy foreign consumer goods, they will do so abroad unless they can buy such goods at home at the same price – thus, incentives to repatriate earnings include the ‘liberalization’ of the import of consumer goods. This further reduces the chances of building national industry on an import substitution basis.
Finally, in general, emigrants regard home as merely home, not somewhere where they can use their foreign earnings to set themselves up as small capitalists (an illusory aim, given the relatively small earnings they individually make). Thus, remittances converted into local currency are used to buy land for housebuilding, to build houses and buy consumer goods. One result is, as noted earlier, inflation in the construction industries. In sum, the districts of emigration become dormitory suburbs or country cottages of workplaces abroad, places where foreign earnings are consumed not where productive activities are improved.
These elements indicate some of the pressures on world labour demand that restructure labour exporting countries, making even more difficult any independent strategy for national economic development. In practice, States react empirically, adjusting policy step by step without being conscious of the overall drift until it is too late to reverse the process. Their preoccupations are more directed at supervising the return of remittances.
The power of the State over nationals outside its frontiers is limited. At most, it can withhold the renewal of passports, seize property left behind or punish relatives. But abroad, no international policy yet exists to trace recalcitrants in the way, at least in principle, stolen goods can be traced. Usually, documentation is its sole power, which explains in part efforts made to enforce the necessity to travel with documents, to eliminate the possibility of undocumented movement.
Other measures are taken to strengthen control. Where local companies employ local labour on contracts abroad – as happens with Korean, Turkish or Greek construction companies in the Middle East, or Mexican construction companies in Venezuela – controls can be tight. The State can penalize the company. In turn the company handles the transport (and keeps the return ticket until the worker is instructed to return), housing, feeding and supervision of the worker. The South Koreans stiffen this control by appointing, in charge of each gang of workers, a volunteer craftsman demobilized from the army for the purpose of supervision.
Such controls require local capital to be developed enough to act as employer. For the Philippines, this is not usually the case. The government has therefore moved towards leasing labour in groups to foreign employers. Hirers of labour are required to sign a contract with the government guaranteeing certain conditions and accepting an obligation to return a certain proportion of foreign earnings to the Manila agent directly (that is, not through the worker).
Regulations on remittances vary widely, as does the power to enforce them. South Korea demands remission of 80% of foreign earnings. India requires, in theory, 10%. Filipino workers abroad are required to return 40% of earnings, and 70% if they are seamen. Pakistan demands that 20% of the earnings of professional and technical staff be paid to the State as tax, but it has little or no power to enforce this.
The People’s Republic of China has recently entered the market by permitting provincial governments to offer Chinese labour to foreign employers for work abroad. Guangdong province has recently published details of its proposals in Hong Kong. It offers “unlimited numbers” of workers, aged 18 to 35, to work a 48 hour week, with three days holiday per year. The government promises that its workers will be “diligent and obedient to the employers’ reasonable instructions and work assignments”. Workers will receive free board and travel; they will be given 10% of their total earnings (which should be between £69 and £104 weekly) as pocket money while abroad, and 10% on the termination of the contract, the rest presumably accruing to the Guangdong or Chinese Governments.
Perhaps the Chinese are copying the Philippines Government which has developed a marketing strategy for what is known as “the export of warm bodies”. The Overseas Development Board of the Ministry of Labour circulates glossy brochures to multinational companies proclaiming the superior character (and very low cost) of this “prized living export”, “the best bargain in the world labour market”. The government lays out its terms and promises, on signature of the contract, to “package and deliver workers to various worksites round the world”.
In conclusion, then, the national organisation of the sale of labour power is, at the government level, already well organised. Private labour contractors tout their wares round the globe and have done so for much of the history of capitalism, but State organisation – with a close eye on the balance of payments – is relatively new. If the process were to persist, sooner or later States would have to intervene in the reproduction process to ensure continued supplies and proper maintenance.
 
Conclusion
International migrants are a particular stratum of the world working class, embodying the contradiction between a world economy and its national political and social organisation. Relative to the national ideologies which dominate the world, they should not exist at all. Endeavouring to eliminate them, regardless of the damage thereby inflicted upon the world economic system, is part of the self-destructive drive of capitalism in crisis: the growth of world production is sacrificed to the maintenance of class rule.
The legal migrant is still a person. Although frequently oppressed, immigrants are still in an infinitely superior position to those who dare to move without a licence: the illegal migrant and the mass of refugees. Since these people belong to no ruling class, any barbarity may be inflicted upon them. They can be treated as cruelly as those lost peoples encompassed by the expanding modern national State: the Red Indians, the aborigines, the nomads. [11]
The ruling classes of the destination countries seek to stabilise their national power at the cost of the world system, at the same time as borrowing or stealing the labour forces of more backward ruling classes. There is a strikingly vivid model for a different method of achieving similar results. South Africa reclassified the majority of its natives as foreigners, nationals of a set of hastily run up independent States, the Bantustans. To do this, the distinction between “labourer” and “labour power” was vital, as the Minister of Mining explained in 1965: “They (black workers) are only supplying a commodity, the commodity of labour ... it is labour we are importing and not labourers”. [12] Apartheid, insofar as its aims in the field of labour were actually achieved, secured the purpose of offloading the costs of the reproduction of black labour to the Bantustans while retaining access to the labour power of adult workers. It also prevented black workers seeking to emulate the reproduction costs of white South Africa. Its viability depended upon being able to maintain a divided economy, between a majority low productivity sector and a minority high productivity sector. It has analogies with Japan. Insofar as this structural condition is superceded, apartheid comes to act as a powerful constraint on the growth of South African capitalism.
No issue today so sharply differentiates revolutionary internationalists and national reformists as that of the international migration of workers. The issue at stake is a challenge to the very existence of the national State and its prerogatives in the control of a territory and the inhabitants. Much of the politics of the Left is concerned with gaining control of the State and accelerating the growth of its power over its inhabitants, not with abolishing the State. Deploring the ill treatment of immigrants is seen, not as an attack on the powers of the State, but as an argument for ending all immigration. Demands for a “humane immigration policy” rival the fantasies of “send capital to the countries from which the immigrants come, not immigrants to the countries where capital exists”. If the Left had power to direct capital to new locations, it has the power to abolish capital. In the United States, it is part of the Left which stresses that illegal immigrants menace only the oppressed but native groups – blacks, Puerto Ricans, women – and that, to protect these groups, illegals should be expelled. Yet to permit the expulsion of illegal immigrants is to take one step nearer to the expulsion of immigrants, which in turn is a step closer to the expulsion of selected sections of natives. That way madness lies. Accepting the right of the State to control immigration is accepting its right to exist, the right of the ruling class to exist as a ruling class, the right to exploit, the “right” to a world of barbarism.
In South Africa, the white trade unions allied with the State for immediate gains to a minority of workers at the expense of the majority. It is the AFL-CIO which campaigns more consistently for the rounding up and expulsion of illegal Mexican workers; they “permit” US business to locate across the southern border to use cheap Mexican labour, but refuse to follow them to recruit Mexican workers and establish parity of wages on both sides of the frontier (a demand which would of course bring them into direct collision with the interests not only of US business but also the Mexican ruling class, also dependent upon cheap labour). It is the British TUC which continually presses for an end to the issue of work permits, an aim which, if achieved, would rob the TUC leadership of the opportunity of banquets in expensive London hotels. While it is the labour movement which leads the attack on foreign workers, employers may sleep quietly in their beds: whatever the secondary quarrels, the unions accept “the national interest”, the employers’ interest, that this is the best of all possible worlds.

Notes
1. Compare the contemporary tolerance of the passport as a means of labour control to Marx’s comment on internal labour passports:
“The excess of despotism reached in France will be apparent by the following regulations as to working men.
“Every working man is supplied with a book by the police – the first page of which contains his name, age, birthplace, trade or calling, and a description of his person. He is therein obliged to enter the name of the master for whom he works, and the reasons why he leaves him. But this is not all: the book is placed in the master’s hands and deposited by him in the bureau of the police with the character of the man by the master. When a workman leaves his employment, he must go and fetch this book from the police office; and is not allowed to obtain another situation without producing it. Thus the workman’s bread is utterly dependent on the police. But this again is not all: this book serves the purpose of a passport. If he is obnoxious, the police write ‘bon pour retourner chez lui’ (‘Valid for return home’ – NH) in it, and the workman is obliged to return to his parish!
“... No serfdom of the feudal ages – no pariahdom of India has its parallel” (Karl Marx/Frederick Engels, Collected Works, London, 1978, Vol. 10, p.578.)
2. This phenomenon is usually related to apparently accidental changes in the birth rate, reflected later in changes in the size of labour force. In fact, there is often no correlation with birth rates – for example, Greece .Spain, Portugal and Yugoslavia have the same sort of birthrates as those countries to which their nationals have migrated.
“Surplus workers” is the obverse of “lack of the means to employ” (or “capital deficit”), just as “scarcity of labour” means “excess of the means to employ” (implying an excess demand for goods or services, “capital surplus”). But differences of this kind have existed for a very long time, so they can hardly account for particular movements of workers at particular times. There are many areas, in any case, with a “capital deficit” but hardly any emigration.
Furthermore, the argument implies that it is the “surplus” workers, the unemployed, who move, when frequently it is not. “Scarcity” implies a general spread of unfilled vacancies in labour importing countries, when such a situation never exists, only particular scarcities in particular trades. The argument also assumes that the existing labour force in destination countries is “fully utilized” when it never is nor could be outside the realm of theory. There are always sections of the population which could be employed if the wage and conditions offered were good enough – women working at home, people under the age of 15, the sick, invalided and retired. If the price of labour, the wage, were to rise high enough, it would induce a movement of workers out of low into higher paid jobs (as happened in Germany, France and the United States with agricultural workers in the 1950s and 1960s). Alternatively, jobs can be exported or subcontracted abroad, as today when the Lancashire millowners are trying to subcontract garment making to the Mediterranean countries (the “outward processing” system).
Thus, the occurrence of “scarcity” or “surplus” does not explain the movement of workers; on the contrary, it is the movement which alone gives rise to the invention of these terms.
3. In Britain, the numbers in higher education have roughly doubled every twenty five years in this century. Between 1955 and 1970, numbers were doubling every eight years. On comparative expenditure and enrolments, see:



Increases in Higher Education
(Annual Average Growth Rates)




 


Dates


1. Expenditure


2. Enrolments




France


1958–68


13.3%


9.8%




W. Germany


1957–66


16.3%


5.0%




Italy


1950–65


15.0%


3.9%




Japan


1950–65


11.1%


6.9%




UK (England
& Wales


1950–65


  9.8%


5.1%




US


1957–67


11.4%


7.5%




(OECD Observer, No. 50, Feb. 1971, p. 15.)



Decasualisation reduces the labour hours available if we assume that casual workers formerly took several jobs, and after being decasualized, remained in one job without working the same number of hours as they previously worked in more than one job.
4. The 1971 survey of 47,000 industrial units, employing between one and four workers, and covering 116,000 workers in all, showed:



1. Value added


Rs. 104 million




2. Hired labour costs


Rs.   66 million
(at Rs. 1,375 per year)




3. Imputed wage for employers and family labour


Rs.   93 million




4. Profits


Rs.   55 million




5. Actual return to employers and family labour


Rs.   38 million
(or Rs. 559 per person)




A.N. Bose, Calcutta and Rural Bengal, Minerva, Calcutta 1978.



5. The Report of the Inspector General of Recruiting, following the Boer War, noted “the gradual deterioration of the physique of the working classes from whom the bulk of recruits must always be drawn” (cited R.M. Titmuss, Essays on the Welfare State, London, 1958.)
6.



 


Distribution of Gross Domestic Product, 1976




 


G.N.P.
per capita,
1976
US$


Public
Consumption
%


Private
Consumption
%


Gross
Domestic
Investment
%




Japan


4910


  9


57


33




US


7890


17


64


16




France


6550


13


62


23




W. Germany


7380


18


55


24




USSR


2760


–


–


–




UK


4020


19


60


17



7. One estimate of the net subsidy from immigrant homelands to West Germany puts the figure for workers who have moved between 1957 and 1966, and 1968 and 1973 (there was a net outflow of foreign workers in 1967) at US$33 bn. (1962 prices). Remittances returned to the homelands in the same period were US$8.8 bn. There are no estimates of the immigrant net contribution to West Germany’s gross domestic product. Another estimate, solely for highly skilled and professional immigrants to Britain, Canada and the United States, 1961 to 1972, puts the subsidy at US$46 billion.
8. This migration increases shortages for casual labour during the harvesting in parts of Spain which encourages the larger farmers to buy labour saving equipment, which in turn increases emigration: “to their paternalist relationship with the big landlords, has been added a further dependence on the European trade cycle” (Bernard Kayser, Manpower Movements and Labour Markets (Report), OECD, 1971, p. 196)
9. In a study of Cologne in Germany, a writer notes:
“the throng of foreign workers does not form a simple quantitative supplement, elastic by definition: on the contrary, it is for the most part an essential force in the economy because of the sectors of which it is in possession. For the main feature of immigrant manpower on the labour market is its practically irreversible specialization: it seems out of the question that, even in a period of crisis, nationals should demand again for themselves jobs which have become considered inferior and abandoned to the foreigners.” (Kayser, op. cit., p. 175)
10. It is for this reason that Bohning describes immigrant labour as a “conjunctural shock absorber” (W.R. Bohning and D. Maillat, The effects of the employment of foreign workers, OECD, Paris 1974, p. 18)
11. Compare Victor Serge’s observation on the exiled:
“I have witnessed the birth of the enormous category of ‘stateless persons’, that is, of those men to whom tyrants refuse even a nationality. As far as the right to live is concerned, the plight of these men without a country ... can be compared only to that of the ‘unacknowledged man’ of the Middle Ages who, since he had no lord or sovereign, had no rights and no protection either, and whose very name became a kind of insult.” (Memoirs of a Revolutionary, 1901–1941, translated by Peter Sedgwick [to whom much thanks for pointing out the passage], Oxford 1963, p. 373)
12. And once their labour power was exhausted, they must carry their bodies off, out of the territory of the State. General Circular No. 25 of 1967 stipulated that:
“as soon as they become, for some reason or another, no longer fit to work or superfluous in the labour market, they are expected to return to their country of origin or the territory of their national unit where they fit in ethnically (even) if they were not born and bred in the ‘Homeland’.” (cited in Crossroads: A consequence of ideology or urbanization, by M.J. Andrews, unpublished dissertation, May 1979)
 



In 1964, Mao decided:
‘The Soviet Union today is under the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, a dictatorship of the German fascist type, a dictatorship of the Hitler type’
A clique, he said, had usurped the Communist Party and the Soviet Government, and imposed the rule of a bureaucratic monopoly capitalist class, namely a new type of bourgeoisie’ which pursued ‘social implications abroad’. [1]
The statement ratified an open break with the Soviet Union, just as Stalin’s 1949 description of Yugoslavia as ‘fascist’ implied that no short-term reconciliation was possible; the regime had to be overthrown by force. Mao’s formulation was a theoretical bombshell. The Soviet Union had apparently seen no major social transformation in the ten years following Stalin’s death, no change in the structure of power, no change in the basic lines of domestic and foreign policy. How, then, could a counter-revolution have triumphed in this period without anyone except Mao noticing? The problem apparently troubled few supporters of either the Soviet Union or China. No flood of books from China or elsewhere demonstrated how such a gigantic change could have taken place without apparent signs. The world settled down again with, now, two ‘superpowers’ (USA and USSR), one of them operating ‘social fascism’ at home and ‘social imperialism’ abroad.
Now, ten years after Mao’s statement, some of the foreign supporters of the Chinese government have begun to try and clear up the theoretical mess. Mr Nicolaus’ book [2] is, however, a religious tract, a pecularly sterilized version of Kremlin myths, 1937-vintage, pure ‘ideology’ without any attempt at Marxist analysis; it can be of interest solely to the more slavish devotees of the cult of the Great Helmsman.
Charles Bettleheim’s work [3] is a quite different kettle of fish. Mao has found a theoretician. In pursuit of the origins of the degeneration of the Soviet Union into state capitalism, he has retraced his steps to the October revolution itself and to a detailed examination of Lenin’s writings. It is an extraordinarily difficult exercise. One false step in the analysis of the Soviet Union can lead to the implication that the structure of power – if not the detail of operation – is the same in the People’s Republic of China, and that there China is either already state capitalist or on the road to becoming so.
 
‘Bourgeois Social Practices’
What is his case? It turns upon a concept vital to Marx’s analysis but now raised to a status that almost eliminates everything else – ‘social relations’. It is possible, Bettleheim argues, for workers to conquer the State, but then fail to transform the basic relations of production – the relationships between workers and managers, workers by hand and by brain, town and country. He cites with approval a 1923 statement by Bukharin:
‘The working class can defeat mechanically its adversary ... it can physically take possession of what exists but it can at the same time be absorbed by adverse cultural forces ... This danger inevitably threatens every working class which takes state power. If that happens, we transform ourselves into a new class, constituted by the new technical intelligentsia, by a party of the new bourgeoisie ... because we are detached without noticing, but completely, from the general proletarian base and we transform ourselves thus into a new social formation.’ [4]
Bettleheim reiterates that
‘Although the process of social reproduction may no longer be dominated by the bourgeoisie, the capitalist character of this process is only partially modified by the existence of the dictatorship of the proletariat; the fundamental structure of this process is still not really broken.’ (p.116)
It takes a long period of social change to overcome the inertia of the old society, and necessitates
‘a class struggle prolonged and guided by a correct political line, that is to say, a line set at each stage by aims permitting an effective social transformation of the relations of production. The elaboration of such a line assumes the existence of a proletarian party armed with revolutionary theory and playing a directing role.’ (CB stress; p.118)
It follows that the party can know what should be done, independent of the society of which it is a product – it is ‘independent’ of society – and it always has the material power to change ‘social relations’ in a socialist direction, independent of the level of material scarcity (whether this is the Soviet Union of the 1920s or China of the 1950s and 1960s).
In the Soviet Union of the twenties, according to Bettleheim, the Party leadership – both left and right – consistently sacrificed changing ‘social relations’ to expanding the output of the economy. They did this because, apart from Lenin, they shared a common misunderstanding of Marxism; they were all ‘economist’. According to Bettleheim, ‘economism’ arose from the reformist nature of the second International (the prewar association of social democratic parties); Marxism was corrupted by the interests of the privileged ‘labour aristrocracy’ of the industrialised countries. Expanded output, regardless of the relations governing production in the factories, sustained the privileges of the union and labout bosses, whereas changing the relations would jeopardise these privileges. Bolshevik cadres took their Marxism from the Second International.
However, this intellectual source does not explain why this ‘ideological inertia’ persisted in the new Soviet society where there was little or no ‘labour aristocracy’ at the beginning. But, says Bettleheim, the ‘economist’ version of Marxism coincided with the cultural assumptions of workers, trained in the old society in subordination to capitalist control, and, more important, with the material interests of two groups of people – the former Tsarist officials, managers and intelligentsia who were induced to work for the new regime, and some of the Bolsheviks, now in positions of authority in the factories and state. Furthermore, the Party had, mistakenly, made no attempts to lead the class struggle among the peasantry, and therefore, no continuing process of rural revolution came to reinvigorate the workers’ party. The two social groups – bourgeoisie and new Party officials – together could, left to themselves, constitute a ‘new bourgeoisie’. Bettleheim generalises thus:
‘All those who, in the system of production and social reproduction, hold a place corresponding to that of the bourgeoisie who develop bourgeois social practices, despite the existence of the dictatorship of the proletariat, constitute a bourgeoisie.’ (p.120; CB stress)
The criterion is apparently the style with which authority is exercised by the bureaucracy, not the existence of the bureaucracy itself. This certainly conforms with Mao’s observation:
‘We should get rid of the enemy. Rigid bureaucrats should be reformed into creative bureaucrats. If, after a long time, they cannot become creative, then we should get rid of them.’ [5]
Apparently, therefore, style is not the product of a particular structure of class power, but the cause of the creation of a new class. Marx is stood on his head!
 
Economism and the Intellectuals
What is Bettleheim’s ‘economism’? He claims it is related to Lenin’s conception (p.31), but this is clearly not so. Lenin used the word to describe the strategy of a group of Social Democrats who maintained that the bourgeois revolution in Tsarist Russia would be led by the Tsarist bourgeoisie, and that, therefore, workers must subordinate their political aims to the bourgeoisie; the role of Social Democrats was not to lead workers politically, but only economically, in limited industrial matters. By contrast, Bettleheim defines his ‘economism’ as the reduction of Marxism to an ‘economic’ theory, but he then broadens the notion to cover a whole ragbag of different questions, leaving precious little of precision behind except a vague feeling that ‘economism’ is wrong, selfish, partial.
Yet the concept is extremely important for Bettleheim’s case, and is indeed used in the same loose way on the Left generally. It implies a clear gap between economic questions (‘practice’) and politics (‘theory’) [6], a gap which corresponds, not surprisingly, to a social division between workers and intellectuals. Middle class thought is generally addicted to the dissolution of scientific social categories into moralising and not for accidental reasons. In the big confrontations between capital and labour, the middle classes have no leverage over events other than their ideas, their morality. On the left, the demand for the priority of ‘politics’ over ‘economics’ (indeed, even the myth that the boundary is usually clear) is quite often a demand for the leadership of the intellectuals. It carries the familiar old-fashioned Christian connotation that the middle classes, having no material interest (apparently), are disinterested and unselfish,, in contrast to what, one prominent Communist intellectual once called the ‘belly socialism’ of the workers; unselfish ideological commitment faces mere greed. At the height of the Cultural Revolution in China, the same emphasis on moral questions, on style of exploitation, emerged:
‘The core of the system of ideas on the exploiting classes is egoism, selfishness, a result of thousands of years of existence of the system of private ownership; such egoism has a deep-rooted effect.’ [7]
Compare the Daily Telegraph:
‘Inflation is a moral as well as an economic crisis ... what we are suffering from, as a nation, is greed.’ [8]
Of course, on the left, the possibility of this crude class prejudice masquerading as Marxism depends on Marxism itself being treated as a doctrine of abstract religious principles, applicable at all times and places regardless of circumstances, depends on Marxism having its historical and materialist teeth removed.
Politically, the doctrine of the sharp separation of politics and economics provides a justification for the idea that the Party, not the working class, is the decisive force in and after the revolution. The intellectuals provide that mysterious and magical ingredient, ‘the correct Marxist-Leninist’ leadership out of their historical treasure chest, not the working class out of its daily experience of class struggle. Bettleheim’s history is essentially history from the view point of the intellectual elite. His account of the rise of the Bolsheviks places overwhelming stress on Lenin’s What is to be Done?, which taken in isolation is a striking manifesto of the intellectual elite. The problem, for Bettleheim, is entirely how to fashion the intellectual elite, not how the Party relates to the working class. Apparently, once the intellectuals have got themselves sorted out, the workers will automatically flock to their banner. The Lenin of 1905 and of 1917 disappears into insignificance. [9] After the revolution, the ‘class struggle’ is entirely fought out at the level of party purges!
A series of intolerable gaps open up between the masses’ perception of their interests and the party’s ‘correct line’, between the working class itself and those who claim to be the ‘proletarian leadership’, between the real proletariat and the ‘proletarian ideology’ presented by the party. Indeed, who the proletariat is changes alarmingly. Bettleheim says the ‘true proletariat’ does not pursue its class interests, but the abolition of all classes. We are back in the world of the Daily Telegraph, where greedy ‘sectional’ interests like those of the workers stand contrasted with the true interests of the nation, represented by the elected government. In China’s case, that old reformist solution to all social ailments, education – whether in schools, in mass campaigns, in guided ‘Cultural Revolutions’, in sending bureaucrats to dig ditches – can curb the unruly masses and their lower rulers, can wean them away from their obstinate adherence to their own interests. A series of other distinctions disappear – between popular participation and popular control, between mass support and mass initiative, between consultation and democracy, between class collaboration and working class independence, between reformism and revolution. All disappears into a populist fog.
 
The NEP: A ‘Gigantic Step Forward’?
Bettleheim is too sophisticated not to refer to the peculiar historical conditions of Russia in the 1920s. But he does not seriously test his argument that social relations could have been transformed in an isolated Russia. For him, the history of China seems to demonstrate that it is always possible. Yet the Soviet Union was very backward, emerging from world war, civil war and famine, its working class decimated and its peasantry impoverished. Fighting the civil war had been an overriding priority, in conditions where there was initially no trained army and precious few weapons. Building the army, restoring production to supply the army, and fighting were decisive for the survival of the regime. How were the old Tsarist specialists to be induced not to emigrate but put their skills at disposal of the regime? How were the old Tsarist military experts to be persuaded to work for the new Government and not run away to fight for the White armies? How were skilled workers to be persuaded to return from the villages and start up the factories again?
These problems could only have been avoided if supplies of industrial and agricultural products were abundant or available from abroad, if Communist experts and skilled workers were available to work at the average wage and without other privileges. It is precisely because the Soviet Union was backward and isolated from the goods and skills available in more advanced countries abroad that the government was compelled, as the condition of its survival, to recreate or tolerate the recreation of a hierarchy of privileges. Even then, a surprising degree of equality was maintained throughout much of the 1920s, in contrast to the deliberate state policy of massively increasing inequality in the first Five Year Plan period and subsequent years. Bettleheim’s history is wrong, as also is his illusion that the Party subordinated all to the needs of production in the 1920s. It did not, it subordinated all to the maintenance of the ‘alliance’ with the peasantry, in contrast to what came later in the first Five Year Plan and after.
Bettleheim, despite a wealth of factual detail, dodges the issue to concentrate on ideological questions, the mysterious lurking enemy of ‘economism’. The history of the post revolutionary years becomes a series of fateful mistaken decisions – for example, the restoration of ranks and privileges in the army (p.98 and p.246). But these are only the symptoms, but the sum of the errors does not explain history (as the reformists would have us believe). Only the structure does that.
From where do the ‘social relations of production’ come? In advanced capitalism, they are imposed and sustained by a dominant class as the condition for retaining its monopoly of the appropriation of the social surplus. But because society is rich, that function is no longer required for the survival of society; on the contrary, capitalist control is a ‘fetter on production’. However, in an isolated backward society, ‘social relations’ are imposed and sustained by material scarcity, by the ruthless division of labour demanded by the tasks of survival in conditions of backwardness. Scarcity impels the creation of a ruling class capable of maintaining the division of labour. Can such a division of labour be avoided in a backward society? Of course, by getting access to the material abundance of advanced societies. Is it politically feasible to get such access without a workers’ revolution in an advanced society? Of course not. The priorities of the victorious workers’ regime in a backward country must be – as Lenin tirelessly reiterated – to break out of its ghetto, to foster workers’ revolution in an advanced country as a condition of its very survival:
‘We have emphasised in many of our works, in all our speeches, and in our entire press, that the situation in Russia is not the same as in the advanced capitalist countries, that we have in Russia a minority of industrial workers and an overwhelming majority of small farmers. The socialist revolution in such a country can be successful only on two conditions: first, on condition that it is given timely support by the socialist revolution in one or more advancecd countries ... second, that there be an agreement between the proletariat which establishes the dictatorship or holds state power in its hands and the majority of the peasant population ...’ [10]
Bettleheim does not accept that the existence of a world economy is decisive, nor that material backwardness imposes any imperatives:
‘What has happened in China demonstrates in effect that “the low stage of development of the productive forces” is not an obstacle to the socialist transformation of social relations and does not have the necessary result, arising from the process of primitive accumulation, of aggravating social inequality, etc.’ (p.40)
Marx, he says, argued that it is the class struggle, not the development of the productive forces, which is the motor of history, a formulation which – in contrasting the two – makes nonsense of Marx. Therefore, everything is in the power of the ‘correct Marxist-Leninist leadership’, regardless of material circumstances. It follows that, if this is true, the materialist conception of history is nonsense.
Bettleheim is compelled to turn everything on its head – the will to change social relations is more powerful than the material reality of which the social relations are the product; consciousness determines social being. Materialism is scrapped (not, of course explicitly) in exchange for a new doctrine of utopian socialism – great minds with access to the great idea (the correct line) is all that is needed.
Lenin is similarly turned on his head. From his last three writings, Bettleheim extracts a national reformist strategy from the New Economic Policy. A cultural revolution, serious propaganda and organising work among the peasantry, and co-operatives, can defeat the logic of backwardness. Organisation and propaganda can make up for scarcity. Yet he omits to notice the strategic aims which these documents assume – the temporary retreat of the workers revolution abroad, and therefore the need to hang on for a longer period than expected in an isolated Soviet Union. Indeed, one of the documents states that the aim is ‘holding on until the socialist revolution is victorious in the more developed countries.’ [11] In the light of the strategic aims and the immediate past (War Communism at home and rising revolutionary movements abroad), then the New Economic Policy was a retreat, embodying concessions to the peasants and small capitalists at home in the same way as concessions were made to foreign capitalist regimes abroad, all to win a temporary breathing space. But Bettleheim cannot admit this because it indicates how Bukharin and Stalin extracted an alternative notion, ‘socialism in one country’, from ‘the temporary exigencies of the New Economic Policy, and thereby scrapped the international perspective. Instead, Bettleheim defies Lenin’s last writing as, albeit with ‘hesitations’ that encouraged misinterpretation, not at all a retreat, but a breakthrough to Mao Tse-tung thought!
‘Unhappily, this gigantic step forward (New Economic Policy) is found presented through the false metaphor of a “retreat”.’ (p.499)
Bettleheim wants to protect Stalin and reject Bukharin but ends up in a position where he cannot but be Bukharinist. Since Bukharin is now being raised in certain circles [12] as the only true prophet of socialist humanism, the only true intellectual, Bettleheim is batting on a fashionable wicket.
 
The New Utopians
‘Revisionism’ was a perversion of Marxism presented by a number of people at the turn of the century, the best known being Edouard Bernstein. Among other things, they argued that Marxism was a science of economic analysis, showing the inevitability of socialist revolution, but not indicating why anyone should do anything about it. It lacked a moral imperative to inspire workers to revolution. Some of the group then formulated just such an imperative, drawn from the great German bourgeois philosopher, Emanuel Kant, which they tried to graft on to Marxism. It was the ideological entry point for moralizing, for voluntarism, for reaffirming the decisive role of those who could understand what on earth it was all about, the intellectuals. Above all, it reestablished philosophical idealism, the conception that ideas, rather than material conditions govern society.
Bettleheim also redefines Marxism to make it idealism. He lifts the term ‘social relations’ and makes it into a mystical concept, detached from material reality. The neo-Kantian ethics pop up in the new disguise of the ‘correct Marxist-Leninist leadership’. This is a counterattack by the Utopian Socialists, defending the role of the wise elite. Their power depends on, among other things, the maintenance of existing national frontiers, defining their patch. They must, as a matter of survival, defend themselves against the cause of international self-emanicipation, breaking those boundaries and their independent power. As opposed to ‘workers of the world unite’, we have ‘popular masses of one country unite under the correct (petty-bourgeois) leadership.’ At the moment of crisis, the national disunity of the rebels safeguards their enemy, imperialism.
However, Bettleheim’s roots are in the Marxist tradition, and, as a result, he cannot escale inconsistency. For example, he attacks the Russian Communist Party for making Marxism an incantatory religion that obscures reality and prevents criticial reflection on the history of the Soviet Union (p.45), without batting an eyelid about exactly the same monstrous cult in China. He asserts that social relations of production exist independently of the wishes of the participants, and yet then continues to argue as if this were not true.
Bettleheim is only partly free from the terrible intellectual heritage of Stalinism. While he has rejected one set of myths – for example, that socialism is identical with the State ownership of the means of production – he has restored another, those of Proudhon, St Simon, Owen and even some of the conservative anarchist thinkers. Some of the reviewers see this. Bettleheim defends, even if he distorts, Lenin. Paul Sweezy, reviewing Bettleheim’s book in the American Journal, Monthly Review [13], has no such sentimentality. For Sweezy, Lenin was guilty of economism, as was quite a lot of Engels’ work and even some of Marx’s. What Sweezy calls ‘economism’ is clearly the materialist conception of history! Consistent with his case, Sweezy makes a personal selection of the ‘proletariat’:
‘only “natural” bearers of values espoused by Marx and Mao (which centre on the imperative to eliminate all real inequalities, though not of course, all individual differences) are proletarians who have no privileges or special interests and on whom, therefore, the responsibility falls to carry on the struggle against all privileges and special interests.’ [14]
The case is deeply pessimistic – the masses cannot emanicipate themselves, only the party can. [15] However, Marxism can provide an explanation without these intellectual acrobatics, but only on condition that the appraisal of the Soviet Union (and China) is as ruthless as the method requires. What happens in Russian and Chinese factories and why?
 
‘Socialism in one Country’
The survival of the USSR as an independent national society demanded industrialisation, demanded that the historic tasks of the bourgeoisie and a capitalist division of labour be accomplished. That process was two-fold – the accumulation of capital, appropriated from the exploitation of workers and peasants; and the socialisation of the labour force, the transfer of labour from low productivity agriculture to high productivity industry.
The state was still capable of contesting for some measure of limited national autonomy against the world centres of capitalism, especially in interwar conditions when the world centres were wracked by crisis. It was only a limited power, but in the conditions of the Soviet Union, it permitted the state to undertake the tasks of the bourgeoisie. The emergence of the state – more markedly in other backward countries in the post second world war period – as the sole available agency for executing the tasks of the bourgeoisie, only threw into sharper relief the essentially parasitic functions of what remained of the private capitalists leeching off the means of production. However, that private capitalist class often remained important in backward countries – that is, the social formations of a past period of the division of labour now come to make more difficult the task of independent national economic development. The world private capitalist class was thus not only a ‘fetter on production’ in the advanced countries; it paralysed the backward dependencies and made the tasks even more difficult. Just as in Russia, there was no possibility of completing the bourgeois revolution in 1917 without overthrowing the private capitalists, in the same way, there was no possibility of industrialising Russia, without overthrowing both Tsarism and the foreign and native private capitalist class.
The Bolsheviks did not come to power to fulfil the tasks demanded by the survival of an independent Russian national society. They saw themselves as taking part in the emancipation of the world working class, not simply its Russian section. That task implied the dissolution, in the long term, of an independent Russian state, its merger in what the Comintern called in its first Manifesto, ‘an international workers’ republic’, not the creation of an independent industrialised state.
There were thus two separate possibilities on the historic ‘order of the day’ – fulfilling the tasks of the national bourgeoisie or of the world proletariat. The Communist Party of the 1920s was not an instrument for the first set of tasks. It required radical transformation, including a massive purge of its old cadres and leadership, in order to eliminate the preoccupation with the second set of tasks, as well as beat back the inertia of a backward society, continuously seeping into the party. The period of Bukharin’s leadership in the party is one of indecision, bouncing between what was required to survive in a backward Russia and what was demanded to break out of Russia. The critical conjunctures of the early twenties stress one (the scissors crisis, the need to expand industry, the threat of war) or the other (the situation in Germany, Bulgaria, Italy, Britain, China etc.).
The key decision came when one section of the Party leadership agreed – or was forced empirically – to undertake the historic tasks of the bourgeoisie. They set themselves to transform Russia as an independent national power and to transform themselves in order to carry out that task. Could they have ‘advanced to socialism’ while executing the tasks of the bourgeoisie? Such an idea is clearly absurd: the accumulation of capital in conditions of national backwardness imposes a division of labour independently of the wishes of the participants, the more so, the more urgent the need to accumulate, to ‘catch up’ with the power of those foreign states threatening the survival of the Soviet Union.
In the 1960s, the world centres of capitalism have grown vastly beyond what they were in the 1920s. To enter the system on terms of equality with the existing dominant powers now requires a much greater accumulation of capital than the Soviet Union needed. Yet China is much more backward than the Soviet Union in the 1920s, so poor it cannot even successfully undertake the Stalinist process of capital accumulation. Indeed, the limited role of State capitalism in breaking through now seems to be exhausted after a much shorter life than that of private capitalism. The political foundations of the world system – the national State – bounce against the world economic division of labour and are now one of Marx’s classical ‘fetters upon production’.
Where does all this place Bettleheim’s ‘social relations’? In the ideology of defending the ruling class of a backward part of the world economy by making a virtue of the conditions of austerity imposed by the survival of a backward China. It is a reactionary position, particularly now, when the struggle of workers around the globe is once more shaking the corrupt local representatives of the ‘international bourgeoisie’.
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (Mao and the Chinese Revolution)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

Mao and the Chinese Revolution

‘As our opinions of an individual are not based on what he thinks of himself so can we not judge of such a period of transformation (social revolution) by its own consciousness; on the contrary, this consciousness must be explained rather from the contradictions of material life, from the existing conflict between the social forces of production and the relations of production’
(Marx, Critique of Political Economy, Selected Works 1, London n.d., p.356).
MAO is dead. The twentieth century loses possibly the greatest nationalist revolutionary of the century, and one of the greatest of all times. The peculiarities of the history of his times enabled Mao to play such an extraordinary role. What were the historic forces which enabled him to be effective?
 
The State and capitalism
In the twentieth century, capitalism has a number of new characteristics – the scale and concentration of production and ownership (’Monopoly Capitalism’), the merger of business and the State, and the intense domination of the whole globe by the rivalries of a small group of industrially advanced countries. The private owners of capital – numbering in Britain, hundreds of thousands in the nineteenth century – have dwindled as the power of the system has grown. They can no longer in any serious sense be, as they once were, a popular class, with deep roots in the mass of the population. Even for those that survived as owners, State ownership, control and planning became decisive for their survival. Every crisis or war served only to increase the role of the State in order to safeguard the national ruling class against internal and external attack.
Segments of private business promoted the changes in order to secure their own survival (other segments fought bitterly against it, of course, since success in the endeavour would eliminate them). The more backward a country, the more vulnerable it is under the hammer blows of slump, and the more sections of its ruling class were impelled to adopt measures of statification. It was primarily a defensive reaction, an attempt to secure a scale of capital and unity of direction capable of competing with the enormous concentrations of capital that dominate the world market, capable of substaining the national independence of a particular ruling class.
 
The Bourgeois Revolution
If the institutional form of a stable national capitalism requires today complete or partial control or ownership of the means of production by the State, what does this make of the concept of the ‘bourgeois revolution’? There, the capitalists, rising out of a pre-capitalist society, led the urban classes to seize the State, while the mass of peasants seized the lands of the aristocracy, so destroying the social basis of the old State, all in the name of the freedom of the majority. Once accomplished, capitalism could freely develop, transforming the whole country on the basis of a much more systematic and increasing exploitation of labour. In pre-capitalist countries of the twentieth century, however, industrial production was largely in the hands of foreigners and of their dependents, essentially parasitic interests. Already, at the turn of the century, European Marxists had noted that
‘The farther east one goes (i.e., the more backward the country), the weaker, meaner and more cowardly in the political sense becomes the bourgeoisie.’ [1]
The ‘moral’ failing was the result of the changed position of capital, now threatened from abroad by much more powerful concentrations of capital, and at home, by a numerically much more powerful working class, infected with radical ideas. Even if, by chance, private business did inherit power, it was no longer capable, by reason of the structure of world capitalism, of building an independent capitalist economy, of transforming the whole society.
The ‘bourgeois revolution’ in its classical form stopped. Its highest ‘achievement’ in the twentieth century was the Weimar Republic of Germany, tumbling helplessly into Nazism. In more backward countries, there was not even that interlude. Only bayonets could protect the social order, and State enterprise the economic. In Italy, Poland, Rumania, fascism was the only method of survival for the ruling class in conditions of interwar slump. In China, in practice if not name, it was the same order under Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang; in the economic order, the largest part of the fixed assets of industry and transport were in the hands of the State.
However, the problems for which the bourgeois revolution was a solution – the contradiction between the relations of precapitalist production and the means of production, as well as the general social misery of pre-capitalist society – not only continued, they were vastly intensified under the impact of increasing domination by the advanced industrial powers. In the same way, the problem of national independence, essentially the struggle of a subordinated bourgeoisie to secure its freedom, grew more extreme.
The bourgeois revolution always had an international aspect, intimately interwoven with the struggle for national independence. As a result, there were many examples of national independence being won before the material basis, capitalism, had arrived. The American war of independence contributed directly to the French revolution of 1789, which in turn sparked off national independence movements throughout the whole of Latin American which, assisted by British imperialism, destroyed the Spanish Empire. But US capitalism did not secure unchallenged domination of the United States until after the American Civil War, one hundred years later. Mexico experienced a terrible bloodletting in the war of independence against Spain (1810-30), but did not, in victory, secure a stable bourgeois order; political upheavals continued through the century, culminating in the great peasant revolution of 1910-1920, but again ending in stalemate. Not until after the second World War, under the impact of world economic expansion, did the Mexican bourgeoisie create the material basis for what they had undertaken in 1810.
 
‘Socialist’ nationalism
If the employers would not undertake to destroy the old State, others did. There were a host of them in the backward countries of Europe (Garibaldi in Italy and Kossuth in Hungary, for example) and in Latin America. In Asia, in the twentieth century, there were others – for example, Sun Yat-sen, founder of the Kuomintang in China, or Ghandi and Nehru in India. They were in general from the social group Marx called in Germany, ‘the democratic petit bourgeoisie’. [2] In our times, however, they are more narrowly identified as coming from the urban intelligenstia (even where some of them had a prior rural origin). Such a group, not rooted in the private ownership of the means of production, were much more adept at transmitting the changed needs of twentieth century capitalism – State control, ownership and direction.
In the twentieth century, all the national revolutionaries have been in name ‘socialist’. Any movement for national independence must be cemented with demands for social reform, and must secure State direction and planning, the precondition for even attempting to survive against the great capitalist concentrations of the imperialist powers. Only ‘socialist’ rhetoric was capable of linking the social aspirations of the mass of the population (in place of 1789, when ‘freedom’ played that role) with the new form of capitalism. Many of the national leaders, reacting pragmatically, produced only impure forms, however: the ‘mixed economy’, State planning with a public sector but also private business and foreign capital (for example, see the cloudy ramblings of Sun Yat-sen’s Three People’s Principles or Nehru’s ‘socialism’). Many of them also lacked the organisational forms capable of carrying them to power – the mass centralised party (which had not been required in 1789 or the nineteenth century). Those contributions came from a different source.
 
The Bolsheviks
The Marxists were engaged in a quite different undertaking – not the creation of a substitute national bourgeoisie in a backward country, whether fashioned out of private businessmen or the functionaries of the State, but the destruction of the bourgeoisie in advanced capitalism and the creation of an international planned economy, founded upon the self-emanicipation of the majority, the working class. However, in Tsarist Russia, the two revolutions overlapped. By European standards, Russia was backward, its working class small, and its private industry dominated by foreign interests.
The first step was clearly the bourgeois revolution, but Russia’s few private employers were far too weak to undertake the seizure of the Tsarist state. According to the Bolsheviks, the only class which could undertake it, in conjunction with the peasant seizure of the land, was the working class. Once the workers had seized power, however, they would be defeated by a new alliance of private property owners, the new landowning peasantry and the petty private businessmen (Kulaks and nepmen). The only defence against such an occurrence was the possibility that the destruction of the Tsarist State would merge with the international socialist revolution in the advanced countries of Western Europe. Then, the victorious working classes of advanced capitalism would bring the material means to assist their beleagured Russian brothers and sisters, to placate the peasantry and secure the survival of the workers’ State.
The Bolsheviks were not concerned with the ‘national liberation’ of Russia. On the contrary, it was explicit that an independent Russian State would be dissolved in an ‘international Soviet Republic’ (Communist International, 2nd Congress) The growing contradiction between the political structure of the world, the national State, and its economic structure, a world capitalist economy, would be resolved through an international society.
 
Stalinism
The perspective failed. There was no German revolution. On the contrary, there were massive defeats for the west European working classes. A new leadership in the Soviet Communist Party switched the points of history, from the aspirations of an international working class revolution in 1917 to the national ambitions of 1789, executing the historic tasks of a Russian State-based substance bourgeoisie: accumulation and the transformation of Russian society to fit the imperatives of the survival of national power in the twentieth century. In the plans of the thirties, they had apparently remarkable success in this endeavour. A ‘new civilisation’ was born, founded on a more systematic exploitation of labour than was possible in the old capitalisms of the West.
In doing this, the Russian leadership also transformed the political alternatives available. The most advanced sections of the working class of the industrialised countries were now tied for more than a generation to the perspectives of creating a new State-based industry in Russia. In the backward countries, a new perspective for power was born, through a mass organised party, borrowing upon the collective disciplines of the working class, and, after the seizure of power, introducing the purest forms of accumulation – State capitalism. ‘Socialism’ became, not a method of collective self-emancipation, but a ‘model of economic development’.
 
China
The ultimate argument against Stalin’s transformation of the perspectives of the Communist International was a working class revolution that broke free of his Russian national preoccupations. Few countries had such an experience, partly because often the leadership of the workers’ movement was tied either to the interests of the rulers of the Soviet Union or to those of the advanced capitalist countries. But the Chinese working class, in the mid-1920s, exploded with elemental force. The contradiction between the interests of the Russian ruling class and the Chinese proletariat wrecked the Chinese Communist Party, tore it entirely loose from its shallow moorings in the traditions of October 1917.
 
Mao
Mao’s strength was to create, slowly and patiently and in the face of apparently overwhelming obstacles, a quite different force. Not only was it not rooted in the Chinese working class, there was no need for it to be; indeed, it would have made its operations much more difficult if it had had to carry a working class base. Nor, contrary to what is often claimed, was it rooted in the Chinese peasantry, although a majority of its members were ex-peasants. It was not dedicated to creating an international workers’ republic, but to attaining national power in China, with whatever social forces would assist in that undertaking. The forces of the old bourgeois revolution in China were so weak that they could create no more than a corrupt dictatorship under Chiang Kai-shek, but even then, the whole territory of China could not be unified under it, nor could the Kuomintang make any effective resistance to the Japanese invasion in the 1930s. In such circumstances, Mao’s ‘communist’ party became the only Nationalist alternative.
Stalin and his supporters betrayed the perspectives of October 1917; they turned the clock back. Mao did not, for he did not set out to achieve 1917; but the betrayal of 1917 was the precondition for Mao’s career. Stalin pushed the aspirations of the Soviet Union in the 1920s backwards into the imperatives of primitive accumulation, dressed in the rhetoric of ‘socialism in one country’. But Mao went forward towards primitive accumulation, a great step forward for backward China. Out of the catastrophe of 1926-27, Mao created a military force capable of survival against overwhelming odds. In the face of all the predictions to the contrary, he then conquered power. He could not have done so in circumstances any less extreme than those of China in the late 1920s and 1930s, the era of warlords, weak central government, social collapse, and finally overwhelming foreign invasion. But to say that is not to detract from the remarkable capacities of tenacity, courage and persistence required to survive and grow in that period. But this had nothing to do with the international proletarian revolution, although it was the language of that tradition Mao was obliged to use. He could never acknowledge his own real originality in his writings, since it contradicted the tradition.
For a mass working class organisation, the programme of the party is a decisive question. For it is meant to summarise class interests as they are perceived by the advanced elements of the class. But this is not so in all revolutions.
It was the audacity and persistence of Mao and his party, his incorruptibility and devotion to all Chinese which inspired the young nationalists of China, just as earlier such characteristics had inspired the followers of Bolivar and Garibaldi. In 1789, it was the same for the sans-culottes – ‘it was this impression of “caring”, far more than any political specific, which counted.’ [3] Like Robespierre before him, Mao seemed to have dragged down the gods from their pedestals. He cleansed China of that peculiarly vicious form of barbarism, Asiatic despotism, rotted but simultaneously glued in place by Western imperialism and its satraps.
In Korea, his armies, still breathless from the rigours of a vast and testing civil war, operating from a war ravaged country, blocked the might of the most powerful military State in the world, the United States, leaders of the old bourgeoisie. Only ten years later, Mao acquired the highest status symbol of national power in the modern age, nuclear weapons. With audacity, he openly opposed the oldest State of the substitute bourgeoisie, the Soviet Union, much as the young Prussia of 1871 flexed its muscles over ageing France. And ten years later, with manifest delight, he received the highest accolade of the old bourgeoisie, a State visit from the President of the United States.
National power was not the only theme, but the most important one, and certainly so for Mao himself. The Chinese revolution is part of the old age of the long epoch of the bourgeois revolution. But it has thrown up some of the same themes originally raised during the youth of the epoch, the French revolution of 1789. There, the revolutionaries also proclaimed Equality and Fraternity – but also Liberty. Saint-Just and the radicals declared:
‘The poor are masters of the earth; they have the right to speak with authority to government who ignore their interests.’ [4]
Again
‘Robespierre had no detailed or specific programme at this time. His economic ideas were unformed. He gave expression to the feelings that patriots most widely shared, glorifying the people, calling for vengeance upon aristocrats and traitors, urging the government bodies be purified, branding as counterrevolutionary both middle class moderates and proletarian malcontents. [5]
Even the abolition of the marks of military ranks, proudly proclaimed in China in 1965, had its French forebear:
‘let commanders, officers and soldiers receive the same pay and eat the same bread, so that differences in ranks do not become the subject of a vain parade, but serve a useful purpose.’ [6]
Then, as in China today, morality rather than science was all. The morality is aimed, in Marx’s words on the utopian socialists, at inculcating ‘universal asceticism and social levelling in its crudest form’ [7], an ‘ascetic communism, scorning all enjoyments of life and liked to Spartan conceptions’. [8] Its nearest reality in the eighteenth century were those Puritan businessmen who lived in a terror of any raid upon their accumulation from those with no better claim than hunger. In a backward society with controlled equality, rather than competing businessmen,then the picture is rather more what Marx described in Fourier as ‘industrial feudalism’.
Thus in history, the material forces of production transform the proclaimed ethics, transform the struggle for emancipation into the rationalisation of more systematic exploitation. Ironically, those ethics are still strong enough in the old bourgeoisie to excite their universal admiration of People’s China. But they are not strong enough to change the material basis of China with any rapidity.
The sequence by which the achievements of the Chinese revolution were accomplished are complex. Here are a series of notes on some of the important episodes that fashioned Mao Tse-tung and his role in China.
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (Other Thoughts of Mao)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

Other Thoughts of Mao

‘Next there is the implementation of a ten hour day and progressive piece wage systems using wages to increase production and raise labour consciousness... the egalitarian supply wage system obliterates the distinctions between skilled and unskilled labour, and between industriousnessand indolence – thereby lowering worker activism; we must replace the supply system with a progressive piece rate system to stimulate worker activism and increase the quantity and quality of output’
Economic and Financial Problems, 1942, Ching wen t’i yu ts’ai cheng we t’i, as originally published, New Democracy, Hong Kong 1949, p.115 (cited by Howe, Wage Patterns and Wage Policy in Modern China 1919-1972, London 1973, p.59)
‘Revolution is the emancipation of productive forces; it promotes the development of productive forces.’
(Liberation Army Daily, 3 Aug. 1967, and People’s Daily, 3 Aug. 1967)
‘Those who have no practical knowledge are pseudo-red, empty headed politicoes.’
(Feb. 1958, in Mao Papers, pp.64-65)
‘Sometimes this isn’t so (that the masses are understanding and reasonable). Once the masses are aroused, they become blind, and we have our own blindness too. In the past during the Wuhan epoch, the masses mobilized factory strikes against reduction of wages, there was unemployment and blindness.’
(20 Dec. 1964, Forum on Central Committee Work, Miscellany, ii, p.417)
‘Our experience is that if cadres do not discard their haughty airs and identify themselves with workers, the workers will frequently look upon the factory not as their own, but as the cadres’. The lordly behaviour of the cadres makes workers unwilling to consciously observe and implement labour discipline.’
(1961-62, comment on Soviet experience. Miscellany II, p.283).
‘When China really wins her independence, then legitimate trading interests will enjoy more opportunity than ever before. The powers of production and consumption of 450 million people is not a matter that can remain the exclusive interest of China.’
(to Edgar Snow, Red Star over China, London 1973, p.96)
‘We welcome foreign investments if such are beneficial to China’s economy and are made in observance of China’s laws... We shall be able to absorb vast amounts of foreign investment.’
(On coalition government, 1945, as originally published, in A Documentary History, op. cit., p.312).
‘There has been an erroneous emphasis on “doing everything as the masses want it done”, and an “accommodation to wrong views existing among the masses”, of “one-sidedly propagating a poor peasant-farm labourer line” ... that the democratic government should be a government of the peasants only, or that the democratic government should listen only to the workers, poor peasants and farm labourers, while no mention at all was made of the middle peasants, the independent craftsmen, the national bourgeoisie and the intellectuals.’
(Feb. 1948, Selected Works IV, p.197).
‘We should get rid of the enemy. Rigid bureaucrats should be reformed into creative bureaucrats. If after a long time they can’t become creative, then we should get rid of them.’
(9th Plenum/8th Central Committee, Jan. 1961, in Miscellany II, p.240)
‘The method of simply rejecting everything and negating everything, of directing the struggle against cadres who shoulder most of the responsibilities and do most of the work of against the ‘heads’ (of departments) must be abandoned.’
(Jun.1967, in Mao Papers, p.141)
‘In my opinion, he (a recent graduate) may not be qualified to be a departmental head. A departmental head must have some scholarship! Since you haven’t yet completed your academic work, or have only just graduated, you have no teaching experience, no experience of administering a department.’
(Feb. 1967, Miscellany II, p. 452)
‘We must believe that more than ninety per cent of our cadres are good or comparatively good.’
(13 May 1966, Mao Papers, p.154)
‘I am the black hand that suppressed the Red Guards.’
(July 1968, Miscellany II, p.480)
‘Nor can we put all the blame on Comrade Shao-ch’i and Comrade Hsiao-p’ing. They have some responsibility, but so has the Centre. The Centre has not run things properly.’
(Liu Shao-ch’i, President of the Republic and Mao’s chosen ‘heir’, 1945-1966; and Teng Hsiao-p’ing, General Secretary of the Party up to 1966; the two leading ‘capitalist roaders’ attacked in the Cultural Revolution and removed from office; from Mao Unrehearsed, p.274)
Workers should ‘firmly stick to their production posts, firmly uphold the system of eight hours work, and make revolution only in the spare time outside their working hours.’
(New China News Agency, Peking, Feb. 10 1968, Survey of Mainland China 4119, Hong Kong, Feb. 15, 1968, p.10)
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (Sources of Mao's Statements)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

Sources of Mao’s Statements
Cited in Text

1. Statements before 1949
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Volume 1, Peking 1965 (official translation of the 2nd official Chinese edition, Peking April 1960) (reference in the text), Selected Works 1).
Mao Tse-tung, Selected Works, 1926-36, Vol.I (official translation from the Chinese edition, Peking 1951), New York 1954 (reference in the text, Selected Works I, New York 1954).
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vols.II and III, Peking 1956 (official translation of the 2nd Chinese edition, Peking 1960).
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol IV, Peking, 1961 (official translation of the 1st Chinese edition, Peking 1960).
Sources of citations from individual writings of Mao earlier than these editions are cited in the text.
Mao’s China: Party Reform Documents, 1942-44, translated by Boyd Compton, London 1952.
Mao Tse-tung, China: The March Towards Unity, documents, CUPSA, New York 1937.
 
2. Speeches, writings and quotations
after 1949, from:
a) official published sources (e.g., individual publications: Mao Tse-tung on Art and Literature, Peking 1960; Four Essays on Philosophy, Peking 1968; Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung, Peking 1966 etc.)
b) Internal Party publications as compiled in various sources, but particularly:
Mao Tse-tung ssu-hsiang wan sui (Long Live Mao Tse-tung Thought), 1967/1969 as translated in:
Miscellany of Mao Tse-tung Thought, 1949-1968, Vols.I and II, Joint Publications Research Service (mimeo), Arlington Virginia n.d. (reference in the text, Miscellany)
Mao Tse-tung Unrehearsed, Talks and Letters, 1965-1971, edited by Stuart Schram, London, 1974 (reference in the text, Mao Unrehearsed)
Mao Papers, Anthology and Bibliography, translated and edited by Jerome Ch’en, London 1970 (reference in the text, Mao Papers)
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (The Making of Mao)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

The Making of Mao

UP TO 1927, Mao was an important member of the second rank of the leadership of the Party. In various positions, he worked in party and trade union work in Hunan, in the party centre, as one of the Communists in the apparatus of the nationalist party, the Kuomintang, and as a peasant organiser. However, in none of these fields did he display a distinctive set of characteristics or politics which would have marked him out for his future role.
The same is true in 1927. On the one hand, Mao claims he presented radical proposals on the peasant question to the Sth Party Congress (April 1927) which were suppressed; on the other, the Comintern delegate and special representative of Stalin, M.N. Roy, describes Mao as on ‘the extreme right-wing of the Party’. [1] There is no trace or confirmation of Mao’s proposals. However, after the 5th Congress he did become Chairman of the National Peasant Federation. In this capacity, he was required to implement Kuomintang-Communist policy which was solidly for ‘eliminating anarchistic conditions prevailing in the villages’. [2] What this meant was protecting the land of Kuomintang officers and their relatives from seizure by the peasants. Mao’s radicalism, if it existed, could not therefore have been greater than his loyalty.
The record of this period has, of course, been heavily doctored, and Mao’s writings extensively revised much later. Mao claims to have written a great deal and, as editor of the Kuomintang journal, Political Weekly, on a regular basis. [3] Yet only two pieces from the Political Weekly have survived. They do not differ seriously or systematically from the official Comintern position. Some people have seen a quite new political alternative, proposing a peasant revolution, in Mao’s famous Report on an investigation of the peasant movement in Hunan. [4] The head of the Comintern, Bukharin, publicly praised the work as ‘an excellent and interesting document’ and it was translated and reprinted in Russian and English, a fate inconceivable for a document less than orthodox by Comintern standards of that time. [5]
It is from the 1 August Emergency Conference of 1927 that Mao begins to play a different role. He himself never framed a political alternative to the leadership of the Party and the Comintern. But the sum of his actions, after the events of the ensuing years, did constitute something different (of course, at the same time, the Comintern’s policies were changing).
At that Conference, the Comintern swung the Party into a premature exercise of what became known in the following year as the Third Period’. Officially, the view was proclaimed that the events of 1927 were not a defeat at all. On the contrary, the movement for revolution was rising, and, as a result, the Communists no longer needed to ally with the Kuomintang. Revolution was now an immediate perspective – the Party must move straight to insurrection and the seizure of power. In fact, it seemed that the Communist International, completely misconstruing what had happened, calculated that a few Communist bases would be an effective bargaining basis for the re-establishment of the alliance with the Left Kuomintang.
But the movement was reeling from a massive defeat, from discovering that those supposed champions of the revolution, Chiang Kai-shek and the so-called Left Kuomintang, were both opposed to a popular movement. Recovery would have been possible, for the base of the Party was intact. But to recover required retreat, repair, rehabilitation. Instead, the Party was thrown into contesting military power with the victors. In effect, the Party was ordered to destroy itself in futile waves of attack, and demoralise its worker and peasant members even further. The leadership of the Party could only be defeated in such an enterprise; at which point, it would be removed by the intervention of Moscow, and a second line of sacrificial victims promoted for self-destruction.
Insurrection, in isolation from a real mass movement, imposed a quite different discipline on those involved. The work of developing strong roots in the working class (or the peasantry), the programme of the class interests of the exploited, was necessarily pushed into the background. The cadres, as a matter of sheer survival, were compelled to concentrate on mobilising and holding together military forces at virtually any cost. There was no point in working in peasant associations or trade unions when an armed uprising was scheduled for the following week. Indeed, this was the conclusion rightly but unofficially drawn by the chief of the second group of leaders promoted by Moscow when the first failed (Li Li-san). Warfare was not a mode of struggle open to workers or peasants except by abandoning their role as workers and peasants, except by joining that rootless stratum which made up the guerrillas. Mao was quite straightforward in acknowledging this rootlessness: ‘When we started to fight battles, we depended on vagrants because they dared to die. There was a time when the army wanted to weed out the vagrant elements, but I opposed it.’ [6] It was obviously a sensible thing to do if the survival of the partisans was at issue, even if it in no way squared with the party’s claim to be ‘of the working class’.
In August 1927, Mao was entrusted with Politbureau authority to direct military operations in what was considered one of the most important provinces of China for peasant revolt, Hunan. This was part of the ‘Autumn Harvest Risings’ to take part in four provinces. Mao was apparently highly excited by the opportunity and full of optimism: ‘While objectively China had long ago already grown to the 1917 level’, he wrote to the Party Centre, ‘we had previously believed that we were at the 1905 level. This was a very serious error.’ [7] At the time he was not criticised, but when the attacks failed, it was used as part of the indictment. [8]
The Party leadership, aware of Moscow’s watching eye and its urgent need for victories to confound the accusations of the opposition, covered itself from the beginning. There must be, as well as insurrection, mass mobilisation of the peasantry. In vain, did the thinly scattered cadres report peasant indifference, the fears of reprisal among urban workers if they listened to the hysteria of the Communists. The Party leadership had been instructed that they were in the midst of revolution, so that all glimmerings of reality were no more evidence of a lack of revolutionary fervour. Mao was himself reproved, and replied with some asperity: ‘Your policy is a contradictory one; you desire us not to be concerned with military matters, but at the same time, want a mass armed force.’ [9] It was the target – the seizure of key cities – which determined politics and tactics, not the leadership’s terror of Comintern reproof.
The main attack in Hunan failed. Mao was arrested before hostilities began and was held in custody throughout the attack. [10] But he managed to escape in time to catch up the fleeing forces. At the November Plenum of the Central Committee, Mao was selected for special reprimand to protect the central leadership from responsibility for the defeats. He was guilty of ‘military opportunism’, an ‘over-reliance’ on military forces rather than mobilising a mass peasant movement. [11]
The following year, armed with these reprimands, Chu Chiu-p’ai, now the main leader of the Party, repaired to a Party Congress specially summoned in Moscow. He was eloquent in blaming his leading cadres (it did not save him; he was removed):
‘China’s “revolutionary generals” ... imagined the proletarian armed struggle to be a military coup d’etat. Protection of the masses class struggle might be possible after the coup d’etat, but the masses must await the coup.’ [12]
Chu’s scorn was misapplied. The Comintern strategy led to exactly that conclusion. No mass movement could be built while waging serious insurrection; it was either built before or not at all. Any sensible cadre would try to make sure of the insurrection first, and rationalise this, by saying the mass movement could be created afterwards. A year earlier, the then leading figure in the party, Chen Tu-hsiu, had reached an identical conclusion as he tried simultaneously to build a mass movement of the exploited while holding hard to an alliance with the party of the exploiters, the Kuomintang – ‘Only after the expansion of revolutionary forces throughout the entire nation will it ultimately be possible to establish the power of workers and peasants in Shanghai’. Perhaps, he meditated, the Party ought to retreat to a remote area and build a base, free of warlords and Kuomintang. It seemed the mass base was dispensible, and protecting the cadres all; the Kuomintang’s Northern Expedition had pressed its military image into the Communist Party – first conquer the State, then emancipate the people, not emancipate the people in order to conquer the State. Two years later, Mao was beginning to draw the same conclusion:
‘Only after wiping out comparatively large enemy units and occupying the cities can we arouse on a large-scale and build up a unified political power over a number of adjoining counties. Only thus can we arouse the attention of the people far and wide.’ [13]
It followed that the function of the cities, of the working class, was not to wage class struggle against their employers but supply the partisans with men and material; the vanguard became the rearguard.
Mao and his forces retreated to the Chingkang Mountains, where they were subsequently joined by other partisan groups and two bandit leaders, Wang Tso and Yuan Wen-t’sai. All the insurrections were defeated. The last, in Canton in December 1927, was a major disaster. But the experience, for those who survived, trained them in warfare and self-reliance. Their subsequent experience, living off the mountains, was a further training in survival in a peculiarly obdurate environment, quite independent of the class struggle, urban or rural.
 
The Partisans and the Peasants
If insurrection imposed its own discipline upon those who undertook it, even more so did permanent bands of partisans, operating in the most backward areas. The central problem was not the social origin of the fighters, nor their politics, but material survival. The peasants were naturally suspicious of what must have seemed to them yet another bandit gang, despite their wild talk; when the partisans moved on, as sooner or later they were compelled to do, peasants who had trusted them and stayed behind, were completely exposed to landlord and warlord reprisals. It is not surprising that Mao found that ‘Wherever the Red Army goes, it finds the masses cold and reserved; only after propaganda and agitation do they rouse themselves.’ [14] It was very different to the impression Mao’s report on Hunan gave.
It was, of course, necessary to maintain a proper image for the Central Committee in Shanghai, but serious political work was severely limited by the need for mobility and survival. The partisans set up peasant committees, but they disappeared when the fighters moved on. Imposed land reforms disintegrated on evacuation. When the partisans could settle down, as they did in the Kiangsi Republic, more was possible, but even then it was very circumscribed. The partisans depended on the peasants growing a surplus to feed them, and that surplus almost invariably came from the rich peasants and landlords. Redistributing the land tended to eliminate the surplus. Furthermore, expropriation incited the sons of the landlords and rich peasants themselves to undertake reprisals, to fire the houses of known Communist sympathisers, and even copy the Communists and become guerrillas, in league with the warlords and bandits. [15]
The leadership became increasingly cautious in practice. The letter of the agrarian reforms sounded radical enough for the Party leadership, but the fine print gave wide discretion to the cadres. As a result, the social structure of the Kiangsi Republic was not radically altered. Even sometime after land reform, Mao could complain that rich peasants dominated the central Soviet area. [16] Concessions to the dominant classes always entail the sacrifice of the interests of the exploited. In this case, it was the landless peasants.
‘We feared the counterrevolutionary turn of the rich peasants and consequently asked the agricultural labourers to lower their demands.’ [17] The experience was salutary, and ever afterwards Mao condemned the official land policies of expropriation of this period as a great mistake, as ultra-left. [18]
Even without land redistribution, the problems of survival were severe enough. The soldiers needed foodstuffs and labour power, and they took the sons of peasant households into the army. Some might cultivate themselves if land was available and military duties permitted, but ultimately the peasants had to support them. Military insecurity and, finally, the Kuomintang economic blockade closed off the markets outside the Republic for what the peasants had to sell, and so stopped up the income with which to import goods – salt and cloth, in particular, became very severe problems for the troops. [19]
 
The Partisans and Party Policy
The problems of material survival, so decisive for the partisans, were of little meaning forthe tiny Shanghai sect that called itself the leadership. There, policies could be formulated in the most extreme terms since it cost nothing. Officially, landlords and rich peasants were abolished; ‘Soviets’, elected by the teeming working classes of the Kiangsi mountains, were a model of a socialist commonwealth; or, at least, the Party leadership saw no need to point out the reality to its overlords of the Comintern.
In his formal statements, Mao perpetuated the myths for the same reasons. To have acknowledged reality, apart from reducing the splendour of the Party’s achievements, would also have been the occasion for a denunciation in Moscow, and, along with hosts of other national leaders, expulsion (had he been on Russian territory, he would have been sentenced to a labour camp). He therefore loyally transmitted the official line:
‘the foundations should be laid for the proletarian struggle in Shanghai, Wusih, Nirigpo, Hangchow, Fuchow and Amoy ... workers’ bases must be vigorously established at Nanch’ang, Kiukiang, Sian and on the Nanch’ang-Kiukiang railway.’ [20]
or
‘Building a proletarian foundation for the Party and setting up Party branches in industrial enterprises in key districts are the important organisational tasks of the Party at present.’ [21]
Only years later, in Yenan, did Mao feel strong enough to confess that, after the Autumn Harvest debacle, ‘from the point of view of the cities, the movement appeared lost’. [22]
Mao appears solidly orthodox. He was even, apparently, enthusiastic about the second wave of insurrection under Li Li-san (Changsha, July 1930) [23], although he refused to act on some instructions, as when the Central Committee told him to break up the Red Army into guerrilla bands and return to Shanghai. [24] He waged no opposition to the insane policies of the Comintern aftd the Party leadership in the terrible years of attrition, 1927-34, when what was left of the urban and peasant base was wantonly destroyed by the policies of the Third Period’. Mao’s disagreements were apparently restricted to tactical questions that affected his military base, as when he was removed from office in the Kiangsi Republic in 1933-34 over how the Republic should be defended against Kuomintang encirclement.
Mao’s politics had become, in practice, completely pragmatic, governed solely by the necessity to preserve the military base. He had at no stage ‘chosen’ the peasantry as a revolutionary class, in some kind of contrast to the Comintern’s’adherence to the working class’. Both the Comintern and the CCP leadership regarded the peasantry as the main force in China’s bourgeois revolution. What he had chosen was guerrilla warfare, building a partisan base in a rural area from whatever manpower was available, and in so doing, he had shaped his politics by a quite different discipline. The difference between his pragmatic responses and the official line was covered by silence or hypocrisy.
The experiences in Chingkangshan and in the Kiangsi Republic were harsh and testing. But they paled in significance beside the staggering rigours of the Long March which followed the defeat and liquidation of the Kiangsi Republic by the Kuomintang. Quite justly, the feat is celebrated as an impressive testimony to the sheer tenacity of the Communist leadership. There were enormous losses – up to four fifths of the original forces disappeared through desertion, sickness and death. At the Tsonyi special conference, during the Long March, at long last he became simulaneously head of the Party and the army.
The Long March and the creation of a new base in the exceedingly backward area of north-east Shensi were indeed triumphs in the face of massive defeat, but they were triumphs of the will, not of the class struggle. That will was not unlimited. Remarkable though the capacity of the Party was to survive, there is no reason to doubt that the vastly superior forces of the Kuomintang, no matter how corrupt and inefficient, would have encircled and destroyed the Yenan base too, sooner or later. But there had been a decisive change in the national political scene – the Japanese invasion. So far as the Kuomintang was concerned, this tied down forces (even if they did not fight), pushed the capital far to the South West, overturned the unstable political balance in the national government, and vastly accelerated the forces of decay and demoralisation which ultimately produced its collapse.
But for the Communist Party, it was a heaven-sent opportunity to present itself as the only serious, honest nationalist alternative, the only force prepared to fight consistently. Now, at last, the abandonment of the interests of the exploited except in their shallowest form had a national political rationale – the threat to the “nation’ which took priority over all other issues. Patriotism was not now ‘love of the ruling class’ and the mark of Right-wing politics; it was ‘simply an application of internationalism in the war of national liberation’. [25] The class struggle had been pushed into the background by the pragmatic imperatives of insurrection in 1927 and after. Now it had, for the wider middle class public, a worthy justification – and not simply local in significance; not merely socialism or even China was threatened, but all the ‘democratic anti-imperialist powers’, that is, the major imperialist powers other than Japan and Germany. [26]
Stalin, with characteristic unscrupulousness, was for the Chinese Communists re-merging with the Kuomintang, so that thereby the Soviet eastern borders would be more effectively secured against Japanese depredations. But this time, in contrast to the period before 1927, Mao kept his forces entirely independent. He made many verbal concessions, tactical feints, and indeed, conceded the scrapping of the land programme:
‘We have already accepted a decision not to confiscate the land of the rich peasants, and if they come to us to fight against Japan, not to refuse to unite with them. We are not confiscating the property and factories of the big and small merchants and capitalists. We protect their enterprises and help them to expand so that the material supply in the Soviet districts, so necessary for the anti-Japanese campaign, may be augmented.’ [27]
It was but a step to the inclusion in the new United Front of ‘patriotic landlords’ and ‘enlightened gentry’ [28], and, what followed, ‘curbing the excesses’ of the exploited:
‘In the matter of raising wages and improving living conditions of the workers in the rural areas, we must especially not make excessive demands on their behalf, or the peasants will protest, the workers will lose their jobs and production will decline.’ [29]
But on one thing Mao conceded nothing. The Red Forces and their base were to be strictly independent. Of course, this was not the ‘independence of the working class’, so much stressed by Lenin; but of the Party, its territory and its main instrument of power, the army.
The land policy remained basically intact up to the final victory. In 1947, there was a shift to the Left, possibly because the peasants were unresponsive to the Party’s programme which proposed no more than a reduction in interest and rent (and even then, gave wide discretionary power to the responsible cadres). As Mao put it, in urging more serious implementation of rent reduction, without it, the masses in the newly liberated areas will not be able to tell which of the two parties, the Communist Party or the Kuomintang, is good and which is bad.’ [30] The radical phase, by contrast, included Poor Peasant Association with the right to try landlords and appropriate land. It spread like wild fire. But it was very brief. Mao launched the counterattack on ‘excesses’ – ‘“doing everything as the mass want it done”, and an accommodation to “wrong views existing among the masses”.’ [31] All the way through since 1926, those ‘excesses’ – the expression of the genuine interests and anger of the poor peasants – had threatened the alliance with rich peasants and others, jeopardised food supplies for the army, and above all, circumscribed the power and freedom to manoeuvre of the Party. The role of the masses, in Mao’s scenario, was strictly to cheer on the troops, not use their initiative independently, let alone express what he was later to call, ‘the selfish, narrow and complacent mentality of small peasant agriculture.’ [32] ‘Land to the Tillers’, ‘Down with Landlordism’, they were slogans strictly to excite enthusiasm, not generate spontaneous seizure of the land.
By 1935, the main elements of what became known as ‘Mao Tse-tung Thought’ had been constructed. By the 1940s, the Party had acquired a mass membership, and the need to refashion it into some homogenous form. It was a new party, with only a handful of men and women who had experienced the Long March, let alone the events of 1927. In 1944, 93 per cent of the members had a membership that extended back only to 1937 and 90 per cent of these were of peasant origin. The Yenan rectification campaign, 1942-44, introduced on a mass scale those instruments of party control characteristic of subsequent years – the mass denunciation of individual errors, rectification and punishment through participation in manual labour, close attention to education and culture, and continuing campaign against the ‘bad style’ of cadres – arrogance, bureaucratic pride etc. The measures were necessary to render the party an effective instrument, to prevent splits and disunity, and, above all, to find a basis of unity to replace the lacking class interest.
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (The Communist International and China)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

The Communist International
and China

THE Chinese Communist Party was founded, in May 1921, as a result of the impact of the October revolution on the left wing of the growing Chinese nationalist movement.
According to Mao’s own account, given to Edgar Snow in 1936,
‘the leading roles were played by Ch’en Tu-hsiu and Li Ta-chao, both of whom were among the most brilliant intellectual leaders of China.’ [1]
Li Ta-chao, who was murdered by the troops of the pro-Japanese warlord Chang Tso-lin in 1927, represented the more nationalist wing of the movement – nationalism with a marxist veneer, an embryonic Maoism in fact.
Ch’en, an internationalist, and a serious student of Marx, was the most prominent leader of the party from its beginnings until August 1927 when he was made the scapegoat for the failure of Stalin’s policies in China.
The political basis of the CCP was the line of the Communist International, to which it immediately applied for affiliation, and, especially the Theses on the National Question adopted at the second world congress (1920).
These theses made a sharp distinction between imperialist and colonial or semi-colonial (oppressed) countries.
‘At the present time therefore we should not restrict ourselves to a mere recognition or declaration of the need to bring working people of various countries closer together; our policy must be to bring into being a close alliance of all the national colonial liberation movements with Soviet Russia.’ [2]
At the same time:
‘A resolute struggle must be waged against the attempt to clothe the revolutionary liberation movements in the backward countries, which are not genuinely communist, in communist colours. The Communist International has the duty of supporting the (evolutionary movement in the colonies and backward countries only with the object of rallying the constituent elements of the future proletarian parties – which will be truly communist and not only in name – in all the backward countries, and educating them to a consciousness of their special task, namely, that of fighting against the bourgeois democratic trend in their own nation. The Communist International should collaborate provisionally with the revolutionary movement of the colonies and backward countries, and even form an alliance with it, but it must not amalgamate with it; it must unconditionally maintain the independence of the proletarian movement, even if it is only in an embryo stage.’ [3]
This dual task faced the infant CCP, operating in a country dominated and divided into spheres of influence by Britain, France, the USA and Japan, not to mention minor jackals.
These powers had their concessions, their extra-territorial rights, their troops and naval forces on Chinese territory, protecting the investments of their respective capitalists. Each of them also had ‘its own’ warlord, (sometimes more than one), paid and aimed to protect its interests. The ‘national government’ in Peking was powerless. China was in a state worse in many ways, than the outright colonies of the imperial powers.
The party’s first aim was to create a working class base. To quote Mao again:
‘In May 1922 the Hunan party, of which I was the secretary, had already organized more than twenty trade unions among miners, railway workers, municipal employees, printers and workers in the government mint. The work of the Communist Party was then concentrated mainly on students and workers and very little was done among the peasants ...’ [4]
What did the working class amount to at that time? It was a small minority but a growing one; ‘about 1,500,000 factory workers, about 750,000 other industrial workers (miners, seamen, railroad workers), still closely linked, socially and economically, to the mass of urban shopworkers and handicraftsmen numbering more than 11,000,000.’ [5]
Here were to be found the ‘constituent elements’ of a genuine communist party. But, of course, given communist leadership of this working class, a successful revolution would depend also upon the active support of large sections of the peasant masses.
Marx wrote to Engels in 1856:
‘The whole thing in Germany will depend on the possibility of backing the proletarian revolution by some second edition of the Peasant War.’ [6]
So, still more, in the China of the 1920’s.
The land question was fundamental.
‘Chinese rural economy has been characterized by the following main features; the increasingly swift concentration of land ownership in the hands of a constantly narrowing section of the population; the passage in title of much of the land to absentee landlords, government officials, banks and urban capitalists, who controlled the commercial capital penetrating to the remotest villages via the local merchants and usurers ... From sectional studies ... Professor Chen Han-seng estimated in 1936 that no less than 65 per cent of the peasant population was either entirely landless or land-hungry, i.e., possessing land in parcels too small and too burdened ... to provide a living even on the barest subsistence level.’ [7]
Here was a tremendous reservoir of revolutionary potential. More than three quarters of the Chinese people belonged to peasant families. More than once in China’s history peasant revolts had destroyed a dynasty. But they had not created a new social order. A redivision of the land laid the foundation for a new dynasty.
‘By its very nature,’ Marx noted, ‘small peasant property is suitable to serve as the foundation of an all-powerful and innumerable bureaucracy.’ [8]
The landless peasants, poor peasants, and even sections of the middle peasants – together with the overwhelming majority on the land – were the biggest component by far of the revolutionary potential. They could bring down the old order. But they could not themselves rule. To create a new social order, the leadership of an urban class was needed – that was marxist commonplace.
Which class? The Chinese bourgeoisie
‘remained bound by a thousand links to the pre-capitalist or semi-feudal system of exploitation on the land. The peasant was subject to the depredations of landlord, usurer, merchant, banker, warlord, tax-collector and local official. The interests of these groups fused ... Not uncommonly the collector of rent, interests, feudal dues and taxes was one and the same person.’ [9]
The bourgeoisie had too great a stake in the existing system of exploiting the peasantry to wish to sweep it away. It would never act as its French counterpart had done in 1789.
There was another factor, too. Important sections of the Chinese bourgeoisie were intimately connected with foreign capital. These were the ‘compradores’. They ‘still leaned heavily on their foreign rivals and derived much of their revenue from them. The gulf which separated them from the great mass of the people was far wider and less bridgeable than the antagonism between them and the foreigners.’ [10]
National independence and the unification of China were contrary to the it terests of the imperialists – and so to the interest of the Chinese bourgeoisie in its role as compradore, just as agrarian revolution was contrary to its interests in its role as landowner, usurer and tax farmer. This class would never make a real revolution. A ‘bourgeois revolution’ of the classic type was not on the cards.
Therefore the urban working class was the key. It had no stake in the-existing order. Given communist leadership it could put itself at the head of a vast popular movement, embracing all the oppressed classes. This was the original perspective of the CCP.
 
The CCP and the KMT
The perspective was, of course, an internationalist one. Lenin had asked in his report on the National and Colonial Questions at the second world congress: ‘are we to consider as correct the assertion that the capitalist stage of development is inevitable for backward nations ...?’ and had replied ‘If the victorious revolutionary proletariat conducts systematic propaganda among them, and the Soviet governments come to their aid with all the means at their disposal – in that event it will be mistaken to assume that the backward peoples must inevitably go through the capitalist stage of development.’ [11] The Chinese revolution, then, could succeed in skipping the capitalist stage if it was part of international revolutionary movement.
However, by the time the Chinese revolution erupted in 1925, the leadership of the CPSU and of the Communist International had abandoned the internationalist outlook, in deeds if not in words. The bureaucratisation of the Soviet regime symbolised by Stalin’s rise to power, the doctrine of ‘Socialism in one (backward) country’ – the bureaucracy’s ‘declaration of independence’, the baiting of Trotsky and left-wing oppositionists generally and the manipulation of the policies of the Communist International in the interests of the conservative bureaucratic caste that now ruled Russia: all this had profoundly unfavourable effects on the young CCP.
In pursuit of the ‘close alliance’ with the ‘national and colonial liberation movement’ the CCP had, in 1922, sent its members into the bourgeois-nationalist organisation, the Kuomintang, after the KMT leader Sun Yat-sen had refused to accept a formal alliance between the two parties. This action was approved, after the event, by the Comintern Executive with the qualification that
‘this should not be at the cost of obliterating the specific political features of the CCP ... While supporting the Kuomintang in all campaigns on the national-revolutionary from, to the extent that it conducts an objectively correct policy, the CCP should not merge with it and should not during these campaigns haul down its flag.’ [12]
This advice was not at all easy to carry out. But it was just possible at first. Each side wanted something the other could give. Sun Yat-sen, who had temporarily lost his territorial base in Canton after quarrelling with the local war-lord Ch’en Ch’iung-ming, wanted Russian guns, military instructors and organisers and he got them. The CCP wanted an opportunity to use the bigger and better known KMT machine to reach broader layers of workers, peasants and students. It was able to do this.
But the arrangement was bound to be highly unstable. Already in 1924 the CCP leadership, pushed on by the Comintern representative Borodin, was playing down its ‘specific political features’ in order to stay in the KMT. The KMT was, after all, a bourgeois party. Once the mass upsurge came, as it did in the spring of 1925, a split was inevitable – unless the CCP would act as an agency of the Chinese bourgeoisie!
On 30 May 1925 the British-controlled Shanghai municipal police fired on a demonstration in support of a textile workers’ strike, killing twelve Chinese. The communist-led General Labour Union called a general strike against the foreign companies. Shanghai was paralysed and the movement spread rapidly through the coastal cities; after three weeks 400,000 workers were out. After British and French troops killed fifty-two demonstrators in Canton on June 23rd, a general boycott of British goods was declared and the British colony of Hong Kong was totally shut down, 100,000 workers leaving the colony for Canton.
This stormy mass movement, almost entirely communist led, shook the foundations of foreign power in China. It also swept the KMT to power in Kwantung province (of which Canton is the capital) and brought the rift between KMT and CCP into the open. The KMT right-wing and the leading Chinese businessmen now saw the communists as the main enemy. Chinese factories too, were being shut and a rapprochment quickly developed between conservative nationalists and the foreign powers.
Comintern policy was, above all, concerned to prevent the inevitable split with the KMT by a policy of manoeuvre ‘at the top’. The chosen instruments of the Comintern were – Chiang Kai-shek, the future leader of the counter-revolution, and Wang Ching-wei, the future head of the Japanese puppet government of China! Borodin’s influence, buttressed by Russian supplies and money, was exerted to defeat their rivals and to make them, respectively, the military and civilian heads of the KMT after Sun’s death in 1925. The CCP leadership was assured that Chiang and Wang were most reliable allies.
The sixth plenum of the Comintern Executive solemnly declared (13th March 1926):
‘The KMT, the core of whose members acted in alliance with the Chinese communists, is a revolutionary bloc of workers, peasants, intellectuals and the urban democracy ... The revolutionary government established in Canton by the KMT has already established contact with the broadest masses of workers, peasants, and urban democracy, and has, by relying on these classes, annihilated the counterrevolutionary bands supported by the imperialists, and radically democratised the entire political life of Kwantung province. The Canton government, which thus personifies the vanguard of the Chinese people in its struggle for independence, is a model for the future revolutionary-democratic structure of the country ...’ [13]
A wave of Stalin’s wand and a bourgeois nationalist organisation was transformed into a ‘revolutionary bloc’ – on paper! This, the notorious ‘bloc of four classes’ theory, was borrowed from the KMT theorists – the only difference being that the ‘national capitalists’ were tactfully translated into ‘urban democracy’!
Just one week later Chiang launched his coup, arresting leading communists and forcing his rival Wang to retire, ‘for reasons of health’. The KMT ‘left’ collapsed and the CCP was required to hand over lists of all its members and to undertake ‘not to entertain any doubt or criticism ...’ [l4]
This was the crunch. To accept was to capitulate. The CCP leaders were divided. But the Comintern had no doubts. The present period is one in which the communists should do coolie service for the Kuomintang’ [15], Borodin told Ch’en Tu-hsiu. The CCP obeyed orders and capitulated.
The coup of 20 March 1926, presents the remarkable spectacle of a huge mass movement, led by communists, being painlessly deflected from the course of its own interests and placed under the direct control of its worst enemies, and being kept in total ignorance of this change by its own leaders.
The prestige of the October revolution and Red Russia were employed to perr suade the CCP to submit to the Chinese Kornilov. The Stalinists in Moscow had no confidence in the prospects of the mass movement. They hoped to cement an alliance with a bourgeois nationalist ‘strongman’. The strongman took their aid – and as soon as he was strong enough turned on his allies.
 
The Defeat and the Transformation of the CCP
The immediate outcome is too well known to require more than an outline. Having tied the CCP hand and foot, Chiang called off the boycott and launched the Northern Expedition – the conquest of China. It was swept forward on a tide of popular revolt. Chiang still mouthed revolutionary phrases – he still needed the mass movement – and his left flank was protected by the CCP’s uncritical support. As his troops neared Shanghai the greatest city of China and the centre of foreign power, the CCP led its mass working class base into an insurrection which drove out the warlord forces (21 March 1927). The working class was in power in Shanghai (outside the foreign concessions, guarded by 30,000, largely British troops).
Chiang entered the city on 26 March and immediately began preparations to ‘restore order’. The CCP, still loyal to the Comintern line, made no attempt to warn and prepare against the impending danger. No propaganda was undertaken amongst Chiang’s troops. The KMT was ‘a revolutionary bloc’, and ‘model’ – the Comintern said so.
Chiang struck on 12 April, after transferring unreliable leftist units of his own forces away from the city. Without organised resistance, the CCP, the unions and all workers’ organisations were thoroughly smashed. A white terror with mass executions was unleashed. Relations with the foreign powers immediately became cordial. [16]
Shanghai was a catastrophic defeat, but it need not have been decisive.
‘In Hunan and Hupeh the revolutionary tide was just sweeping in. The peasants were rising to seize the land; and the workers in degree of organisation and potential power, were already quite capable of becoming the leaders and guardians of the agrarian revolt. Together they represented a force strong enough to defeat the reaction.’ [17]
Mao Tse-tung, who had played no role in the great events in Canton and Shanghai, now, in fact (as opposed to Maoist myth), became an important mass leader.
Stalin had preferred to rely on the bourgeois nationalists rather than the workers. He now, as the peasants revolt gathered force, discovered a new bourgeois nationalist centre to rely on, at the expense, of course, of the peasant movement.
Wang Ching-wei had moved from Canton and established his own power base in Wuhan, up the Yangtse, in alliance with the ‘progressive’ warlord. Tang Sheng-chih. This ‘left KMT government, according to Stalin,
‘by a determined fight against militarism (in alliance with Tang Sheng-chih!) and imperialism will in fact be converted into an organ of the revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry ...’ [18]
In the interest of this fantasy the peasant movement was held back, the formation of peasant Soviets expressly forbidden and the basis laid for the next defeat:
‘... only a few weeks later, startled readers of Izvestia would learn that the left KMT leaders had proved to be “playthings in the hands of the generals”.’ [19]
The CCP was disorientated, the mass movement thrown back. Now, after the scale of the defeats was becoming impossible to conceal, the Moscow centre switched abruptly to a policy of putschism. In August 1927 a ‘special conference of the CCP, under Soviet pressure, condemns Ch’en Tu-hsiu and other top Chinese communist leaders for restraining the peasantry and “retreating” in order to maintain the alliance with the KMT left’ [20], that is for faithfully executing Moscow’s instructions!
A series of hastily prepared risings (Nanchang, Swatow and, culminating disaster, Canton) were carried out under the guidance of the new Comintern representatives Neumann and Lominadze. It was too late. The tide had been missed. In March the CCP had a good chance of destroying Chiang by a well prepared rising in Canton while the mass movement was still rising. By December, when the Canton insurrection was launched, the reaction had the advantage and the result was the destruction of the CCP in Canton.
In the aftermath, the CCP disappeared from the cities; ‘by 1930 Chao En-lai reported to the September plenary meeting of the Central Committee that out of a total membership of 120,000, the industrial worker-members only numbered a little over 2,000.’ [21] Soon even they were gone.
What survived, in the ‘Soviet Areas’ were peasant military units led by party professionals. The subsequent twists and turns of Comintern policy and their repercussions in China served only to reinforce this state of affairs.
Yet the CCP did, ultimately, take power. It proved possible, contrary to the expectations of the marxists of the nineteen-twenties, for a new state machine to be created (in backward and isolated Yenan) which was able, in the end, to conquer by military means the disintegrating KMT regime. But the resulting ‘People’s Republic’ had no connection with working class power or with communism, except in rhetoric.
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (The Chinese Working Class in the 1920s and 1930s)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

The Chinese Working Class
in the 1920s and 1930s

Chinese factories and cities repeated the appalling conditions described by Engels in Manchester seventy years earlier, or Mayhew in London at about the same time. Famine, slaughter and bonded slavery afflicted the peasants; debt, bonded labour, unemployment and barbarous conditions for the workers and their families.
Labour Conditions in China, British Government Report, London, Cmnd. 2442, 1924:
Child labour, much of it under the age of six, was widely employed on two twelve hour shifts in silk filatures–
‘Young children, certainly not more than five years of age, were to be seen working with almost incredible rapidity.’ (p.43)
‘The scale of wages earned by the head of the family is insufficient to support the family, and any efforts that might be made by the employers to regulate the labour of women and children are frustrated by the economic necessity on the part of the labourer to permit all the members of his family to contribute as much as possible to their own support.’ (British Consul, Tientsin, p.96)
‘The sanitary conditions in silk factories are extremely bad. All workers must live in the factories. Those completing their work before night are free to go where they please, but they must return by dark. This means that only a few men get out of the factories except on special occasions. When they finish their work at night, they pull out their roll of bedding, and sleep on the floor, on stray boards laid across the benches, or on the ground in the courtyard.’
The workers were paid very poorly, subject to arbitrary deductions and the robbery of labour gangsters. There were no safety precautions usually so that terrible accidents occurred – for example, in the Oyama pit disaster of 1917, over 1,000 were killed or injured.
 
Land and Labour in China, R.H. Tawney, London 1932, pp.149-50:
Visitors regularly see children ‘sleeping at night on the floor of the shop, in which lighting is such as to make it certain that the sight of many will be permanently injured; machinery is completely unguarded, the air is loaded with poisonous dust which there is no ventilation to remove, and the buildings are unprovided, in spite of municipal bye laws, with emergency exits, with the result that in the event of fire, some proportion of the workers will almost certainly be burned.’
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (Mao Tse-tung Thought)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

Mao Tse-tung Thought

What were the main lines of Mao’s thinking and how do they appear in comparison to Bolshevism?
One of the most striking assumptions is that the working class and the rural poor can only be won to the cause, and land distribution made more equal, after the seizure of State power. The class struggle is then not at all the basis of the revolution, the source of that collective experience and those institutions of class power (Soviets) which lead to the seizure of power. On the contrary, the class struggle is a side issue which can detract from the main task, building a military base independent of classes. Indeed ‘classes’ begin to disintegrate into complex strata whose treatment is defined not by their position in the social structure, but by their political attitudes:
‘Whoever sides with the revolutionary people is a revolutionary. Whoever sides with imperialism, feudalism and bureaucratic capitalism is a counterrevolutionary.’ [1]
After the Party came to power, ‘class struggle’ took on a different meaning. It is still nothing to do with working class activity, but is a Party purge. Mao provides a striking example of this usage: ‘We have not had a class struggle for ten years. We had one in 1952 and one in 1957, but these were just in the administrative organs and in the schools.’ [2] It is only the CCP which can wage ‘class struggles’, because ultimately, it alone is the proletariat. In China’s case, however, during the Cultural Revolution when he led an attack on a section of the Party, it seems he and his followers became the proletariat on their own.
If the Communist Party is in practice the proletariat, it needs no organic relationship to workers or anybody else, nor do workers need to play an important role in the Party. Workers are just one of many groups that the Party relates to and, on occasions, needs to secure support from.
It follows that the Party is concerned with the class interests of the exploited only as a means to mobilise support for the army before the revolution, without thereby jeopardising the interests of other classes. In practice, this necessitates a programme of moderate social reformism, balancing contradictory interests and suffused with a great deal of moral rhetoric. Attacking a class interest is reserved only as a punishment for ‘unpatriotic’ landlords or capitalists. In the same way, in foreign policy in subsequent years, the two ‘superpowers’ lost and acquired moral status between the ’fifties and ’sixties; neither were seen as part of an objective world order, independent of the intentions of their respective leaders.
Class collaboration is therefore of the essence of the struggle for power. In practice, Mao seems to have measured his performance by the reaction of the ‘middle strata’, as he measured the foreign impact of China in the eyes of ‘educated liberal opinion’ in the Western countries, not the working class movement. The ‘middle strata’ in China covered a vast range from the urban middle classes through the middle and rich peasantry, to small businessmen and merchants, what for Marx was the ‘petty bourgeoisie’. They were, in Mao’s view, the majority:
‘Chinese society is a society with two small heads and a large body; the proletariat and big landlords and capitalists are minorities; and the broadest group is the middle class. If the policy of any political party does not look after the interests of the middle class, if the middle class does not have freedom of speech, if it does not have clothes to wear, food to eat, work to do, books to read, national affairs cannot be well managed.’ [3]
Collaboration with the Chinese bourgeoisie was in the foreground of these politics. But Mao also acquired from the politics of the Third Period an unwillingness to collaborate with other parties in the working class movement. It is not accidental that the term Stalin used to describe the Social Democrats in the late ‘twenties, ‘social fascist’, has been adopted as the description of pro-Moscow Communist Parties in the 1960s. The results are disastrous for Maoist groups abroad – an urgent need to collaborate with bourgeois parties, and a sectarian rejection of the Communist Party. [4] The ‘United Front’ Maoist style is not, as some people have suggested, a tactical feint – although it includes much smart footwork – but a strategy. Indeed, Mao himself defines its status thus:
‘Our eighteen years of experience show that the united front and armed struggle are the two basic weapons for defeating the enemy. The united front is a united front for carrying on armed struggle.’ [5]
Methods of cadre control became, in power, also methods of securing the acceptance of the cadres by the population and methods of general social control. Again, there was a characteristically peculiar combination of conservative practice and heroic slogans, as had occurred in the land proposals in the ‘thirties. The ‘bureaucracy’ was denounced, as if the Party leadership intended to abolish the bureaucratic ruling class, but the denunciation referred only to the style of work of the cadres. Or, Mao demanded ‘democracy’, but never majority control of the leadership or policy, only the cadres listening to people more and behaving fairly’. In the ‘twenties, Mao had called the Red Army ‘democratic’ without meaning that the soldiers elected their officers. What he did mean, he explained, was:
‘The officers do not beat the men; the officers and men receive equal treatment; soldiers are free to hold meetings and speak out; trivial formalities have been done away with; and the accounts are open for all to inspect.’ [6]
Similarly, the ‘Soviet’ was no longer the institutional expression of a collective, the working class, it was just the name of the local authority set up after the Red Army had secured a territory (and scrapped, as a verbal concession, after the ‘United Front’ was created in 1937).
The language of Marxism was little more than a camouflage. The core of Mao’s pre-occupations were either military tactics or associated material questions, and politics became not much more than a suitable decoration. For Lenin, the analysis of the objective world was decisive for fusing the struggle for class interests, the struggle for the State, and an objective class structure changing over a particular phase of history. But if the method of securing power, military conquest, did not need to identify and utilise class interest, there was no need of such an exercise.
It was appropriate enough that Mao should return to the philosophic doctrines of the nineteenth century nationalist revolutionaries, idealism, even if expressed in pseudo-materialist terms. Will and conviction were the sole keys to history. The psychology of men and women could be transformed, regardless of social structure, by education and propaganda:
‘The Red Army is like a furnace in which all captured soldiers are melted down and transformed the moment they come over.’ [7]
The soldiers, bandits, Kuomintang or warlord, could find the truth if they only believed. The method of doing so was creating, as well as a style and rules of work, a religion, a ritual, learned and repeated by rote, a set of abstract propositions entirely remote from any science of history.
The religion required a Godhead, and from the early 1940s, Mao played that role – as well as those of Gospel writer and Pope. The abstractions, the ‘quotations’, permitted complete freedom to the Party leadership to do what it wished. But no action could be undertaken without an embroidered fringe of Mao-thought, much as religious men in Europe added a word from the Bible a hundred and fifty years earlier, or Stalin dredged up some string of Lenin’s words. This was not ‘theory’, it was, in Marx’s sense, ‘ideology’, false consciousness’.
What is the meaning of the ‘cult of personality’? It is not an accidental mistake. It is, as Marx said religion was, a projection. Religion was the projection of all the humanity robbed from mankind by capitalism, ‘the heart of a heartless world’. The so-called cult of personality is the projection of a people’s creativity, of its initiative. The Chinese people built modern China, not Mao, but the historical record is of a giant bestriding a world of grateful pygmies, sheltering in his shadow. The size of the giant is an inverted measure of the self-emancipation of the Chinese people. The larger it is, the less emancipated they are.
Mao tolerated and encouraged the cult of his own personality from the early 1940s. It attained spectacular proportions in the Cultural Revolution, but it was not new. Consider out of the wealth of examples, just these two from earlier years. In 1950, the Peking Municipal Government cited with warm approval this statement of a peasant:
‘Formerly we worshipped Kuan Kung who was said to be omnipotent. Where is his omnipotence? Whom shall we worship? To my mind, we should worship Chairman Mao.’ [8]
In the Great Leap Forward, the cult attained even more inflated proportions:
‘Mao Tse-tung thought is the only correct thought. It is the incarnation of Marxism-Leninism in China, it is the symbol of truth. Therefore, if a person at any time whatever, in any place whatever, regarding any question whatever, manifests wavering in his attitude towards Mao Tse-tung thought, then, no matter if this wavering is only momentary and slight, it means in reality that the waverer departs from Marxist-Leninist truth, and will lose his bearings and commit political errors. So we must follow Chairman Mao steadfastly and eternally! Forward, following a hundred per cent and without the slightest reservation the way of Mao Tse-tung.’ [9]
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (Mao and the People's Republic)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

Mao and the People’s Republic

The triumphs of the new State are well-known, and need not be repeated in detail here. At every stage, and particularly in the 1950s when the triumphs were most spectacular, Mao was the leading figure in the formulation of national policy. Much later, in the Cultural Revolution, devotees of the Chairman, quite misunderstanding his role, tried to suggest that Mao was somehow not responsible in those years for anything except the Great Leap Forward. The First Five Year Plan, the policy towards private business, or the retreat of 1959-63, were not Mao’s responsibility. The object is to exonerate the hero from responsibility for what suddenly became the nasty bits of history, and pin them on a scapegoat (in this case, the luckless Liu Shao-ch’i). Up to the Cultural Revolution, the Chinese leadership was well-known for its homogeneity, its lack of major splits and divisions (there had been only two splits in the leadership since 1949). Mao was enthusiastic about the first Plan, and Liu Shao-ch’i about the Great Leap Forward. Mao, although retiring as Chairman of the Republic in 1959, retained all his Party posts, and led the way in the retreats of 1959. There is not a shred of evidence to support the myth of Mao being in and out of power; in spite of his penchant, like Stalin’s, for rewriting the record. The ‘two lines’, Mao and the capitalist roaders, was cooked up in 1966-67 to justify very short-term tactical needs.
With remarkable speed, the new regime restored the shattered economy – between 1949 and 1952, industrial output expanded by 27 per cent per year. Simultaneously, it cleared the country of all opposition, whether of the gangster-petty warlord-Kuomintang variety, or peasant rebels and worker militants. At the same time, it intervened in Korea and effectively blocked the challenge of the United States; it also extended assistance to the Vietminh forces in Vietnam. Finally, it undertook the central measure of its ‘conservative revolution’, controlled agrarian reform, a carefully regulated redistribution of land, extending over a number of years. Simultaneously, the Government moved into the reunification of holdings in what were known as Mutual Aid Teams and ‘lower level’ co-operatives.
From 1952, the first Five Year Plan was designed to gear up the whole economy to a massive drive at accumulation. There was a vast expansion of output, based upon controlled consumption and increased work and productivity, but with declining effects in terms of jobs.
Private capitalism played an important role in the first stages. The Government promised – and delivered – a high profit level; this averaged 29 per cent in 1951 and 31 per cent in 1953. [1] However, the private sector threatened to grow faster than the public, bidding up the prices of raw materials, sustaining a black market, and attracting away from the State sector, skilled workers (a higher profit rate meant it could pay higher wages, so jeopardising the whole State wage structure). In the interests of retaining control, the Government moved towards absorbing the private sector, each stage being governed by the need to maintain the expansion of national production [2] and the willingness of the capitalists to accept generous compensation terms (including guaranteed interest payments on their capital for their lifetime) and work as State managers. There were difficulties, but Mao particularly praised the contribution of big businessmen, mentioning playfully in one of his speeches to them that the workers did not understand how important big business was, would accuse the Chairman of ‘Right deviation’:
‘The workers will say we are making it too advantageous for the capitalists. In their opinion, they (interest payments) should be cancelled immediately.’ [3]
The workers had other reasons to complain at the singularly generous treatment accorded private business. For they were subject at the same time to sustained speed-up, draconian labour discipline, and tight control of wages in the State sector. The consolation was that for the first time for many years, jobs were expanding and employment was stable. Nevertheless, the high absentee rate, go-slows and strikes indicated in 1955-56 that Chinese workers had not become passive cardboard figures in Mao’s private drama. The peasants also took counteraction to protect their grain and food stocks against State depredations.
By 1956, city unemployment was becoming severe. The changes on the countryside had produced a flow of people into the cities far in excess of the number of jobs being created. On the land itself, there was also much unemployment – Chou En-lai in early 1956 estimated that China’s agricultural output required 30,000 million 8-hour labour days to produce, but there was on offer, 45,000 million from the rural labour force. [4] The problems directly affected the rate of accumulation and the capacity of the regime to sustain it at the high levels of the first Plan. That in its turn affected ‘he very power of China – as Mao put it,
‘China’s economy is backward and China is materially weak. This is why we have been unable to take much initiative; we are spiritually weak. We must make a spurt (forward in production).’ [5]
The first response was a radical tightening in controls – food rationing, controls on movement, residence controls, financial controls over State managers’ hiring rights. The second was the Great Leap Forward.
 
The Great Leap Forward
The Great Leap (started early in 1958) was a gigantic effort to mobilise the population to expand output, increase accumulation and employment. It was a blockbuster to burst through all the obstacles that seemed to crowd in on the regime in the closing years of the first Plan. That is, contrary to the interpretation of Mao’s devotees, it was an effort to intensify the direction of the first Plan, not do something different. It included a reorganisation of the rural population in gigantic Communes to organise massive labour schemes (on irrigation, drainage and construction work), appropriate a larger share of rural produce and develop rural industry (the ‘backyard furnaces’ etc). In the cities, there was an unprecedented increase in the tempo of industry.
As the Leap progressed, Mao’s ambitions soared – there were no objective barriers to China’s development if the will was there:
‘With eleven million tons of steel next year (1959), and seventeen million the year after, the world will be shaken. If we can reach 40 million tons in five years, we may possibly catch up with Great Britain in seven years.’ [6]
By December, he had revised his targets upwards, speaking of 60 million tons in three years’ time [7], and he even confessed later that he had hoped for 100-120 million tons by 1962. [8] In the mid-1970s, China produced around 25 million tons, still a very respectable performance in comparison with many other countries.
The Great Leap crumbled against the obdurate backwardness of the country. Each innovation became its opposite. The rationed food supply system to Commune canteens, which was aimed simultaneously to lower the wage bill and permit housewives to be directed into agricultural work (while their menfolk were moved into rural industrial work), led to a major increase in the demand for foodstuffs, especially as the cadres were appropriating the output of private agriculture. Backyard furnaces, designed to expand steel output, in fact robbed the modern steel mills of iron ore and coal to produce an iron of a quality too poor to be refined.
Stalin had perfected the art of setting the cadres impossible tasks, and then deploring their ‘excesses’ in trying to achieve them and blaming them for all failures. Mao has generally followed a similar approach. In early 1959, he began deploring their excesses of the cadres [9], and denouncing their forcible seizure of peasant private produce. [10] He led the way in reversing policy – ‘We have to restore the primary (private) market in rural areas’ [11], to end the dominant role of the Commune authority and restore the local cadres for ‘there is now semi-anarchism’. [12] After all the spectacular rhetoric about the Communes, Mao now was prepared to write them off:
‘We were prepared for the collapse of half of them, and if 70 per cent collapsed, there would still be 30 per cent left. If they must collapse, let them.’ [13]
All the claims for 1958’s output were now revised dramatically downwards as it became clear that they were the result of cadre terror rather than a serious count. The steel target for 1959 was cut to 13 million tons.
However, unlike Stalin, Mao, within the secret confines of the Party, did not disguise the scale of the defeat, nor his own responsibility:
‘In 1958 and 1959,’ he said to the Lushan Plenum in July 1959, ‘the main responsibility was mine, and you should take me to task ... Who was responsible for the idea of the mass smelting of steel? I say it was me ... With this we rushed into a great catastrophe.’ [14]
‘The chaos caused was on a grand scale, and I take responsibility. Comrades, you must all analyse your own responsibility. If you have to shit, shit! If you have to fart, fart! You will all feel much better for it.’ [15]
Of course, to acknowledge responsibility was partly to draw the sting of criticism. Very few of the listeners dared accept the invitation to take Mao ‘to task’. The Chairman retired from his State post (Chairman of the Republic), but retained all his key positions in the Party. The proposal of retirement had been announced in 1958, and does not seem, on the present evidence, to have been a penalty for the failures of the Great Leap.
 
The Retreat
Mao was a master of conceding in order to fight another day. In the Great Leap, the Chinese people had defeated his ambition. Now he swung into reverse. Private cultivation and markets were restored; cadre control in the factories was relaxed, and the wage incentives were returned (but also the factory labour force was drastically cut). Two successive years of very severe agricultural disaster, and the sudden withdrawal of all Russian assistance (1960), drove the economy into slump.
Some of the first results were an extraordinary blossoming of petty capitalism and private agriculture. One report from Yunnan province says that by 1962 the private grain harvest was larger than the public, and there was more land under private cultivation. [16] In agricultural sidelines, in trade and petty handicrafts, the ‘rich peasant’ economy reappeared with surprising speed. Corruption similarly flourished in the lower levels of the Party. [17]
In 1962, Mao personally launched the Socialist Education Movement to rectify the rural party, to tackle, not the structure which produced these results, but the cadres who ‘indulge in idleness and hate work, eat too much and own too much, strive for status, act like officials, put on bureaucratic airs, pay no heed to the plight of the people, care nothing about the interests of the State’. [18]
Such forces, Lenin identified in Russia as the cultural remnants of a pre-capitalist society, of ‘Asiatic barbarism’. But in China, Mao identified them as the re-emergence of ‘capitalism’, but not as an objective system, rather as a set of psychological attributes. A third of the party, he said, was in the hands of the ‘enemy’:
‘At present, you can buy a Party branch secretary for a few packs of cigarettes, not to mention marrying a daughter to him.’ [19]
Mao was cautious in tackling the problem, since it could jeopardise the power of the party in the rural areas, unlike the man in charge of the campaign, Liu Shao-ch’i who seems to have favoured a much more ruthless purge. [20] Nevertheless, the disagreements were tactical and not apparently of major significance until later events led to them being described in a much more dramatic way.
 
The Cultural Revolution
In late 1965, Mao began a campaign to reform the cultural and educational work of the party and the educational system. He found considerable resistance to the campaign (he was compelled to launch it from Shanghai rather than Peking), and, to force the pace, closed both the schools and institutions of higher education. The explosion of revolt which followed when the students went onto the streets is now well known. The students swept through the country, attacking a host of targets well outside the terms of reference of the campaign. Their initiative at first elated Mao as had the first months of the Great Leap Forward:
‘Nieh Yuan-tzu’s big character poster of the 25th of May (1966) is the declaration of the Paris Commune of the ‘sixties of the twentieth century; its significance far surpasses that of the Paris Commune.’ [21]
and
‘The present Cultural Revolution is a heaven-and-earth shaking event. Can we, dare we, cross the pass into socialism ...?’ [22]
But by September, matters were changing. Workers had beaten up some of the student Red Guards, and a series of directives were issued by Mao insisting that the workers stay at work and not interfere. Such was the ‘leadership of the working class’. [23] Furthermore, Mao’s hints that Liu Shao-ch’i, his official heir since 1945, and Teng Hsiao-p’ing (General Secretary of the Party) were the leaders of the resistance to the Cultural Revolution had produced a furore of attacks upon them which Mao could not control. He began to draw back:
‘We should allow Liu and Teng to make a revolution and reform themselves.’ [24]
and
‘We shouldn’t condemn Liu Shao-ch’i out of hand. If they have made mistakes they can change, can’t they? When they have changed, it will be all right. Let them pull themselves together and throw themselves courageously into their work.’ [25]
As in 1959, he apologised for his mistakes:
‘I myself had not forseen that as soon as the Peking University poster was broadcast, the whole country would be thrown into a turmoil ... Since it was I who caused the havoc, it is understandable if you have some bitter words for me.’ [26]
It was too late, too late to save Liu and Teng – their sacrifice became necessary to protect the social order – and too late to protect the Red Guard virus becoming a plague. The smouldering discontents that had lain beneath the surface, unseen by Mao, now flared up. At the turn of the year, Shanghai workers exploded in a rash of strikes and agitation that were echoed round the country. They raised quite different issues and not at all ‘cultural’, issues of wages, conditions, and the right to independent trade unions, all the issues of the ‘economism’ that Mao had denounced for years. This time, Mao did not retreat defensively. In the third week of January, the army was ordered to take over the administration of the country. The aim was to force the ‘new forces’ into yoke with the rehabilitated cadres of the Party, under the firm direction of the army (what became known as the Revolutionary Committees).
It was not easy. There were numerous advances and retreats by Mao and his followers before he finally got the students back to school and university, and the workers firmly back in the factories. The Cultural Revolution had ignited the beginnings of a real revolution. Now Mao decided to make the best of a bad job:
‘We must believe that more than 90 per cent of our cadres are good or comparatively good.’ [27]
His former inspiration, the Red Guards, were now troublemakers. In July 1968, he told the four main Red Guard leaders, lest they have any illusions:
‘I am the black hand that suppressed the Red Guards.’ [28]
And, lest they cheat him, he insisted on tape recording his words:
‘Otherwise you might just quote what you please on your return. If you do so, I will just release the recording.’ [29]
By 1969, the revolution had been strangled. The US war in Vietnam had not disturbed its course, but in 1969, there were open armed clashes between Chinese and Russian troops on China’s northern border. The need for stability was urgent. The Ninth Party Congress (only the second since Mao had come to power) ratified the decimation of the Government, the removal of the main leadership of the Party, and appointed as Mao’s new chosen successor, Minister of Defence Lin Piao. It was not very long before Lin (along with the main leadership of all the armed forces) was accused of attempting to murder Mao (1971). Chou En-lai, by default, inherited in the last tired years of Mao’s decline. Yet even then, Chou’s appointed successor, the rehabilitated Teng Hsiao-p’ing (‘second in command of the capitalist readers’) could not be allowed to inherit.
Since 1969 we have no access to Mao’s writings and speeches. It is not clear therefore whether he played a decisive role in recent events. The destruction of Liu Shao-ch’i broke the carefully maintained traditions of the Party, and once broken, they could not apparently be restored. Palace intrigue and coups and countercoups became the norm. The inner conflicts of the bureaucracy are important, not because there is serious evidence of different strategic political positions – both sides defend the rule of the bureaucracy – but because leadership instability is itself an index of the objective problems facing China’s ruling class, and has implications for the development of the class struggle outside the purview of the bureaucracy.
At the end of a very long and full life, Mao leaves a China fundamentally transformed, a China scarcely recognisable as the same country that existed in the 1920s. His capacities – of ruthlessness, audacity and tenacity, not circumscribed by any loyalties except to the building of a strong national State – were remarkable by any standard. They were the abilities of the great nationalist revolutionaries of the past, but enhanced by the spectacular obstacles to achieving power. The Long March to power was long indeed, requiring exceptional persistence and patience. But it would not have been possible without the destruction of proletarian nationalism in Russia.
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (Mao's Life)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

Mao’s Life

Origins



Dec. 26th 1893


born, eldest of three sons and one daughter, to Mao Shun-sheng, rich peasant/small landowner and grain merchant, of Shao-Shan in central Hunan




1901-1906


elementary education, village school, then to farm work.




1909


enrolled Tung-shan modern primary school, Hsiang-hsiang, then moves to Changsha, capital of Hunan province.




Oct. 1911


Revolt in Wuchang – collapse of the Ch’ing dynasty (first Chinese revolution). Mao visits Wuchang. Fighting in Changsha, Mao in student volunteer corp.




1913-1918


Mao enrolled in the Provincial First Normal School. Contributes, 1917, to New Youth, paper of later top Communist leader, Chen Tu-hsiu.




1915-1917


secretary, Changsha Student Association.




Sept. 1918


to Peking. Li Ta-chao (later, important early leader of the Communist Party), Chief librarian at Peking University, employed as temporary clerk.




Spring 1918


The May 4th Movement (in rejection of the Versailles Treaty, concluding the first World War, conceding Germany’s interests in China to Japan). Mao returns to Changsha, active there in May 4th Movement, begins the Hsiang River Review for the Hunan Students Union.




Dec. 1919


Hunan warlord forced out. Mao returns Changsha, works as primary school teacher until the winter of 1920-21.




Autumn 1920


marries Yang K’ai-hui, daughter of former leading Changsha teacher.




Oct. 1920


organizes Changsha group of Socialist Youth League




The Party



July 1921


Mao is one of the twelve who form the Communist Party of China under Chen Tu-hsiu and Li Ta-chao. Returns to Hunan.




1921-23


Secretary, Hunan CCP, and trade union organiser.




Nov. 1922


Chairman, Hunan trade union federation.




April 1923


trade unions and party in Hunan repressed. Mao flees to Shanghai.




June 1923


attends 3rd Congress, CCP; elected to Central Committee, and becomes director, Organisation Department. Congress ratifies Comintern direction to join the Kuomintang, leading nationalist party, HQ in Canton.




Jan. 1924


1st Kuomintang Congress, Canton. 3 Communists elected to Executive Committee; Mao and 5 others elected as alternate members. Mao appointed as deputy, Kuomintang Organisation Department
CCP withdraw from post? Mao retires ‘ill’ to Hunan and misses 4th CCP Congress where removed from Central Committee and reprimanded for failure to distinguish Communist and Kuomintang politics. CCP membership now 994 (with 2,365 in youth organisation), reaches 3,000 by May. Mao works in Hunan peasant movement.




Jun. 1925


repression in Hunan. Mao flees to Canton.




Oct. 1925


Mao made head of CCP Peasant Department.




Jan. 1926


2nd Kuomintang Congress, Canton. 7 Communists elected to 36-man Executive Mao and others elected as alternates. CCP membership 12,000.




Mar. 1926


First coup by Chiang Kai-shek, military head of Kuomintang, against CCP




1925-26


Mao works briefly as political secretary to Wang Chingwei, officially head of Kuomintang, also as acting director, Kuomintang Propaganda Department, and editor of Kuomintang official political journal, Political Weekly (Cheng-chih Chou-pao). Also head of Kuomintang peasant training institute.




July 1926


Chiang Kai-shek launches the Northern Expedition to reconquer China. CCP and Russian advisers to Kuomintang generally opposed up to March coup, but Mao said to be enthusiastically in favour. Mao to Shanghai.




Aug. 1926


Mao to Hunan, where remains till the spring of 1927, where witnesses Chiang Kai-shek repression after Kuomintang take Hunan.




Mar. 1927


Mao publishes report on peasant movement in Hunan. Chiang takes Shanghai, and open split in the Kuomintang between Chiang and the official leadership, now based in Wuhan (Hankow). Chiang attempts destruction of CCP.




April 1927


Mao flees repression in Hunan. Attends 5th Congress CCP. Claims proposals on peasant movement suppressed there, but elected chairman. National Peasant Association, that seek safeguard alliance CCP and Wuhan Kuomintang by curbing land seizures.




May 1927


repression in Hunan by Wuhan Kuomintang. CCP membership 58,000.




July 1927


Wuhan Kuomintang seeks to liquidate CCP and trade unions.




The rise to leadership



Aug. 1927


CCP insurrection fails, Nanch’ang. Emergency conference called by Comintern, old leadership blamed for disasters and ‘neglecting the peasant movement’, but Mao not reprimanded. Mao sent as Politburo director to Hunan for Hunan share of Autumn Harvest insurrections.




Sept./Oct. 1927


Autumn Harvest insurrections: all defeated. Mao and troops flee remote Chiangkang mountains.




Dec. 1927


Canton CCP insurrection – defeated.




April 1928


Chu Teh and troops join Mao.




Mid-1928


6th CCP Congress held in Moscow. Old leadership blamed for defeats. Mao elected in absence to Central Committee. CCP membership 10,000.




Late 1928


Mao and troops forced out of Chiangkang mountains, ultimately reach Juichin, in the mountains of south-east Kiangsi.




Aug. 1930


second wave of insurrection; Mao and others attack Changsha, fail to hold. Wife Yang K’ai-hui executed. Later marries Ho Tzu-chen.




Dec. 1930


Mao represses Fu-t’ien revolt of CCP troops. Kuomintang begin first of five military campaigns to liquidate CCP bases.




Sept. 1931


Japan begin invasion of Manchuria.




Nov. 7 1931


1st Congress of Soviets held Juichin. Mao elected Chairman, Central Soviet Government. Party leadership remain in Shanghai until 1932 when flee to Juichin. Mao begins to be eased out of leadership.




April 1932


Chinese Soviet Government declare war on Japan.




1934


Mao removed from leadership, under house arrest.




Oct. 1934


Kuomintang force evacuation of Juichin – beginning of the Long March (size of military forces reduced during year of the march of 6,000 miles from 120,000 to 20,000). Ho Tzu-chen ill on March; to Moscow for treatment.




Jan. 1935


during the Long March, special enlarged Politbureau meeting at Tsunyi – Mao becomes Chairman of the Politbureau, Central Committee and Party, member of the secretariat and head of the military operations.




Building the new party



Mid 1935


7th Congress, Communist International, shift line to Popular Front/United Front with bourgeois Parties. CCP begin moves for United Front with Kuomintang against Japanese.




Late 1935


Japan begin advances from Manchuria into north China proper. CCP base at Yenan, Shensi.




1937


achieve United Front, change name of Government and army, scrap land programme. Sino-Japanese war begin Japan advance rapidly southwards.




1938-39


Japan eject Kuomintang from capital Nanking, then temporary capital at Wuhan. Final wartime capital becomes Chungking in west. CCP launch guerilla attacks behind Japanese lines. Outbreak of European war. Mao divorces Ho Tze-chen, marries Shanghai actress, Lan P’in (Chiang Ch’ing).




1939-45


Expansion of territory activity and membership of CCP; clashes with Kuomintang. US representatives attempt to mediate.




Apr. 1945


7th Party Congress (first since 1928). CCP membership 900,000.




Aug. 1945


Soviet Union invade Manchuria in closing phases of war against Japan.




1945-46


unstable front with Kuomintang under US mediation, as both armed forces race to establish most powerful bargaining position after Japanese collapse.




mid-1946


outbreak of civil war with the Kuomintang.




March 1947


Kuomintang forces seize Yenan.




Jan. 1949


People’s Liberation Army take Peking, move southwards to Nanking and the Yangtze crossing (April).




May 1949


Take Shanghai and Wuhan.




Oct. 1 1949


Mao announces the Central People’s Government, Peking




Dec. 1949 – Mao to Moscow.



1950


Agrarian Reform Law to eliminate landlords but under tight Party control. Reconstruction programme begins. Mao to Moscow.




June 25, 1950


Korean War begins.




Oct. 1950


Chinese troops enter Korea to assist the North. Assist Vietminh in Vietnam.




Jan. 1953


Inauguration of the first Five Year Plan (1953-57). Stalin dies.




Oct. 1953


talks on the Korean. War, Panmunjom, culminate in Armistice.




1954


first Taiwan crisis – US fleet protects Kuomintang regime in Taiwan. Geneva Conference – Chou En-lai attends. Strikes East Germany. [1]




April 1955


Bandung Conference of ‘non-aligned’ powers with China’s sponsorship.




1956


Polish and Hungarian revolts. ‘One Hundred Flowers’ campaign in China to permit free speech; then closed down. Krushchev’s 20th Congress speech criticizing Stalin.




1957


1st Russian sputnik launched. Soviet-Chinese treaty to make Russian nuclear technology available to China.




Jan. 1958


Great Leap Forward to accelerate the growth of output, accumulation and employment. People’s Communes set up – slogan: Overtake Britain. Second Taiwan crisis.




1959


Great Leap wound down – Mao retires as Chairman of the People’s Republic. Soviet Union scraps the nuclear treaty.




1960


Severe agricultural difficulties. Soviet Union withdraws all assistance. Concessions to the peasants.




1961-2


agricultural disasters, economy slumps.




1962


Mao launches the Socialist Education Movement to rectify rural cadres.




1963-5


economy restored. Increasing US intervention in Vietnam. First Chinese nuclear test (1964).




1966-69


Mao launches the Cultural Revolution to rectify cultural and educational work, but becomes attack on section of national and local CCP leadership. Severe disturbances, 1967-68, only controlled through People’s Liberation Army assuming administration and setting up ‘Revolutionary Committees’ to rehabilitate discredited cadres. Escalation of the Vietnam War.




1968


Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.




1969


armed clashes between Chinese and Russian troops on China’s northern border. Soviet rumours of Russian invasion likely. Increase China’s military preparedness. 9th Plenum of CCP nominates Lin Piao as Mao’s heir.




1971


Lin Piao denounced for, allegedly, plotting murder of Mao. Mao in retirement; Chou En-lai effective head of regime.




1972-76


rehabilitation and advance of Teng Hsiao-p’ing (General Secretary of the Party up to 1967, then removed with President of the People’s Republic Mao’s heir, Liu Shao-ch’i). Death of Chou. Removal of Teng from all offices. Nixon visit to Peking, and rapprochement with US.



 
Note
1. The strikes in East Germany took place in June 1953, not in 1954. – ETOL
 

is et al.: Mao Tse-tung (Prospects)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mao Tse-tung

Nigel Harris et al.
Mao Tse-tung

Prospects

IN transforming China, Mao and the Chinese Communist Party transformed themselves. They moved from the inheritance of 1917 – the emancipation of the world through the international self-emancipation of the working class to be achieved through the abolition of classes, exploitation and the national State – to the inheritance of 1789, the emancipation of onr State to create a new unified ruling class which could undertake the heavy tasks of primitive capital accumulation on an isolated national basis. But in terms of the real alternatives available in the 1930s and 40s, in China, Mao’s actual perspective was a gigantic step forward for China.
To make this transition demanded not just the abandonment of the perspective of 1917 and the early Congresses of the Communist International, it required the reduction of the language of Marxism to an opaque false consciousness. Mao created a new concept, ‘non-antagonistic contradictions’ to explain the continued class struggle in People’s China. The disguise led some of the best elements of the Communist parties into a reconciliation with the aims of China’s new ruling class. But, in the end, Marx was right. It is material forces which shape the practice of classes, not some independent ‘ideology’, inserted from who knows where. Communist parties, pro-Moscow or ‘Marxist-Leninist’ are no less subject to the materialistic laws of history than other folk.
The world of today is not that of 1789. Then, primitive accumulation, bloody and savage as it was, was easy by comparison to contemporary conditions. The bourgeoisie was able to claim to embody the aspirations of the whole of society. Today, it is not so. The world is one capitalist system, dominated by the enormous concentrations of capital in the group of advanced imperialist powers. Not only is China far poorer than the France of the late eighteenth century, impoverished by more than a century’s domination by imperialism, but the tasks today are spectacularly greater. Soviet Russia and Japan were the last two competitors to climb aboard the ‘economically developed’ status before the imperialists hauled up the ladder. Now accumulation on a scale sufficient to transform whole national societies is blocked. The condition of China’s national economic development is breaking the stranglehold of the advanced, unlocking the accumulated capital of the advanced powers. The national reformist strategy of China is withering in the face of objective factors.
If the world economy continued to expand for the next half century, China’s leadership could indeed build a powerful industrial sector in the midst of rural China. Mao’s death could mark the end of the heroic period, for the regime cannot afford to undertake the dangerous exercises of Great Leaps Forward and Cultural Revolutions without even more severely jeopardising social stability. But stability need not jeopardise steady capital accumulation. However, the world economy faces no such prospects. The storm signals are hoisted. Increasing fluctuations and long term stagnation seem the likely results of advanced capitalism’s inability to restore the long-run rate of profit. Already the political results are emerging. Above all, the political reappearance of the world working class after its long withdrawal. The politics of rebellion, whether in advanced capitalism, the bureaucratic capitalist sector or the intermediate economically backward sector, rapidly increase with each fluctuation in world capitalism.
With Mao’s death, the epoch of Mao Tse-tung thought and its parent, Stalinism, is also drawing to a close. If the political alternative can be built, then the twentieth century’s version of the bourgeois revolution, the bureaucratic State capitalist revolution, will no longer be able to operate as a substitute for proletarian internationalism. The political form of the social relations of production, the national State, is an increasing fetter on the means of production, international in scale. The objective factors are indeed over ripe for the breaking of those fetters. The key question is the subjective factor, the politics in the heads of the revolutionaries.
For China’s ruling class, the period ahead is dangerous and difficult, as it is for all the world’s ruling classes. Mao’s last heirloom – the decimation of the senior leadership of the party – will not help his successors to pilot their way through the stormy seas. But they cannot opt to be an island. The Russian army sits on their northern border, and the obverse of increasing world economic instability is increasing political instability and threats of war. For accumulation to proceed, China needs must import both industrial, raw materials, equipment and technology. That again forces participation, forces China’s internal situation to be synchronized with the world order. The events of 1966-7 indicate that the Chinese working class is no passive plaything in the hands of the regime. The dangers and difficulties will force it again into action, groping outwards to reunite with the world working class.
In the coming stresses, China’s ruling class will operate increasingly as a reactionary force, in defence of the existing world order of national ruling classes. That order is the basis of its own power and privileges. Already, the first signs of instability have shown this – in Bangladesh, Ceylon, Chile and many other places. [1] Those occasions were not ‘mistakes’. They flowed from the interests of defending a national ruling class against any revolt, at home or abroad. The politics of Mao Tse-tung Thought thus become in contemporary conditions the politics of defending China’s ruling class.
Many of those who, faced with the stark alternative of Russia or China, opted for Mao, will, under the impact of the convulsions ahead come to reflect once again on the questions. They might remember the words of William Morris, written in the youth of Marxism, words which might stand as one of the epitaphs of Chairman Mao:
‘Men fight and lose that battle, and the thing they fought for comes about in spite of their defeat, and when it comes, turns out to be not what they meant, and other men have to fight for what they meant under another name’.

Note
1. Cf. China and World Revolution, ISJ 78, May 1975.
 



THE LIFE OF CHOU EN-LAI spans the history of the Chinese Communist Party. When he joined the European section of the new party in Paris, Lenin was still alive; there were still serious efforts to promote a workers’ revolution, and the Communist International had not become simply an extension of the Russian State. China was the hunting ground for any foreign power with an eye to a quick profit, divided into the petty kingdoms of warlord and gangster. As Chou dies, there is neither a Communist International nor even a single orthodoxy for Communist parties. The cause of workers’ revolution is now for them no more than a rhetorical device, and Marxism an obscure religious faith, not the theory of socialist revolution.
But China has been transformed. The imperialist powers were expelled; a new order created, and the living standards of the mass of Chinese dramatically transformed. The ‘sick man of East Asia’ has become in some respects a third Great Power. Chou En-lai contributed directly to this contradictory achievement.
 
Chou was born in 1898, the son of Kiangsi gentry. His grandfather had been a high Mandarin official. Educated in Tientsin and briefly in Japan, he was arrested as a student activist during the agitation of the 4 May movement. In 1920, he was in France, again a student activists (arrested in Lyons), and there joined the French Communist Party. In 1924, he returned to China, to Canton, the headquarters of the popular nationalist party, the Kuomintang.
From 1924, Chou’s life falls into three distinct phases, the phases of Party history. In the first, the Party, a small group of intellectuals, acquired a mass worker base and was heavily defeated (1925-7). In the second, it disintegrated through three phases of insurrectionary violence, but out of it emerged a new force, an independent army. In the third, the army conquered power and established a new State (1935-49; 1949-76).
In the first two phases, Moscow – the Communist International – directed policy. Chou was a leading figure in executing that policy up to 1931. In the first phase, Stalin’s strategy for China was to arm and advise the Kuomintang on how to unify the country; the role of the Chinese Communist Party was to assist this, mobilising popular support for the Kuomintang. Stalin’s basic assumption was that no workers’ revolution was possible in China, and his aim, to safeguard the eastern flank of the Soviet Union against Japanese attack.
On his return from Paris in 1924, Chou became head of the political department of the new Russian-financed Kuomintang Whampoa Military Academy, Canton. A generation of officer cadets went through his hands. He helped organise a Left-wing society of cadets that helped strike pickets, protected the Kuomintang and trade union offices from gangster attack, and spread the message of agrarian revolt among the peasants of the surrounding province, Kwantung.
The alliance of Communists and Kuomintang was basically anomalous, however. Most of the Kuomintang officers were the sons of landlords, and rural revolt, proclaimed by the Communists, was directed at their parents. It was more frightening than imperialism. Much of the Kuomintang leadership had close links with Chinese capitalists, and when, in 1925, the Communists found themselves riding a tiger of worker revolt, it equally terrified the Kuomintang. In every area of policy, the anomaly was reflected. Chou, in charge of the Party’s Military Affairs Department, formulated the line on what Communists should do in the army –
‘Go into the national revolutionary army (Kuomintang – NH), strengthen it, raise it to fighting ability, but do not carry on any independent work.’ [1]
The Kuomintang leader, Chiang Kai-Shek, was earlier restrained from breaking with the Communists by his need for Russian arms. In 1926, he made efforts to curb Communist influence and found it was quite easy; the Russians and Chinese Communists retreated before all his demands, and did not attempt to use their popular following to fight back. Chiang was now in a position to launch a military campaign to reconquer China and possessed enough military power to dispense with the Communists.
In 1926, Chou was transferred to the great industrial city in the north, Shanghai, to prepare the ground for Chiang’s northern march of conquest. He trained worker pickets for a rising to seize the city and make it easy for Chiang’s armies to take it. Chou was one of the leaders of the enormous general strikes that took place, one of the members of the committee that took over the city.
Chiang had other ideas. Shanghai workers cheered the army into the city, then the army disarmed and arrested the worker pickets, shut down the trade union offices and began a wave of slaughter. Chou led a delegation to Chiang’s headquarters to petition for the return of the workers’ weapons. He was arrested and his execution ordered, but ex-Whampoa cadets in the army smuggled him out of the city. Behind him, more than 5,000 workers and Communists were butchered.
The Communist Party was shattered. Its worker membership was seriously depleted and the cadres who survived, demoralised at such a shocking defeat for the Communist International. However, it would have been possible to begin the tasks of rebuilding the Party, even in Shanghai, if the Communist International had been willing to learn the lessons. But in the factional fight then dominating Moscow, it was impossible for Stalin to admit a mistake. On the contrary, he was compelled to describe the catastrophe as an advance – the Right had been expelled from the genuine ‘Left’ Kuomintang, and the revolutionary wave was still rising. When the so-called ‘Left’ Kuomintang expelled the Communists a few months later, this also proved the correctness of the Comintern’s strategy and the need for immediate insurrection to seize power.
The Communists launched three waves of insurrection. Each failed, and to protect the Comintern’s leadership from criticism, the Chinese leadership which had loyally carried out Moscow’s direction, was blamed for all the failures.
Chou was a participant in the first rising (Nanch’ang, Kiangsi, 1 August 1927, now celebrated as Army Day in China). He fought at Swatow in September, and at Canton in December when 3,000 workers and Communists were butchered. The reward for his loyalty came at the Sixth Party Congress (held in Moscow). The old Party leadership was dismissed for failure, and Li Li-san came to power, with Chou as his strongest supporter. It mattered little who was the leader of the Party with such disastrous direction from Moscow. Instead of retreating to take up the day to day issues facing workers and rebuild their confidence and organisation, such matters were denounced as ‘bourgeois reformism’. Only insurrection was serious politics, a proposal that naturally terrified the mass of workers as they retreated from defeat.
Nevertheless the Party leadership remained in Shanghai (Chou was head of the Organisation Bureau). But it was quite unable to influence the workers who turned from the ultra-left heroics of the Communists to the ‘yellow’ unions, the labour gangsters, as the only leadership available. Li Li-san’s 1929 wave of insurrections failed as had the earlier ones, and, as before, Moscow accused Li of having brought about defeat. Nevertheless, at the first challenge, Chou delivered the main report and demonstrated conclusively that Li had done no more than carry out the instructions of the Comintern. It was a brief respite before the letter from Moscow which directly denounced Li. Chou turned full circle, denounced Li’s role and called ‘on the whole party to condemn my mistakes’. [2]
The confession saved Chou (he was once again put in charge of military affairs) but it must have been a most scarring experience. Loyalty to Moscow had not saved him from accusation, even though it had rendered impossible the task of building a workers’ party.
Meanwhile, a different force was emerging. Mao Tse-tung and Chu Teh led their tiny forces out of the insurrectionary waves to build a separate headquarters in a very backward area. In August 1929, they named it a ‘Soviet’, even though there could be no workers in such an area, and the mass of peasants were organised only by courtesy of the Red Army. By 1930, the Comintern was no longer embarrassed by opposition criticisms that, in China, the Party had no proletarian base, and it needed some triumphs to cover the disasters. As a result, the ‘Soviet Government in China’ began to be mentioned as a great victory for the Comintern’s strategy (hitherto Moscow had opposed it).
For Chou, licking his wounds in Shanghai, the change must have been dramatic. It was becoming clear that the choice facing him was either loyalty to Moscow, self-destruction and the strangling of any revolution, or an independent Chinese national revolution with Mao and without the working class. In 1931, Chou made his first visit to the ‘Kiangsi Soviet’, and possibly negotiated the terms of his return. He was an important catch as a senior Party leader, and, in any case, had some following among the army officers of Mao’s army (what Chen Tu-hsiu called ‘Chou En-lai’s Whampoa clique in the Soviet Areas’). When, in 1932, Chou emigrated to the Kiangsi Soviet, he was rewarded with the deputy chairmanship of the Military Council. From this position, he began to extend his influence. Mao’s control was not yet secure, and in 1932, a dispute between Chou and Mao led to Chou displacing him as General Political Commissar to the army. However, the actual march of events proved Chou wrong in November 1934 when the Kuomintang finally liquidated the Kiangsi Soviet and drove the Communist forces out on the Long March.
At the Tsunyi conference, during the Long March, Chou confessed his errors, and was one of the key supporters in Mao’s efforts to secure the unchallenged leadership of the Party. Mao became Chairman of the Central Committee and Politburo of the Party, and head of the Military Affairs Committee. In return, Chou became the leading spokesman of the Party until his death. He was never again caught on the losing side.
 
Thereafter, Chou’s life is the official life of the Party. It was Chou who saved Kai-shek’s life in 1936 (the ‘Sian Incident’) in return for a new alliance of Communists and Kuomintang, against the Japanese invasion, and who, to carry out the alliance, sat for ten years (1937-47) on the Kuomintang’s coalition council. Chou did not, on that body, raise the question of Kuomintang labour laws (which outlawed strikes) of inflation (which cut real workers income in half in 1939-40 [3]), nor did he champion the sporadic peasant revolts against Kuomintang conscription and predatory taxation. He was back in the diplomacy of 1926: the ‘alliance’ took priority over the conditions of the working class. It was Chou who bore the main brunt of wooing the US military mission in Chungking, requesting active collaboration and American arms; in 1944, he asked that he and Mao be allowed to visit Washington to negotiate an alliance with Roosevelt (a tactic, that, it is said, exposed Chou and Mao to much criticism in the party). It was only fitting that, in 1949, when the People’s Liberation Army had finally swept China clean of Kuomintang, Chou should be premier and foreign secretary, the most loyal of the loyal.
As premier, Chou officially launched the economic transformation of the country. He summed up the task:
‘The fundamental aim of this great people’s revolution of ours is to set free the productive forces of our country from the oppression of imperialism, feudalism and bureaucratic capitalism, and eventually, from the shackles of capitalism and the limitations of small-scale production.’ [4]
To achieve this, Chou loyally echoed Mao in the attempt to build a Stalin-style economy – piece rates, production speed-up, incentive bonuses, elaborate discipline rules etc. Like Mao (and Stalin), he denounced egalitarianism as a
‘petty bourgeois outlook which encourages backwardness and hinders progress. It has nothing in common with Marxism, and a socialist system. It damps down the enthusiasm of workers and employees in acquiring technical skills and raising productivity; it harms the growth of our economic construction. We must therefore resolutely oppose equalitarianism.’ [5]
And, like Mao, he stressed the urgent need ‘of overcoming bureaucratism and commandism ... attitudes of superiority and complacency’. For bureaucracy made more difficult the common subordination to the process of capital accumulation.
Again, like Mao, he learned that in the backwardness of China, Russian command methods would generate a revolt. He followed loyally through the successive attempts to find other methods of achieving accumulations: the Great Leap Forward, agriculture as the foundation of the economy, Communes, small industry etc.
The shifts and changes in direction generated periodic leadership battles. There is no evidence that Chou played any distinctive role in these conflicts. With Liu Shao-ch’i and Teng Hsiao-p’ing he loyally defended Mao in the clash with Kao Kang and Jao Shu-Shih in the early Fifties. He was not identified with the opposition in the removal of Mao as Chairman of the Republic following the disasters of the Great Leap Forward. He played no role in the clashes between prominent leaders during the Socialist Education Campaign. In the Cultural Revolution he loyally carried out the imperatives of the CR Group at the same time as defending what he could of the administrative machine. The other leaders fell but Chou survived. At the eighth Party Congress (1956), Liu gave the political report, but had fallen by the time of the ninth (1969). There Lin Piao gave the political report, only to fall shortly thereafter. At the tenth (1973), Chou assumed what had hitherto been the position of heir to Mao.
The Cultural Revolution made it possible for Chou to play a key role in the rehabilitation of Party leaders. Perhaps Teng Hsiao-p’ing owes his position to Chou’s amazing capacity to survive. Chou survived as the instrument of policy, as the embodiment of the Party leadership, as its chief mandarin. He betrayed no ambition to be the sole leader of the Party, to replace Mao, so that death has not robbed him of his inheritance. But because he played no identifiably distinct political role, his death is unlikely to produce any changes of policy.
 





 



Map showing neighbouring Laos, Cambodia & Vietnam



Nigel Harris writes: On October 6th, the Thai armed forces once again seized power, their fourteenth coup in forty years. This time however the scale of savagery was extreme – forty were killed and 100 injured in the first day. 4,000 were arrested at the same time, including most of the leadership of the student, trade union and peasant movements, the political parties and the press. Political parties are now banned, the press tightly censored, and over one million books, pamphlets and documents have been seized from libraries and bookshops for burning.
The extremity of the official violence – garrotting, throwing petrol on victims and igniting it, grenade and rocket launcher attacks on the unarmed – is ‘law and order’s’ response to the scale of the class struggle.
Exactly three years ago, a half million demonstrators frightened the military chiefs and the king into ditching the triumvirate in power, including dictator General Thanom Kittikachorn and police chief General Prapas. It was unprecedented in Thai history that a popular movement could have had such effect. It demonstrated that the students had been able to gain the support of an entirely new force, the Thai working class, created in the 1950s and 1960s. In a panic, the older order conceded elections, political parties and a free press, but not legal trade unions (that did not come until January 1975).
The following year saw an explosion of militancy. The strike rate doubled (see that graph) [1*] on the staggering score of 1973; workers began to raise their desperately low pay, beat back the foremen’s gangsters and improve conditions. There was an answering call from the peasants, and a rash of new peasant associations began to agitate for land (in the north-east and north), and lower interest rates and higher rice prices in the central plains. The Muslims of the South again became active against Thai Buddhist oppression. The student movement turned sharply Left. They began to raise socialist demands, to attack the dominant position of foreign capital in the country, and the presence of 39,000 US troops and a string of American military bases.
The seams of the whole society appeared to split. The atmosphere was electric. For example, when the Bangkok police locked up a taxi-driver in July, 3,000 rallied to his support and fought a three day gun battle with the police.



Thailand
Population: 39 million
Major exports: rice, sugar, tapioca, rubber
Income per head: about £140 per year
Foreign investment: Japanese business owns 12 per cent of all capital. Thai Chinese are the largest group. Many foreign companies have plants here.
Employment: 75 per cent in agriculture.
Industrial safety
1. March 1976 – Government Labour Department presents the first minimum safety standards for industrial workers. President of the Board of Trade opposes them because of ‘the damage which would accrue to investors from the enforcement of the safety measure regulations’
2. Government survey shows that 65 per cent of all industrial workers were suffering from the accumulation of toxic poisons in the blood arising from employment conditions.
History
1932 – military coup takes power from the king, but retains royal figurehead
1941 – Thailand allies to Japan and the Axis powers
1947 – brief civilian interlude
1957 – generals change
1969 – brief civilian interlude
1973 – collapse of the military dictatorship.
Jan. 1974 – general elections, and after two months haggling, a coalition government under Prime Minister Kukrit.
Apr. 1976 – general elections – 4 party conservative coalition under Seni Pramaj.



The new Government tried to make concessions – of increases in the minimum wage to ward off the demand for legal trade unions and national bargaining rights; of a weak land reform and rent control to divert the peasant movement; of regular consultation between the prime minister and the National Student Centre to disarm opposition. Yet each concession seemed only to increase the agitation.
The Right began to organize. The army’s Internal Security Operations Command financed a wave of physical violance against the leaders of the revolt. Navapol appeared, a political thug organisation, with its own paramilitary youth organisation, the Red Gaurs, aiming to split the student movement between the university and technical college students (the technical students bore the brunt of the 1973 fighting, but inherited very little of the prestige afterwards). Whenever the National Student Centre called its factions to a united demonstration, Navapol’s armed squads were there to beat them up under the banner of the ‘Anti-Communist Imperialism United Front’. Towards the end of 1975 and into this year, some 35 Left and liberal party and student leaders, trade union leaders, and 21 chairmen of peasant associations were murdered. Party and trade union headquarters were bombed, and opposition party candidates intimidated to withdraw.
Yet it did not kill the militancy. In January of this year, the Government raised the price of rice by 30 percent. The Federation of Trade unions called a general strike for five days. The Government caved in. There were new elections in April, and a more Right-wing coalition formed a new government under Seni Pramoj. Simultaneously, the student movement continued its massive campaign against the US presence in the country. Despite the open hostility of the military, they forced the Government to push much of the US military forces out (’American advisers’ remain, plus US air landing rights and a secret tracking station).
It could not last. Wages began to rise rapidly. There was a strike by private investment, and the inflow of foreign capital dried up. The victories of the liberation forces in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos brought the red tide lapping to Thailand’s borders – just at the moment when the demonstrators had forced an American evacuation. The hysteria of the Right became insupportible. Now the king publicly warned of the ‘sabotage of our kingdom’. The military called alerts to try and deter the students, and continued holding martial law in 28 provinces. In April, at a birthday cocktail party for the armed forces chiefs, the Supreme Commander urged them to patience, saying ‘I will tell you when the time comes.’
The time came in October, no doubt by courtesy of ISOC. The bodies of two Left-wing activists were discovered hanging from a wall outside the city. The police subsequently admitted responsibility for the murders.
The Left could no longer restrain itself and demonstrated, demanding trial of the policemen concerned. It was the opportunity ISOC and Navapol had awaited. Watched impassively by the police, masses of Right wing thugs drove the students into the campus of Thammaset University, and then turned to demonstrate before Seni Pramoj, demanding the Government clean up the country. The final signal was broadcast from the Armed Forces radio: armed thugs and 1,000 police with special warfare units then deluged the university campus with heavy fire. They then raced through it, throwing grenades into the lecture rooms, beating up any any unlucky enough to come in their way. At the same moment, Supreme Commander Admiral Sa Ngad, two days earlier appointed Defence Minister (Seni Pramoj’s attempt to placate the armed forces) seized the Government.
Thailand went into a revolution in 1973 but without a revolutionary party. The Thai Communist Party has throughout the events of the past three years been hundreds of miles away from the scene of the action, Bangkok, holed up in the hills of the north-east fighting guerilla warfare. The needs of the city struggle was an immediate political alternative to the old order which remained still in power despite what had been won in 1973. But the guerillas of the CPT aim to encircle Bangkok only after twenty years of ‘protracted struggle’. Without a revolutionary party, no systematic efforts were made to capitalize on the discontents of the troops of in the lower echelons of the State bureaucracy. The oligarchy’s truncheon remained intact. Above all, the rebels in the main failed to understand that the movement could not stop halfway as a stable permanent extra-parliamentary opposition. The regime – the military, and its US backers, Chinese and foreign business, the corrupt upper layers of the bureacuracy – could not tolerate indefinitely the revolt from below. Either the old order would have to smash the rebels, or the rebels had to create a new order and annihilate the oligarchy. The Government was no more than a weak facade for the old order’s power, yet the student movement felt it had won a victory when the Prime Minister consulted it.
The war is not over, but the events of October 6th are a heavy defeat for the Thai working class. The victories they have won in the past three years are now disintegrating. The leadership is dead or gaoled or has fled. Some of the students will conclude that the perspective of guerilla warfare and ‘protracted struggle’ is now abundantly confirmed, failing to see that the defeat is partly the responsibility of their leadership. They will flee to the north-east, and the workers will once more be thrown back on their own resources. They have shown abundantly once again the capacity of workers to transform the political scene, to develop with staggering speed, and the decisive importance of a mass workers revolutionary party dedicted not to influencing the State but to smashing it. They return to silence and to memory.

Note by ETOL
1*. No graph is printed with the article.
 



ONE
OLD Mrs Jackson has given up the two miles walk to the welfare clinic. She used to go on the subway, but now it is too expensive. Then, despite her sixty-seven years, she walked. But now she says that there are so few staff at the clinic she does not get a hearing anyway, and it is too cold and slippery to walk.
There are thousands of others in New York who are similarly learning to live with the slow destruction of the minimum conditions of city life. The city officials, caught between the voters and the city’s creditors, plaintively urge ‘self-reliance’; the city dustmen’s chief recommends householders to sweep’ the gutters themselves, ‘out of a sense of civic responsibility’.
New York has been the heart of American capitalism for more than 150 years. But now the heart has gone somewhere else, and in the general crisis of profitability in the whole system, New York has become victim instead of victor.
A series of processes have combined to destroy the financial basis of the city. Three of the most important are detailed below.
 
1. The Flight of Industry
FOR nearly half a century, American industry has been moving its activities away from the cities of the north-east of the country. It is now also moving away from the North-Central region (Chicago-Detroit). Business has been pursuing low costs, escaping from the high living, housing and transport cots of the old cities, and more recently, the urban riot. High technology new industry paying the highest wages has moved to the West (California) and the South (Texas).
The workers have chased the jobs. Put crudely, the relatively high income skilled whites have moved westwards and southwards, while the relatively unskilled blacks and immigrants have moved northwards from the south. A relatively declining average income in the northern cities bites deep into municipal revenue unless there is redistribution between the cities of different regions. Most of the big cities in the expanding regions have continued to increase jobs and incomes through the slump, while the cities of the north and north-east have, to a greater or lesser extent, had financial crises.
This only relates to cities. Every southern and western city has its impoverished ghetto of blacks, Mexicans, poor whites and other ethnic groups, just as the northern cities sport the leafy garden suburbs of the rich.
Nevertheless, the flight of industry changes the whole distribution of income in the north, increasing the extremes of income and making it impossible to finance, let alone rehabilitate, the old cities. Only the centralisation of the country’s government so that business could not escape paying would overcome this. In more centralised countries, like Britain and Japan, the similar problems of London and Tokyo are concealed by direct government subsidies.
New York’s loss of jobs has steadily grown more severe. It is concealed to some extent when the national economy booms, but is starkly exaggerated when there is a slump. Between 1969 and 1974, the city lost 340,000 jobs (or more than had been created in the preceding 15 years). It missed the national boom of 1971-3, which, if the city had expanded as the national economy did, should have brought it a quarter of a million new jobs. In the year of slump up to May 1975, another 93,000 jobs disappeared (or a quarter of a million jobs if we include the surrounding New York – north-east New Jersey area). The decline in jobs prompts people to leave the city altogether – since 1970, the city has been losing about 2½ per cent of its population every year (this is the official figure, and does not include ‘illegal immigrants’). As a result of the contraction in the size of the labour force, unemployment rates have been kept down – 11.7 per cent in the middle of 1975 (as against a national average of about 8 per cent).
 
2. The Flight of the Rich
AT the same time as industry has been moving nationally, the rich and the middle classes have been trying to escape high city costs by moving beyond the city boundaries. The spread of car ownership is a key factor in this process. The long-run census figures show the movement over a long period – the areas of most rapid population growth at different times was as follows: 1900-1910, central city areas; 1910-1920, a five mile ring around the cities; 1920-1950, a five to ten mile ring round the cities; thereafter, beyond the ten mile radius. Indeed, most city growth since the second World War has been by extending city boundaries, not by increasing the number of people inside the old boundaries. Where cities are allowed – as New York is not – to extend their boundaries, they have come to cover an immense area. Houston in Texas now covers 503 square miles, and its suburbs, over 6000 square miles.
In the 1960s, the American suburban population increased by 30 per cent,.the central cities by five per cent. The relatively poor continue to move into the central city areas, as the rich leave in even larger numbers. Those left in the cities are those who cannot escape and are politically important only when they riot. The municipal boundary – where it will not be extended – becomes the frontier between the suburban rich and city poor, between whites and blacks or ‘immigrants’ (the Mexicans, Puerto Ricans and others, regardless of whether they were born in the United States or not). In the case of New York, between 1945 and 1970, about two million richer people ($10,000 or more income per year) left the city, and slightly fewer poor ($6,500 or less) settled there.
The incomes of the city’s residents is the base for municipal income, so that if the average falls, the corporation has to raise more taxes to keep the same revenue flowing – or extend the boundaries to recapture the rich. But this last reform is impossible while the rich continue to control the State Assembly which could alone sanction a change in boundaries. As a result, New York becomes a kind of poor house, and the financial crisis is insoluble.
 
3. The Predatory Banks
AS the tax base has shrunk because of the loss of jobs and the rich, New York municipality has become dependent on increasing taxation (which accelerates the flight of business and richer households from the city) and bank loans. In a boom, when interest rates are high, the city borrows heavily to pay the interest. In the slump, the tax base contracts, the banks become increasingly savage in recovering their loans and most reluctant to offer further advances except under cast iron guarantees. To escape this last problem, the municipality has – like some of the medieval kings did – offered the yield on particular municipal taxes before any other expenditures are considered. The situation is complicated by the sheer corruption of municipal government. The councillors are often there as representatives of local business, out to make a killing in municipal contracts. The web of bank-financed land speculators, large property owners, building and construction contractors, includes municipal officials and councillors. It is said that, while city workers are being sacked to cut costs, the municipality is still leasing office blocks that stand empty because they are not needed; the leases are favours to the banks that finance the land-purchase, the property speculators and building companies.
A different structure secures the voting base. The winning party rewards its followers not only with contracts, but also lucrative sinecures on the municipal payroll. The leaders of particular ethnic communities get their slice if they supported the winning horse. The trade union bureaucrats get their share of the spoils too, and if they seem to be effective in delivering the vote, in prosperous days, a grateful mayor looks to the conditions of trade union members.
The municipal unions have been able to build up a moderately strong position on wages as a result of this share out of spoils. In addition, successive administrations have tried to extend their political base by financing an extensive system of public welfare – hospitals and clinics, schools and what was until recently a free university (CUNY, with about a quarter of a million students), as well as unemployment relief. In a slump, all these elements tend, to increase in cost just as the municipal revenue is contracting.
It is the welfare-education expenditure of the city as well as its wage bill which has made the New York crisis of national significance. The city has become a test case, the ‘creeping socialist menace’ to rally the backwoodsmen of the Right. As in Britain, one section of the ruling class is arguing that the crisis of profitability is so severe because of ‘unproductive’ public expenditure. Private profits must be salvaged by pruning the public sector.
Felix Rohatyn is a banker, leading proponent of the case against ‘the social wage’, and was head of the Municipal Assistance Corporation (’Big Mac’), the group of bankers set up by the State Government last June at the time of New York’s first default crisis, to promote the sale of city bonds. When asked what sum the municipality needed to cut from its expenditure, Rohatyn replied, ‘It’s not a question of how much. The city has to change its lifestyle’. Thus, the city’s ‘lifestyle’ became the anvil on which American capitalism was to hammer a new strategy of profitability.
The myth of New York’s working class wallowing in its feather-bed, on a diet of welfare and free milk, was a useful one, particularly in demoralising the working class itself. It turned class anger into attacks on other workers, supposedly living off the fat of taxes. With some of the worst slums in the United States, a much higher level of unemployment, and a dirty ill-kept city, the myth would have been a joke if it had not been so effective.
The myth has been confirmed by the continual concessions made to the banks by the municipal authority and to the municipal authority by the trade union leadership. Mayor Beame spent a year vacillating, veering between the demands of his political base and the bankers, but all the time promising to pay until he was publicly removed from effective control by the State Governor. Yet still he had promised 67,000 redundancies, a sizeable pay cut for municipal employees, a three year wage freeze, severe cuts in welfare, medical and educational expenditure. It was never in doubt that ‘changing the lifestyle of the city’ meant in practice an assault on the poor. But to keep some, credibility, Beame also had to fiddle the books, yet that only increased the hysteria of the banks and the State Governor. It must have been the banks who put around the rumour in August that Beame was about to have a mental breakdown.
The municipality claims to have sacked 35,000 since last December. Some of the cuts were perhaps directed by Beame at the strongest unions (including the police and firemen) in the hope that the banks would relent or that strikes might be provoked which would frighten the banks. The overall pattern of sacking inevitably hit the poorest city workers hardest, particularly black and Puerto Rican employees, and affected the top paid least. As a result, as city services deteriorate, the unemployment relief bill soars.
 
The Labour Movement
THE attack could have been rolled back. But it required a national demonstration of the commitment of New York’s workers not to be used to bail out the banks. In July, Rohatyn himself warned of the dangers of a general strike. But he need not have feared, for the trade union leadership bent all their best efforts to prevent any but token action. At the end, the union leaders pathetically offered up their members’ pension funds to buy their own survival (by September, the pension funds of the teachers, firemen, policemen and municipal employees were all, to some extent, being used to stave off the bankruptcy of the city). De Loury of the dustmen even offered $1.5 million of his members’ funds to buy off redundancies (Beame took the money, and continued with the sackings).
In July, there was a sudden upsurge in popular anger. The dustmen took unofficial strike action for three days; the highway workers occupied their depots, and sacked policemen blocked Brooklyn Bridge. But the teachers’ union leader, Shankar, said he would take no initiative until early September when his members’ contract came up for renegotiation. The transport workers restricted themselves to a demonstration, and welfare and hospitals did not move. The union leadership scuttled its members back to work. In September, as a result, the teachers were left to fight alone, being finally sold out by Shankar, despite his earlier bold talk (14,000 teachers were not rehired, class sizes increased). Other union leaders grumbled, or like Barry Feinstein of the Teamsters, restricted themselves to empty bluster:
‘I’m in favour of a general strike at this time. We have given our blood. The unions are bleeding to death.’
What finally forced President Ford to extend the minimum level of federal aid for very short-term relief, was not a revolt of New York’s workers, but the revelation that if the city defaulted, some of the leading banks and large companies (like the giant ConEdison electricity company) might also go bankrupt. In November, it was discovered that 546 national banks were holding New York city bonds equal to 20 per cent of their capital, and 41 banks in New York State had municipal holdings equal to 50 per cent or more. Furthermore, the downward slide of the city threatened to impose bankruptcy on the State of New York, Ford, asked to give federal assistance last May, had allowed the situation to deteriorate so far that it had come to threaten the whole structure. There was no way of disentangling public and private capital. But the aid granted is on such restrictive terms, it is no more than keeping the city out of default so that it can continue with the cuts.
The New York working class was and still is in the forefront of the attack to save the system, and the municipal employees in the vanguard. The continuing defeat of New York’s workers can only produce a general depression of militancy in other cities and unions. Yet at particular moments, a handful of dedicated city workers could have created the rank and file leadership capable of precipitating a general strike that would have compelled federal intervention on very different terms. One general strike with mass pickets on Wall Street would have forced Ford’s hands, compelling him to concede much more as a political defence of the system than just the financial saving of the banks. As it is, workers blame some anonymous ‘market’ for failing to take up the City’s bonds.
The Left in New York is larger than most other places. Yet it suffers from the bitter heritage of isolation and irrelevance. The city’s crisis has delivered hammer blows at the traditional attitudes of New York workers, but the Left has not been able to relate to it. The Left’s isolation brings the same sense of impotence before gigantic blind forces that afflicts the workers. No-one is prepared to gamble. Yet audacity is the precondition for a rank and file movement. It is not created by occasional leaflets or attending union meetings in a handful of workplaces. That is also required, but there is no ‘building by slow accretion’. A rank and file movement is created by exercising audacious political leadership in conditions of momentary crisis – ‘giving a lead’ when there is a vacuum of leadership. That situation, with fluctuations, has existed in New York for the past year and will go on existing. It ought to be a top priority for any group with a serious orientation on building a rank and file movement and a mass workers’ party.

TWO
THE growth of American capitalism in the 1950s and 1960s sucked in an enormous number of workers from Mexico, Puerto Rico, the rest of Central America and the Caribbean, from the Philippines and East Asia, just as the growth of the Common Market siphoned workers out of the Mediterranean countries to France and West Germany. Simultaneously, in both Europe and the United States, whites have been moving out of the assembly line and metal fabricating industries into better paid jobs in the service industries. In the United States, this has meant the movement of black workers and ‘immigrants’ to the old industrial centres of the north and north-east. The long traditions of southern racialism with its foundations in the interests of the slave owners have been passed over to the industrialists and the cities of the north. In the working class, the whites who cannot escape from the cities are particularly vulnerable to absorbing the interests of a white ruling class, as also are those trapped in a particular district that seems about to be absorbed into a black city. The blacks and immigrant groups similarly absorb the same savageries, opening rifts between, for example, southern-born and northern-born, between American blacks and Jamaicans, between blacks and Hispanic peoples and so on.
The effects of the divisions are not abstract. Between 1965 and 1968 the American blacks unknowingly assumed the natural militant leadership of the entire working class. Their politics created the tone and style of all mass politics that came after them; their cultural legacy dominates the Left. Yet the challenge to the system was destroyed by walling off the black leadership from its mass – and mainly white – audience, by reinvoking the racialist barrier. The leadership was then either murdered, exiled or bought off. In the last case, the reward was often some toehold in small capitalism (boutiques, record shops, Soul-food stores, African clothes trade etc) and absorption into the national political leadership: for example, the NAACP leaders, Julian Bond, Marion Bond and Andrew King, now respectively a Georgia Senator, Washington DC City Councillor and member of the House of Representatives. Much of the small capitalism has been swept away by the slump, but the political perks continue; the US Census authorities estimate that between 1970 and 1974 there was an increase in black elective officers in the country; the black population is 11½ per cent of the whole population).
Yet the condition of the mass of black people remains the same as before or has deteriorated. The National Urban League argues that black people have faced ‘chronic depression’ for 20 years, compounded by the economic catastrophes of recession in 1969-71 and slump in 1974-6. Real family income declined by over 3 per cent in 1973, to reach 58 per cent of the average white family income (in 1969, it was 61 per cent). About a third of all black families are classified as below the poverty line (9 per cent of all whites are below the line), and they make up about a third of all the poor. In mid-summer 1975, the black unemployment rate was officially 13.7 per cent (the white rate was 7.6 per cent), but according to the National Urban League, 25.7 per cent (the rate for black youth was estimated by the League to be between 40 and 60 per cent; the official rate for black youth at the end of 1975 was 37 per cent, and for white youth, 17.8 per cent).
The national picture is reflected in the worst areas of all major cities, whether they are generally prosperous or depressed. Take, for example, one of the most famous districts, Watts, with a population of 28,000 in the south-west corner of Los Angeles. Ten years ago the district became famous through its massive revolt that provided the immediate signal for the struggle of black people throughout the country. Yet, despite worsened conditions, there has been no revolt this year. The area is dominated by those on welfare, single mothers and the aged, with an unemployment rate said to be around 50 per cent. The median annual family income – including welfare payments – is around $6,000 (the national average for black families is now $7,500). The area is still ‘an economic and spiritual desert’, with high incidence of alcoholism, hard drug ailments and suicide (it is said that black males under the age of 25 have the highest rate of suicide for any similar group). However, the people of Watts, like those of Compton further south (a 50 per cent unemployment rate), have a consolation they were denied a decade ago – the Los Angeles mayor, the California State Lieutenant Governor and School Superintendant are all black.
The destruction of the Black Panthers’ leadership and the decay of the Black Power movement into a defensive cultural style (exploited by black business – witness the shop sign, ‘Black is Beautiful but Business is Business – don’t ask for credit’) has done considerable damage to the confidence of the mass of black people. Of course, the unemployed kids continue sporadic guerilla warfare, half revolt and half crime (against a police force much more heavily armed than ten years ago). According to the FBI, serious crime increased 18 per cent in 1974, with an increase of 15 per cent for boys under 18 and 21 per cent for girls (the under-18s accounted for 27 per cent of all arrests for serious crimes in 1974). Some proportion of that figure is black revolt.
There is also sporadic communal warfare, seen most sharply in 1975 in the clashes over bussing in Boston and Louisville, the summer warfare over the beach at Boston and demonstrations against the police and harassment in at least three States. The scale of bussing is enormous – 260,000 children are transported in Detroit daily – all to avoid improving schools adequately outside the rich suburban areas. The movement between black and white working class districts provides a ready-made audience for the extreme Right.
It is a measure, however, of the relative weakness of the old forms of communal revolt that, fortunately, the extreme Right has not had more growth, whether it is the new retooled Ku Klux Klan (’sophisticated, college-educated, media-oriented’), front organisations like Louisville’s ‘Kentucky Taxpayers’ League’ or the openly Nazi organisations. Yet there was a temporary working class audience in both Louisville and Boston; in Louisville, the backbone of the white demonstrations identified themselves as trade unionists.
However, concealed in the relative decline of communal action is the growth in confidence of black workers in the mass production industries. With an effective basis of power on the shop floor, a new leadership is emerging, a leadership which, as a necessary element in its tactics of fighting, is becoming not simply the leadership of black workers but of all workers, including the whites and Spanish-speakers. To some extent, the demoralisation of communal politics is made that much worse by this development, but on the other hand, the future prospects of the emancipation of black people become much brighter. The press, of course, can see only ‘race-conflict’, so that the development of rank and file factory leadership receives much less attention than the communal riot. Ex-Black Panthers may well be the most important single source of the new factory leadership; their experience of the violence of the State, their political experience and sophistication, makes them the natural link between the communal revolt of the sixties and the working class revolution of the late seventies.
There are apparently many such small black groups and newspapers, most of them explicitly socialist, boring deep in the major industries, and to a greater or lesser extent, contesting the leadership of all workers in the workplace, not simply black workers. The discipline of the shop-floor and their suspicion of the white Left to some extent insulate them against the absurdities that afflict many, of the socialists – growing herbs in Arizona is an alternative to overthrowing capitalism. Yet it will also impede the creation of a mass workers’ party. At the moment, the lack of any known national alternative makes the Left much weaker than it should be in terms of numbers. The first organisation to achieve national significance is likely thus to inherit all and grow quickly. But there is very little time to waste, given the perspectives for the system. Before the end of the decade, the Left, black and white, could be facing its decisive confrontation.
 



As early as 1936, he (Lu Hsun) pointed out the dangerous tendencies of the criminal Trotskyites. Now the clarity and correctness of his judgement have been proved beyond doubt by the facts – the obvious fact that the Trotskyite faction has turned into a traitorous organisation subsidised by Japanese special agents.
(Mao Tse-tung, 19 October 1939 [2])
Livio Maitan has been a leading member of the United Secretariat of the Fourth International (USFI) for many years, that is, of an organisation which claims to represent the essence of ‘criminal Trotskyism’. Given the very important writings of Trotsky himself on China, of Harold Isaacs and contributors to the Fourth International journal, New International, in the Thirties, a book that continued this powerful critique up to the present would be of major importance.
There would be a number of problems, not least Trotsky’s argument that it was impossible for the Chinese Communist Party to attain power without recreating its base in the working class (destroyed in 1927-28). China was and still is very poor; the material basis for the self-emancipation of the majority, socialism, does not exist on an isolated national basis. Lenin argued that the transition to socialism therefore depended upon creating first a relationship between the victorious Chinese workers’ regime and the Chinese peasantry and second, ‘the Soviet governments (of several advanced powers) coming to their aid with all the means at their disposal’. [3] Trotsky spelt out the implication:
To believe that without the victory of the proletariat in the most advanced capitalist countries and prior to this victory, China is capable with her own forces of ‘skipping over the capitalist stage’ is to trample under foot the ABC of Marxism;
or again,
it must be made clear to the vanguard of the Chinese proletariat that China has no prerequisites whatever economically for an independent transition to socialism (April 3, 1927). [4]
However, the Chinese working class did not become reunited with the Communist Party. The party had scarcely any worker members, had no serious programme for workers, and maintained no units of the party in the main working class areas of China before the People’s Liberation Army conquered power. It certainly carried support from sections of the peasantry, but there was no proletarian revolution in the most advanced capitalist countries which could then bring massive aid to the new regime.
If Mao is right, Marx, Lenin and Trotsky are wrong, and massively so. The working class is not the decisive element in a socialist revolution – no workers need be involved at all. Nor are they needed to begin ‘building socialism’, that is, a state planned industrialisation. Nor is the help of foreign advanced countries needed – all the prerequisites for the transition exist within China’s boundaries. Some people dodge the issue, of course, by shifting the scenery round – the ‘working class’ become the Chinese Communist Party or the army, or that master of disguises, the intelligentsia, or the passive rural poor, drummed up to play a walk on part in the historical drama. Whatever the answer, clearly the self-emancipation of the majority is no longer possible; they are emancipated by proxy, by a minority that knows how history works; and internationalism is not integral to the task but a pious afterthought.
However, despite the clarity with which Trotsky presented his position, Maitan evades all the key issues. He has written a very rum book since, without answering some of these questions, there does not seem to be much point in yet another dreary resumé of modern Chinese history. So far as the key questions are concerned, Maitan follows the standard Stalinist method of sliding over them, of asserting rather than arguing, proving or demonstrating. In the breach, a few firm ‘undoubtedlys’ or ‘unquestionablys’ can disarm the incredulous:
The triumphs of a socialist revolution in China was undoubtedly one of the decisive events of human history (p.7, my stress)
or
Unquestionably, the Chinese example shows that a socialist revolution makes a decisive break with the underdeveloped and dependent development which afflicts the countries of the capitalist ‘Third World’ (p.289, my stress).
Does it? How and why? With so much confusion on the Left, surely the least Maitan could have done was to try and clarify rather than just go with the tide. If China has made ‘a decisive break’, why is this so? Because its leaders are cleverer than other folk? Because they cunningly nationalised everything (as have done in part all the ruling classes of the backward countries)? Whence come these cunning ideas, and what is the material basis which sustains them? On Maitan’s case, it seems, material backwardness plays no role after all when the authorities have the right ideas – and clearly then dialectical materialism is just as the bourgeoisie always said, bullshit.
Maitan uses terms with supreme casualness, an unusual characteristic for one who comes from such a discriminating Talmudic tradition. Consider this example of the light fantastic – ‘the state engaged in primitive accumulation’ p.24) – as if it were a waltz or a marriage ceremony. Can he really be using the concept Marx employed to identify the most barbarous phase of capitalism? He does not explain, and carefully avoids the core of the concept – a savage intensification of exploitation, for then he would have to say whether there was exploitation in China or not, and that raises a whirlwind of disturbing phantoms.
Only briefly does Maitan tackle the ‘class character’ of the Chinese revolution, and it provides a good example of his ambiguous and evasive style. The revolution was basically propelled, he says, by a peasant movement. The Chinese peasantry, quite unlike its European counterpart, co-operated, forced into collaboration by its dependence upon large scale irrigation works (a familiar thesis, but one for which he provides no evidence). As a result, the Chinese peasants supported collectivisation. Maitan is almost as bland as Peking itself on the question of ‘peasant support’; again, he finds no need to demonstrate it. But Marx still tugs at his sleeve, so he quickly qualifies – there was not even a primitive division of labour in Chinese agriculture, the only possible basis for collective organisation. Then, he throws caution to the wind – ‘In twentieth century China, the destitute peasants and landless labourers sustained a socialist revolution’. ‘Sustained’? As peasants ‘sustain’ landlords? Or what? And what is the evidence that these two social groups played either an important or any distinct role in the Chinese revolution? None is provided. Maitan draws back quickly lest he slips straight into Mao’s self-idolatry – the revolution ‘could, in a different way and for different ends, also raise itself ‘above society’ (as Louis Napoleon did in relationship to the French peasantry – NH) and impose upon them (the two lowest rural strata – NH) advanced forms of collective ownership’ (p.36). Does he mean the Chinese Communist Party is really Louis Napoleon, and must therefore be opposed? How can the core of socialism, self-emancipation by the majority, be imposed from above? Surely that is Blanquism? Maitan divulges no explanations; all subsides in a fog; we are not meant to take the labels seriously.

THE central trouble is that Maitan has no theoretical framework adequate for analysing China. There is no scientific basis for his account. Notwithstanding the heaps of facts he interlards his narrative with, the book is invertebrate. For science, he substitutes ideological preferences, without explaining at all why the reader should accept his curious tastes. China is apparently not governed by any material necessities, although, as Maitan describes, it is very poor.
The problem appears to be that, since the party agreed with Stalin, it therefore has things wrong with it. But they did nationalise everything, swear at the United States, and the party was derived from 1917, so China must have something good, or at least, ‘responsive to mass pressure from below’. When Maitan approves of something, he conjures up ‘mass pressure’ as the source; when he disapproves it is because of a bad ideological influence. Thus, the north Chinese peasants were the agency of a ‘triumphant socialist revolution ... However, this is not to say that China was not profoundly affected by the Stalinist model’ (p.9) Was it profoundly affected? By what? Did Stalin have a’model’ and what was it a model of? Are there no material necessities sustaining whatever this ‘model’ is? Maitan does not tell us. He criticises official attacks on rebels:
By falling back on the language of ideological terrorism, the leading groups and strata showed their authoritarianism, sectarian intolerance and set hostility towards any movement from below. (p.141)
What is this ‘falling back’? Some superficial moral backsliding? Regardless of the style of authority, were they wrong? If they led a socialist revolution, how can they slide into error in this way? Sometimes, it seems, Maitan shares with Mao a belief in original sin and persistent wickedness.
Maitan’s main criticism of the Chinese leadership is that there is not enough ‘democracy’. But if it is a ‘socialist’ society (Maitan dodges this issue, although seems on balance to believe it is), a Maoist might argue, why does this lack of adherence to outdated bourgeois norms matter at all? Maitan does not explain, indeed, how socialism can exist without freedom. Mass self-emancipation must mean majority rule. The only other sort of ‘socialism’ is Stalinism, state dictatorship, which is no socialism at all. Yet it seems that this is what Maitan accepts, and, as a result, comes precious close to mainstream American liberalism – China’s regime is good and socialist, but it is a pity there’s not more democracy.
If there is any theme to the book it is the search for democracy. He finds it popping up all over the place, but somehow it never quite wins through. The peasant associations during the land reform programme, he asserts (as usual, without evidence), ‘created favourable conditions for establishing and sustaining genuinely democratic institutions of revolutionary power’, but unfortunately, when the People’s Liberation Army took power, ‘no attempt was made to begin the work of setting up institutions of popular power.’ (p.20) So the army needs to ‘set up’ mass control? Why should it do so? Because
Revolutionary democracy based on Soviets of workers, peasants and soldiers would have provided the best guarantee for the future course of the revolution. (pp.20-21)
But is the army interested in doing this? The ‘Soviets’, pulled out of Maitan’s hat without explanation, might just as well have contested power with the army, and so destroyed the ‘socialist’ revolution!
The contradictions gather thickly about Maitan’s pen. Consider his startling balance sheet of the Great Leap Forward (pp.48-49) when he simultaneously lists among the successes of the commune movement, ‘setting up truly democratic forms at the lower level’, along with its ‘negative features’, ‘the brusque lack of regard for the aspirations of the peasants’! You can, it seems, have your cake and eat it both democracy at the base, and a disregard for the aspirations of the base. The same problem recurs; we find ‘there were real possibilities for people at lower levels to make democratic choices’, but there were no elections, everything was directed by the leadership, and
It is true that there were no democratic channels within the Party which wielded total power through which the rank and file could express its will or translate that will into reality. (p.64)
So what kind of choices could people make? Maitan docs nol distinguish between consultation and control, participation and democracy, so of course, all is a fog. He does not say why democracy matters except to imply things would be nicer with a little of it.
Unlike the people Maitan claims as his tradition, he has no commitment to the working class of China. He pays very little attention to it – it is just another piece of furniture in the Chinese scene. Consider his astonishing comment on the regime’s argument before 1949 against favouring ‘one sidedly’ workers (rather than favouring workers and capitalists equally):
No doubt (!) it was necessary at this time to restrain the purely economic demands of the workers in the liberated areas but that did not necessitate dampening down their political aspirations. (p.21)
That is, provided the important issue (wages) is tied up, the workers should be allowed to chatter ‘politics’. But this is not Trotsky, nor Lenin, nor Marx. This is Joseph Stalin and the Popular Front! In similar fashion, he mentions casually that ‘forms of contract labour existed in the co-operatives’ (p.55) but without comment, without showing that contract labour continues right up to the present and in both cities and countryside, and is one of the most barbarous methods of exploitation. That is just a grubby worker interest, beneath the lofty concerns of our ‘revolutionary’.
Without any sense of the necessities governing China, Maitan can understand nothing. He transmits the false consciousness of the Maoists. Consider his account of the nationalisations of private industry in the 1950s. He does not examine the detail to determine the reasons, but offers – as if it were the motive of the government – ‘private capitalism directly exploited sections of the working class, imposing anti-democratic management methods which in the long run would have created conflict between government and masses.’ (p.28) As always, his explanation raises more questions than it answers. Are workers in the state sector exploited (especially, under ‘primitive accumulation’)? Is management simply a matter of trying to be ‘democratic’, or impelled to behave in particular ways by the structure of necessities facing it? Does the regime care, provided output rises and there are no revolts? In any case, the explanation entirely misses the point. The regime took control of the private sector in order to appropriate its profits, its equipment, its skilled labour force, and hold down wages (which were being bid up by private employers, drawing away skilled labour from the state sector). But Maitan must have his ideological jam: nationalisation ‘once more (when did it do it before?) confirmed the class nature of the party’. (p.28) But what was the class nature of the party? The Maoists have scrapped the notion that state ownership is the criterion of socialism, but the USFI holds firm.
By no criterion, then, is Maitan a Trotskyist if that has anything to do with the politics of Trotsky. He is an unhappy Stalinist. The doctrine of socialism in one country, in all but words, underlies this book. The USFI, if this book is an accurate reflection of its views, would like to play to the Chinese Communist Party the role that Tribune plays in the Labour Party. The politics of Trotsky can only be a vulgar embarrassment for the USFI. The old man, passionate and razor sharp, rooted in a solidly materialist indictment of Stalinism and its Maoist offspring, is nowhere discussed by Maitan. Not even a nominal effort is made to square the circle, to clean the theoretical lumberroom. Trotsky is unceremoniously shunted into a footnote on historical sources, where he can neither bark nor bite. Furthermore, he is last in the list (after Snow, Belden, Deutscher, Selden, Brandt, Djilas, Dedijer, p.350). He does not even have icon status.
What does ‘orthodox Trotskyism’ mean today in the hands of the USFI? Sitting on the fence, having your cake and eating it, ambiguity and vague reformism. The ambiguity is staggering. Consider Maitan’s dithering over the Cultural Revolution – ‘not a revolutionary break, but rather an admittedly (to whom are we admitting? – NH) profound movement of reorganisation and reform, or rather an unprejudiced (? – NH) attempt at self-reform’ (p.144). What on earth is it about? Who is doing what to whom and why? All the cloudiness of Maoism itself, attempting to justify a particular ruling order, is faithfully reproduced.
China is different relative to the USFI than Russia. Communist parties outside the Eastern bloc do not usually regard the Soviet Union as the ‘fatherland of socialism’, but, while strongly critical of those details which catch Western middle class opinion, retain a conception of socialism very similar to Moscow’s. Few Communists today have the theoretical acuity to rationalise this ambivalent attitude. But the USFI, having properly sterilised Trotsky, does. The Communist parties need the concept of the ‘degenerated workers’ state’ as they have never done before, which is one reason for the popularity in intellectual circles, of a kind ot ‘right-wing’ respectable Trotskyism. But the Maoists are not yet knocking China, and do not want a theory of ambiguity. On the contrary. Maitan’s criticisms can only infuriate them. Perhaps that is why his criticisms are so mild and unrelated to his main account.
New Left Books, the publishers, call this book ‘an independent Marxist evaluation’. In what sense is it Marxist? It is not grounded in any scientific analysis of the material and social reality of China, the division of labour or the class, relationships. Indeed, there are no real necessities operating in the country, apparently. It is entirely national in preoccupation, as if all the problems of China could be solved in its national boundaries. Of course, it is ‘left-wing’ in the loose sense of being concerned with radical postures. But it is in no way ‘independent’. It takes its entire basic orientation from Maoism, while continually inserting ‘But ...’
Much of the book is low level chronology, which depends upon events to move it rather than an argument or theory. Superficial Pekinology rubs shoulders with what USFI cadres call ‘impressionism’. There are serious omissions (the 1956 Wage Reform, for example) and what appear to be straight factual errors – for example, his wildly inaccurate account of differentials (p.55); or such oddities as ‘profit is not used as a regulator’ (p.353) when it clearly is; or ‘More generally, the exchange economy has started to wither away’ (p.354), which is just silly, although half protected by the ‘has started’. He uses Maoist terminology without explanation – for example, ‘Khrushchevite revisionism’ pops up, without inverted comas or justification; are the Russians more revisionist than the Chinese? Like the Maoists, Maitan is much preoccupied not with what the regime does, but the style in which it does it – ‘essentially paternalistic and authoritarian’. (p.244)
At the end, Maitan asserts quite arbitrarily that the condition of China breaking out of its contradictions is that it be ‘organically’ linked to a supranational building of socialism and must introduce ‘democracy’. Two bits of flotsam washed up on the tide, all that is left of the vision of the struggle for international proletarian freedom. Because it has never been explained why these two elements are important (indeed, the first is ruled out by the description of China as ‘building socialism’), they seem to be sentimental quirks. The accommodation to Stalinism has gone too far to scramble back again at the last moment.
Maitan is no worse – and often better – than much of the liberal scholarship on China. But since he comes from a tradition so much better than liberal scholarship, and one he proclaims, there has to be a different criterion. Trotsky had the resources of scorn required to deal with Maitan’s immersion in liberal Stalinism, so uncannily similar to Shactman’s assimilation of straight anti-Communism. Mao has nothing to fear from the USFI; it lost its teeth somewhere in the Forties.

Notes
1. Maitan, Party, Army and Masses in China, New Left Books, £8.00.
2. Included in Jerome Ch’en (Editor), Mao Papers, London 1970, p.14.
3. Speech, 2nd Congress, Communist International, Collected Works, 31, p.244.
4. Reprinted as Changing relations in the Chinese revolution, New International, March 1938, p.87.
 



HOW DO the politics of black power relate to building a united workers’ movement? Some black power militants – and their white supporters – argue that in effect colour defines a separate national minority whose identity is more important than the class or classes to which the members belong. Because white racialism is so widespread, black people can rely only on themselves. This is an understandable defensive reaction against physical, economic and cultural repression. It has provided the basis for a powerful assertion of identity and confidence among black militants – black is beautiful.
In a period of growth in the system, labour scarcity ensures employers are more concerned with exploitation than discrimination. Racialism is used on a personal and cultural level rather than structured by the ruling class. Boom also makes possible an escape from the ghetto for a minority, some on the basis of leading black people. They use their blackness to build a base for self advancement, simultaneously trying to become assimilated into a white middle class. The common proletarian character of the black community is contradicted by a middle class leadership – whether community leaders, barristers, shop or restaurant owners or small businessmen. Such a leadership has a vested interest in corralling the black community and holding it separate from class issues as the basis for its own ambitions.
Economic crisis changes all this. It hits white workers in the leading sections of the working class movement, and promotes the possibility of a militant working class alternative as well as increasing the possibility of a racialist attack on black workers as scapegoats for the failures of the ruling class. It also blocks the advancement of the black leadership – it ties them to their colour, whether they like it or not. Simultaneously it exposes the black community to the realisation that they cannot win against the system solely on the basis of their community, their colour, any more than the white working class can win while being racialist.
But these are only ‘possibilities’. Whether opportunities are turned into real action depends on leadership, on the alternatives offered by the white working class movement and the black community leadership. If the white leadership accepts ruling class interests as embodied in racialism, there is no possible solution. If the leaders of the black community will not relinquish the basis of their power, colour, for a class position, this is a serious obstacle to building a united party. Blacks who – because of their experience of oppression under capitalism – ought naturally to be over-represented in the leadership of the working class movement, ought to be leading white workers, become trapped in a political ghetto. White racialism then has the last victory by locking up the potential of black leadership in a community prison.
In the united States, we can see how successive struggles by the blacks have been converted into ghetto issues by white racialism. The American ruling class has been able to isolate and stifle the natural leadership of the working class, the blacks, forcing them into exporting their hopes to some illusory foreign saviour in Africa. The most extreme case is the radical break with American ruling class culture which is embodied in Black Islam. The black Muslim leadership has now degenerated into a million dollar corporation, fleecing the black community in the name of religious separatism. The Black Panthers owe much to the radicalism of the Muslims, but they also were unable to break out of the ghetto to class politics. The militants became guerrillas, isolated from the black masses, with only Africa to console them. Others became a black pressure group in the Democratic Party, yet again adjusting to the system rather than overthrowing it.
We are now entering a major crisis in world capitalism in which the possibility of a working class alternative becomes more serious than for decades. Given the bitter legacy of white racialism – where white workers have been, from the point of view of blacks, the main racialists – can a united workers’ party be built? Some black militants insist that this is not a problem. It is up to white workers to prove their good faith. The blacks will organise in any case, and need no help in pushing the system to its limits. Among Asians in Britain – where identification with the politics of blackness is much less common than among West Indians – there is a similar case among Maoists. Asians, they say, are a national minority which should organise separately. When a white working class revolutionary party has been setup, they will ally with it. So far, they have not pushed the case to its conclusion – namely, that a separate area of the country should be set aside as an independent black state (this was a position advanced by the Communist Party of the United States in the ‘thirties for American blacks). The position as a whole is attributed to Lenin.
What was Lenin’s position on this question, the ‘right of national self-determination’ for minority peoples in Tsarist Russia, and the question of separate organisations in the struggle for power?
 
Lenin and National Self-Determination
THE JEWISH workers of Tsarist Russia were the victims of vicious anti-semitism. Tsarist pogroms expelled hundreds of thousands of Jews from the country. The Jewish Bund organised Jewish workers, and for a time allied with the Marxists, the Social Democratic Party. However, when the Bund protested against the Social Democrats recruiting Jewish workers, even in localities where there were no Bund members, Lenin sharply reproved them. The right of national self-determination of the Jews did not take priority over the working class revolution.
‘Social Democracy, as the party of the proletariat, considers it to be its positive and principal task to advance the self-determination of the working class within each nationality rather than the self-determination of peoples and nationalities. We must always and unconditionally strive to achieve the closest unity of the proletariat of all nationalities, and only in isolated and exceptional cases may we advance and actively support demands tending to set up a new class state or to substitute a loose federal unity for the complete political unity of a state’
(Selected Works, 2, 1936 edition, p.322)
It is correct to recognise the right of self-determination, but that does not mean supporting every demand of nationality. Marxists, he says, are distinguished from liberals on exactly this point, for they subordinate the demand for self-determination – the right of a people to have its own state – to the needs of the class struggle.
The oppression of the Russian Jews had produced what Lenin called ‘estrangement’, encouraging Jewish workers to organise separately against Russian racialism. Should Marxists support separate organisation so that Jewish workers would have their own independent role in the revolution?
‘This estrangement is a very great evil’, Lenin writes, ‘and a very great obstacle in the struggle against Tsarism, and we must not legalise this evil or sanctify this shameful state of affairs by establishing the “principle” of the separateness of parties or a “federation” of parties.’
(Ibid., p.330)
The unity of the workers’ party is absolutely necessary. One centralised fighting organisation is required in the struggle with a centralised and armed Tsarist State.
The Jewish Bund accuses Russian workers of anti-semitism, and confuses the people who support the ruling class with ruling class interests. If Russian workers are anti-semitic, that is because they support the ruling class. Only a class attack on the ruling class can beat back anti-semitism, not a retreat into race consciousness.
For the Bund, race took priority over class – even though its leadership claimed to be Marxist. Jewish workers were the exclusive property of the Bund. The perfectly reasonable demand of Jews to defend themselves had passed over into a demand for a separate Jewish revolutionary organisation, which would then enter into a revolutionary federation with non-Jewish workers as a separate entity – as if Jewish workers were a separate class from Russian workers. Lenin replied:
‘We must act as a single and centralised fighting organisation, we must have behind us the whole of the proletariat, without distinction of language or nationality ... we must not set up organisations that would march separately, each along its own track, we must not weaken our offensive by breaking up into a number of independent political parties, we must not breed estrangement and isolation, and then have to cure, with the aid of these famous “federation” plasters, an artificially injected disease.’ (Ibid., p.337)
What can we learn from this discussion? Black consciousness and the pride of Asians in their own culture and identity can hardly be overestimated as first steps in a rejection of the values, not of ‘the English’, but of the white ruling class. White workers who adopt the interests of the ruling class as their own will see this assertion of an independent identity as a threat, as ‘black racialism’. Dimly, they understand that black militancy is an assault on the ruling class and therefore on the interests they support. But there is no ‘black racialism’; racialism, like imperialism, is a one way process, from dominant to dominated. The defensive reactions of the oppressed should never be treated as the same as the offensive of the oppressor, as if there was nothing to choose between tyrants and their victims.
Does the assertion of a cultural identity earn the right to a separate state? For Lenin, it was not so. The revolution required support from those culturally and geographically distinct peoples, the Ukrainians, Georgians, Turkmen and so on, and their loyalty could only be secured by guaranteeing their right to a separate state. But the Jewish people lived closely interwoven in Russian, Polish and Ukrainian cities, a fundamental part of the working class. They had every right to develop their cultural identity, but not on the basis of a series of independent ghettos. Of course, later on the Jews were exiled to Central Asia, but that was the result of Stalinist anti-semitism, not the Leninist emancipation of the Jews.
In Britain, West Indians, Africans, Asians and others are, like the Jews of Tsarist Russia, a fundamental part of the working class, not geographically distinct nationalities. There is a basis neither for a series of separate states, nor for separate revolutionary organisations. An argument for separation can be advanced only in defence of a reformist leadership that aims to use colour to achieve advancement, a leadership prepared to sacrifice the interests of a class to the advance of its own power.
Ideologically, the black power leaderships need to compensate for the numerical weakness of the black communities in white societies by identifying with the black majority in other countries. The politics of the ‘Third World’ are a necessary complement. There is also a leadership which is black and anti-imperialist, and which frequently denies the local existence of class – classes are less important than nations. What happens in the ‘Third World’ therefore directly affects the viability of a separate black alternative to class struggle.
 
The ‘Third World’
THE ‘THIRD WORLD’ is an alliance of the ruling classes of the economically backward countries, and it stands in contrast to a world working class, some of whose sections exist in economically backward countries. Should working classes in backward countries fight the local ruling class against imperialism? It was a question the second Comintern Congress (1920) avoided by preparing two drafts which were both included in the record even though they could be contradictory. In practice, with the defeat of the European working classes in the 1920s, the whole direction of Communist Party policy shifted towards alliance with anti-imperialist ruling classes. It was argued that the working class was too small and too vulnerable, and revolution was liable to upset the balance of international power to the disadvantage of the Soviet Union. Yet the experience of the alliance produced catastrophes – the local ruling class used the Communists to dragoon the workers, and then turned on it and destroyed it.
In the 1940s and 1950s, the majority of former colonial countries won their political independence. They were necessarily anti-imperialist and some of them also regarded the Soviet Union as no less imperialist than the United States – they chose ‘non-alignment’. Furthermore, they rejected both capitalism and what passed for socialism in the Soviet Union as the model for their own regime. They proposed a third alternative, often involving a large public sector, national planning, curbs or nationalisation for foreign capital, and a verbal concern with popular welfare.
The ‘third alternative’ was anti-imperialist. But it was also anti-working class. Trade unions were tightly controlled or eliminated; strikers were gaoled; and real wages held down in order to increase the rate of exploitation. Over time, also, the anti-imperialism weakened, for the new ruling classes needed foreign capital, weapon imports and foreign markets for their exports. It would not have mattered if world capitalism had grown fast enough to deliver jobs and incomes to a large enough proportion of the workforce in the backward countries. In the 1960s, the stagnating growth of the backward countries has undercut the claims of national independence, or a third alternative. The black ruling classes have a declining chance of competing with the white imperialist powers, and therefore are forced to opt to join forces with the whites. Rising unemployment, declining real wages, the collapse of most efforts to develop, isolates the new ruling classes as parasitic and privileged strata in the eyes of the local people. They can recapture loyalties only by force at home and wars abroad – by squabbles with other ‘Third World’ ruling classes. The ‘Third World’, an alliance of ruling classes, crumbles, leaving a world working class, with a heavily oppressed peasantry, facing a world imperialist order, some of whose sections are black.
This is the lesson of a whole range of offensives by working classes in backward countries over the past eighteen months – from the gigantic Indian railway strike, the rash of strikes in Burma, Thailand and Malaysia, the widespread agitation in Pakistan, the general strike that overthrew Haile Selassie in Ethiopia, the explosion of militancy in Nigeria, Jamaica, Trinidad and Dominica. The victory in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos becomes the final stages of the past strategy of national liberation struggle, not the forerunner of a revolutionary response to the crisis of world capitalism.
The situation in southern Africa illustrates most sharply how events are moving. The revolt of black workers in South Africa has done more damage to apartheid in eighteen months than two decades of non-worker agitation, whether by white and black liberals or by guerrillas. It has made Vorster and the dominant section of the white ruling class desperate for means to win over a section of the black working class, to create a black middle class loyal to the South African regime. To do that, the challenge of the black ruling classes of Africa has to be ended. South Africa has to have black allies abroad, particularly among those best known for their anti-imperialism and opposition to white racialism in South Africa. To win them, Vorster has to settle the Rhodesian issue in favour of a Zimbabwean black middle class. Such an ambition would have been absurd only a short time ago, but the world economic crisis has, fortunately for Vorster, driven into his arms a whole flock of willing black rulers.
It was not merely the well-known right-wing leaders that wanted access to South Africa’s economic power. Last year, the price of copper collapsed at the same time as Zambia’s maize crop partially failed. The interests of survival of the Zambian ruling class diverged sharply from those of the black working class of South Africa, and President Kaunda made his peace. Vorster was quite cynical about the exercise:
‘I think that we have whetted the appetites of a number of African countries to have a closer look at South Africa – in every sense of the word,’ he is reported to have said. ‘I also think we have made countries realise that their own economic interests demand that they buy in the nearest, the cheapest and the best market’ (Cape Argus, interview, May 7 1975.)
The spirit of collaboration has become so close that it was the Zambian Foreign Minister who announced that South African troops would evacuate Rhodesia by the end of May. In return, Zambia has pushed the radical Zimbabwian forces into an alliance led by the conservative nationalists, arrested ZANU officials in Zambia and banned all nationalist groups except the conservative African National Congress. What South Africa was seeking to achieve by the use of troops, Kaunda is now doing – trying to destroy the guerrillas. Nyerere of Tanzania has followed Kaunda’s lead, and together they presented the ‘moderate’ case at the last Organisation of African Unity conference in April. The FRELIMO, for six months participants in office in Mozambique, have provided no alternative perspective, for, like Kaunda, their interests as a new ruling order are powerfully threatened by the crisis in world capitalism.
The crisis is separating the interests of the black ruling classes and the masses, pushing the first-for-survival-into the arms of a world imperialist class. The ‘Third World’ provides no third alternative, only a temporary resting point that depended upon the economic growth of the world system in the 1950s. The African working class is beginning to move, and as it does so, it clearly illuminates that the central issue is one of class.
 
Leadership
THE FACT that the economic base for black politics is ending does not spontaneously produce class politics, however. Indeed, for black people in Britain – facing the daily savagery of racialism on the shop floor, the buses, the streets – the decline of a political alternative can produce demoralisation, a flight from reality to an imagined utopia in Africa or ‘home’. The necessity of the ghetto is made into a virtue.
This situation comes about if there is no class alternative, if the black leadership makes a virtue of its isolation and the white worker leadership does not deliberately fit its demands to the situation of black workers (as it must fit its programme to carry both the advanced sections of the working class and all peculiarly oppressed strata). Fighting racialism on the shop floor and outside the factory, fighting the National Front, is not a virtuous act of a do-gooder. It is the precondition for building a united working class alternative.
The role of black leaders is also vital. By their experience of white oppression, by their concentration in the worst organised trades, their capacity for revolutionary leadership will be far greater than their numbers. They are, as Trotsky described the American blacks in the 1930s, ‘the most dynamic milieu of the working class’, the most capable of revolutionary courage and sacrifice, and inevitably over-represented in the leadership of the working class. But this is only possible if they see the struggle against racialism as part of the development of a united class alternative, so that they then have the courage to lead not only black workers, but also white. The high number of Jews in the leadership of the Bolshevik party shows how far this conception was effected in Tsarist Russia.
Already, there are a number of important examples of outstanding black leaders of white – or majority white – workforces. The more this develops, the more powerful the class alternative so that black and white workers have more in common than black workers and black businessmen, shopkeepers and policemen. There is already a thin stratum of black capitalism in Britain, often based upon the exploitation of the black community (whether as customers or workers). It seems to offer an exit from racial and class oppression, but the crisis walls up that exit for all except a very few. We should welcome the ‘promotion’ of black capitalists so that the ruling class is more clearly identified. It is that ruling class – in Britain or the United States or India or Tanzania or Nigeria or Jamaica – which is the obstacle to the emancipation of mankind. Black workers have a decisive role in its overthrow.
Socialists must give unconditional support to all efforts which defend both oppressed nations in the world and national minorities in the heartlands of imperialism. But defence will not bring socialism. For that we need a united international workers’ party, where the divisions of nationality and colour are subordinate to the development of a workers’ leadership.
 



Rural Protest: Peasant Movements and Social Change
edited by Henry Landsberger
Macmillan, £8.00
MARXISTS have always argued that industrial workers must play the decisive role in the achievement of socialism, and that therefore socialism was impossible before the creation of capitalism and a working class. Many socialists and revolutionaries do not agree. Revolution, they say, derives from oppression, and the world’s peasantry has always been more oppressed than the working class. To the Marxist case that there is a fundamental conflict of interest between a worker and a peasant, the non-Marxists reply either that there are only ‘people’ (workers and peasants are the same), or that workers are indeed different: they are corrupted, and a part of the privileged ruling class.
How far does this collection of essays help us in answering some of these questions? It includes ten contributions which the editor aims to measure against the same set of questions. In the first chapter, he lays out the questions, before other authors try to answer them in the rest of the book. In Part 1, we are concerned with the European peasantry in the Middle Ages, the 1381 English peasant rebellion, social banditry, rural anarchism in 1873 Spain, and the Pugachev revolt in Tsarist Russia. Part 2 examines peasant politics in Eastern Europe between the wars, and in Poland from 1895. Part 3 discusses peasants and nationalism in the rest of the world since the second World War. The scope is vast and the results very patchy. Some of the pieces on European history are good and very illuminating, but the closer the book gets to the present, the less satisfactory it becomes. Part 3 is awful – to have one contribution on the peasant movements of Asia and North Africa since the war is a piece of impudence that is quite breathtaking. It has nothing at all to say which is either new or instructive. The last piece on Mexico and Bolivia is interesting, but too slight to do much.
So we do not get much further forward in terms of the contemporary scene, although there is much of value on the past in Europe. But the price is prohibitive.
 

l Harris: China and World Revolution (2. China and Economic Development)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

2. China and Economic Development


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.10-13.

IN AN imperialist dominated world, what does ‘economic development’ mean? In most economically backward countries, there are plenty of people. What is lacking are the means to put them to work. Even just putting people to work would mean there would be much more output, and so much more available for everybody. But to provide the tools requires capital equipment and it is just this desperate shortage of equipment which prevents even employing the people that there are.
What are the sources of capital? Men and women in work can be forced to ‘save’ if they are not allowed to consume all they produce. The resources ‘saved’ (unpaid labour) can be turned into investment and with that, even more can be produced. The more investment or ‘accumulation’ the larger the stock of equipment and machines, the more people can be not only employed but produce more and more for each hour of work: labour productivity increases.
As well as forced savings inside the country, resources are sometimes available from abroad – but on certain terms. Countries can trade and make a profit on exchanging the products of the labour of their people for those of other countries. Foreign governments may make capital grants or credits available for political reasons or to increase their own exports (what is called Aid). Foreign capitalist companies may be willing to supply capital, provided they can in due course take out the profits.
These are the sources of investment, and investment is the core problem of economic development. There are many things which drain investment however. Colonial control, the profits of private capitalism, the privileges of bureaucrats, all leech off the product of labour. In the case of China, imperialist domination over 150 years not only robbed the country directly, impoverished its people, it also savagely reduced the productivity of its people. In most of the countries of Asia, the people are now so poor that they have to consume the largest part of what they produce just to survive; many of them need to consume more than they produce.
This is not the end of the problem. In the past, ruling classes increased their investment not only by exploiting their own people, but also by expelling those they could not employ to their colonies and by robbing other countries through colonialism. There are no colonies now to which the ‘unproductive’ can be sent, nor countries which can easily be colonised and robbed. The economically backward countries were forced by the imperialists into trading in mainly raw materials where the profit is very small, so that the manufacturing monopoly of the industralised imperialist countries, was preserved. The advanced capitalist countries have such a stranglehold over the markets where profits are large that prevents other countries breaking in.
Furthermore, even more investment is required now to get economic development going. For example, to make steel at the lowest cost, requires much more equipment today than ever before-and a steel plant employs even fewer people. A one million ton plant used to be enough; now it is a six million ton plant, and soon it will be a twelve million ton plant. That means that the majority of countries cannot afford to manufacture cheap steel. But it is impossible to make the tools at home or compete in manufactured goods abroad or even have a defence programme without steel. So steel must be imported from the imperialist countries, and then paid for by exports. It is impossible to escape if the national borders are to be defended, and even the bare minimum of industrial jobs provided. Stalin knew this when he launched the industrialisation programme in the Soviet Union. In 1931, he put it:
‘We are fifty or a hundred years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this lag in ten years. Either we do it or they will crush us.’
In China, when the new regime came to power, it strictly enforced ‘savings’. In the First Five Year Plan, it introduced ‘compulsory savings’ first by controlling the level of wages and prices, by procuring foodstuffs from the peasants at artificially low prices, by taxing, and finally by conscripting the rural unemployed at very low real wages on large-scale road and irrigation projects. Furthermore, it received some assistance from the Soviet Union for key industrial projects.
The results were impressive. Nearly a fifth of China’s total output is reckoned to go into investment. In a very poor country, that is a high level indeed. But the kind of investment determines how fast the economy will grow in the future. That is where defence comes in. The external threats of first the United States, and latterly the Soviet Union, forces a large diversion of investment into defence projects – perhaps this is now over half the overall national investment level. Defence takes three and a half million men and women directly in the armed forces and perhaps another ten million civilians supporting them. Scarce steel is taken out of making the tools to assist the peasants and put into weapons. The nuclear programme draws on all the most scarce elements – it is prodigal in its use of expensive equipment, of the scarcest sorts of highly skilled labour, of desperately scarce electrical power. Maybe a quarter or more of China’s potential rate of economic growth has been taken off for military expenditure.
To cut costs, the regime stresses the need to increase labour productivity in the factories rather than increase the number of jobs. Those who are unemployed in the cities must be sent off to the countryside, to be absorbed there in ‘underemployment’. So, while output has increased quite fast, the number of jobs has not. When the regime came to power, the largest part of national output came from agriculture. Now only about a quarter of output comes from agriculture. But nevertheless, it is farming which provides employment for two-thirds of the population, just as it did before the regime came to power. Despite all the dramatic changes, the country has not been able to shift the balance of employment from low productivity agriculture to high productivity industry.
The Chinese leadership has been consistently aware of the central problem of accumulation, It is this preoccupation of the leadership which underlies the twists and turns of policy as they desperately search for some means to push along the process of economic development. In the First Plan, the government tried to prevent any increase in consumption in order to shunt the maximum output into investment. They made the core of their investment programme the development of heavy industry so that they could shorten the period before they had steel and engineering available to provide the tools for mass development and the weapons for defence. By 1956, the country was cracking under the pace. ‘Savings’ took so much, consumption was so low, people were losing all incentive to work. The 1956 Party Congress had to notice:
‘the need to increase consumption, for otherwise there would be a serious contradiction between the Party and the masses which would lead to unforgivable errors’.
But before any relaxation could be introduced – that is, a cut in the savings level and an increase in consumption-Chairman Mao on his own authority launched a further massive attempt to break the bottleneck by the ‘Great Leap Forward’. Instead of concentrating on building a heavy industry which takes a lot of capital and produces in the short term very few jobs, capital should be dispersed round the country so that the masses of unemployed could be brought into work. Instead of concentrating savings in the hands of the centre, local communes would be forced to raise their own savings to finance local investment. Masses of small-scale foundries would produce the iron, not great steelworks. It was heroic, but catastrophic. It plunged China into a major crisis. For the small foundries were extremely wasteful in their use of resources. They used extravagantly very scarce supplies of iron ore, coal and transport, to make iron of poor quality. By 1960, most of the small industrial units had been scrapped or amalgamated. There were only some 300 of the thousands of smelters left.
The economy dumped, driven down both by the dislocation of the industrial economy and three years of disastrous harvest (also partly the result of the Great Leap’s changes in agriculture). The crisis was deepened still further by the unilateral suspension of Soviet aid and the withdrawal of Russian technicians in 1960.
The regime had no alternative but to relax the drive to increase savings, and let consumption rise. Slowly, they put the bits back together again. By 1965, output was getting back to the levels of 1956-7. But the years had taken their toll. The mass Party membership had got used to ‘relaxation’, to eating more and saving less, to using their privileges as the local authority. They were not prepared for yet another struggle to increase national savings, to curb consumption. This was the problem that the ‘Cultural Revolution’ was designed to overcome. It was a major attempt to refashion the Party for its central task. Yet before the dust from that explosion had settled, the threat of a Soviet invasion (following the direct military clash between China and the Soviet Union in 1969) reversed all the priorities. Now, as a matter of supreme urgency, the regime had to ensure its capacity to ward off a Soviet attack. It could not afford the discontents inside China arising from any sustained effort to increase savings and lower consumption. The regime relaxed as it had done in 1959-60, allowing worker and peasant consumption to increase. It ‘decentralised’ financial responsibility in a number of areas in order to cut central costs and concentrate on expanding defence capacity. Yet all of this lowers savings, and makes more difficult achieving the central drive of the regime, that capital accumulation which will make possible a role for China in the world commensurate with its size.
 
Democracy
Where people are very poor, much of their time and energy is taken up with keeping body and soul together. They will not willingly sacrifice the meagre livelihood of themselves and their families for some distant aim. They will certainly not be willing voluntarily to save when they are still hungry. To ensure that there is savings, the regime must compel it. That makes it impossible to have any genuine democracy, any real popular control, when economic development is being pursued in national isolation.
China has a great deal of ‘popular participation’, but its regime cannot afford democracy. The National People’s Congress, China’s parliament, is not elected; its delegates are nominated by the local party organisations. It is supposed to meet at least every four years, but in practice since the People’s Republic was inaugurated in 1949, it has met only three times – in 1956, 1958 and 1965. Perhaps there is democracy inside the Communist Party? But the Party Congress rarely meets. It has met only in 1958, 1969 and 1973. Even when these bodies meet, their deliberations are not publicised, so it is impossible for the mass of people to know what is being decided in their name. Take for example, the Five Year Plans, supposedly embodying the aims and strategy of the regime. The National People’s Congress formally approved the Second Plan, but then – without consulting the Congress – it was scrapped, and Chairman Mao launched the Great Leap Forward. There was no plan thereafter until the Third (1966-70). To avoid the embarrassment of the Second, the National People’s Congress was not invited to approve it. Indeed, it was not even published, so very few people could know what it proposed. As a prominent economist, working in China and sympathetic to the regime, commented:
‘For the first time in a socialist regime, a whole people was ordered to embark on a Five Year Plan without being informed of the targets ...’ (Deleyne, p.29)
But in any case, the regime had published no set of figures on any sector of the economy since 1959, and no estimates of the size of population since the census of 1956. How could the mass of people make an intelligent choice of the alternatives without even the minimum basic information?
The major changes of line and leading personnel have never been discussed publicly, let alone subject to democratic decision. The Great Leap Forward was Launched and stopped; Chairman Mao was dropped as head of State and Marshall Peng as Defence Minister during a major disagreement among the leadership in 1959; the Party was turned upside down during the Cultural Revolution; Liu Shao-ch’i, Head of State and for thirty years second in command of the Party, and numerous other very prominent figures were dropped as ‘capitalist-readers’ in 1967-8; the Politbureau was superseded by a group of people personally nominated by Mao, the Cultural Revolution Group; and all this, without a vote or even a discussion by the National People’s Congress or a Party Congress. The man elected at the Ninth Party Congress in 1969 as heir to Chairman Mao, Defence Minister Lin Piao, was then removed from office, and fled with the top leadership of the armed forces and the third leading member of the Party, Chen Po-ta. Apart from these bodies, the institutions do not exist which could focus a democratic decision on these events. Those that might – for example, the All-China Trade Union Federation – are subject equally to the power of the choice of the national leadership; this particular body was just suspended in 1967 without any form of consultation with its mass membership or indeed explanation.
It might, of course, be argued that these institutions are irrelevant to real democracy. Mass movements operate through their own logic, regardless of the institutional forms, However, not only did the mass of Chinese not know about the changes until after event, they had no means of opposing or even varying the decisions made. The mass movements were conjured to support the leadership after the event, not before.
The personal rivalries of the central leadership of the Party match the zigzags, the contradictions in policy. ‘Self-reliance’ is stressed at one moment, only to be attacked at the next. Workers should ‘take control’ in one year, but in the next it is managerial authority that is applauded; the People’s Daily attacks ‘factory anarchy’ and those who criticise factory discipline. Western capitalist technology is deplored, but then the regime purchases the most advanced foreign products (China’s imports between 1972 and 1974 included 21,366 vehicles, 85 medium and long-range aircraft and 23 helicopters; the aircraft included orders for Boeing 707s, Tridents and Concordes). Beethoven, whose music Lenin liked, is at one moment attacked as a ‘German capitalist composer’ (People’s Daily, 14 January 1973), and at another is being played in Peking by a foreign concert orchestra at the official invitation of the Chinese government.
The shifts and changes show the need for campaigns to mobilise a people who do not control the broad direction of policy. The same factor accounts for the way in which the leadership stresses the need for sacrifice, for moral not material incentives. The regime does not possess the resources to change the reality which faces the average Chinese. The best it can do is try to change people’s attitudes to poverty, to get them to tolerate the intolerable. Workers in the West know what it means when there are calls from the government for greater sacrifice, we must tighten our belts, we need more moral devotion instead of material greed etc.; it means defending profits at the expense of wages.
As the crisis grows more severe, the Chinese leadership has less and less recourse to the traditions of Marxism-Leninism. It appeals increasingly to the ancient national cultural traditions. Confucius, dead for two and a half thousand years, has to be disinterred and thrashed all over again, even though the number of Chinese familiar with Confucius must be far fewer than the number of English familiar with Shakespeare.
To China’s crisis is now added the crisis of world capitalism. With all the struggles and sacrifices of the past quarter of a century, the majority of people are still close to the subsistence level. Yet now, with a downturn in world capitalism, it is the poorest countries which are most savagely victimised. China is more protected than many smaller countries by its sheer size. It also has large resources of oil. But nevertheless, the markets for its exports other than oil are shrinking, while its need for expensive imports – of industrial and technical goods as well as grain – remains high. Above all, the threat of the Soviet Union, itself reacting to the military threat of the United States, locks China into the central military technological competition of world imperialism. It imposes upon its people a crippling level of defence expenditure. What is the way out?
 
Next Chapter


l Harris: China and World Revolution (3a. The CCP and the KMT)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution
3. The Nature of the Regime

The Chinese Communist Party and the Kuomintang


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, p.14.

1. CCP official spokesman,Chin Po-ku, Chungking, Novembers 1938:
‘China needs Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek’s leadership more urgently than ever today when the national crisis has reached a life and death stage. His remaining in office and his valuable services to the Chinese nation are essential and imperative in the struggle leading to final victory. The Chinese Communist Party has placed unquestioning confidence in Chiang Kai-shek’s fixed policy of conducting a war of resistance. No-one else can lead this war except Generalissimo Chiang’ (to the People’s Political Council).
2. Wang Ming (CCP delegate to the Communist International, in Comintern 14/10 October 1937:
‘We Chinese Communists openly declare that we support the Kuomintang and the Nanking government (of Chiang Kai-shek), and will fight shoulder to shoulder with them against Japanese imperialism’.
3. Report, 6th Plenum of the 6th Central Committee, CCP, October 1938 (omitted from Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung):
‘In the course of its glorious history, the Kuomintang has been responsible for the overthrow of the Ch’ing, the establishment of the Republic, opposition to Yuan Shi-k’ai, establishment of the Three Principles of uniting with Russia, with the Communist Party, and with the workers and peasants in the great revolution of 1926-7. Today, it is once more leading the great anti-Japanese war ... it has had two great leaders in succession-Mr Sun Yat-sen and Mr Chiang Kai-shek ... One can foresee a brilliant future for the Kuomintang.’
 

l Harris: China and World Revolution (5. China's Policies Abroad)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

5. China’s Policies Abroad


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.22-25.

THE WORLD is governed by imperialism, but imperialism does not impose one order on the world. As Lenin outlined, the system is governed by the vicious rivalries of the powers that dominate it. That imposes a common discipline on all the rest. It makes the world one system, not a series of countries added together, nor a First, Second and Third Worlds. Ruling classes command the separate provinces of the whole and compete with each other, but they are not, and could not be, independent of each other anymore than one capitalist firm could be independent of its rivals in one country. The ruling classes are far from equal. The small cluster of ruling classes in the industrialised countries dominate their junior partners, their gangers and chargehands, in the majority of economically backward countries. There is indeed a great divide between the oppressing and oppressed ruling classes but they are both ruling classes. And that means that each depends on the exploitation of other classes, workers and peasants. Ultimately, the ruling classes both compete with each other and have a common interest – just as firms do inside countries. Altogether, they constitute a world ruling class facing a world working class and peasantry.
Between the First World War and the 1950s, many of the backward colonial countries were dominated by the struggle for political independence from the ruling classes of the industrialised countries. Without a serious international working class alternative, the anti-colonial struggle was waged by class coalitions of one sort or another. Whether led by middle class people or by part of the old pre-imperialist ruling class, it was an important challenge to imperialism that inflicted defeats upon it.
However, once in power, the new regimes faced different problems. Now they needed either rapid economic development so that national power rose to the level of the new regimes’ ambitions, or the spread of the revolution into the heartlands of imperialism. Without one or the other, without establishing national power on a par with the imperialist powers or breaking them from within, the world system inevitably begins to recolonise them. It is not necessary to do so by the direct use of force; indeed, military intervention is the least important method of incorporation. Through trade, capital movements and political influence, the world order subdues its rebels. The law of value of the world market begins to reassert its hegemony over the entire world.
Supporters of China’s policies argue that the rivalries between powers should be used to weaken the system, and that this aim is what explains the different phases of China’s foreign policy. It obviously makes sense to try to do this, provided it does not jeopardise the central task, building an alternative basis of power in the working class. Without this, the fiercer the rivalries between the powers, the more pressure on workers to support their own ruling classes. The system is not at all ‘weakened’ if there is no worker challenge to it – it merely becomes increasingly barbaric and oppressive. And barbarism does not automatically promote a revolutionary response unless there is a workers’ party proposing a real alternative. If improvishment and savagery produced revolutions spontaneously, the world would be continuously topsy-turvy with revolution.
A revolutionary government is concerned, not with building a conventional level of power, but the growth of an alternative source of power, the world working class. The enemy is capitalism, both its multinational and its backward national sections.
How does all this relate to China’s foreign policy? China is still weak in conventional national power, too weak to influence events on a serious scale. But, because of the politics and class position of its leadership, it is incapable of developing an alternative system of power, the international working class. The Chinese leadership pursued the same class collaboration abroad that it accepted in its rise to power and in its time in power. The end product is the same, reformism. In the struggle for power, the Communist Party in essence invited the Chinese capitalists to unite with workers and peasants under its leadership to isolate the ‘handful of reactionaries’ and build a powerful Chinese nation. Abroad, it invites foreign ruling classes to unite under its leadership to isolate the ‘handful of reactionaries’, namely the ‘two superpowers’ (the United States and the Soviet Union), and build a prosperous world order. In order to isolate one ‘superpower’, the Soviet Union, it is necessary to give tacit support to anything that opposes it, including NATO and the Common Market, regardless of whether this conflicts with the interests of European workers. It is similarly necessary to give tacit support to SEATO or the five power Commonwealth agreement for policing south-east Asia, lest the Soviet Union intervene to ‘fill the vacuum’ (The Times, October 23, 1972).
The Chinese Communist Party’s class collaboration policies were part of the reason why the effect of the Chinese revolution on the world class was so small. The 1917 Russian revolution and the work of the Comintern spread the impact of workers’ power round the world. It created Communist parties in most countries, including China. It was a call to a world class, not to ‘oppressed’ ruling classes, and the aim was the creation of an ‘international Soviet Republic’, not a group of allied ruling classes constituting a ‘Third World’. The Chinese Communist Party rejects the need for a centrally disciplined Comintern because it does not accept that there is one world working class. It looks at the world as a national ruling class, not as the Chinese workers’ section of a world class. Therefore, the United Nations is an adequate forum.
Ninety nine per cent of the external relations of the People’s Republic are with other governments. It accepts the terms of such relationships and the terms of the rivalry between the advanced powers – bribery (through aid), manipulation, and the private meetings and secret assurances of important leaders. No matter if the leader happens to be a most reactionary ruler, king, Shah, or Sheikh; how he treats his people is his ‘domestic concern’. It means also doing favours to ensure the stability of the existing ruling classes, as Chou En-lai has twice done in Vietnam for the United States. The Chinese Prime Minister admitted in 1972 what had long been known, that ‘he had wrongly persuaded the Vietnamese to make concessions at Geneva in 1954 to get a settlement; he was wiser now than then.’ (Times, interview, July 13, 1972) Wiser he may have been, but it did not prevent the Chinese Government inviting President Nixon to Peking in February 1972 without consulting its supposed allies in Vietnam who were still fighting US forces. There was much barely concealed anger in Hanoi, but again this did not prevent China (and the Soviet Union) using all pressure to persuade the North Vietnamese to accept President Thieu as the legitimate negotiator for the South, a concession they had hitherto refused to countenance.
It goes even further. Discretion is needed in domestic reports of foreign events lest it offend friends abroad. The Chinese masses were told nothing of the Watergate affair, nor are they invited to understand the events in Northern Ireland. When relations improved with the Filipino dictator, Marcos, reporting of the Huk revolt disappeared, and the southern Muslim rebellion has never featured in China’s newspapers. There was nothing on the events in East Bengal, nor the youth revolt in Ceylon, nor even the appalling destruction of the Indonesian Communist Party in 1965. In the same way, events in the countries which China is wooing are not allowed to affect relations – while Chou En-lai assiduously flattered his Egyptian hosts in 1965, they were putting avowed supporters of China on public trial.
To play the diplomatic game, you need to keep all the cards in your own hands, not display them. You need to preserve the ability to make quick changes without reference to some other audience, either one at home or a popular movement in some other country. The switch from attacking the United States as the major threat to the Soviet Union as the main enemy was a change of gear that seemed to wreck a foreign policy of two decades standing. At one moment, as Foreign Minister Chen Yi put it 1965,
‘Peaceful co-existence with US imperialism which is pushing ahead its policies of oppression and war, is out of the question’.
At the next, Peking was offering Nixon what was seen as a great diplomatic coup to relieve him of domestic embarrassment. There were no great gains from the concession. Taiwan remains under the Kuomintang. But China is now a member of the United Nations!
Chinese foreign policy shifts and changes, just as domestic policy does, but it always clings to the central aim of achieving an association of ruling classes, and working class interests in the countries concerned are sacrificed to this. At one stage, it was the grand alliance of North Korea, North Vietnam, Indonesia, Ghana and Cuba. But the Russians mobilised to prize loose Korea, Vietnam and Cuba, and the leadership of Indonesia and Ghana fell through a hole in the structure of their domestic class coalitions. For a time, it was the European imperialist powers who were the key. Indeed, Mao went so far as to describe it thus:
‘France itself, Germany, Italy, Great Britain – provided the latter stops being courtier of the United States – Japan and we ourselves: there you have the Third World.’
(French Parliamentary delegation, 1965)
Then policy shifted back to the task of piling up votes for the crucial debate on China’s entry to the United Nations. Then back to wooing European imperialism – Heath and many of the European foreign ministers were feted, wined and dined at the expense of the Chinese masses. But with dissension in the Common Market and economic weakening, policy turned again to the ruling classes of the backward countries.
In 1974, Teng Hsiao-p’ing tried to impose some order on these shifts in a speech to the representatives of the ruling classes of the world in the United Nations:
‘The world actually consists’, he said, ‘of three parts, or three worlds that are both interconnected and in contradiction to one another. The US and the Soviet Union make up the First World. The developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and other regions make up the Third World. The developed countries between the two make up the Second World.’
(Peking Review 15, 12 April 1974)
The world apparently has a class system of ruling classes in which the smaller imperialist powers are a petty bourgeoisie, and the economically backward countries’ ruling classes, the workers and peasants. The ‘workers and peasants’ include such unlikely members as Hailie Selassie (until his fall), the Shah of Persia, the Mafia that runs Thailand, the Chilean and Brazilian juntas. The scheme is a dreamworld designed to hide the great divide that cuts through every country and every district of the world, between the world ruling class and the world working class peasantry.
The Chinese Communist Party needs to obscure reality, both to conceal the class divide inside China and its weakness abroad. It has no power to oppose the Soviet threat except national military preparedness. It cannot appeal to workers in Russia or anywhere else to defend a workers’ regime in China, because it is not a workers’ regime. What it can do abroad is to try and win allies among other ruling classes and prevent the Soviet Union winning them. That is, at the end, an illusory power, since all its good friends who have been bribed or have dined in Peking, will also be happy to sit on the sidelines and watch the Sino-Soviet war as an entertainment. The American and European ruling classes, in particular, will watch to see whether there are any profits for them in such a confrontation. And the United Nationa which it cost China so much to enter and to which it has contributed so heavily since, will undoubtedly deplore the loss of life and urge moderation on the belligerents.
For the Chinese leadership, there is no objective structure of classes, or power, only relationships to be manipulated. Japan in 1971 was a dangerous militaristic and imperialistic threat to the Pacific region. But in 1972, after the Peking visit of Prime Minister Tanaka – now dismissed for corruption – the Japanese ruling class is described as no longer seeking power in the Pacific and the People’s Republic has now agreed to supply Japan with oil (up to 50 million tons by the 1980s). The Chinese leadership is not concerned with what a revolutionary Japanese worker might make of this strange somersault.
Not very long ago, the Soviet Union was, according to the Chinese Communist Party, a socialist society. On the accession to power of Mr Khrushchev it became fascist at home and imperialist abroad. There was no change in the class structure of the Soviet Union which made it capitalist – if it had been socialist before – let alone fascist. If the workers had been in power, if there had existed the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’, how was this wrested from them without any apparent struggle? No doubt in the future if the accidental conjuncture of forces leads to Russia and China improving their relations, the Soviet Union will pop back into the ‘socialist camp’. Of course, a real analysis of Soviet society as opposed to rhetorical phrase mongering would draw uncomfortable parallels with China itself. If, as the Chinese say, Russia is State capitalist, then on the structure China is also State capitalist.
In fact, as these examples show, analysis for the Chinese government – talk of classes and fascism – is not the basis for policy, it is a diplomatic ploy to justify things already settled for reasons of State policy.
For the Chinese leaders, the capitalist class suddenly disappears into a ‘handful’ of selfish people, easily overcome or reeducated. The lack of analysis before events, the ‘r’einterpre-tation’ of events so that they are always victories whatever happens, means that policies can never be tested in practice and no lessons can be drawn from failures (because, by definition, there are none). The leadership is infallible. There was no appraisal of the terrible defeat of the Indonesian Communists in 1965 (although they had been directly influenced and encouraged by Peking), of the Indian Marxist-Leninists between 1969 and 1971, or the Bengali Left in 1971.
The lynch-pin of China’s relations with other ruling classes is the Five Principles of ‘peaceful co-existence’ (mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, non-aggression, non-interference in internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, opposition to imperialist policies of aggression and war). The principles are so vacuous that they are acceptable to any, including the imperialist powers themselves. They bind no-one to anything, for there is always some reason available to an aggressor to reconcile his action with the principles concerned (intervention was at the request of the ruling class concerned, is the standard excuse). Indeed, they are used against China itself; in November 1974, when China moved the United Nations seating of Sihanouk’s Cambodian regime, it was rejected on the grounds that it was interference in domestic Cambodian affairs.
For those not in the ruling classes, ‘peaceful co-existence’ does mean something, however. For the Chinese government, ‘interference’ in the domestic politics of another ruling class is a far worse crime than that ruling class slaughtering its own people (Pakistan, Ceylon etc.). ‘Peaceful co-existence’ is a conservative principle. It accepts the existing world order and guarantees it to those who benefit from it. China’s acceptance of the principle from the Soviet Union is like Chile’s Allende accepting, as a condition of power, ‘non-interference’ in the Chilean armed forces. No-one committed to the class struggle . could ever accept such a principle since it disarms the oppressed – it forbids help to workers who live in other countries, forbids the existence of a world working class.
What of the cases where China has assisted revolutionary forces? Moral support is offered unstintingly – even if not necessarily publicly – except where the Chinese government is wooing the threatened government. But China takes no initiatives in starting movements elsewhere. For example, there is no guerrilla movement operating in Taiwan (although there is a Taiwanese independence movement, anathema alike to Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Tse-tung). Practical assistance to movements that exist is flatly denied by Chou En-lai, but here is evidence that some help, very small and very exceptionally, is given (it is minute in comparison to the help given to other ruling classes). In Vietnam, there was a great of help, but that was to an established government, that of North Vietnam. In the Middle East, China gave early moral support to Al Fatah, but only a little practical assistance (most of the weaponry of the Palestine Liberation Organisation came from other sources); the help reached a peak during the Jordanian civil war, but then shifted to diplomatic relations with the Arab States (especially Egypt, Lebanon and Syria).
In Southern Africa, Peking is said to have assisted guerrilla movements against the Portuguese and against the Rhodesian regime, but again it is not clear that this has been of any great significance in the struggle. Certainly, the cash or arms involved has been trivial beside the railway finance advanced to Tanzania and Zambia (the ruling classes of which were, in 1975, busily attempting to suppress the same Zimbabwean guerrillas).
Elsewhere, the guerrillas may fight forever more, but Peking has nothing but talk and occasional holidays in China to offer. Even those may be curbed when it affects State relations: as has happened in Malaya, Thailand and the Philippines. China’s propaganda certainly emphasises popular action and rejects the ‘Parliamentary Road to Socialism’ – except in Chile or wherever else it might seem to be successful – but not the fundamental basis of a parliamentary road strategy, class coalition reformism.
The victims are the exploited. In every class coalition or alliance of ruling classes, it is their interests which are sacrificed to the exploiters. There may be temporary concessions made to encourage them, but in the end this is just the price of giving up the struggle against exploitation. Nationalism in isolation from the struggle against exploitation is no more than the old ‘divide and rule’ tactic. Long ago, Marx put it quite clearly:
‘Past experience has shown how disregard of that bond of brotherhood which ought to exist between the workmen of different countries, and incite them to stand firmly by each other in all their struggles for emancipation, will be chastised by the common discomforture of their incoherent efforts’.
(Inaugural Address to the Working Men’s International Association, 28 September, 1864).
 
Next Chapter


l Harris: China and World Revolution (1. China: Imperial and Republican)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

1. China: Imperial and Republican


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.8-10.

FOR OVER 150 years, China decayed under the impact of foreign imperialism – British, French, Russian, German, American, and finally Japanese. The results were a frightening impoverishment of the mass of the people, the collapse of the imperial regime in 1911, and a long drawn out period of political disintegration closed by Japanese occupation of the most important areas of the country and the Second World War.
Initially, it was the British in the nineteenth century who made the running in the competition between the major powers to grab parts of China. British merchants drained silver out of the country in payment for the opium they pumped in. Whenever the Imperial authorities tried to suppress the opium trade, British and French bayonets prised the country open a little wider (as happened after the infamous Opium Wars of 1842 and 1858). The foreigners by force of arms compelled the Empire to legalise opium, to open the hinterland to European traders and cede, in part or whole, the key coastal cities. Once the Suez Canal was opened and the steamship introduced on the Far Eastern run, the whole tempo of commerce changed. Chinese trade doubled in value between 1885 and 1894. Henceforth, the acid of commercial capitalism rotted the fibres of the country just as opium rotted the minds of its people. The only slight protection for China was the failure of any one capitalist power to take over the whole country – their greedy rivalry to some extent checked each other.
Many of the Chinese upper classes, the nobility and civil servants, moved into the trade at the coastal cities, scavenging after the European merchants. Corruption became rife. The cash generated in trade and bribes moved back from the cities into the purchase of land or rural moneylending, expropriating the peasantry. The central government decayed, and local gangsters, bandits, the notorious secret societies, a combination of nobles and an indigenous Mafiosi, took over local power. The political paralysis meant that the government could no longer maintain the vast irrigation and drainage systems without which the farmers could not survive. The land became increasingly subject to disasters – floods, famine, drought and plague. Mass pauperisation became the character of the society.
The Imperial administration was eaten from within by the depredations and bribery of the foreigners, merchants and diplomats. Rebellions increased in frequency. China has a long tradition of peasant rebellions, and one of the greatest – the Taiping Rebellion – began in 1850. Masses of peasants swept through the central provinces, even as far as the gates of Peking. The rebels set up an entirely new regime in the Yangtse valley that lasted some eleven years. The British and French saw their opportunity. They attacked, sacking the Emperor’s Summer Palace, in effect taking over the Imperial government. Then General Gordon turned on the Taiping rebels and slaughtered them.
The British and French were, however, being overtaken by other powers. As the Manchu dynasty weakened, Tsarist Russia took over more and more of the territory in the north and west. In the 1890s, the Japanese provoked a war with China in order to seize Korea, the enormous island of Taiwan (Formosa), a number of ports, and impose punitive damages on China for the privilege of losing its territory. The Japanese now dominated south Manchuria, and Tsarist Russia north Manchuria – the result was the Russo-Japanese war of 1905, much the most important consequence of which was the 1905 revolution in Russia.
In 1911, the inevitable happened. After 250 years of rule, the dynasty fell. Even the weapons of the foreigners could no longer hold it up. There was no force, group or class capable of taking over the whole country. The nobility was divided and corrupted. The merchants and capitalists had no popular backing and were dependent on the foreigner. The foreigners strengthened their control, preventing national unification by playing off one local warlord against another.
Rarely has a country been brought so low. The First World War brought everything to a head and broke the spell. There was a boom in the coastal cities because European imports were cut off by the war and Chinese capitalists opened up their own production. A Chinese capitalist class began to emerge as a separate force. In 1917, the Russian Revolution and the Bolshevik rejection of the Tsarist ‘Unequal Treaties’ with China roused enormous enthusiasm among the nationalist middle classes. The war boom created a new city proletariat, responsive to the new ideas. Outside the cities, the terrible impoverishment of the peasantry continued, and banditry spread as the only form of rural defence.
Japan hoped to use the First World War to consolidate her dominant position in China. While her predatory rivals were tearing each other to pieces in Europe, she took the opportunity in 1915 to impose on China ‘Twenty One Demands’. In effect, these would have reduced the country to a Japanese colony. At the end of the war, the conference to carve up the world among the victors was held at Versailles. There was much talk by the victors of the ‘right of national self-determination’ for all peoples; countries would be created that corresponded to the wishes of the people. The Chinese who were aware of the conference expected that at least it would roll back the dominance of the foreign powers. It did nothing of the kind. As a result, there was an explosion of rage in China. It developed first among students in what was called the May 4 Movement, and spread quickly through the cities. It filled the sails of the small and hitherto ineffective nationalist party, the Kuomintang, and led to the setting up of a small Communist Party. Finally, it spread out to assist in the rapid organisation of workers in trade unions and the setting up of militant peasant associations. At long last, there was developing a force of popular power which could cut through the mass of warring generals and gangsters which paralysed the country.
The new Communist International in Moscow took a particular interest in China. Lenin and its other leaders held that an anti-imperialist revolution in the major areas of imperial control like China and India would give great assistance to the workers’ revolution in Europe. The Russian government offered much help to the Kuomintang, and later, after Lenin’s death, the Comintern instructed the Chinese Communist Party to ally itself with the Kuomintang. Joseph Stalin as leader of the Soviet Communist Party and dominant force in the Comintern from the middle twenties, argued that the Chinese working class, even if it was in alliance with the peasantry, would be too small to defeat imperialism in China. This was quite contrary to what happened in Tsarist Russia itself where the small working class did indeed seize power. The Chinese working class, Stalin said, must enter an alliance with other classes, the capitalists and landlords of the Kuomintang, enter what was called ‘a Four Class Bloc’. In this way, all the nationalist forces would be united against their common enemy. The Kuomintang under its most famous leader, Sun Yat-sen, advanced the slogans of nationalism (but with concessions to keep foreign powers well-disposed), democracy (but the vote for the masses was only a long term aim) and people’s livelihood (under Chinese capitalism).
Stalin had high hopes of the Kuomintang. Within it, the Russians supported a particular man whom they hoped would inherit the leadership of the Kuomintang on the death of Sun Yat-sen. And their nominee, a man who had been taken to Moscow for his military education, did indeed become the head of the Kuomintang. His name was Chiang Kai-shek. Chiang was happy to accept Russian support, and to accept the popular backing which the Communist Party brought him – but only until such time as he had enough power to dispense with them. When the Kuomintang military forces were strong enough to begin the reconquest of the rest of China, Chiang’s forces fell upon the Communists and slaughtered or gaoled them. Between 1927 and 1930, the Party suffered 30,000 killed. The Party membership dropped from around 100,000 to 10,000, and it was entirely driven out of the cities.
The contradictions of the ‘Four Class Bloc’ were shown most vividly in the destruction of the strongest section of the Chinese working class, the Shanghai workers. On Tuesday, 12 April 1927, the Kuomintang Northern Expeditionary army under Chiang approached the city. Chou En-lai and the Communist Party prepared a triumphal greeting for him by calling a General Strike. 350,000 workers responded, and the city was paralysed, awaiting liberation by the army. The Shanghai capitalists mobilised gangs of toughs to counterattack. They sent urgent messages with promises of large bribes to Chiang, urging him not to enter the city lest his troops be infected with the virus of Bolshevism. When the gangsters had done their worst, the Kuomintang took the city. Their troops publicly beheaded 5,000 workers in the squares of Shanghai.
Meanwhile, Chiang guarded his flank. In the year in which he launched his offensive on the Communist Party, he had secret talks with the Japanese. He offered them complete control of Manchuria and Mongolia if they would support him while he consolidated his control of the rest of China (known as ‘south of the wall’, or inside the Great Wall). The Japanese were not unhappy to play with Chiang while it suited their purpose. In 1932, they seized Manchuria, setting up a puppet state called Manchukuo, and began a steady penetration westwards. In 1937, they struck south through the wall, taking Peking and beginning the conquest of the heartlands of China. Simultaneously, they attacked from Shanghai and sacked the then capital, Nanking, in one of the most terrible massacres of modern times.
At each stage, Chiang fell back, more concerned to preserve his military hardware than risk it in batde. Many of his armies were already corrupt and demoralised. Chiang was driven out of the eastern provinces, until he finally reached his wartime capital in the west, Chungking. There he settled down to sit the war out. For his war had become the Second World War, and he relied on the Americans to defeat the Japanese for him so that he could then inherit all without losing a tank or a plane.
The only people who offered some real resistance were the small forces of the Communist Party. Those few who survived the holocaust of 1927 to 1930, regrouped in a remote area, the Kiangsi border mountains. They were driven out of there by the Kuomintang, decimated in the Long March of flight, but finally reached a sanctuary in a very remote and backward area, famous now as Yenan. From there, they began operations, and one of their first active aims was to foment guerilla attacks on the Japanese forces from behind their lines. The Japanese occupation was of the utmost ferocity, and this produced a steady stream of young peasant recruits to the Communist armed bands which became the People’s Liberation Army. The Communists grew, winning popular support. The second World War gave them the opportunity to become for the first time a serious military contender for power against the Kuomintang.
After the war, there was a race between the two protagonists to secure as much territory as possible as the Japanese were driven out by the Americans (who of course did all they could to ensure that Chiang inherited). But by now the Kuomintang had nothing to offer even to its capitalist backers. Hyper-inflation, the lack of even a bare minimum of administration, made it impossible for Chinese business to operate. The Kuomintang armies dissolved or went over to the People’s Liberation Army, while the generals grabbed what they could and fled to Taiwan, Hong Kong or further afield. Chiang’s Republic disintegrated, and the People’s Republic was born.
It was created in appalling conditions. The tasks of elementary reconstruction, let alone improvement, were enormous tasks. Neither could be undertaken singlemindedly because the world outside continued to threaten.
 
People’s Republic
Even as the Communist Party was launching the final phase of its attack, war broke out on China’s southern border with Vietnam between the French and the Vietminh of Ho Chi Minh. Churchill, on the other side of the world, declared a world-wide Cold War, and the United States began to rearm. American forces continued to hold much of the east Pacific coastline – Korea, Japan, Okinawa, Taiwan, the Philippines. It was the US fleet that blocked the attempts of the new Chinese government to complete the conquest of China and finally rout the Kuomintang by invading its last province, the island of Taiwan. Finally, the United States challenged Russia and now China to a war for the control of Korea.
The country was extremely poor and disorganised. For example, the average Russian in 1928 (before Stalin began his massive industrialisation programme) had three or four times the income of the average Chinese in 1952. In terms of available food, the average Russian in 1928 had more than twice as much as the average Chinese of 1952. The value of production per head in Britain in 1801 has been reckoned at between £77 and £96; in China, in 1949, it was around £19.
Industry had to be restored, a devastated transport system reconstructed, a decayed or wrecked system of irrigation and drainage works rebuilt, while maintaining a military establishment capable of repulsing the United States and its allies. In a quarter of a century, it has been done. By comparison to conditions before 1949, the change wrought in the lives and livelihood of millions of Chinese is truly remarkable. The imperialists were kept out and the country transformed almost out of recognition.
But it is still very poor. To illustrate how poor, the New China News Agency in 1972 gave an account of a commune in Hopei province. There the average production of each person was valued at £38.25 per year. The commune was heavily dependent on supplies from outside. City workers are much better off. The average wages per year 6f a Shanghai shipyard worker was reckoned at £161.50, or just over £3.00 per week. Of course, this does not show the real value of wages, for prices are kept very low (rice is said to cost about £11.50 per person per year, and housing, water and services, about £16.9 each year). But this is no affluent society. Even with the massive changes that have been made, one very sympathetic economist reckons that it will be a dramatic achievement if the average Chinese income (city and country incomes combined) reaches about £77 per year, or £1.48 per week, by the 1980s (Deleyne, pp.188-9).
The country desperately needs to increase its output. The numbers employed in agriculture at very low levels of productivity remain enormous. To increase their output, to increase the national output, needs capital equipment. Yet defence imposes an intolerable burden on what capital equipment there is. Ultimately, there is no alternative to economic development, to rapid industrialisation.
 
Next Chapter


l Harris: China and World Revolution (Introduction)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

[Introduction]


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.7-8.

MODERN CHINA has been an inspiration to many thousands of socialists round the world. The revolution involved more people than any earlier popular struggle and it threw off a legacy of oppression, corruption and disunity that had been the despair of earlier generations. Once in power, the new government tackled its responsibilities with great vigour and energy, and yet seemed to remain flexible enough to adjust and shape its policies to fit the specific needs of its people. Popular enthusiasm appeared to be a buoyant tide that must sweep the country forward. And as a country, the sheer diversity and beauty – from the cold deserts of the north to the tropical jungles of the south – as well as the splendour of its cultural past, made China a sort of microcosm of the world, the place in. which mass creativity could at long last refashion its world. Photographs and film carried the message of students marching off to help the peasants, of barefoot doctors voluntarily giving up the privileges of city practice to tramp the villages, of new schools, of great factories. The contrast with the rest of Asia, particularly with the other giant, India, could not have been sharper.
For socialists abroad, China appeared as the most dedicated anti-imperialist force in the world, a giant standing alone against oppression. The style of the Cultural Revolution scattered a shower of sparks that caught ablaze in places as diverse as Calcutta, Berkeley and Rome. In May 1968, one spark – at Nanterre in Paris – set alight the most massive General Strike in the history of postwar France.
In the light of such a record, expressing any reservations about China’s role is taken as the mark of pro-imperialist agents. However, in 1971, a number of events took place which could not be shrugged off. In particular, events in Pakistan and in Ceylon raised a number of questions. What actually happened?
In the mid-1960s, China reached a close friendly alliance with the then ruler of Pakistan, General Ayub Khan. This association was reached despite the fact that the United States was supplying military and economic aid to Pakistan as a member of the Asian equivalents of NATO, the Central Treaty Organisation and the South East-Asian Treaty Organisation. Nor did it affect the well known fact that the authoritarian regime of Ayub Khan was systematically exploiting its eastern province, East Bengal. The Left opposition to Ayub in Bengal was heavily influenced by China in its politics, but was clearly weakened by the Pakistan-China relationship. Indeed, after one of the main leaders of the Bengali Left, Maulana Bashani, visited Peking, he was prevailed upon to offer critical support to Ayub Khan. Between 1968 and 1971, Pakistan exploded in revolt. In Bengal, this revolt led to the demand for independence, a demand which the Left opposed because of its critical support for Ayub Khan. In March 1971, Pakistan military forces launched a massive and brutal repression of East Bengal, which led to a mass flight of refugees into India. The role of the Left meant that the forces which championed the popular opposition were the corrupt group of middle class politicians round Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The Pakistan attack opened the way for Indian military intervention, culminating in the new regime of Bangladesh under Indian guidance. At every stage in these events, China gave consistent public support to the general who had replaced Ayub Khan, Yahya Khan. It also extended considerable financial assistance. Indeed, without China’s support – and the implicit threat that China would open a third front against India to deter the Indian army – it is possible that the Pakistan military would not have embarked on the policy of repressing the Bengalis. The victors were India and its ally, the Soviet Union. The losers were the people of Bengal (the Chinese statements on these events are included at the end of this article).
Ironically, the appalling conditions of Bangladesh now is used by the more unthinking supporters of China as evidence that Peking’s foreign policy was correct. Yet the condition of East Bengal, including the famine of 1974, is the direct result of the failure of the revolution; Peking’s policy ensured that a corrupt ruling clique was brought to power in the new country (the Bengali Left offered no national alternative) under the domination of India. Forcing the Bengalis back under the oppression of Yahya Khan – as Peking hoped to do – would only have made present conditions even worse.
In Ceylon, in the spring of 1971, there was a major revolt of young people, the JVP rising against the regime of Mrs Bandaranaike. The regime had betrayed most of the promises on which it had won a landslide victory a year earlier. When the revolt was savagely put down – perhaps some 4,000 were slaughtered in doing so – China congratulated Mrs Bandaranaike. Furthermore, it extended its financial help to the regime.
The Chinese government sent a telegram of condolence to Franco’s Spain on the assassination of the Prime Minister, Admiral Carrero Blanco. It gave a ‘rapturous’ reception to the visit of the sister of the Shah of Persia to China at the same time as the urban guerrilla movement of Iran was being wiped out. It gave an even more enthusiastic welcome to British Tory leader, Edward Heath, when he visited China in the early summer of 1974. Just earlier, it had refused to accept as leader of a National Union of Mineworkers’ delegation to China, Mick McGahey, one of the Communist Party leaders in the NUM. China praised the Tory government’s policy of pushing Britain into the Common Market, although the British labour movement was opposed to it. The People’s Daily praised the Tory defence White Paper with its proposals to strengthen NATO and increase British military expenditure. And so on.
Each of the different incidents, raises the same central political question. Does China support the hare or the hounds? How can the government of China treat foreign governments in ways which seem directly both to contradict the development of a mass revolutionary movement and to flout the known opinions of the organised working class movement?
There were a number of answers on the Left. One opinion is that these examples were mistakes, and everyone makes mistakes occasionally. But these are not isolated occurrences. They are part of consistent policies that, in some cases, China has pursued from the birth of the People’s Republic. The leadership of China does not accept that these examples are mistakes or inconsistencies.
The mistakes arise, it is said in some circles, because foreign policy is remote from the Chinese masses who directly exercise a progressive influence over domestic policy. China is still, they say, involved in a domestic class struggle, and foreign policy mistakes are possible when the wrong class influences are at work. The Chinese leadership would not accept that China’s foreign policy is not already fully progressive. Nor would they agree that, even though there may be domestic class struggles, the hostile classes are able to command so important an institution of the central government as the foreign office. It seems more likely that the foreign socialists either do not understand China’s foreign policy or they do not understand domestic policy.
The foreign policy of China is, of course, necessarily different in style from the politics of the Chinese Communist Party. To survive in an imperialist world requires an isolated revolutionary government to deal with capitalist governments abroad, to use diplomatic courtesies, to reach trade and other agreements, to make compromises in order to secure its own survival, after all, it was Lenin who invited foreign capitalists to invest in Soviet Russia under the New Economic Policy. But whatever marginal compromises a revolutionary government might be forced to make, it cannot be allowed to contradict the aims of the Party. It is clearly self-defeating to be giving arms to a foreign government at the same time as the Party is arming the rebels against that government, to assist both oppressor and oppressed.
Of course, there are people who just shrug their shoulders. Perhaps the Chinese government has done things which are wrong. They may do damage to particular sections of the world revolutionary movement. But they are small matters in the broad sweep of history. The Bengalis – or at least, some of them – will live to fight another day. Such an argument shows a carelessness about the scarce forces of the Left that no serious revolutionary could adopt, let alone a Bengali. But is it true in any case that there are compensating victories somewhere else?
This article sets out to show that the leaders of China have pursued aims abroad that are fully consistent with their domestic policies. By examining these politics in the history of China, we shall see that there is a solution to the problems which face the Chinese government, but it is not open to the Maoist leadership to choose it.
 
Next Chapter


l Harris: China and World Revolution (3. The Nature of the Regime)




Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

3. The Nature of the Regime


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.13-19.

THE PROSPECTS are not at all grim if we look at the world as a whole rather than just one relatively poor country. And the world is one economy, not a number of national economies added together. It is one dominating imperialist system with different components. On a world scale, there is no shortage of resources or savings at all. On the contrary, they are superabundant in the advanced capitalist countries. There they search for ‘labour-saving’ equipment and squander capital in trivialities, waste the accumulated wealth extracted from the labour of the world working class.
But it is an imperialist world. The poor are forced back onto their own resources, forced to make a virtue of their oppression by the rich. The rich ruling classes of the West keep their loot. Yet getting that loot is the precondition for ending the poverty. Without it, each poor nation is driven backwards. The struggle for survival, for national independence, where the standards of national power are laid down by the rich, has its own logic in a poor nation. It forces a new exploitative division of labour, a new class system. The ability of imperialism to isolate the challenge to its rule, to lock it up in a few poor countries, ultimately forces those countries into the mould of class rule.
Internationalism is thus not an optional extra for the anti-imperialist revolution. It is not just rhetoric or a gesture of idealism or of quixotic virtue. It is the condition of survival for a socialist revolution in one country. Lenin saw this quite clearly when he argued that the workers’ revolution in Tsarist Russia – where the peasantry were the overwhelming majority – could not survive unless it sparked off a revolution in Western Europe where the working class was a majority. Then the German proletariat, spurred to make a socialist revolution by the example of their Russian brothers, would bring to the aid of Russia their support. Then the great engine of German industry would propel forward the backward Russian economy, without the necessity to pillage the Russian peasantry and increase the scale of exploitation of Russian workers.
However, the core of Lenin’s internationalism was the alliance of workers, the unity of different national sections of a world working class. As all Marxists accepted in his time, no other class had an interest in internationalism of this kind. For the bourgeoisie, the national boundaries ring its power, its area of privilege. Its attitude to the countries beyond is, if it is strong, predatory; if it is weak, cowardly. But in either case, it is absolutely opposed to relinquishing any of its rights to an international order.
For some of the middle classes in the backward countries, the national boundaries are even more important than they ate for the bourgeoisie. They hope to replace the bourgeoisie, to become a new ruling class. So they defend national power even more fiercely, denouncing the willingness of the bourgeoisie to trade elements of national independence for imperialist bribes. Like the bourgeoisie, the middle class is absolutely opposed to any idea of an ‘international class’ or workers’ power, even where the middle class is in favour of nationalisation and planning.
To develop without increasing the exploitation of its own people, China needs at least one revolution in an industrialised country, as Lenin’s Russia needed a socialist Germany. Without it, the energies, enthusiasm and ingenuity of its people will be squandered in the desperate task of irrigating a vast desert with only one small watering can among millions of people. The means to achieve the revolution abroad is an alliance between Chinese workers and the workers of the rest of the world, including the industrialised countries. This was the central purpose of the Comintern when it was founded:
‘It is the aim of the Communist International to fight by all available means, including armed struggle, for the overthrow of the international bourgeoisie and for the creation of an international Soviet Republic as a transitional stage to the complete abolition of the State. The Communist International considers the dictatorship of the proletariat the only way to liberate mankind from the horrors of capitalism.’
This was the reason for the foundation of Communist Parties round the world, to embody the world revolutionary aims of a world working class. Of course, the Comintern then was not what it became under Stalin, a means to force foreign Communist Parties to carry out the foreign policy of the Soviet state.
This is not to say that there are not divisions within the world working class, just as there are divisions in each national working class. The workers of the imperialist countries are in general richer and stronger than those in the rest of the world. As a result, they are in general less revolutionary. They have enjoyed substantial advantages as well as high levels of exploitation. The legacy of suspicion is not overcome until the workers of advanced capitalism prove their willingness to fight not just for their fellow-workers in oppressed countries because they are workers, but also for their right of national self-determination. In present conditions, that means the unconditional defence of all oppressed countries against attacks from world imperialism, regardless of whether they are workers’ regimes or not.
There is then a means to break the stranglehold of imperialism – by aligning the struggle for the national liberation of oppressed countries, the struggle of workers in those countries against their class oppressors, and the struggle within the advanced capitalist countries. Can China’s leadership undertake this? Is such an aim consistent with the absolute defence of national power, the belief that socialism can be built in one country and maintained by ‘peaceful coexistence’ with other national ruling classes?
Under the guidance of Stalin in the 1920s and of Mao since then, the Chinese Communist Party has believed that the struggle for national independence against imperialism could be separated from the struggle against capitalism. The workers were asked to subordinate their anti-capitalist fight to the need to carry capitalists in a coalition of classes against foreign imperialism. In the 1920s, that meant that at various times the Party had to restrain workers striking against Chinese capitalists who supported the Kuomintang – in the interests of the Four Class Bloc. When the alliance collapsed, the Party was driven out of the cities, losing virtually all its working class membership. This catastrophe might have provided the opportunity to reject what was an essentially Menshevik policy and return to Leninism:
‘The workers must open the eyes of the people to the fraud of the bourgeois politicians, teach them not to place trust in promises and to rely on their OWN forces, on their OWN organisation, on their OWN weapon alone’. (Lenin emphasis)
Mao did indeed rely on his own organisation, but in complete isolation from the working class of China. Politically, he continued to pursue a coalition of different classes, the Four Class Bloc. In the mid-30s, the Stalinist Comintern adopted the same line, known now as the ‘Popular Front’ against fascism. Implicitly, the working class was nowhere in the world strong enough to take on imperialism or fascism on its own. Mao appealed continuously to the Kuomintang to unite with the Communist Party, despite 1927, subsequent persecution and indeed open warfare.



The Chinese Communist Party and the Kuomintang



Mao’s Party organised uprooted peasants, claiming that the Party ‘represented’ the workers of China. Worker membership of the Party was less than one per cent of the total up to 1948. Most political attention was devoted to peasant questions, and the Party implied that this was the real source of the revolution. They did not discuss Lenin’s consistent opposition to the Bolsheviks representing peasant interests:
‘In our opinion, there should be no Social Democrat [i.e. Bolshevik – NH] Peasant Committees. If they are Social Democratic, that means that they are not purely peasant committees; if they are peasant committees, that means that they are not purely proletarian, nor Social Democratic committees.’
(Attitude of the Social Democrats to the Peasant Movement, Selected Works 3, 1936, p.147).
The distinction between worker and peasant disappeared in Stalin’s hold-all, the ‘toiling masses’. For Lenin, the difference was crucial:
‘We support the peasant movement in so far as it is revolutionary and democratic. We are making ready (making ready at once, immediately) to fight it insofar as it becomes reactionary and anti-proletarian. The whole essence of Marxism lies in that double task, which only those who do not understand Marxism can vulgarise or compress into one simple task.’
(ibid., p. 144)
Mao aimed to become the peasant movement, as we shall see shortly. Before the revolution, the Party under Mao made no attempt to organise or develop work among workers except on the basis of drawing support from any source for the military struggle against the Japanese.
 
The Workers
There were no Communist unions, and the Party did not summon a meeting of its National Conference of Trade Unions between 1929 and 1948. It maintained no Party organisations in Kuomintang controlled areas during the crucial years, 1937 to 1945, since this might have jeopardised the attempt at an alliance with Chiang Kai-shek. Rarely did it publicly oppose the Kuomintang at all. For example, it did not fight the Kuomintang’s brutal labour policy, which included the threat of the death penalty for anyone proposing or undertaking strike action during the war. The Party had much to say on agrarian questions, but very little on labour questions. What it offered was never any semblance of workers’ power or even nationalisation of the means of production, but government mediation between workers and capitalists in dispute. So far as workers were concerned, the programme of the Communist Party up to the revolution offered considerably less in terms of their specific interests than the manifesto of the British Labour Party in 1945!
As the armies of the People’s Liberation Army closed in on the main industrial centres, there was no rising, no strikes, like the massive Shanghai General Strike had greeted Chiang’s Northern Expeditionary Army in 1927. There were few Party units in the cities, and what there were, saw no role for workers in the seizure of power. The invading generals issued instructions to all citizens alike, to stay at work as normally while the army won the revolution on their behalf:
‘The people are asked to maintain order and continue in their present occupations. Kuomintang officials or police personnel of provincial, city, county or other level of government institution; district, town, village or pa.ochia. Personnel ... are enjoined to remain at their posts.’ (General Lin Piao, instruction before the fall of Peking and Tientsin, New China News Agency, 11 January 1949; see the identical message from Chairman Mao and Chuh Teh on crossing the Yangtse, New China News Agency, 3 May 1949. Both cited Gluckstein, pp.212-3).
Power changed hands with scarcely an active involvement of the mass of the people except in the role of cheering bystanders. Even where workers did seize factories in preparation – as happened at the Leinch’ang Iron Works, Tientsin – the army restored the authority of the management as soon as it took the city.
Once the Party was in power it adopted in essence the Kuomintang’s 1928 Labour Code to regulate discipline in the workplace. Strikes were officially outlawed – although that did not stop them happening – and compulsory arbitration introduced. Thereafter, whenever workers attempted to defend their interests, they were denounced for ‘economism’, much as Western ‘public opinion’ denounces strikers for ‘selfishness’.



The Chinese Communist Party and the Workers



In fact the conditions of workers were improved. With a stable political order, industry and employment began to recover. The government made sustained efforts to stimulate businessmen to invest, as well as beginning the process of slum clearance, improving medical help, cleaning up the city and rooting out the gangsters.
But it was not the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’, Workers’ Power, but a Chinese version of Social Democracy, of say – the British Labour government of 1945. The workers’ proportion of Party membership was very low. In 1951, it was 6.3 per cent of the total membership. It rose in the following years to reach 14 per cent in 1956, before dropping slightly to 13.7 per cent in 1957. In 1957, the proportion of membership classified as ‘intellectuals’ (that is, those of former middle and upper class origin) was 14.8 per cent of the total (the figures are from Teng Hsiao-p’ing, Report on the Revision of the Constitution, 8th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, Peking, 1956, and Report on the Rectification Campaign, Peking, 1957).
The re-establishment of stable order did not end the class struggle. The regime tried to step up production through lengthening the working day, formal wage contracts, penalties for absenteeism and ‘indiscipline’, and speed-up. There were experiments to keep the machines running flat out – for example, through four overlapping eight hour shifts in the mines to eliminate the drop in production during shift-changes. The accident rate and the rate of sickness arising from fatigue increased, particularly because the regime has always opposed annual holidays other than the two to five days permitted for the Chinese New Year. There were also strikes, absenteeism and go-slows, as in 1951 and 1954. The People’s Daily regularly denounced these spontaneous revolts as ‘counter-revolutionary’, and demanded the fiercest penalties for managers or trade union officials who seemed to tolerate or equivocate about such indiscipline. A similar movement flared up in 1957.
However, much the largest explosion of worker opposition occurred during the Cultural Revolution. Beginning in the autumn of 1966, the strike wave culminated in the great Shanghai General Strike in December. The strikes spread to Kangsu and Canton (electricity, water and transport workers), to the railways at Harbin in Manchuria (the north-eastern railways stopped for ten days), to Chekiang and Shansi, to Kweichow (factories, transport), to the coalfields of the east, and even to Peking itself in January 1967 (see Cliff, IS 29, p.15, and Harris, IS 35, pp.19-21). The issues in dispute concerned not only the endemic conflict between permanent city workers and temporary rural contract labour used in the cities (the so-called ‘worker-peasant’ system), but all the common issues of exploitation and bureaucratic mismanagement that afflict workers everywhere. Some workers even set about creating independent trade unions under worker control; they were duly denounced by the bureaucracy as attempts at ‘guild organisations’ to express the selfish materialism of workers.
The movement could not for long remain politically neutral when the government spent so much time denouncing it for political crimes – for being subversive, attempting to restore capitalism, provocation by the ‘capitalist road’ faction of the Party or even by the Kuomintang and the CIA. But some of the worker revolt fed into the spirit of organisations denounced as ‘ultra-left’ or ‘anarchist’ – the Kweichow Worker Militia, the General Organisation of Revolutionary Rebels in Shantung, the Harbin Red Flag. One of the sharpest statements of uncompromising Leninist opposition to the Red Capitalist Class came from Hunan’s Sheng-wu-lien.



Sheng-wu-lien (Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee)



A regime that, on occasions, greets strikes in other countries as a ‘rising tide of revolution’, at home treats them as reactionary. The full power of the state is brought to bear on any worker who fails to recognise that his ‘contradiction’ with the management is ‘non-antagonistic’.
It might be argued that in any case the majority class of China and the origin of two-thirds of Party members is a different exploited class, the peasantry. For a Communist Party which by tradition and politics claims to be the voice of the revolutionary proletariat, it is peculiar to have a majority of members from the peasantry.
 
Peasants
Mao explains the peculiarity in this way:
‘As China has no political party exclusively representing the peasantry, and the political parties of the national bourgeoisie have no thoroughgoing land programme, the Communist Party of China has become the leader of the peasants and all other revolutionary’democrats, being the only party that has formulated and carried out a thoroughgoing land programme, fought earnestly for peasant interests and therefore won the overwhelming majority of the peasants as its great ally.’
(On Coalition Government, Selected Works, p.298).
The reality is less clear than Mao suggests. The countryside had its own classes, ranging from landlords and gentry through the rich, middle and poor peasantry to the mass of landless labourers. Not only was each stratum not clearly distinct from those adjacent to it, each stratum in essence had different and not necessarily reconcilable interests. To give land to the landless – which is what, above all else, they wanted – means to take land from someone else, whether rich peasant or landlord. To accept the position of the rich peasant was to deny the interests of the poor. In practice, the Party changed its policy to suit its needs in different areas at different times, whether this meant encouraging the poor peasantry (so that, on the promise of land, they might join the People’s Liberation Army) or ensuring the supply of food to the army by backing those with the largest marketable surplus of grain, the rich peasantry. For much of the time, this meant opposing the demand for a serious land reform or land redistribution programme, and restricting the demands to reducing rent (by up to but not exceeding 25 per cent) and interest on loans. The Party’s approach was in essence the same as its attitude to workers and capitalists – it attempted to:
‘follow a policy of adjusting the interests of both sides. They should not take a one-sided stand, either for the landlord or for the peasant.’
(source: Brandt et al., p.279).
As the civil war intensified, more landlords were inclined to opt for the Kuomintang and the People’s Liberation Army desperately needed more troops. So the Party made its policy more radical, but with the effective seizure of power, it drew back again. In 1950, Mao Tse-tung in his report to the Third Plenary Session of the 7th Central Committee described this retreat as
‘a change in our policy towards the rich peasants, a change from the policy of requisitioning the surplus land and property of the rich peasants to one of preserving a rich peasant economy,’
The Agrarian Reform Law (1950) attempted to put the ‘agrarian class coalition’ policy into legal effect (cf. Gluckstein, pp.85-88). It preserved the element of sacrificing the interests of the poor and landless peasants to those of the richer, and continued to do so until the Party led the movement for co-operatives, mutual aid teams and finally communes (which actually tried to abolish land ownership and the peasantry rather than meet the interests of any particular stratum). But even then, at each stage, it was checked. First, by the absorption of rich peasants into the Party and the transformation of rural Party cadres into rich peasants. Second, by the refusal of the peasants to relinquish their crops to the State. As Mao put it, the peasants ‘eat yams during the day and rice at night’, and ‘stood on a high ridge and blew the whistle’ (to warn them of the approaching official; cf. Gray, p.38).



The Chinese Communist Party and the Peasantry



Officially, the ‘rich peasant system’ was finally scrapped in July 1955. The Party set out to unify holdings. The peasants retaliated. Between July 1954 and July 1956, for example, the stocks of pigs in China dropped from 102 million to 84 million, as the peasants strove to keep their pork out of the hands of the State (Hsinhua, 1, 1957, p.88-90). The Party drew back, permitting free markets in agricultural goods and doubling the quota of land allowed for private cultivation. By late 1957, the pig stock had climbed to 146 million, but grain output on communal land had increased by only 1 per cent. At that time, while the private share of land was not more than 7 per cent, it produced nearly a fifth (and in some richer areas, over half) of the total value of output. By 1962, in Yunnan, the private grain harvest was reckoned to be larger than the communal, and private cultivation took half the total land area. In Kweichow and Szechuan, in 1964, there was more private than public cultivation (Wheelwright and McFarlane, p.70).
The ‘rich peasant system’ survives in the commune framework according to the needs of the Party, not the interests of any particular section of the peasantry. In the Cultural Revolution, the Big Character posters listed the complaints of peasants – over the interest charged on loans, over prices and the government’s compulsory procurement of grain, over wages paid on the communes (said to be between 10 and 20 Yuan per month, in contrast to city officials who received between 500 and 1,000). After the Cultural Revolution the government needed to relax the drive to accumulate to damp down opposition in the face of the Soviet threat. It allowed, therefore, the ‘rich peasant system’ to be revived. Once again the People’s Daily praised the peasants’ private plots, saying they were definitely not part of the ‘capitalist road’ (22 October 1972).
The Communist Party of China has never been consistently in favour of the interests of one or other stratum of the peasantry. As in the city, so in the countryside, the aim of the Party is to damp down class struggle, not to fight it.
The Party was not, however, the creature of any other class. It was not given the opportunity of winning much support among capitalists. Most Chinese capitalism was in the areas of Japanese occupation, and what was left, clustered around the Kuomintang in Chungking. But it did not prevent the Party making the effort to win them in its policy statements.
 
The Capitalists
The decay of the Kuomintang and the disintegration of Japanese rule gave it the chance to make policy effective. Between 1937 and 1949, the Chinese hyperinflation increased commodity prices 8.5 billion times over. It ruined the mass of small businessmen and much of the middle class. The impoverishment of the mass of the people and the destruction of war wrecked any market much of business might have had. Many lost any hope of surviving under the corrupt and incompetent Kuomintang. They fled to Hong Kong and further afield. Nevertheless many others had reasons for optimism. In the interests of the national coalition of classes, the Communists offered a stable business environment in which ‘honest profits’ could be made and the relations between workers and capitalists firmly regulated by the state. Indeed, the Party offered the prospect of expansion for both domestic and foreign businessmen. Capitalists returned from abroad to open their factories, merchants reopened their offices, and a new mood of hope gripped the business class. Officially, the regime distinguished between ‘national’ and ‘compradore’ capitalism, but in practice anybody who accepted the new regime was ‘patriotic’ and ‘democratic’.



The Chinese Communist Party and the Capitalists



The capitalists had no reason to complain. For, although later the state steadily encroached on their ownership in the interests of capital accumulation, it was always anxious to placate them. The government was particularly eager that the capitalists convert themselves into professional managers in the employment of the state. They could then not only continue to rule their enterprises, receiving a generous salary as employees of the state, they could also continue to receive interest and dividends on the capital invested in their former enterprise. By 1960, there were still some 300,000 merchants receiving interest on trading organisations, and an even larger number of capitalists in the same position. It is not clear whether they still do so today – they did so certainly up to the Cultural Revolution – for the government had guaranteed the payments in their lifetime, and for a short period, through the lifetime of their heirs. A whole stratum thereby was allowed to draw off the surplus of the labour of the Chinese working class through the good offices of ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’.
Imperialism
However, perhaps the concessions were all justifiable in the interests of the national struggle against imperialism? But there were also concessions to imperialism itself. The Party wooed the United States assiduously in the hope of securing its support against the Kuomintang (and with some success among the US officials in Chungking). It stated that it was not opposed to foreign capitalist operations in China, nor to economic aid from capitalist countries. Everything, from Mao’s viewpoint, was subordinate to the anti-Japanese war. Japan was the sole target, and other imperialist powers might be persuaded to assist the Communist Party in defeating it (including those arch-Far Eastern imperialists, the British and French). Mao put the point most clearly to Edgar Snow when he visited Yenan. Snow asked if the problem of foreign imperialism was finished once Japan was defeated, and Mao replied: ‘Yes, if the other imperialist countries do not act as Japan.’ If imperialism was just the Japanese occupation of China, all the Marxists were clearly wrong over the preceding thirty years, not least of all Lenin.
The Chinese working class had shown between 1925 and 1927 its capacity to lead both the class struggle in China and the struggle against imperialism. Despite its small size and relative newness, it demonstrated as much capacity to fight and provide a lead to the mass of the peasantry as had the Russian working class in 1905 and 1917. But the class struggle is unpredictable, it jeopardises the cosy stable relationships between established ruling classes. It brings to power forces no longer capable of manipulation in small rooms, forces that speak in tones and language offensive to those in the middle classes who expect by right to dominate the political scene.
The group which assumed and guided the fortunes of the Chinese Communist Party was neither worker nor peasant. It was roughly ‘middle class’ in origin – that is, its parents were from a number of different dominant classes (landlord, mandarin, merchant, intelligentsia), but the group was united as much as anything by having been students at the end of the First World War. The politics which guided it were those of Stalinism in the late 1920s. Stalin had destroyed the leadership of the Bolshevik Party in order to launch a pace of industralisation that required a savage increase in the exploitation of workers in Russia and the pillage of the peasantry. The leadership of the Chinese Party never acquired the traditions of Bolshevism that made it necessary for Stalin to purge the Russian Party in the Moscow trials to gain his ends. The Chinese used the inherited language as they wished, attaching it to whatever objects suited their purpose. The forces the Party mobilised were, in origin, from the peasantry, but that did not align Party and peasant interests. The soldiers were recruited after they had left the land, and were refashioned under military discipline; as Mao once put it, speaking of captured Kuomintang troops:
‘The Red Army is like a furnace in which all captured soldiers are melted down and transformed the moment they come over.’
(Selected Works, New York, 1, p.83).
Refining out of the pure patriot the dross of class interest was the key task in assuring the leadership of the Party, control of the army. The Party offered itself as patriotic leader, and mediator, manipulating what it defined as ‘non-antagonistic contradictions’ to the greater glory of the ‘nation’.
 
Next Chapter


l Harris: China and World Revolution (3e. The CCP and the Capitalists)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution
3. The Nature of the Regime

The Chinese Communist Party and the Capitalists


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, p.14.

1. Mao Tse-tung (November-December 1936):
‘We are not confiscating the property and the factories of the big and small Chinese merchants and capitalists. We protect their enterprise and help them to expand so that the material supply in the Soviet districts, so necessary for the anti-Japanese campaign, may be augmented in this way.’
2. Mao Tse-tung On Coalition Government 1945:
‘The task of our New Democratic system is ... to promote the free development of a private capitalist economy that benefits instead of controlling the people’s livelihood, and to protect all honestly acquired private property.’
3. Mao – to Edgar Snow (Red Star, p.96):
‘When China wins her independence, then legitimate foreign trading interests will enjoy more opportunities than ever before’.
4. Chou En-lai (to the first National People’s Congress, 1956):
‘We have no objection to economic aid to economically underdeveloped countries ... If the Western countries would also enter into economic co-operation with other countries in conformity with the principles by which we abide, it will have a very beneficial influence not only on the economic development of all the countries concerned, but also on the improvement of the international situation.’
 

l Harris: China and World Revolution (6. World Crisis)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

6. World Crisis


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.25-26.

THE MOST important elements of China’s foreign and domestic policies are ultimately derived from Stalinism in the Soviet Union. Stalinism was the product of the defeat of the European working class, the defeat of the German revolution, the victory of Hitler in Germany, of Mussolini in Italy, of Franco in Spain, of mass unemployment, and finally the Second World War. It was also the product of the economic backwardness of Russia and the desperate drive of Stalin to build an advanced economy to protect Russia’s national power. The Bolsheviks – unlike the Chinese Communist Party in 1949 – had been in 1917 the leaders of a workers revolution. For Stalin to convert the Bolsheviks into the Soviet Communist Party as the political instrument of his power, he had to physically destroy the old leadership of the Party. The labour camps of Siberia were the gravestones of the October revolution.
Stalinism eliminated the idea that the working class is the agency of the socialist revolution, and that it is a world class. It substituted for the working class, class coalition, the ‘Popular Front’; and for internationalism, ‘Socialism in one country’. For workers’ power, it offered State power. For democracy, authoritarian planning. In Chile in 1973, just as in China in 1927, the class coalition policy proved catastrophic for the working class.
After the Second World War, capitalism went into a phase of unprecedented growth. It transformed the industralised countries. But now the system is again entering a phase of crisis. It is likely to be as severe as that which afflicted it between the Wars. That phase of crisis produced the largest upsurge of revolutionary feeling in the history of the European working class, culminating in the Russian revolution. The same dangers and heroic opportunities are looming up again.
The crisis is at its most savage in the economically backward countries. There the ruling classes are not only intriniscally weak. They are subject to a much more severe savaging from outside. Despite its great size, China is not immune to this onslaught. Political rivalry in the system – the threat of war-is likely to force China to shoulder yet a larger burden of expenditure, robbing the resources that should go to development. The price of China’s technically sophisticated imports is rising while its exports – mainly agricultural goods – stagnate China’s foreign trade is, relative to the size of its economy, small, but in terms of the modern industrial sector, vital. The petro-chemicals industry (particularly fertilisers) and the steel industry are currently dependent on imported plant for rapid expansion. In a whole range of other still small industries – aircraft, vehicles, shipping – the dependence is also great. China’s only strong card is its rising oil exports which indeed make possible the greater ‘self-reliance’ it so strongly urges on less favoured nations. But rapid expansion in oil exports also demands increased imports. Already there is strain in China’s balance of payments as a result of purchases over recent years – in November 1974, Peking was asking the Japanese to accept deferred payments for six months and extend credit for steel imports. It has also moved on from accepting short-term credit for imports to medium term credit (which is, for other backward countries, ‘aid’); the more difficult its payments position, the more tempted it will be to accept long term debts. To service the debts, to make up for sudden agricultural difficulties which are not at all ruled out yet, to finance increased defence expenditure, all requires an increase in the level of exploitation of Chinese workers.
The room to manoeuvre for each ruling class narrows as the crisis deepens. It becomes increasingly difficult to make any concessions, any reforms, to buy worker loyalty. A great hole is torn in the politics of reformism. The basis of reformism, the collaboration of classes, begins to split apart between the divergent class interests. If employers have to drive down real wages to survive, it becomes increasingly difficult to persuade workers that this is really in their own interest, that the exploiters and their victims have a common ‘national interest’.
Much of the Left has believed in the reformism of ‘national revolution’. If only, it was argued, a fragment of the world economy, one nation, could be torn out of the world market, socialism could be built there. It did not happen. A new ruling class emerged to command the newly independent State. Of course, socialism is long overdue on a world scale. But on the scale of one poor country, trapped in the ghetto of its own pauperisation, it is not. The massive accumulation of capital, sweated out of the world working class is concentrated in the industralised countries. It needs to be fused to the needs of the poor nations. Then the great resources of stifled energy, initiative and enthusiasm of the world’s people will have the tools to do the job. But the one is not a simple substitute for the other. What it could be is the basis for a world class movement – the working class of an economically backward country can offer the same lead to the world working class as that given by the Russian workers in 1917.
Mao’s China cannot offer that lead. Its leadership clings ever more tenaciously to the politics of class collaboration. It is opposed to forming a new International within which the workers of the advanced and backward countries can forge a common class strategy to overturn the system. It does not form a base for establishing revolutionary movements in other countries, for that would be to ‘interfere in the domestic affairs’ of friendly ruling classes. It makes a virtue of national fragmentation and imprisons the energies and attentions of its followers within boundaries laid down by the ruling class. Social Democracy does the same, and in this, Harold Wilson and Chairman Mao are at one. As a result, China makes a virtue of the nationalist ‘divide and rule’ tactic of world imperialism.
If the revolution can be spread from its first starting point to encompass one or more industralised countries, then immediately the prospects are changed. The markets are opened, the capital resources and industrial goods become available, and the military threat that imposes such a burden of defence spending is ended. It becomes possible to see development taking place in China and elsewhere without exploitation.
But for all that, there can be no ‘peaceful co-existence’, no bribes to regimes that are simultaneously repressing working people. The Left has to reunite its politics with the working class once more instead of acting as the unofficial public relations men of ruling classes in backward countries. It has to adopt the aim of the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’, not ‘alliances of the people for the democratic revolution’, the old Popular Front. It requires a recreation of Lenin’s original strategy – the Russian bourgeois revolution would spark off the German workers revolution, which would then make it possible for Russian and German workers to move on to socialism together.
Why is it that there are in many countries good worker revolutionaries who adopt in international questions the standpoint of the Chinese Communists? It is quite understandable that, faced with the simple alternatives of a Russian reactionary nationalism and a Chinese radical nationalism, the choice is simple. Indeed the closeness of the thoughts of Mao to those of Stalin make it easy to move from one to the other without discomfort.
In practice, however, the thoughts of Chairman Mao are irrelevant to what revolutionaries do here in the organised labour movement. What has the Chinese experience to show Reg Birch or Mike Cooley in their work in the engineering union? Nothing. The rhetoric encourages high hopes, and it is comforting to feel that somewhere faraway there are heroic deeds – but in terms of serious and scientific analysis, strategy and tactics, there is nothing. At worst, the thought of Mao is a diversion because it proposes to workers that they can rely on some force other than their own collective strength, whether it is other countries or classes.
A divergence between theory and practice sooner or later trips a revolutionary, unless he substitutes for serious thought sectarianism or simple adulation. In either case, he makes himself irrelevant to that very purpose to which he supposes himself contributing, the revolution. Now more than ever irrelevance is the worst crime. For the opportunities are enormous, and we can build both a mass revolutionary party in Britain and a revolutionary International. But capitalism’s crisis is moving faster than ever. There is not much time for discussion and thought to decide whether we are prepared to dare. Either we make history, or we shall be its victims.
 
Works Cited


l Harris: China and World Revolution (3b. The CCP and the Workers)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution
3. The Nature of the Regime

The Chinese Communist Party and the Workers


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, p.15.

1. On Coalition Government (1945. p.304):
‘The policy of adjusting the interests of labour and capital will be adopted under the New Democratic system. On the one hand, it will protect the interests of the workers, institute an eight to ten hour working day according to circumstances, provide suitable unemployment relief and social insurance and safeguard trade union rights; on the other hand, it will guarantee legitimate profits to properly managed State, private and co-operative enterprises.’
2. Factory Regulations (governing factory committees etc, 1950):
‘If a decision passed by a majority of a Factory Committee shall be judged by the Head of the Factory (or Manager) to be in conflict with the said Factory’s best interests, or when the said decision shall be in conflict with the instruction of higher authority, the Manager or Head of the Factory is empowered to prohibit its implementation.’
3. Provisional Procedure for the mediation and settlement of Labour-Capital disputes in Private Enterprises, August 1949:
Workers ‘must comply with factory administrative regulations and with the work orders of the capitalists. The capitalists alone have the right to hire and fire workers and employees’.
4. Central Committee May Day slogan, 1950:
‘Chinese workers in public and private enterprises— Resolutely carry out the policy of taking into account both public and private interests and benefiting both labour and capital, welcome the national bourgeoisie in investing their capital in, and developing productive enterprises beneficial to, the national welfare and the people’s livelihood’
(Cited Gluckstein, p. 195).
5. Constitution of the All-China Trade Union Federation, 1953
Trade unions exist in China:
‘to strengthen the unity of the working class, to consolidate the alliance of workers and peasants, to educate workers to observe consciously the laws and decrees of the State, and labour discipline, to strive for the development of production, for the constant increase in labour productivity, for the fulfillment and overfulfillment of the production plans of the State’
(in Labour Laws and Regulations of the People’s Republic of China, Peking, 1956, p.17).
6. Wen Hui Pao (Shanghai, 3 May 1967) warned the Red Rebels supporting Chairman Mao not to
‘regard all workers as conservatives and to fight civil wars against them. We must be aware that, except for a few diehards, most of the workers misled by conservative groups are our class brothers.’
7. Harbin radio (4 August 1967) accuses the ex-Governor of Heilungkiang province of subverting the trade unions by promoting the idea that:
‘Trade unions should be an independent structure and an economic organisation established for the sole purposes of solving the personal interests and struggling for the livelihood of workers and peasants.’
8. Minister Po I-po:
‘The democracy which we practise in enterprises is democracy under the control of central direction, diametrically opposed to the false words of order (?) and the erroneous practice of "workers self-government",’
(cited Bettelheim and Charriere, p.34)
9. Chou En-lai (18 January 1967, highpoint of the Cultural Revolution): orders the restoration of all property, private or public, seized; furthermore:
‘every indiscriminate increase in wages should be considered null and void ... From now on, the subversive elements who incite the masses to attack the banks to take money with violence will be treated as counter-revolutionaries ...
‘All rebels have the duty to help the police and protect the national banks.’
(Report on Trade and Finance, 1967)
 

l Harris: China and World Revolution (4. The Chinese Regime)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

4. The Chinese Regime


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.19-22.

HOWEVER, mediation was not something that could be continued once the Party had won power. It had promised the dominant classes of China that it would not injure their interests provided they supported the Party. But as the government, its survival in an imperialist world depended upon how quickly it could build up its national power, could force the pace of capital accumulation. Its policy therefore swung back and forth between placating the old entrenched classes when it needed their support and attacking them when it thought it could accelerate the process of growth. At the same time, it eroded and in some cases eliminated the position of entrenched classes. By these means, by the process of growth, a middle class stratum of party leaders transformed itself into a ruling class, based upon the control of the means of production. But the poverty of China and the dangers of its external situation allowed no stability – the swings of policy continued as the condition of survival of the ruling class.
Much the most important element to be wooed and abused was the ‘rich peasant system’. In the first phase, the Party freely permits private plots and private markets; it also tolerated the improvement in worker conditions and pay. As a result, the surplus available for investment tended to shrink. Furthermore, inequalities increased, the local Party and army leadership increased its privileges, and the potential for class conflict grew. Sooner or later – and sooner, when an external threat such as Soviet or American intervention grows more threatening – the centre goes into reverse. It tries to beat back popular consumption, to reinforce a more uniform level of austerity, and break the opposition in the Party and army. It can do so only for so long as output keeps up. When peasants refuse to relinquish their crops without the inducement of higher prices, or workers cut their output because wages are too low, then again the process must be reversed lest it affect the overall surplus. From the regime’s viewpoint, it is a Catch 22 dilemma.
Without an internationalist class strategy China is ruled by the regime’s attempts to escape the central contradiction. The millstones of the world market and imperialist military threat on the one side, and of a majority peasant economy at subsistence levels on the other, grind the Chinese regime between them. The situation would be stable despite the zigzags if the economy did grow rapidly. But the years of sustained growth become fewer and fewer in comparison to the years of stagnation, and each new effort to drag the country out of stagnation requires greater and greater effort by the national centre (and more and more splits in the central leadership). The process afflicts the whole world, and particularly all the economically backward countries, as world capitalism enters a phase of long drawn crisis.
Peking’s control of all sources of information in China except the Big Character posters makes it difficult to see these effects in the real quality of life in China. Foreign visitors see only what the regime permits them to see, and speak only – if they can speak at all – to those acceptable to the government. It is this which disguises 800 million people, a quarter of mankind, in such a queer monolithic appearance, as if they all thought, spoke and acted in unison. However, even the casual visitor can see clearly that the standard of living and general wellbeing in the cities and better off communes is tangibly superior to that in the rest of Asia. There is a noticeable lack of those brutal inequalities which make many other Asian countries so obscene.
Yet these impressions have to be compared with other facts. For example, the cities are tightly controlled against illegal entry, against the spontaneous movement of people. The pass system and elaborate regulations exist to prevent the mass of impoverished peasants fleeing to the relative privilege of city life. They do not do it with complete effectiveness, which is why the regime must continually campaign to get people out of the city, to reduce the actual or potential urban unemployment. Unemployment in China, as in other poor countries, is a key index of the failure to develop. Chou En-lai reckons that the population is growing by around 2 per cent, which has added perhaps 20 to 25 million people to the labour force every year since 1968. Taking into account the number that go into higher education, the armed forces etc, the system needs to find 10 to 15 million jobs a year to keep up the level of employment of 1968. Deleyne (p.57) guesses that there are only about half a million new jobs in the cities each year, and very few on the land (except for the very short period of harvesting when there is sometimes a shortage of workers). The rest can only go into work sharing (underemployment), unemployment or flight to Hong Kong (the numbers going to Hong Kong have been at exceptionally high levels over the past three years, possibly 80,000 in 1973). Those in the villages will try to get to the cities where there is a higher chance of getting a job or just getting by, and it is precisely to stop this that the city entrances are blocked and young people are regularly expelled.
The Big Character posters offer another insight. In 1974, the posters revealed – despite vigorous efforts by the authorities to prevent journalists seeing them – continuing complaints of arbitrary arrest, police brutality and torture, the corruption of public officials, inadequate health and safety conditions, poor compensation for accidents. These posters were probably sanctioned by one section of the bureaucracy in its fight with another, so they reveal only the tolerated complaints, not the spontaneous reactions of ordinary people. They were also in the cities where life is much better than in the countryside. They are not the voice of the poorer peasants, the citizens exiled to villages or even the ordinary city worker. The effects of the enormous improvement in conditions between 1945 and 1957 cannot now be effective in purchasing loyalty.
 
Inequality
Basic inequality in China remains substantial, and is a continuing source of complaint. Of course, it is less extreme than in the Soviet Union, let alone Kuomintang China. Piece rates are not employed on anything like the same scale, and considerable efforts are made from time to time in the provision of housing, medical facilities and cheap basic foodstuffs. Nevertheless, there is still a heavy emphasis in urban industry on increasing labour productivity and the continuous use of machines – increasing jobs is sacrificed to raising output per job.
What are the differentials? The first major one is between town and country. On the countryside, the variation between communes is enormous, from the rich lowland horticultural or export-crop farms to the arid subsistence hill farms. In 1965, the Kwantung Province Party estimated that Mutual Aid teams received monthly pay per commune dweller ranging from 150 to 200 Yuan for rich teams to around 60 Yuan for poor. In 1964 family incomes in thirteen communes in different provinces varied between 390.9 Yuan and 1,392.4 Yuan. For agricultural labourers, monthly wages in eight provinces varied between 17.5 and 47.2 Yuan. Deleyne (p.72), a most sympathetic former inhabitant of China, reckons in 1971 that over the whole vast variety of China, peasant incomes vary by a ratio of 1 to 12. Communes visited by foreigners, he notes, are not located in the poorer regions, but even in those communes, the monthly income per worker varies between 200 and, exceptionally, 600 Yuan, or for families with two working members, 400 to 1,200 Yuaa But there are cases in the far south where the income per worker is as low as 50 Yuan. On top of this income, there is what peasants receive from their private plots, and there the differences are much greater because of the variation in the quality of soil; in the better off communes, this may add 15 to 30 per cent on top of the basic pay.
All these figures leave out the level of pay of higher officials at the communue or county level, let alone the value of differences in allowances and ‘perks’ (housing, food, transport). There is not much information on the variation in real consumption, and little that is recent. In the First Plan period, the New China News Agency reported that the differences in the annual consumption of cloth per person varied between 94 feet for Party cadres and 39.58 for other city dwellers in the municipality of Tsinan, and between 5 and 20 feet for peasants. Even if we had figures on consumption, it would not show the other advantages in being a cadre or an army officer – for example, access to higher education or professional jobs for their children, to the use of modern transport (cars, rail, air) etc.
The current relaxation and particularly the occasional stress on commune ‘self-reliance’ makes the differences much worse. For, if a poor commune has to finance its own educational, medical and welfare services, they will inevitably be much worse than those provided in a rich commune. Equality does depend on the richer areas helping the poor, not on ‘local self-activity’.
There is more information on city incomes. There has been little change in factory pay in recent years. In large scale modern factories, there is – according to several accounts – a more than three-fold variation in wages for skilled workers, and between the least skilled and the most skilled technician, a ratio of 1 to 7 in difference. Karol (p.559) for 1967 says that there are eight wage grades among workers, ranging from 40 Yuan to 120 Yuan per month, with factory directors getting between 140 and 190; one Chief Engineer of a ‘ chemicals plant received monthly 250 Yuan. On top of these basic rates, an incentive premium was paid of between 6 and 10 per cent of the salary. Apprentices received 18 to 20 Yuan per month. These figures are only internal to the factory, and exclude the higher pay of higher management staff outside the factory, banking and merchanting, Party and city officials and government bureaucrats. Nor do they include any allowance for the bureaucrats’ access to facilities-housing, transport, different types of canteen food, medical facilities, schooling for children – nor special privileges, like being able to go on holidays for longer than the two to five days allowed ordinary workers.
Incomes are much more stable than the propaganda of the regime suggests. The Party and management are under continual pressure to reduce the wage bill (which is why municipalities were given the opportunity of employing cheap temporary rural contract labour on unskilled loading jobs in the city – on the railways, docks and in the mines). But because overall wages are low, any real changes drastically affect people’s willingness to work. So far, no ruling class has found a means of filling stomachs on a diet of moral rhetoric about sacrifice, particularly when the differences in sacrifice required are so apparent.
What was the Cultural Revolution about, then, if not to recharge the batteries of idealism and ‘destroy the thousands-of-years-old concept of private ownership’ (Wheelwright and McFarlane, p.109; note, on the account of these authors, the problem was not ‘a capitalist road’, which is only a couple of hundred years old).
 
The Cultural Revolution
The Cultural Revolution was not a revolution. As Shen-wu-lien says (see the Box), a revolution in the Leninist sense, involves a transfer of power from one class to another and the destruction of the old State. It is a change in the structure of power which topples a ruling class, not a change in personnel or policies. Yet in China, the men and women who form the leadership remain broadly the same as before, despite some dramatic dismissals at the top. Indeed, some of those sacked – like the former General Secretary of the Party, Teng Hsiao-p’ing – have been readmitted to power.
For the party leadership, the Cultural Revolution was an old-fashioned Party ‘rectification’ campaign, but one that was compelled to use forces from outside the Party because the leadership believed the decay inside the Party too deep-rooted to be tackled through an internal Control Commission. The decay was however the direct result of the policies pursued by the same Party leadership over the preceding seven years which had allowed the cadres steadily to extend their privileges and power to the point where they were limiting the power of Peking itself, inhibiting its capacity, ‘to grasp the revolution and promote production‘. (NH stress).
But the campaign to purge the Party had two separate results that threatened the whole exercise. First, it split the leadership itself, to Mao’s astonishment (see the extracts from his unpublished speeches, Mao Tse-tung Unrehearsed, Talks and Letter, 1956-71, edited by Stuart Schram, Penguin (London), 1974, pp.267-279). One section fought the purge on the basis of leaving things as they were, and tried to form a conservative alliance of national and provincial leaders against Mao Tse-tung. It became necessary for the whole conflict to be escalated, to simulate a fake ‘class war’ against people now designated ‘capitalist-roaders’.
To simulate class war is dangerous for any ruling class. In China, it promoted real class war, a real struggle for democracy that threatened to make no distinction between the rival factions in the ruling order. The instrument for the first attack on the conservative Party bureaucrats – the school and college students – immediately began to raise many other wider issues than that simply of ‘culture’. At some stages, their grievances spilled .over into a real attack on the regime. Attempts were made to disperse them, to get them to leave Peking and return home, to put them under army direction, to divert them into worrying about educational matters rather than job privilege. It had all happened before. For example, the Party was claiming in 1962 to have transformed the educational system and raised the proportion of working class entrants to higher education from 36 per cent (1957) to 67 per cent.
What changed the terms of the battle was the wave of strikes that followed in the wake of the Red Guards, and the agitation among peasants. This threatened not just the ‘capitalist readers’ but the very structure of power. The leadership panicked. Despite severe disagreements among themselves, they called in the People’s Liberation Army to re-establish order and beat back what was now officially described as ‘the black wind of economism’, anarchism and Kuomintang provocation.
‘In all institutions where seizure of power has become necessary, from above to below, the participation of the People’s Liberation Army and militia delegates in the temporary organs of power of the revolutionary triple alliance is indispensible. Factories, villages, institutions of finance and commerce, of learning (including colleges, secondary and primary schools) must be led by the participation of the People’s Liberation Army’.
(Red Flag, March 10, 1967).
‘Bombard the Party Heaquarters’ was replaced by the demand to close the ranks against anyone doing so, by the sudden rapid shrinkage of the ‘capitalist roaders’ into a tiny handful, many of whom could return to their positions after a pause. The attack on the bureaucracy and on management by decree was now replaced by an attack on those who seek to ‘rob the nation of the mature political and organisational skills of experienced men’ (Red Flag, February 22, 1967).
However, Mao still hoped to win back full control over the process of capital accumulation, despite this temporary setback. The escalation of the US war on the people of Vietnam on China’s southern borders did not deter him in this endeavour. But two other external events did – the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, showing to what extremity Moscow could go in curbing recalcitrants, and the armed clash between Russian and Chinese forces on the Ussuri river in 1969. Now the leadership really went into reverse, restoring much of the old Party leadership and relaxing domestic consumption levels. Defence became the top priority, not accelerating economic growth.
The Red Guards accepted the liquidation of their role with great reluctance. The change of gear encouraged cynicism and bitterness, and permitted the ‘rehabilitated’ cadres to wreak vengeance on their former persecutors. Relaxing the economy, restoring the ‘rich peasant system’, also permitted the return of profiteering, black marketeering, speculation and embezzling. The Red Guards were prized out of the cities in droves-some 10 to 20 million young people are said to have been despatched to the countryside between 1969 and 1971. Some of them then made the hazardous trip to Hong Kong.
The stalemate which emerged from the Cultural Revolution is directly the product of a domestic class struggle. It concerns disagreements within the Party, not between the ‘socialists’ and the ‘capitalist readers’, but between those prepared to tolerate economic stagnation provided it brings to them central political power, and those – led by Chairman Mao – who want to subordinate all consumption to the drive for capital accummulation. Both sides of that debate take for granted that the workers and peasants of China will be the source of the surplus; they disagree on what should be done with the surplus.
The leadership played with the language of class war. But it quickly returned to the concepts of class collaboration, of national unity in the face of the Soviet threat.
It is this reformism that makes China and its Communist Party so attractive to so many middle and upper class non-Marxists in the West. Chinese Communism seems to offer a political parallel, a sister reformism, in economically backward countries to Scandinavian Social Democracy in Europe. For them, approving of Chairman Mao involves them in no commitment to fighting a class war. Indeed, it does not involve them in fighting imperialism in Europe or anywhere else. It preserves – indeed it offers approval of – their own national boundaries, and wards off the prospect of international class war. It also allows those daydreams of happy toiling communities, singing at work, united and polite, a whole people free of strikes, strife and ‘greed’ (that is, workers fighting exploitation). No wonder Labour’s Denis Healey responds with simple pleasure at the apparent lack of industrial disputes and wage pressure.
The liberal Maoists are like the Webbs, those famous Labour intellectuals. They were horrified at the ‘anarchy’ of workers’ power in 1917, but promptly fell in love with the barrack-society of Stalinist Russia in the 1930s. The one threatened their entire importance, the second guaranteed it.
 
Next Chapter


l Harris: China and World Revolution (Some Notes on Foreign Policy)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

Some Notes on Foreign Policy


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, pp.26-27.

The Common Market
Chou En-lai (11 September 1973, Peking Review, 37, 1973):
‘We ... support the peoples of European countries in uniting themselves to safeguard their independence. We are for the view that the cause of European unity, if it is carried out well, will contribute to the improvement of the situation in Europe and the whole world’.
Teng Hsiao-p’ing (Vice premier, speech to the UN, 10 April 1974):
‘The case of the developed countries in between the superpowers ... (they) are in varying degrees controlled, threatened or bullied by the one superpower or the other In varying degrees all these countries have the desire to shake off superpower enslavement or control and safeguard their national independence and the integrity of their sovereignty’.

United States of America
From 1942, Chou and Mao made repeated attempts – with some success – to invite US officers to visit Yenan; from 1944, requests were made for US aid. Mao and Chou requested an invitation to visit Washington in February 1945 for discussions with Roosevelt, but nothing came of it.
February 1945 – Chuh Teh asks US for loan of $20m – refused.
13 April 1945 – Telegram to Truman expressing warm condolences on death of Roosevelt.
7th Congress of CCP (3 May 1945):
‘The American people, whom the Chinese people have been accustomed to consider as the inhabitants of a remote land, seem today like close neighbours. The Chinese people will co-operate with the people of the great powers, America, Great Britain, USSR and France, as indeed with all people of every other country, to create a new world peace, secure and durable’.
Foreign Minister Chen Yi, 1965:
‘Peaceful co-existence with US imperialism which is pushing ahead its policies of aggression and war, is out of the question’.
Chinese toast to President Nixon, 21 February 1972:
‘The social system of China and the US are fundamentally different, and there exists great differences between the Chinese government and the US government. However, these differences should not hinder China and the US from establishing normal State relations on the basis of the Five Principles ...; still less should they lead to war. As early as 1955, the Chinese government publicly stated that the Chinese people do not want to have a war with the United States and that the Chinese government is willing to sit down and enter into negotiations with the US government. This is a policy we have pursued consistently.’
9 May 1972 – US mines harbours of North Vietnam. China protest that two Chinese ships attacked in Vietnamese waters. US launch massive bombing campaign. From 1966 to March 1972, US announce dropped 6.2 million tons of munitions, or 262 pounds per head of the Indo-Chinese population.
12 June 1972 – China condemns US for having
‘steadily expanded the sphere of bombing up to areas close to the Sino-Vietnamese border, threatening the security of China’.
19-23 June – Kissinger in Peking for talks with Chinese government; report that received with ‘extraordinary courtesy’.
November 1974 – China reported to have sent two messages of consolence to President Nixon over the three months since he was forced out of office by the Watergate scandal and the Vietnam war.

Soviet Union
Mao Tse-tung (11 May 1964, cited in joint editorial People’s Daily, Red Flag and Liberation Army Daily, Peking Review 17/1970):
‘The Soviet Union today is under the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, a dictatorship of the big bourgeoisie, a dictatorship of the German fascist type, a dictatorship of the Hitler type.’
A clique had usurped the party and government to create ‘a bureaucratic monopoly capitalist class, namely a new type of bourgeoisie’, pursuing ‘social imperialism’ abroad.
Chou En-lai (to 10th Party Congress, August 1973):
‘Over the last two decades, the Soviet revisionist ruling clique, from Khrushcvek to Brezhnev, have made a socialist country degenerate into a social-imperialist country. Internally, it has restored capitalism, enforced a fascist dictatorship and enslaved the people of all nationalities.’
Peking Review (14 April 1969):
‘Fascist white terror reigns in Soviet society today’.

Pakistan
China in longer term alliance with Pakistan, despite Pakistan’s membership of SEATO and CENTO. 1965-Chinese forces mobilised on the Indian border during the Indo-Pakistan war to divide Indian forces (something that was not done opposite Taiwan during the Vietnamese war to divide US forces). Chinese support for Pakistan’s military dictator, Ayub Khan, leads to Pakistan Left giving critical support to Ayub, and in East Pakistan, refusing to champion the Bengali right to independence.
25 March 1971 – West Pakistan begin repression of Bengali revolt. China extends considerable material support – small arms, paper to break paperworker strike in East Pakistan etc. In February 1971 China-Pakistan highway opened.
Leader of East Bengal Left, Maulana Bashani, telegram to Mao:
‘The ideology of socialism is to fight oppression ... and if Mao refuses to protest against the atrocities of the military junta, the world may think you are not the friend of the oppressed’.
Chou En’lai message to General Yahya Khan:
‘The unification of Pakistan and the unity of the people of East and West Pakistan are the basic guarantee for Pakistan to attain prosperity and strength.’
China gives full support for Pakistan’s struggle to safeguard ‘its national independence and State sovereignty’.
2 April – NCNA cite Yahya Khan’s broadcast of 26 March justifying repression, imply Indian interference main source of revolt.
11 May – People’s Daily:
‘The relevant measures taken by President Yahya Khan in connection with the present situation in Pakistan are the internal affairs of Pakistan, in which no country should or had the right to interfere ...’
5-8 November – President Bhutto of Pakistan on state visit to Peking. Official Chinese government statement (16 December)
‘We hold that there can be no neutrality on the question of aggression versus non-aggression, of division versus anti-division, and of subversion versus anti-subversion.’ (Peking Review 51/1971)
31 January-2 February 1972 – Bhutto on state visit to China – China offers to convert four loans to Pakistan into straight grants, defer its 1970 loan repayment period for 20 years, and make future loans.
 

l Harris: China and World Revolution (Works Cited)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution

Works Cited


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, p.26.

Bettleheim, Charles J. and Charriere, H. Marchision, La construction du socialisms en Chine, Maspero (Paris), 1965.
Brandt, C., Schwartz, B. and Fairbank, J.K., A Documentary History of Chinese Communism, Allen and Unwin (London), 1952.
Burki, Shahid Javed, A Study in Chinese Communes, Harvard University Press (Cambridge, Mass.), 1965
Cliff, Tony, Crisis in China, International Socialism 27 (London), 1966, p.7.
Deleyne, Jan, The Chinese Economy (L'Economie Chinoise, Paris), Deutsch (London), 1973
Gluckstein, Ygael, Mao's China, Economic and Political Survey, Allen and Unwin (London), 1957
Gray, Jack, Politics in Command, The Political Quarterly, 45/1, Jan.-Mar. 1974
Harris, Nigel, China: Let a Hundred Flowers Bloom, International Socialism 35, (London), 1968, p.11
—— India-China, Undeveloped and Revolution, Vikas (Delhi), 1974.
Karol, K.S., China, The Other Communism, Heinemann (London) 1967.
Snow, Edgar, Red Star Over China, Left Book Club, Gollancz (London), 1937
Wheelwright, E.L. and McFarlane, Bruce, The Chinese Road to Socialism, Economics of Cultural Revolution, Penguin (London), 1973.
Citations from the work of Mao Tse-tung are from the official Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Foreign Languages Press (Peking), 1961, unless otherwise specified in the text.
 
Appendix


l Harris: China and World Revolution (3c. Sheng-wu-lien)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution
3. The Nature of the Regime

Sheng-wu-lien
(Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee)


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, p.16.

This federation of organisations in Hunan was attacked by the leadership of the Party during the Cultural Revolution. In particular, Minister of Public Security K’ang Sheng (24 January 1968) alleged:
‘They describe the State and the Party leadership led by Chairman Mao as a privileged class similar to Khrushchev’s Party ... They say that the provincial revolutionary committees and preparatory groups for these are all reformists ...’
Sheng-wu-lien argued in one of their few documents to have come out of China, Whither China? that the Cultural Revolution had arisen because of contradictions between the ‘bureaucratic bourgeoisie’ and the people. Lenin said, they argued, that a revolution is a change of classes, but classes had not changed in China:
‘The rule of the new bureaucratic bourgeoisie must be overthrown by force in order to solve the problem of political power. Empty shouting about realising the 7 May directive (Mao’s instruction for the rectification campaign in the army) without any reference to the seizure of power and utter smashing of the old State machinery will of course be a “utopian” dream
‘The class of “Red” capitalists (have) completely become a decaying class that hinders the progress of history ...
‘As a result, the fruit of the revolution was in the final analysis taken by the capitalist class ...
‘The Revolutionary Committees (set up by the Party leadership to unite representatives of the army, the Party and “new mass organisations” and end the Cultural Revolution) amount to a reinstatement of the bureaucrats already toppled in the January revolution. Inevitably, it will be the form of political power to be usurped by the bourgeoisie, at which the local bureaucrats are to play a leading role ...
‘Before the Cultural Revolution, the bureaucrats dared not really hand over arms to the people. The militia is only a facade behind which the bureaucrats control the armed strength of the people. It is certainly not an armed force of the working class, but a docile tool in the hands of the bureaucrats ...
‘The revolution by dismissal of officials is only bourgeois reformism which changes in a zigzagging way the new bureaucratic rule before the Cultural Revolution into another kind of bourgeois rule of bourgeois bureaucrats ...
‘The real revolution, the revolution to negate the past 17 years, has basically not yet begun ...
‘The bourgeoisie always represent the form of political power of their rule as the most perfect, flawless thing, in the world that serves the whole people. The new bureaucratic bourgeoisie and the brutes of the Right-wing of the petty bourgeoisie who depend on them are doing exactly that.’
 

l Harris: China and World Revolution (3d. The CCP and the Peasantry)



Nigel Harris Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

China & World Revolution

Nigel Harris
China and World Revolution
3. The Nature of the Regime

The Chinese Communist Party and the Peasantry


From International Socialism (1st series), No.78, May 1975, p.18.

1. Communist Party of China, statement
‘The policy of the Party is only to help the peasants in reducing feudal exploitation but not to liquidate feudal exploitation entirely, much less to attack the enlightened gentry who support democratic reforms.’
(cited Brandt et al., p.278)
2. Mao Tse-tung, November-December 1936:
‘We have already adopted a decision not to confiscate the land of the rich peasants, and, if they come to us to fight against Japan, not to refuse to unite with them.’
3. After 1945, the Party promised the confiscation of Japanese-held land and its redistribution in the northeast. The Central Committee (4 May 1946), then promised to buy landlords’ ‘surplus’ land through compulsory purchase. But in calculating the ‘surplus’, it allowed landlords 50 per cent more than middle peasants and 100 per cent if they were active in the anti-Japanese war. Land purchased was sold at half price to the peasants.
September 1947 – a Party National Land Conference in Hopei approved a new Land Law reversing Party policy and instituting the confiscation of land and belongings of landlords and the ‘surplus’ property of rich peasants. Chairman Mao not present, but immediately intervened to denounce ‘Left’ excesses in the Conference.
Mao Tse-tung, directive (11 February 1948):
‘There has been an erroneous emphasis on “doing everything as the masses want it done”, and an accommodation to wrong views existing among the masses.’
Mao Tse-tung, telegram to Liu Shao-chi (in charge of the Land Conference), February 1948: he reiterates the former policy, saying the rich peasants must be neutralised, not rejected.
Mao Tse-tung, attends Conference in Hopei that criticises Liu Shao-chi for adopting the slogan of ‘doing what the masses want’. Li Yen-tzu attacks Liu for arguing that the ‘general settlement of the land problem must primarily rely on the spontaneous movement of the masses.’
4. Peasants who resisted were invariably described as ‘bandits’:
‘Everywhere we are making great progress in the work of exterminating bandits in Central China. In Hunan province, during the past year, about 38,700 bandits were killed, wounded, captured alive or forced to surrender. In Hupeh province, during the three months of May, June and July, the total number of bandits exterminated was more than 12,000.’
New China News Agency, Hunan report, 20 August 1949.
5. Central Committee statement (15 February 1953):
‘It is necessary to permit the continued development of the economic system of the rich peasant.’
 



‘The basic programme of the Communist Party of China is the complete overthrow of the bourgeoisie and all other exploiting classes, the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat in place of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie and the triumph of socialism over capitalism. The ultimate aim of the Party is the realisation of communism ...
‘The Communist Party of China upholds proletarian internationalism and opposes Great Power chauvinism; it firmly unites with genuine Marxist-Leninist parties and organisations the world over, unites with the proletariat, the oppressed peoples and nations of the whole world and fight together with them to oppose the hegemonism of the two superpowers ...’
(Constitution of the Communist Party of China, 28 August 1973)
‘The name “Soviet”, like the name “Communist Party”, can be used by Bolsheviks or Mensheviks, by Marxist-Leninists or revisionists. What is decisive is not the name but the essence, not the form but the content.’
(People’s Daily, 17 March 1971)

[Introduction]

1. China: Imperial and Republican

2. China and Economic Development

3. The Nature of the Regime

4. The Chinese Regime

5. China’s Policies Abroad

6. World Crisis

Works Cited

Some Notes on Foreign Policy
 



The Chinese Road to Socialism, Economics of the Cultural Revolution
E.L. Wheelwright and Bruce McFarlane
Penguin, 50p.
Capital Formation in Mainland China, 1952-1965
Kang Chao
University of California Press, £3.80.
THE first book gives an account of the economic development of China since 1949 as seen from one political viewpoint after the Cultural Revolution. This covers both the background, the First Plan, the Great Leap Forward, the conservative phase preceding the Cultural Revolution. After discussing this latter event, the authors discuss various economic institutions and policies.
But it is poor stuff. The authors seem entirely unaware of the contradictory zigzags of policy, and of how much which they attribute to the Cultural Revolution has been seen before. They have no real sense of the pressures and necessities which force China’s leadership in particular directions quite independent of what they might like. For this reason, what they write now will become rapidly outdated as China adopts some new course, and indeed, can become an embarrassment where it conflicts with the Party line. To escape the knotty necessities of poverty, the shortage of capital and the burden of defence expenditure, they retreat on the slightest pretext into moralising. They care nothing for the oddities that this leads them into. For example, in a society that has supposedly abolished the private ownership of the means of production, we offered something as target called ‘selfish bourgeois individualistic competitive morality’. But it then turns out that this is not about Chinese capitalism or indeed world capitalism at all, but ‘the thousands-of-years-old concept of private ownership’ (p.109). History has disappeared, and all is selfishness or not.
In similar fashion, classes come and go. The Cultural Revolution, it seems, was not what we normally suppose revolutions to be about: the replacement of the power of one class by that of another. No, it was a great social moralising to upbraid the greedy. Although they refer to ‘bourgeois’ and ‘capitalist’, workers and peasants, really they do not mean anything important at all. There is no structure of power, only ‘the people’ and a few ‘bad eggs’. The real life of 800 million Chinese somehow disappears into a dream land. It is one die Labour government shares – it also likes to upbraid workers for selfishness and ask them to make sacrifices.
Unlike China, we know exactly what that means here. The book is intellectually sloppy (for example, ‘Every society needs a morality to suit its economic development as Tawney argued’, p.18). Key issues are mentioned, but then the book misses them, and goes off chasing its own predetermined moral tail. For the authors, bread or rice are not problems.
Kang Chao’s book is very interesting and competently done, but strictly for the specialist. The amazing fluctuations in Chinese investment and policy emerge with great clarity. It would be worth the authors of the first book reading it.
 



The ruling class of Ceylon has been baptised in fire. Until last month, a certain grudging toleration hung like a mist over the relations between the classes. Today, the real class struggle has been revealed. The fog of ‘leftist’ rhetoric has dissipated. Cynical and brutal, the rulers of Ceylon will go to any lengths to preserve their position.
This revelation of the real state of power has been forced by the steadily worsening crisis of Ceylonese capitalism.The ‘Left’ government of Mrs Bandaranaike which won a quite unexpected landslide victory at the polls in March of last year has been, as always, long on promises and short on delivery. But it has become progressively less easy to maintain the balancing game between revolutionary slogans for the mass audience and strictly conservative action for the foreign financiers and domestic capitalists. To escape, Mrs Bandaranaike needed to find and hunt a scapegoat, preferably on the Left so that the Right would be impressed and extend credit and support to her government.
 
The economy
The crisis of Ceylonese capitalism is only an extreme version of the problems facing many developing countries. Sixty per cent of Ceylon’s foreign exchange earnings come from tea (and a further thirty per cent from rubber and coconut). World tea output increases two to three per cent per year, but world demand for tea has been stagnant for years. For Ceylon the revenue it receives from exports is sluggish or declining while the price of its imports is rising. The widening gap can only be plugged by foreign loans, but on steadily more and more restrictive terms.
Ceylon already has debts to foreigners of more than £108 million. This sum has tripled in the past five years, and servicing the debt now takes a fifth of Ceylon’s export earnings. Foreign lenders are less and less inclined to extend more capital until they are sure that Ceylon’s economy is going to grow fast enough to repay the loans. The terms of each new loan get stiffer, and the government is less and less able to resist the demands of foreign lenders for control over the Ceylonese economy. The Bandaranaike coalition, while in opposition, radically attacked the terms of loans clinched by the former UNP government; this time, Minister of Finance Perera (of the formerly-Trotskyist Lanka Sama Samaj) refused to publish the terms of his deal with the International Monetary Fund.
Using foreign aid just to survive – and to fulfill Mrs Bandaranaike’s election promise to double the rice ration – piles up the problems for the future. The economy is not expanded, and new jobs for the rising labour force are not created.
Between a half and one million are said to be unemployed (out of a total population of 12 million), many of them in the age group 15 to 25.The government announced a crash programme to employ 100,000 of them, but this scheme will take a long time to produce any results. Instead of tackling employment, the government concentrated in its election platform on pure demagogy-it would take over the tea industry (the biggest employer with 800,000 workers),the import trade and the banks;it would set up ‘people’s committees’ to represent popular interests in districts and workplaces. But all this was just noise beside the central problem.
The ‘Speech from the Throne’ last June promised boldly that Ceylon would become a republic, nationalization of the banks would be completed, and State agencies would assume direction, but not ownership, of the trade in tea, rubber and coconuts. But in the autumn, an austerity budget showed the real state of play after all the talk (and even that budget was based on an assumed rate of aid that has in fact not materialised). An all round increase in taxes did nothing to help the rising tide of inflation for the mass of the population. Taking over the tea-box import trade and the graphite industry, and abolishing the Upper House of Ceylon’s parliament (where there was an anti-Bandaranaike majority) filled new stomachs. But the government did make a substantial increase in the police force.
If the mass of the population was denied any hope of improvement, Mrs Bandaranaike was not winning friends among the ruling class of Ceylon. What nationalizations there were, plus an incomes ceiling, a compulsory savings scheme to limit dividends and the general spurious populist furore of the government, all induced upper-class anxieties about a rising tide of ‘Bolshevism’. Behind the government lay even more substantial threats. Industrial output has been falling, and the workers have been increasingly prone to strike. Last September strikes in the petroleum and electricity industries prompted the government to introduce a state of emergency under which the army took over petrol and paraffin distribution.
 
The Emergency
The Bandaranaike government was threatened on every side. From abroad came demands to cut the rice ration, increase rice prices and scrap any plans for nationalization – as conditions for the loans which alone seemed to be the means for the survival of Bandaranaike’s administration. Domestic capitalists were terrified that the government was going to extinguish them. Meanwhile, the mass of the population was more and more aware that all the promises of a radical new deal made during the elections were being betrayed in intrigue and petty manoeuvres. Something was needed which would simultaneously defeat all these threats, and provide the pretext for a generalised attack on popular living standards (increasing prices, cutting social services, halving the rice ration). The youthful and fragmentary revolutionary left was just the excuse Bandaranaike and her ‘Trotskyist’ and ‘Communist’ allies needed.
For some years, there have been ‘men training with arms’ in the hills. And no doubt they would have continued there if Mrs Bandaranaike’s need had not been so great. There are a number of radical opposition organisations – including the largest, the People’s Liberation Front (Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna, JVP),and also splinters from the Lanka Sama Samaj such as the LSSP(R) – but none of them was of enough significance to worry the government. Indeed, the JVP supported the Bandaranaike coalition at the time of the election, and had not, except rhetorically, raised the question of seizing power in Ceylon. By last August, the JVP had reached the stage of mass meetings to criticise the government, and the government in its turn harassed JVP militants. JVP membership was drawn primarily from students and the educated unemployed. Despite the fog of rumours and government-inspired fables, there is no evidence that the JVP was very large, nor that it was preparing seriously to attack the government, nor that it had connections with any foreign power (in the early days, it was said, ‘vast’ arms caches of foreign weapons had been discovered; in fact, it turned out,the only weapons discovered were those lifted from the army and police in Ceylon; the North Koreans were expelled as scapegoats for there is no evidence that they were seriously involved with the JVP or any other movement).
The government’s imagination was lively, if inconsistent. Last October, the police claimed that there were 15,000 men preparing an uprising. By March, the number, according to the government,c had climbed as high as 85,000 which – for the benefit of foreign arms suppliers – was happily contrasted with the tiny armed forces of Ceylon (25,000). Other official estimates asserted that there were 4,000 ‘hardcore’ rebels, and 10,000 ‘active supporters’; or 20-30,000 ‘hardcore’ members (that is, those with weapons), excluding other supporters in the cities. And so on. This is the stuff of upper-class nightmares, not of Ceylonese reality. There are of course at least 100,000 potential rebels in Ceylon, but there can at most be only a few thousand actual organised rebels. Yet when the government set out to find a scapegoat for its failures it accidentally met with a sea of hostility which, at least briefly, really did frighten it.
The official explanations as to why the Emergency was called were as diverse as the estimates of rebel strength. The police said the JVP had been planning an armed insurrection for ‘several months’ and that they had attacked the US embassy in March.In fact the attack on the embassy has all the marks of a provocateur’s action: the attackers called themselves the ‘Mao Youth Front’, an unknown group, and the JVP entirely rejected the accusation that it had been involved. But the incident gave the pretext for the arrest of the JVP leadership. On March 16th, the government claimed that there was a plot to kidnap the Social Services Minister, and introduced the Emergency. On March 18th, Mrs Bandaranaike argued that the JVP and others had planned an armed uprising for mid-April. On the 23rd she said it was a plot to seize public buildings and steal guns.
The truth may never be known. But the government used opportunity to slaughter as many of the overt or potential opposition as they could. And the sheer ruthlessness of government forces added desperation to the hunted, so that what began as a demonstration of Mrs Bandaranaike’s power ended as a bloodbath. The numbers killed will probably never be known. The army claims to have made 3,000 arrests (75 per cent of those arrested were between the ages of 19 and 22); another thousand are said to have surrendered under the amnesty. Yet still some of the rebels fought on, with amazing heroism and tenacity. In reply, the government escalated its brutality. In late April, one foreign correspondent observed that
‘Though clearly on the wane, the insurgency had become a cockerel in the hands of the government forces who, not satisfied with wringing its throat, now sought to tear out its giblets as well.’
The ruthlessness of the army and police – like that, of the West Pakistan military in East Bengal – is designed to achieve the most vivid effect on the minds of the mass of the population in the shortest time possible. What is left of the opposition is now concentrated in those areas of the centre and south of the island from which the government draws its main support, from the rural Sinhalese Buddhist areas (not from, for example, the Sinhalese Christian or Ceylon Tamil districts).
The government has crossed its Rubicon. It can no longer play the Left rhetoric waltz to charm its mass audience. And the more ‘Left’ the Cabinet member is supposed to be, the more he has been required to stand up and be counted in these troubled times for Ceylonese capitalism. Leslie Goonewardene, Lanka Sama Samaj Minister of Communications, proclaimed in The Nation that the rebels were ‘right-wing reactionaries’, a view echoed by Colvin da Silva (LSSP Minister of Plantations). Pieter Keuneman, Communist Party Minister of Housing and Construction, went a little further and dubbed the JVP ‘new-style fascists’. Government Ministers proclaimed, not the struggle for socialism, but their firm intention to ‘protect democracy and the democratic way of life which the people of Ceylon have cherished and preserved through the years’. But a ‘Left’ government does make some difference: originally the last massive onslaught on the militants still fighting was timed for May 1st; but the government felt it would be indelicate to launch such a repression on international labour day and postponed the attack for a few days.
Few others have emerged with much more credit. The pro-China Communist Party compaigned consistently against the JVP, helping the government by calling them terrorists. Sanmugathasan, the leader of this group, originally hoped to share in the election spoils and secure ministerial office in Mrs Bandaranaike’s government. But he lost his seat in the election. His loyalty to the coalition did him no good, for both he and his deputy were arrested during the Emergency. But it may be that others, within the government, had their loyalties strained. The parliamentary secretary to the Minister of Planning (R.D. Senanayake) was arrested quite early on. An LSSP MP, Vasudeva Nanayakkara, leader of the party’s youth organisation, was arrested for ‘complicity’ in the ‘revolt’, which might suggest that some of the LSSP youth sympathised with the JVP. The private secretary to the Minister of Information (B.S. Perera) also appears to have been detained. Outside the government, all the leading members of the Ceylon Broadcasting Corporation were arrested or dismissed.
 
Support
The JVP militants have now a clear idea of who their friends at home are. And abroad the picture is no less clear. There was an unseemly rush to prop up the Bandaranaike regime and provide it with the instruments of repression – six US, six Russian, four Indian and two Pakistani helicopters; six MIG 17s and twenty armoured cars, with Russian staff, from the Soviet Union; a quick injection of small arms and 18 army scout cars from British imperialism; and five Indian anti-submarine frigates patrolling the coast. The Russian MIGs are said to have been immediately used to strafe rebel areas in the north central region. More assistance came from Yugoslavia, Egypt and Australia. The Chinese government wrote to Mrs Bandaranaike on 26 April offering a long term, interest free loan of £10.7m, and congratulated her government on defeating the insurgents.
 
Prospects
The government seriously underestimated the potential for revolt and overestimated the army’s capacity to suppress the left. The JVP underestimated the ruthlessness and cynicism of Mrs Bandaranaike and were caught relatively unprepared. For the JVP and other revolutionary groups, the lessons are hard and bitter. Despite enormous heroism and tenacity, the left has received a setback. Without links with the organised workers of Colombo, the revolutionaries were unable to threaten the government from behind its back. The opposition has been forced into the more isolated areas, and it will take time for it to recover. But when it re-emerges, the crisis of Ceylonese capitalism will have reached a much more extreme state.
On the one hand, Mrs Bandaranaike – for short-term political gains – has created an army that will not, as it has in the past, passively accept its role as watchdog to the civilian government. Defence expenditure has tripled through the emergency; the resources going into defence will mean there is less for development, for job creation, which means there will be more opposition, and so the need for more defence expenditure. On the other hand, the cost of the military operation has made the immediate economic prospect, critical before the emergency, now catastrophic. The tea and rubber trades have been brought to standstill, and the rice output has been cut: export earnings and the basic food supply of the population are simultaneously threatened. The middle and upper classes have no doubt been terrified into supporting Mrs Bandaranaike, and perhaps foreign lenders have been impressed with her commitment to defend the Ceylonese outpost of world capitalism, but at fearful cost.She has delivered such a crushing blow to the economy that the class struggle is bound to escalate even more dramatically in the future. And then the only force capable of holding the country together will be the army, no doubt also tricked out in Leftist rhetoric. But the army cannot solve the central problem either.



Maulana Bashani,of National Awami Party (East Pakistan) sent a telegram to Mao Tse-tung, in March 1971:
‘The ideology of socialism is to fight oppression ... and if Mao refuses to protest against the atrocities of the military junta, the world may think you are not the friend of the oppressed’.
It is a little less easy for supporters of China to be as polite as Bashani now about Peking’s role in East Pakistan. Some of the tanks that blitzed Dacca and a lot of the small arms that decimated Bangla Desh were Chinese. The aviation fuel that kept aloft West Pakistani aircraft so that they could dive-bomb the population centres of East Pakistan came increasingly from China.
By April, the four lane all-weather highway which the Chinese have just constructed to link Sinkiang in the far northwest of China with Karachi, the major port of West Pakistan, was open. A hundred lorries a day from China funnelled military equipment into Pakistan in transit for the East. And newsprint to break the Bengal strike which had prevented newsprint shipments from East Pakistan to West through much of March and April was obtained by the same route.
China’s help to the West Pakistan generals was not just material, although that was vital enough for an army fighting a war with lines of communication stretching three thousand miles through Colombo in Ceylon (the rumour, emanating from Delhi, that China provided facilities for the transit of West Pakistan troops by air to the East has never been properly verified). On Pakistan National Day (March 23rd), Chou En-lai sent fulsome greetings to the President, General Yahya Khan, assuring him of the undying support of the People’s Republic of China in Pakistan’s struggle to safeguard its ‘national independence and state sovereignty’. And ever loyal to the desperate efforts of the West’s generals to attribute the whole Bangla Desh affair to a Hindu-Delhi plot, China duly protested to India about its intervention in the ‘internal affairs’ of Pakistan.
The threat implicit in the protest was not an idle one. In the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war, China’s loyalty to Pakistan was such that it mobilised its troops on the Indo-Chinese border next to Sinkiang (on the grounds that India had pinched 59 yaks and 800 sheep, a really profound ‘socialist’ basis for a war if there ever was one, and one which paid scant respect to the need of Indian Maoists to survive in a hostile environment). As a result, the Indian army was divided between two fronts, and the war came to a close. The same threat was there this time. It is a remarkable sign of China’s commitment to Pakistan, for China has never, for example, opened up hostilities against Taiwan in order to divide the US forces and so help the National Liberation Front in South Vietnam. It is no wonder that Bhutto, the maverick of West Pakistan politics, should make an ostentatious visit in mid-April to thank the Chinese ambassador for China’s ‘prompt promise of support in Pakistan’s struggle to preserve its territorial integrity’, and, especially, for saying that East Pakistan is an ‘internal matter’.
Serious Maoists must be very concerned about such Chinese policies, although others have already begun apologising for the West Pakistan generals by saying the whole Bangla Desh movement is ‘an imperialist plot’ – by the CIA rather than India – to discredit China. Other Maoists will be less able to keep out the light of day.
What has to be pointed out is that China’s loyalty to the West Pakistan generals – as opposed to any revolutionary opposition – is not at all peculiar. Apart from one or two rare examples, it has always been true that Peking places its main reliance on official diplomatic relationships with other governments, including aid and trade, rather than on encouraging rebel forces against established governments. And that has been so, regardless by and large of the political nature of the governments concerned.
Consider the energetic activities of Chou En-lai in mid-April when the whole embarrassing business in Pakistan was at its height. In Peking at the same time as the American and British table tennis team was a Pakistan air force delegation on a state visit, perhaps just returned from bombing Bengalis. Chou gave a state banquet in their honour. He also gave a splendid meal for another visitor, Princess Ashraf Pahlevi, sister to the Shah of Persia, also on a state visit to China. At the banquet, Chou spoke, regretting the sad decline in Iran-China relations after the second world war (a euphemism: Iran was and still remains a member of the US maintained military alliance, CENTO) and praising Iran’s ‘struggle against foreign aggression and for national construction’. Ask any opponent of the Shah’s regime. Right at the moment, the ‘struggle’ – for Comrade Chou’s benefit – includes gaoling thousands of domestic oppositionists, the summary execution of 13 rebels in March, and a manhunt for guerrillas by SAVAK, the Shah’s secret police, throughout April.
China’s leaders primary interest abroad is competing as a great power with the Soviet Union and the United States. As a result the last thing they want is to get a reputation in government circles for fostering subversion.
At times, of course, China has tried to use official government delegations to influence local movements, particularly youth movements. But this is less and less important, simply because it is so dangerous for government-to-government relations. In Africa, for example, Chinese diplomatic representatives have been expelled from Burundi, Central African Republic, Congo (Kinhasa), Dahomey, Ghana and Kenya for allegedly, dabbling in local politics. As each of these countries has a vote that is a serious blow to China’s long term aim of getting voted into the United Nations and being accepted as leader of the ‘Third World’. In Zambia, where the Chinese maintain their biggest aid project, the Tanzam railway (£167 million), Kaunda complained about the distribution of Chinese literature, and China dutifully withdrew lest it affect the cordial relationship with Kaunda.
But now that only the insane can hope to blame the Soviet Union for fomenting revolution, governments are strongly tempted to use the Chinese as a scapegoat and as a lever to make the US give civil and military assistance. It takes quite a lot of money for Peking to provide an incentive for them to act otherwise.
China’s resources are very limited, and it cannot seriously compete wherever the Soviet Union is really involved. China has tried for years to establish more than elementary links with Egypt, but has too little to offer. Being poor, China is the more desperate to retain what links it can, regardless of possible adverse political by-products. Thus, China’s adherence to West Pakistan. Or the speed with which China recognised the Boumedienne military coup in Algeria and abandoned Ben Bella. Even in Indonesia in 1965, when a Right-wing military coup slaughtered half a million oppositionists, including much of the ‘Maoist’ Communist Party (PKI), China did not immediately break off relations with Djakarta. Peking kept reassuring the Indonesian generals that all would be well, China would complete the textile mill it was building and so on, provided Chinese personnel were not attacked; in fact, Chinese economic assistance to Indonesia was not suspended until April 1966 (the coup was at the end of September 1965). Of course the Soviet Union with a massive aid mission in Indonesia, did not even consider leaving for a moment.
One reason for the intensity of China’s support for the West Pakistan generals is the fear that the Soviet Union may be trying to outbid Peking and may succeed. In June last year, General Yahya visited Moscow and returned with the promise of substantial aid, including a prize prestige project, a steel mill. The visit came just after the signing of a new Chinese-Pakistan aid agreement for China to build four modest industrial projects in Pakistan. The alarm in Peking must have been considerable. But the Russian promise was before the Pakistan elections last December which brought a substantial vote for Bhutto and his pro-China/anti-India policy. So far as the Soviet Union is concerned, flirtations with Pakistan and Ceylon are subordinate to its main interest, India. As between Bhutto and the Bengali leader Mujib, Moscow inevitably favoured Mujib. The hot Russo-Chinese competition in South Asia neatly divided between Bhutto and Mujib; but the domestic politics of either candidate was irrelevant.
The same rivalry is apparent in another important area of Chinese activity abroad, trade. As the Soviet Union moved towards closer relationships with the military junta in Greece, so did China. In January of this year, a China-Greece trading agreement was signed to exchange Chinese mutton for surplus Greek tobacco. The deal was arranged by Swiss banks, not by the more obvious agent, the joint Greek-Albanian Chamber of Commerce. The goods are to be shipped by Onassis and Niarchos. Again, as the Soviet Union tries to expand its position in the Indian Ocean, and in particular, to establish a naval base near Aden, China has extended £23 million to the South Yemen government.
It should already be clear from these examples that the political complexion of foreign governments does not trouble Peking in its diplomatic and trading relationships. Nor should it if the ‘five principles of peaceful co-existence’ advanced by China at the Bandung conference in 1955 are to apply – questions of ‘internal polities’ are strictly for the local government concerned, and the worst crime of a foreign power is to ‘interfere’ in the domestic affairs of another country. That is the slogan, advanced equally by China, the Soviet Union, the United States and every ruling class threatened by its own workers or peasants.
But even where there are no official diplomatic relations, China trades with countries that are supposed to be entirely repudiated by even the liberal powers of the world. China’s trade with South Africa expanded to £7 million per annum after the imposition of the boycott on South African trade in 1960 (the trade was organised through a French trading company). China was named (along with France, Germany, Holland, Portugal, South Korea and Czechoslovakia) as one of the countries that purchased more than £6 million worth of Rhodesian tobacco in 1966 in the face of what was supposed to be a world ban on trading with Rhodesia. And the nastiest story of all, from The Observer in 1967, that Chinese merchants in Singapore were acting as agents for steel exports from China delivered to the US forces fighting in South Vietnam.
The Chinese aid programme is equally unsqueamish. Aid went to that most reactionary regime, the Imamate of Yemen in 1959, just before the Imam was overthrown. It went to the Batutsi, the feudal ruling class of the old state of Ruanda-Burundi. It went to the Emperor Haile Selassi to assist him in retaining power against all comers. Indeed, it went to Pakistan, a member of the two US maintained alliances, CENTO and SEATO, and a Right-wing military dictatorship. China tactfully chose to ‘understand’ that Pakistan could not leave the alliances quickly, since it depended upon Western aid and military supplies; like the Soviet Union, China was prepared to tolerate the U2 spy flights emanating from Peshawar and elsewhere in West Pakistan.
What is surprising is not China’s recent diplomatic behaviour but that revolutionaries have been able for so long to keep the most elementary facts about Chinese foreign policy out of their minds. For it is not just over the past half year that the West Pakistani generals have been able to use the prestige derived from China’s support to batter the ‘Maoist’ opposition in East Pakistan; it has been going on for the past ten years. Pakistan is only the tip of the iceberg. The whole basis of Chinese foreign policy has been only accidentally related to the pursuit of socialism: and that means that it has usually inhibited the possibility of the development of local opposition, if not – as in Pakistan – positively supplied the arms to crush it. Some Maoists will inevitably escape these facts. Some will move from one wrong position to another, as some Indian Maoists move from Maoism straight into Indian chauvinism. But perhaps some will begin the task of an independent assessment of the reactionary role of China in world affairs today, and what follows from this in understanding events within China and the task of revolutionaries.



The information on both these topics is very unreliable, but for what it is worth, an outline of the known organisations and their politics is given below for the guidance of people involved either in work with Indians and Bengalis or faced with the impudent glossiness of the IMG.
 
The Naxalites
Virtually any form of violent opposition in India now is called ‘Naxalite’, whether it is straight banditry (dacoity) or politically motivated terrorism. This makes it difficult to assess the political significance of the Naxalite movement proper. What follows concerns one group of Naxalites, the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) CPML.
This group, under Charu Mozumdar, broke away or was expelled from the Communist Party of India (Marxist) CPM (itself the result of the split in the CP following the Indo-Chinese border clash of 1962). The breakaway came because of the policies pursued by the CPM as part of the United Front Government of 1967. Early in 1967, CPM cadres from the party’s Maoist wing, in defiance of the leadership, started a movement to seize land and physically liquidate landlords and police in an area of North Bengali Naxalbari (whence ‘Naxalite’). The movement spread through particular incidents into neighbouring States, and took up an earlier agitation (the girijan movement) in the Srikakulam district of Andhra Pradesh. At first, the ether Left parties denounced the movement – the pro-Moscow CPI called it romantic adventurism; the CPM said it was run by CIA agents to break up India – but then, in 1969-70, they also led ‘land grab’ movements to pressurise for more radical land reform and head off the threat on their left. By December 1969, the Indian Home Ministry reported 346 major and minor movements for the forcible occupation of the land throughout India, usually led by the CPI and CPM (incidents were concentrated in Bengal and Kerala, but there were also reported activities in Assam, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Tamilnad, Orissa, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujerat, Mysore). So widespread did the movement become that students wrecking examination halls and bandits holding up peasants began to call themselves Maoists and Naxalites.
The CPML leadership rejected the argument that the dense communication network and effective armed forces of India made a creation of a Yenan base (as was done in China) impossible. The base was to be created in the minds of the peasants. Basic units of 6 to 7 cadres, led by a ‘petit bourgeois comrade’, supported by poor peasants, should carry out exemplary murders of notorious landlords or policemen with whatever weapons were to hand (viz., not guns, but choppers, spears, javelins, sickles etc.) and then persuade peasant support for further actions of the same kind. In Naxalbari as in most other areas, the police and army however were, after a time, able to put down such movements, or at least contain them. The most successful action came among the most backward people, the tribes, rather than ordinary peasants, and, in particular at Srikakulam. But even here it was very difficult, and lack of success constantly produced splits within the CPML (in any ease, it was almost impossible for the CPML to control its units in the field). From late 1969, Calcutta cadres were despatched to hold Srikakulam and to develop a ‘liberated area’ at Debra-Gopivallabpur in the Midnapore district of West Bengal. By March 1970, the West Bengal area was back under the control of the police, the CPML had an important split (with the Pratap Singh group), and Charu Mazumdar directed his cadres to return to Calcutta, ostensibly to counter the ‘white terror’ developing between the 14 parties within the new United Front government of West Bengal (within which the CPM was overwhelmingly the most important). Initially the CPML undertook hit and run assaults on the police, and then later only on ‘anti-Naxalite’ police (that is, known police supporters of the CPM). But this tactic did not succeed in creating a mass movement, and led to countless deaths (more from the attacks of the established parties’ thugs on each other than the CPML intervention) and imprisonments. 2,400 have been gaoled. A Central Government report alleges that between March 1970 and March 1971 Naxalites killed 318, and lost 168. These are almost certainly wild underestimates of the number of deaths, and wild overestimates of the role of the CPML. The toll reached its peak last August when Congress gangsters purged a whole area of Calcutta, slaughtering up to 100 people (the Baranagar-Cossipore massacre). The CPML appears to have had no perspective in this work, nor to have linked it to its rural activity. Peking, formerly ardent in its praise of the CPML, ignored the CPML working in Calcutta. Nor was the Mazundar leadership able to retain its control or its non-Bengal groups – CPML units in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa, Jammu and Kashmir rejected Mazumdar’s leadership. The Srikakulan unit, in November 1970, rejected the ‘annihilation’ tactic, and turned to trying to build mass rural organisations, for which it was denounced by the official CPML paper, Deshabrati, as ‘neo-revisionist’.
In March of this year, Mazumdar made a new turn and order his Calcutta cadres out of the city to build a new ‘struggle zone’ at Birbhum (a rural district).
From 1967, the CPML had links with the East Bengal Left, in particular the Toha group (cf. the next section on this). Like the Toha group, the CPML opposed the demand for an independent Bangla Desh, or even a greater degree of provincial autonomy. In April of this year, after the West Pakistan military attacked the Bengalis, CPML posters in Calcutta denounced the ‘so-called upheaval’ in East Pakistan as ‘an imperialist conspiracy against China’. Cadres did flow between East Bengal and India as the border controls weakened in February, but the degree of formal unity is not clear. Deshbrati continued to attack Mujibur Rabnan as agent of the Bengali kulaks and business, observing – correctly – that ‘the Mujibur clique does not say anything against imperialist investments in Pakistan or in favour of redistributing land among the peasants or voice any demand for better wages for workers’ (May 1st, 1971). The fact that the generals had been consistently ‘pro-China’ was a progressive factor not to be ignored – ‘Although Pakistan is associated with the imperialist block through different links, it has not yet been possible to wholly involve it in any anti-Chinese military conspiracy or power block as is the case of India’ (May 1st, 1971). Accordingly, the independence movement could be very dangerous for China – ‘as a result of Sheikh Mujibur's victory in East Bengal, the danger of (reactionary and revisionist forces) establishing a military base here against China and the liberation movements in India, Burma and south east Asia has increased’ (letter, Feb 4th). It follows that India, rather than the Pakistan military, is the main enemy since it opposes China; the July slogans in Calcutta express this – ‘India Government! Hands off Pakistan! Let the Pakistani people decide their own future’.
 
The East Bengal Left
The Awami League has dominated East Pakistan politics throughout much of the independence period, and established an important position in the struggle to make Bengali a national language in Pakistan in the mid-fifties. In 1957 – just before the military coup d’etat which brought General Ayub Khan to power – Maulana Bashani was the President of the Awami League. Around him he gathered much of what had been the Communist Party (banned in the early fifties). In that year, he broke with the AL after a fight within it in which he had argued that the leading member of the League, Hussein Sahid Suhrawardy (at that time, Prime Minister of Pakistan) was aiming to Americanise the country and stifle the demand for greater provincial autonomy for the East. He was opposed by Mujibur Rahman (then General Secretary of the AL) who supported Suhrawardy and rejected the demand for greater provincial autonomy – Mujib argued that because Suhrawardy, a Bengali, was Prime Minister, this was equal to 98 per cent autonomy for the East. Maulana called for a new party – and attracted the Pakistan National party (which brought support from minority groups in the West, particularly the Pathans) and Mohamed Toha’s Ganatantra Dal, along with Maulana’s base in the AL. The result was the National Awami Party (NAP). Much of the party leadership went to gaol or underground after the coup. Maulana was released from gaol in Nov. 1962 and refused to join a united front, the National Democratic Front, to oppose Ayub Khan, In 1963, he visited Peking, and returned to praise Ayub Khan’s China policy and the general’s aim of ‘Islamic socialism’.
The Sino-Soviet split began the disintegration of the NAP. Without very clear politics, Maulana, by default, headed the pro-Peking NAP, in opposition to the pro-Moscow NAP after its best known leader in West Pakistan). But there were also increasing difficulties within the pro-Peking NAP, particularly after the outbreak of the Naxalite movement in India. Members of thi Maulana’s group began to denounce him for petit bourgeois opportunism as embodied in the notion of ‘Islamic socialism’. Then Maulana tried to expel his leading associates, and the group disintegrated. The pro-Moscow NAP participated in the general elections last December (1970) on the same programme as Mujibur Rahman and the AL. (Mujib refused a united front with this group), and won a provincial assembly seat in Sylhet (the Wali Khan NAP in West Pakistan won 6 national assembly seats – 3 from Baluchistan, 3 from the North West Frontier; this group had lost an important section of members to Bhutto’s PPP, and was in any case in disarray over the question of more autonomy for Bengal).
The main NAP disintegrated, but Maulana committed the rump still remaining to him to the aim of an independent Bangla Desh (Jan. 1971). Apart from the Maulana’s NAP, there appear to be at least seven groups operating that claim to be communist or socialist. Four of these claim to be Maoist and followers of Charu Mazumdar in West Bengal, although only one (the Shiraj Shikdar group) appears to have actually undertaken terrorist work. The groups are


The best known group, led by Mohammed Toha and Abdul Huq. This group appears to be most favoured by China and to have the links with Charu Mazumdar. It claims 80 per cent of the old Communist Party membership, and is, since 1970, called the Communist Party of East Pakistan (Marxist Leninist), CPEPML. Toha is an ex-student leader, underground till 1967, then reorganised the NAP and became its general secretary (1967–8). He was also up until the split, President of the East Bengal Labour Federation. In late 1969, he clashed with Maulana over an alleged CIA document found on a dead student arguing for an Indo-Pakistan confederation against China. Huq was the secretary of the powerful East Bengal Peasant Organisation. The group has its main base in the rural areas of Jessore and Khulna district. Toha opposed Mujib as a US agent aiming to break up Pakistan as part of an imperialist plot to defeat China. He argued that the main contradiction in Pakistan ‘is not between East Bengal and West Pakistan but between feudalism and the oppressed classes in East Bengal itself’. The first task was to destroy the landlords and petty businessmen of East Bengal, i.e., the Awami League. In some ways, this was a dilution of the original first task – to build an all-Pakistan worker and peasant movement.
 
The Dr Abdul Matin and Dr Alauddin group. Matin, son of a small landlord from Pabna, was gaoled in the 1952 land movement, a peasant organiser to 1956 in the Awami League, underground during Ayub Khan's martial law period. Alauddin, son of a rich peasant from Kusthia, was a founder member of the Communist Party. The group is mainly organised in the rural areas of Panna district, but is said to have some following in parts of Jessore district and in north Bengal. It once had a following among Chittagong workers, but lost it to the Shiraj Shikdar group (cf. 3. below) on the Bangla Desh issue. Its student organisation (Purba Banga Chhatra Union : East Bengal Students Union) is reported to have virtually disappeared; its worker organisation is: Purba Pakistan Shramik Federation (East Pakistan Labour Federation).
 
Shiraj Shikdar-Basher group, formerly part of 2. above. This group is mainly student and youth, and the most ‘Naxalite’ in practice – it introduced military training and began the manufacture of bombs before March. It is very small, mainly in the Barisal district, but with some following in Chittagong and Khulna district.
 
The Kazi Jaffar (or Zafar) – Rashed Khan Menon group (Zafar-Menon group). Menon is the son of a Dacca High Court judge (later Speaker in Ayub Khan’s National Assembly), and president of one of the two main student associations; originally CPEPML. The group is said to have a base among metal workers and cotton workers at the Tongi (outside Dacca) and elsewhere. It is said to have worker support in Sylhet, Khulna (at Bagherhat) and rural influence in Comilla district. Its student organisation is Biplabi Chhatra Union (Revolutionary Students Union); its labour group, Purba Banga Shamrik Federation. The group is for an ‘independent socialist East Bengal’, and co-operates with the Maulana NAP in guerilla warfare. It is the most working class and least Maoist of these.


There are three other, non-maoist, groups:


The Shranik-Krishak Samajbadi Dal (Workers’ and Peasants’ Socialist Party), formed in 1969. It has mainly working class support (or so they say), particularly among jute workers. One of its leaders – Janab Abdul Mannan (elected to the National Assembly last December) split to join the new Awami League labour organisation (Shramik League). As a result, the SKSD lost much of its base, but retained some support in towns (Chanpur, Bhairab, Shila) and some rural areas (Barisal, Comilla, Noakhali districts). Its labour organisation is the Samyukta Shramik Federation (United Labour Federation); its student, Samajbadi Chhatra Jet (Socialist Students Federation).
 
The Mali Khan NAP which now claims to be the Pakistan Communist Party. Leading members include Abdul Salam (general secretary), Mani Singh, Professor Muzaffar Ahmed (President of the Bangla Desh branch of the party). Its politics are hardly distinguished from the Awami League in Bengal. In West Pakistan, its factions are united only by the name. Its student organisation (under Mrs. Matia) was very important in the spring events.
 
The Communist Party of Bangla Desh – mainly middle class, but claims worker support and also that of peasants in a rural area of Dacca district. It has a student organisation, Bangladesh Chhatra Union.


The first four organisations above, whatever their attitude to the struggle for an independent Bangla Desh, were deliberately excluded by the Awami League from the ‘National Liberation Front’, created last August by the AL, the Maulana NAP, the Mali Khan (or Muzzaffar Ahmed) NAP and the Communist Party of Bangla Desh. All political groups, other than the AL, were excluded from the Provisional Government set up in Calcutta.



 


Nigel Harris
Camden IS



 



History and Class Consciousness – Studies in Marxist Dialectics
George Lukacs
Merlin Press, £2.50
Books on Marxism have never been produced in such large numbers. Marxism is fashionable, and, so far as publishers are concerned, profitable. Marxists may doubt the revolutionary implications of so much purely ‘theoretical’ interest, but they can only be delighted at the sudden availability of rare historical material, orthodox and heretic alike. At long last, one of the great heretic classics (heretic in the tradition of world Stalinism) has been published in an English edition. It is still not a cheap paperback, but that cannot be long behind.
The process has been long and tortuous. The book was originally published in German in 1923. It was condemned by the fifth, Comintern Congress of 1924 – in substance as Hegelian and ‘Idealist’; but Lukacs’ politics also came in for a drubbing as reformist and revisionist. Thereafter, the book led only a secret existence. Lukacs himself earned his passage back into Stalinism by condemning the work. But even after the liquidation of Stalinism proper, he continued to criticise sharply his early work. He refused to allow it to be reprinted or translated. Nevertheless, a pirate French edition appeared in 1960; and there were other sporadic attempts to translate parts of the book – this journal reproduced the first essay in two issues of 1966, but the full translation of the work was blocked by Lukacs himself and Merlin’s threat of legal action. Now, fortunately, all this has been overtaken by Livingstone’s translation.
The book is a series of essays, written – as Lukacs puts it – as he was moving towards Marxism between 1918 and 1922. It is not a continuous argument, but covers an enormously wide range of issues. What unity it has derives from a preoccupation with certain key philosophic issues. The central concern is with the nature of ‘consciousness’ – what men think and what they are impelled to think by the structure of capitalist society – and the relationship of consciousness to the proletarian revolution. In exploring this broad area, Lukacs tries to identify the essence of Marxism, what makes a Marxist (in the essay, What is Orthodox Marxism). He finds this essence embodied in Rosa Luxemburg’s work, although later in the book he disagrees sharply with her criticism of Bolshevik tactics in the Russian revolution. The core of the book lies in the long central essay on Reification and the consciousness of the proletariat (by ‘reification’ Lukacs means, roughly speaking, the process in capitalist society by which human qualities, relations and even concepts seem transformed into objects that dominate individual men). The implications of this essay are the chief concerns of the other pieces. The book concludes with an excellent essay on organisation, an analysis which ought to be required reading for all serious Marxists.
To begin to follow some of Lukacs’ arguments, one has to understand what was meant by ‘Marxism’ by Social Democracy up to the. First World War. When Social Democracy abandoned its claim to be revolutionary by failing to oppose the world war and lining up with the national forces of the belligerent ruling classes, the shock split the movement between revolutionaries – who opposed the war – and the rest. The revolutionaries had to re-examine the entire theoretical inheritance of Social Democracy in order to see where it had gone wrong. How was it possible that the inner core could have been so eaten away without it becoming obvious? Above all, the tasks of reappraisal and reconstruction were begun in the most important works of Lenin. But others continued the critique, both within the new born Communist movement – men like Lukacs and Gramsci – and among those that left the movement (like Korsch, Pannekoek).
The profound shock delivered to the pre-war orthodoxy in 1914 forced the reappraisal to begin. In Lenin’s case, he ‘rediscovered’ Hegel, as he explains in his Philosophical Notebooks, but he had little time to develop a very extended critique. And even while the work was being started, elements of the old orthodoxy were seeping back into the new, so that many of the assumptions characteristic of pre-war Social Democracy appeared again in what became known as Stalinism. Despite Lenin, Lukacs’ attempt to develop a critique of Social Democracy came to be as much of a threat to the new movement as to the old. Unlike Lenin, Lukacs was not a political fighter, nor was he able to develop a critique both of the theory and the concrete tactics of Stalinism. He would not join the Left Opposition, although in the late ‘twenties he was accused of supporting the Bukharinist Right.
What was the old orthodoxy? Put very crudely, the argument went something like this: Marxism is a science because it deals in the analysis of facts, not mere speculation or subjective wishes. Marxism ‘reflects’ the way the real world is, not our wishes about it. If science is basically concerned with the establishment of laws about how events occur, then Marxism’s status as science is demonstrated by its ability to frame laws about society and derive predictions from these laws about future social events. If the future events occur, the law is proved and Marxism vindicated. Now this version of Marxism is almost identical to the standard idea of science in nineteenth century bourgeois Europe. A scientific law was created by accurately observing the world, not by active involvement in it. Indeed, the philosophers argued that active involvement made it positively impossible to identify scientific laws. Essentially, the observer must be neutral, impartial, outside of it all, so that his ‘private’ views would not unconsciously shape his view of reality. The observer’s mind,his consciousness, should be only a sort of mirror which ‘reflected’ reality – a smudged mirror if the observer is ‘prejudiced’ (or biased), a sparkling one if he is ‘objective’.
This was not an academic issue. Implicit in the case was the argument that the ‘facts’ would produce the proletarian revolution, rather than the active intervention of revolutionaries. The revolution was inevitable because the scientific laws of Marxism had predicted it. And being inevitable, it would be wrong to interfere in the logic of history by trying to achieve the revolution ‘prematurely’, before the facts determined it. There was no place for active mass participation, for consciousness, in the revolution.
This was offered as conceptual rationale for the practice of Social Democracy, Marxist in name but essentially reformist in practice. Since the revolution would come when history was ripe, sensible men would devote themselves in the interim to practical social reform. As a result, what was called ‘Marxism’ became a system of false consciousness, a set of axioms designed to conceal the real nature of the status quo rather than reveal it. What was called ‘materialism’ was merely bourgeois vulgar materialism, not dialectical materialism.
The orthodoxy had absorbed what Lukacs’ calls ‘scientism’. But materialism had been the answer to an earlier case, a wide range of ‘Idealist’ doctrines. Only two points in these doctrines concern us here. Firstly, idealists stressed the central role of consciousness in organising and analysing our thought, not just passively ‘reflecting’ an external world. Indeed, so important did this role seem for some philosophers that they argued that our minds invent the external world on the basis of what would be, without our minds, confused meaningless images. But if we create our world in our minds, what is the basis on which we create. If I see a cat, is there indeed some kind of cat-thing ‘underneath’ the cat image I have in my mind? The insoluble puzzles that flowed from this position preoccupied generations of philosophers, but the only point which concerns us here, is the emphasis upon the active role of consciousness. In addition, in the work of the German philosopher Hegel, the concept of the dialectic was a fundamental contribution by idealist thought to Marxism. In terms of dialectical thought, there are no longer ‘facts’ in the world, but only contradictory processes.
Lukacs – following Marx – argues that the two alternatives, crude materialism or idealism, matter or mind, are equally impossible. The opposition reflects the separation of subject and object in class society, the separation of an active ruling class and a passive working class. Consciousness is neither a passive reflection of some ‘external reality’, nor is it the sole principle of reality: it is neither nothing nor everything. Contrary to the crude materialists, consciousness can organise and transform reality, not (as the idealists argued) by inventing concepts in the mind to analyse experience, but by actually setting out to achieve given purposes in the world, a world whose objectivity is demonstrated in the attempt to change it. Practice – the attempt to act in the world – reconciles the two half truths embodied in the two doctrines, and makes possible the re-identification of subject and object when the proletariat becomes the ruling class. And this practice is not some abstract activity, it is purposive and collective action in real society. Thus, it is in social action that the ‘theoretical constructs of the mind’, of consciousness, are tested against a real world, and that the real world reshapes the purposes and constructs of the mind.
What happened to Marxism in the old orthodoxy was ‘reification’. But relocation is a generalised tendency in thought under capitalism. As a result, revolutionary thought is always threatened by an inner corruption arising out of the nature of that society. What should be flexible concepts become frozen into ‘Principles’ that ultimately inhibit revolutionary action. Lukacs’ primary concern is to identify reification, in order that the conditions for true consciousness – and thereby the proletarian revolution – can be understood. Consciousness can only remain true if it is organised in a party under Leninist discipline, linked directly with, but separate from, the working class, and concerned, not with the immediate ‘facts’ of existence but with the strategic purpose of the revolution. Again, the philosophic issues and immediate questions are directly related:
‘Thus only when the theoretical primacy of the “facts” had been broken, only when every phenomenon is recognised to be a process, will it be understood that what we are wont to call “facts” consist of processes. Only then will it be understood that the facts are nothing but the parts, the aspects of the total process that have been broken off, artificially isolated and ossified’. (p.184)
Each strike means something different seen as an isolated dispute than if seen as a tributary stream in the achievement of proletarian consciousness.
A review can do little justice to the richness of Lukacs’ work. These essays are full of illuminating comments and observations on a wide range of topics. He does not solve all the problems, but at a host of points, he suggests or hints at many solutions (cf. for example, his discussion of the concept of freedom, p.193). But it also needs to be said that the book is very difficult, particularly for those – the overwhelming majority of revolutionary socialists – who are unfamiliar with the writing of Hegel and unlikely ever to get the opportunity to make themselves familiar with it. The style is opaque, occasionally obscure, and the structure of the argument often unclear. This is not a book to be read from cover to cover.
There are also difficulties in the thought, some of which are eliminated as Lukacs’ thought evolves through the book. For example, early in the book Lukacs seems to suggest that man’s alienation from capitalist society can be measured by the degree to which his nature or essence is distorted. In other words, there is an essential human nature from which men diverge under capitalism (for example, cf. p.99). The idea that there is an essential human nature is an old doctrine, and of particular appeal to those opponents of capitalism who look back to a golden age before the creation of industry when human nature existed, supposedly, in more conducive conditions. It is a view characteristic of Utopian socialists, not of Marx. Lukacs himself criticises the same view later in his book (cf. p.187 on Feuerbach). For man is no constant, with an invariable human nature underlying its different historical appearances. Collectively, men make their own ‘nature’ as well as their world, relative to the purposes they choose. Alienation is not the frustration of some true human nature. It is the distortion of the possibility of men rationally creating and recreating themselves as they recreate their world.
The case on ‘human nature’ is answered in the book. But there are other difficulties which remain unresolved. The separation of subject and object which had supposedly been closed with the concept of practice, re-emerges at times as another pair of concepts, ‘consciousness’ (mind) and ‘economics’ (matter). This time the two are not reconciled, so that, in affirming the importance of ‘consciousness’, Lukacs seems at times to be asserting its prior importance. This is a position particularly attractive to intellectuals who are, for whatever reasons, unable to participate in, or identify with, real worker struggles. All they have is ‘theory’, true consciousness, without the power of ‘economics’, real working class struggle. In the Lukacs’ account ‘economics’ is some outside factor, in principle decisive, but somehow not incorporated into his analysis – ‘Parallel with the economic struggle, a battle is fought for the consciousness of society’ (p.228). But the two are not ‘parallel’, and, indeed, not ‘two’ at all, but one. Raising ‘consciousness’ to this separate significance – like placing such primary stress upon cultural questions – leads back to an ‘idealism’, disguised in materialist clothes and remote from real working class practice. This problem is only made worse by the abstractness of the discussion, by its remoteness from the real course of events, from history. The lack of a relationship to history (to ‘economics’, to the real working class – as opposed to an abstraction) allows Lukacs to assert methodological half-truths as if they were general principles (for example, ‘The whole system of Marxism stands and falls with the principle that revolution is the product of a point of view in which the category of totality is dominant’, p.29). It allows him also to Identify as the essence what is often only a temporary historical phase (cf. for example, his comments on planning in capitalism, p.67).
The 1967 German republication of his book includes a new preface (translated here) in which Lukacs criticises his youthful errors. He was guilty in those days, he says, of ‘messianic utopianism’, of ultra-Leftism. Again, a half-truth, from the vantage-point of the post-Stalinist Lukacs, is written as a general comment. The old Lukacs notes, correctly, that ‘in the absence of a basis in real praxis (practice – NH), in labour as its original form and model, the over-extension of the concept of praxis would lead to its opposite: a relapse into idealistic contemplation’ (p.xviii). But what practice is it which the old Lukacs is offering as ‘the real’? Loyalty throughout the ‘thirties and ‘forties to Stalinism? Loyalty to a movement which destroyed the possibility of proletarian revolution wherever it could? The contradictions lie too thick across his biography to determine an alternative clear enough to indict the youthful ‘ultra-leftist’. The preface offers excuses, and can do no more in the absence of a full, rather than a partial ‘cultural’, critique of Stalinism. The critique of Stalinism would need to reappraise the rebels – including Trotsky – that Lukacs rejects.
Merlin are to be congratulated in making available this edition. The translation, occasionally marred by obscurities, unexplained expressions or poor proof-reading, is as clear as can be expected given the original. But it is a pity there was not more sustained editorial guidance. The book cries out for a long introduction (rather than Lukacs’ modern ‘autocritique’) which lays out the historical and philosophical context of the essays, the main issues at stake, and makes some attempt to explain Hegelian terminology. There are some apparently random notes at the end, but they cover very little, and that poorly. The index guides only the most primitive enquiries. However, what we have is far more than might have been expected only a short time ago. And for that, much thanks.
 



Land Behind Walls (A Journey to China)
Lorenz Stucki
Ampersand (Allen and Unwin), 6s
Chinese Communism
Robert C North
Weidenfeld & Nicholson (World University Library), 12s 6d
Industrial Development in Communist China
Edited Choh-Ming Li
Praeger, Paperback 14s and cloth 42s
The number of books dealing with China from the viewpoint either of a casual tourist or of providing a ‘general introduction’ is now getting so large it suggests they will shortly cease, which is all to the good: perhaps the ground will then be cleared for more serious analysis. Mr Stucki, a Neue Zürcher Zeitung correspondent, is not quite a ‘casual tourist,’ but his impressions are very much rooted in the attitudes of a European upper middle class tourist. He records with accuracy his impressions which in the main are only remotely related to his hostility towards the regime. His experiences, like that of all travellers, is fragmentary and partial, and not of great help in the process of general analysis and evaluation.
Professor North has written a competent and useful account of modern Chinese history (not ‘Chinese Communism’ as his title suggests). It is vivid and suggestive, and, within the limits of his brief, relatively fair. It is also graced by an excellent selection of photographs, a good bibliography and chronology. As an introduction to China for serious students it has very few rivals, and is to be welcomed.
The third volume is the reprint of an issue of China Quarterly, probably the best issue of that journal ever produced. It is serious and analytic, even when overtly anti-Communist, and contains a wealth of information on China’s economy up to 1963. If people seriously interested in China missed the original version, this is an excellently reproduced copy, and, more important, relatively low-priced in its paperback edition.
 



A Nation Not Afraid
The Thinking of Enoch Powell
Batsford, 30s
The Conservative Opportunity
Fifteen Bow Group Essays
Batsford, 18s
The Greasy Pole
Reginald Bevins
Hodder and Stoughton, 16s
In the division within British Conservatism between Liberalism (free market competition, private business above the State, etc) and corporatism (controlled competition, State planning and tariffs), Enoch Powell is on the Liberal side, unlike the overwhelming majority of his party colleagues. The present volume attempts to present his views through extracts from his speeches, and the job, competently done. Powell is worth reading, not because of his political significance, but because he penetrates the fog at the centre of British politics, the series of smug assumptions that unites the two political parties. He writes clearly, and cogently – how Government policy is far less significant than the world economy in shaping the British economy, how State intervention provides most of the problems the Government has to solve, how trade-union bargaining in no way affects the general level of wages paid out (so that incomes policy is an absurd irrelevance to strengthening British capitalism).
The points are worth exploring as a contrast to the certainties of Wilson and Heath (that the Government creates all things, and the trade unions do all the bad things), even though they fit into a scheme that is, tor the Conservative Party, a political irrelevance. To create Powell’s economy would require a mammoth revolution that very few in the ruling class want, even though specific points might be useful. Nor is Powell plausible or consistent within his own terms – he depends for validity on two idiotic assumptions:

that the Labour Party is a motivelessly malignant Gestapo instead of being, in leadership, indistinguishable from the Conservatives, and
that the British economy could conceivably constitute a free market between roughly equal competitors.

More than this, Powell refrains from introducing the real tough precondition for his model to work – free competition within the British market by foreign rivals. He is in favour of liberalised trade, but he does not postulate this as a precondition for all the rest to work, which it is. In effect this means his ‘freedom’ is freedom for the big fish to gobble up the small. Correlatively, there are here no hard proposals to break up monopolies and oligopolies, to break down tariff barriers to expose big firms-to foreign competition. Again, the trade unions do not come into the category of free market competitors, because they are a ‘monopoly’ (as if the TUC could dispose of the British labour force as it liked). And like all Liberals, Powell demands that each man be free to run his own life, but would shudder at the logical derivative; workers’ control. Finally, Powell is inconsistent on labour – he wants free movement of capital, but not free movement of labour, since he is one of the champions of immigration control. Mr Powell is a myth, bred on the cultivated muddles of British politics. This is a useful volume for those interested.
The Conservative Opportunity is much closer to what the Tory leadership defines as reality, and, as a result, much duller. The Bow Group chased the Liberal myth once as hotly as Powell, only to change gear with unseemly haste when Macmillan reintroduced planning in 1961 – West Germany as most popular Bow Group country was rapidly displaced by France. This volume consists of an examination of fifteen topics, both issues and proposals being so safe, so tailored to the status quo that the Fabian Society must be envious. The ginger has left the ginger group now that its members have taken their Commons seats and can calculate the personal cost of being as flamboyant as they were when young. They are eminently ‘practical,’ and they seem to have rediscovered with surprise ‘freedom of choice.’ ‘Freedom of choice’ is not offered as the necessity after equality has been achieved, but against a backcloth of inequality – which means therefore freedom for the rich to spend their money as they wish. Give power back to money where it belongs is the cry so that the rich do not have to queue with the poor (as if they did!). It is a bit low pressure.
As for Mr Bevins, he could have saved the paper. Powell is interesting, the Bow Group essays worth dipping into, but Mr Bevins offers us the ‘real nature of politics,’ a compendium of shallow gossip, trivial gibes and vanity. Bevins was once a Labour Party member in Liverpool. It is good to know that he escaped from the horrid dogma and doctrinaire irrelevance of Labour into the utter triviality of his present consciousness.



Any examination of the theoretical contribution to Marxism of three individuals spanning such an immense period of time and facing such a diversity of different problems is obviously impossible in the space of one article. However, some impressionistic themes can be picked out and, schematically, compared, but those themes are necessarily incomplete in being detached from the historical context where they were presented. The historical background is of particular importance here since Bolshevism is a response to a certain range of problems, and a characteristic means of vilifying Bolshevism is to present its theories without mentioning the problems those theories were designed to overcome.
Bolshevism exists essentially in practice. Lenin’s writings were always rooted in some immediate context. He never wrote general theory except in relationship to some immediate political purpose, and it is impossible to understand what he wrote without understanding the charges to which he is replying. However, for Lenin, theory was a prelude and a guide to practice, a means to help practice and something that itself evolved relative to practice. Necessarily, if theories concealed essential problems, they were bad theories. However, successors to Lenin did not regard theory in the same light – for them, Lenin’s words were frozen into ritual, applicable at all times and places; necessarily, theory came after practice as a means of justifying that practice, making it consistent with some tradition of thought no longer used to guide practice. The shift is not because Lenin’s successors were muddled or mistaken or intellectually poor. In the change lies the transformation of Marxism from a means of so analysing society that certain action necessarily follows into the conservative ideology of a new class society, a body of formalised doctrine designed to justify or obscure the existing nature of that society and leave complete freedom of action to its leaders. Comparisons can be made between modern Soviet ideology and various forms of theology, but this is a relatively crude exercise; more interesting are the comparisons that can be made between Soviet thought and Western conservative thought, where the same sort of picture of society emerges. However, the common terminology of Bolshevism and Stalinism should not conceal the almost diametrically opposed range of problems facing each, and the diametrically opposed purposes embodied in each.
The continuing element in this examination of some of the works of Lenin, Stalin and Mao will be the changing relationship of theory to practice, a relationship summarised by Marx for socialist revolutionaries in the term ‘sensuous practice’. This relationship is not, of course, a theoretical problem in isolation – there can be no theoretical balance between theory and practice without real practice, without concrete identification and activity towards the realisation of one’s theoretical ends.
 
1. The Background
Marxism was initially defined and shaped on a mass political level by the German Social Democrat Party, and this definition provided in the 1890s a framework for the union of German socialists and the Victorian philosophic doctrine loosely described as positivism. This union produced a peculiarly stark form of economic determinism which not only virtually excluded the opportunity for revolutionary action (since the revolution was ‘inevitable’, nothing need be done about it), but also made theory redundant. Marxism became a means of analysing society alone, offering no guide to action –it was ‘science.’ In day-to-day practice, German Social Democracy was at one with the non-Marxist Fabians, demonstrating how little general theory was of importance to either. Both took general theory for granted, and necessarily that general theory came to be indistinguishable from the philosophic status quo, positivism. But even as Marxism in the hands of Engels and Kautsky reached Victorian positivism (thus excising from Marxism the dialectic), general European culture itself was reaching a state of almost explosive rejection of positivism; the era of the peaceful expansion of capitalism was giving way to open imperialist clashes leading to war. This change generated entirely new forms of activism on the Left, producing within the labour movement almost a division of labour between revolutionary theory and revolutionary practice, between ‘science’ and activism. There were a number of varied responses to the schism. One philosophic response argued that Marxism was a simple economic doctrine (as it was in Kautsky’s hands) which presented a scientific view of the world but did not suggest why the individual should want what was inevitable; the re-appearance of the Liberal ‘individual,’ contrasted to the Marxist class, is one example of Social Democratic Marxism’s absorption of non-Marxist assumptions. The argument then suggested Marxism’s economic analysis needed underpinning with a system of individual ethics, usually drawn from the work of Kant. The movement became know as revisionism in the hands of Bernstein [1], but neo-Kantianism had much wider repercussions throughout Social Democracy, particularly in the work of the Austro-Marxists. On a non-theoretical level, anarcho-syndicalism can be seen as also a response to the central problem, an attempt to restore revolutionary practice but here in explicit isolation from revolutionary theory. Again, to some extent, Mussolini’s evolution from orthodox Social Democratic Marxism through the phase of being an activist ginger group to stimulate action in Italian Social Democracy, to fascism, could be seen as similar in starting point. [2] However, the major attempt within Marxism to reunify theory and practice was undertaken by Rosa Luxembourg and Parvus, and in Russia, by the Bolsheviks. There is no space here to examine the pre-Marxist revolutionary movement in Russia, the Narodniki, although such an examination is important in locating exactly what was possible for a revolutionary group in the conditions of Tsarism. Many who attack Lenin for not behaving as if he lived in Victorian England or even the Kaiser’s Germany merely demonstrate their ignorance of the terrible repressive conditions of Tsarist autocracy.
Marxist ideas began to circulate in Russia, mainly in academic circles, from the 1870s. The first Social Democrat organisation in St Petersburg dates from 1885, and first (abortive) congress of the Russian Workers’ Social Democrat Party from 1898. Georgi Plekhanov led the attack on the existing Narodnik orthodoxy among revolutionaries, posing against it not only the progressive role of the proletariat (rather than the peasantry) and the necessity for Russia to undergo capitalism before it could reach socialism, but also demonstrating that capitalism was already underway. P Struve, one of the earliest Marxists in Russia itself (Plekhanov was in exile), wrote the first Manifesto for the RWSDP, and it is of interest that he there repeats an opinion common in European Social Democracy and one of crucial significance for subsequent RWSDP history:
‘The farther east one goes in Europe, the weaker, meaner and more cowardly in the political sense becomes the bourgeoisie, and the greater the cultural and political tasks which fall to the lot of the proletariat. On its strong shoulders, the Russian working class must and will carry the work of conquering political liberty.’ [3]
Out of this initial activity emerged roughly three groups, the first two providing the main polemical targets for the third, the Bolsheviks. These first two can be schematised as:

A group of intellectuals (Struve, Berdyaev, Tugan-Baran-ovsky) which, in conjunction with the revisionists in Germany, saw Marxism as profoundly weak as a general philosophy since it was merely economic analysis without any ethical code which would justify its ‘inevitability’ for the individual. The group avoided activity which crossed the censor or the Tsarist police and thus earned the nickname Legal Marxists. Some of them subsequently pursued the ethical strand of thought into religious mysticism.
A group, nicknamed Economists, that argued that the liberal bourgeoisie in Russia would and could overthrow Tsarism once capitalism was more developed. Accordingly, workers should struggle to improve their economic position without intervening in politics or organising a specifically proletarian party. The Economists placed heavy stress on the spontaneous activity of workers as superior to a consciously disciplined worker organisation. Many of the group were subsequently Mensheviks, but remained influential among the Bolsheviks.
 

2. Lenin
‘The whole of Lenin is contained entirely in revolutionary action. His scientific works are only a preparation for action.’ [4]
Lenin was one of the greatest revolutionaries of all times, a man of great simplicity, severity and dedication, but possessing in abundance that peculiar synthesis of the sense of freedom and of necessity which characterises the work of Marx: the economically inevitable and the ethically desirable are once more one and the same in the ‘sensuous practice’ of a revolutionary class. Lenin’s theoretical work is not, by the standards of Marx, great, but it was the essential guide to his practice. Like most of his contemporaries, Lenin was burdened with the inheritance of Kautskyan Marxism so that, despite his attempts to overcome that burden, his philosophic work as a whole is schizoid between a crude Kautskyan materialism and his refurbished and explosive Hegelian dialectic. He utilised the analytic achievements of European Social Democracy (for example, Hilferding’s Finanzkapital for his theory of imperialism), but with the crucial difference that ‘science’ for Lenin was not passive contemplation by one individual of a real world, but study of a world made and sustained by men as a prelude to action by men to change their world. His view of capitalism accordingly stresses its continuing contradictory nature – not just cartelisation stabilising markets, but cartelisation intensifying competition between the cartels; not just world unification through imperialism, but increasingly aggressive conflicts between rival imperialisms. And he extrapolated from this view immediate lessons for Bolshevik practice in Tsarist Russia, relating this practice back to the general European and world scenes.
From the early 1890s, Lenin was active in politics. With many other Russian Marxists, he saw as the main barrier to the overthrow of Tsarism, without which parliamentary democracy and the consequent growth of the labour movement were impossible, the weakness of the liberal bourgeoisie in Russia. Since the State and foreign interests had developed capitalism in Russia, a proletariat had been created proportionately larger than the native bourgeoisie. Thus, the small bourgeoisie would be too frightened of a threat from the proletariat to risk overthrowing the Tsar to create a bourgeois republic. However, the proletariat was still very new and primitive, at that anarchic stage where it could not analyse its own position in society as the basis for realistic action, but wasted its strength in sporadic hopeless battles. The intelligentsia, where socialist-inclined, was equally anarchic; it did not supply the proletariat with a rigorous and continuing theoretical framework which would help workers to channel their manifest hostility into realistic activity. Lenin developed these points with much greater clarity than his contemporaries, isolating two basic problems:

if the proletariat was small and the peasantry still the overwhelming majority, how could the proletariat execute the historical task of the bourgeoisie, overthrow the Tsar and survive?
how could the proletariat and the intelligentsia be welded into a force capable of this task?

There were a variety of responses:

Many of the Economists and Legal Marxists argued that this was pseudo-problem. Since the coming revolution would be bourgeois in both form and content, the proletariat should restrain itself to supporting the bourgeoisie, thus simultaneously lending the bourgeoisie the strength to overthrow the Tsar and not frightening the bourgeoisie into the arms of the Tsar. Necessarily, at an extreme, this position entailed restraining the proletariat in its day-to-day struggles against capital lest that struggle alarm the capitalists – ‘economic’ and ‘political’ activity could not be plausibly separated.
Lenin accepted up to February 1917 that ‘The democratic revolution will not extend beyond the scope of bourgeois social economic relationships,’ [5] but insisted that the workers must remain independent of the bourgeoisie: the proletariat could not simultaneously fight and support capital. However, the peasant revolts of 1905 persuaded Lenin that the peasantry could play initially at least some revolutionary role – its demand for land would remain revolutionary until satisfied, when it would become conservative in defence of its new property. Lenin therefore argued that an alliance between workers and peasants could force the bourgeois revolution which the bourgeoisie itself would not initiate. If the proletariat did lead the bourgeois revolution, it would be able to carry out the main historic tasks of that revolution: the establishment of a democratic republic, the confiscation of the estates of the large landowners, the introduction of the eight-hour day. If it did not, the Tsar and the bourgeoisie in alliance would create an étatiste capitalism on the model of the Prussia of his day. The choice then, Lenin said, lay between a landowner-capitalist ‘bourgeois’ revolution and a proletarian-peasant ‘bourgeois’ revolution, between, on Lenin’s analogy, the creation of a society modelled on the militaristic despotism of Prussia or on the republicanism of the United States. However, if the second was achieved, the peasantry would immediately become conservative in defence of its new land ownership and ally with the bourgeoisie to oust the proletariat from political power.
The Trotsky-Parvus theory was not important at the time but it proved in 1917 more perceptive than Lenin’s. Trotsky agreed with Lenin that the Russian bourgeoisie would not do the job, but he also said that the peasantry was too disunited between rich and poor to form a united party for long. Again, if the proletariat seized power, it would be impossible to restrain it to executing only bourgeois demands. Inevitably, it would meet problems for which there were only socialist solutions, and would therefore press on into the socialist revolution. He argued, against straight economic determinism, that revolutions were not a simple function of a given stage of national development; the Paris Commune of 1871 had occurred in a country economically more backward than Britain and the United States where no such upsurge had taken place. However, if the attempt at a socialist revolution in Russia was inevitable, it was impossible for it to succeed except if it sparked off a general socialist revolution in Western Europe. Such a revolution would, in its turn, help the Russian proletariat and permit it to complete its socialist revolution. He called the theory that of permanent revolution, a phrase taken from Marx’s 1850 Address to the Communist League, outlining a strategy for a situation in Germany not dissimilar to that in Russia at the time. [6]

Lenin, like most Social Democrats, rejected this view as going too far; such a tactic would in any case disillusion the peasantry before the alliance had even begun; he reiterated firmly that
‘The task of the Russian proletariat is to carry the bourgeois democratic regime in Russia to its conclusion, in order to kindle the socialist revolution in Europe. This task has today come very close to the first, but it nevertheless remains a separate and second task; for different classes are to co-operate with the Russian proletariat: for the first our ally is the petit-bourgeois peasantry of Russia; for the second, the proletariat of other countries.’ [7]
Lenin maintained this position throughout the substantial fluctuations of Bolshevik support up to 1917. Only after the installation of the Provisional Government following the overthrow of the Tsar, and in response to the extremely radical mood of the St Petersburg workers, did he acknowledge the unrealistic nature of the proposal that the proletariat, having seized power, should then quietly relinquish it. In the case of the second problem, how to weld intelligentsia and proletariat together for the revolutionary task, Lenin’s solution was unoriginal. He accepted the common opinion among Social Democrats, summarised in Kautsky’s statement:
‘Socialist consciousness is represented as a necessary and direct result of the proletarian class struggle. But this is absolutely untrue. Of course, socialism, as a theory, has its roots in modern economic relationships in the same way as the latter emerges from the struggle against the capitalist-created poverty and misery of the masses. But socialism and the class struggle arise side by side, and not one out of the other; each arises out of different premises. Modern socialist consciousness can arise only on the basis of profound scientific knowledge ... The vehicles of science are not the proletariat, but the bourgeois intelligentsia ... The socialist consciousness is something introduced into the proletarian class struggle from without, and not something that arose within spontaneously.’ [8]
Lenin went on to say that a mass democratic party was impossible in Tsarist Russia (all its members would be gaoled), that therefore any party must be a small secret organisation, demanding absolute dedication from its members lest it be betrayed to the police. Inevitably, it would be relatively undemocratic since it would have to choose its members carefully to avoid infiltration by police spies. It would demand great internal discipine and organisation to avoid suppression: it would have to be composed of professional revolutionaries, not dilettante intellectuals. This, in the circumstances, relatively sensible statement, has been construed as the founding constitution of Stalinist tyranny, as if Stalin could not have reached the idea of tyranny on his own. However, the interpretation is in any case absurd, and contradicted by the actual operation of the Bolshevik group before 1917: in the 1905 revolution, the party consciously opened itself to a mass membership as soon as Tsarist repression permitted, and continued to sustain an open public existence until Tsarist counter-revolution once more forced the Party back into secrecy again. In 1917, the Party was not the prime mover of die revolution – Lenin appealed directly to the St Petersburg workers against the Party which had become relatively conservative and supported the Provisional Government. Lenin was frequently outvoted within the Party so that it could not be seen as a one-man dictatorship. He also indicated in copious references that in the conception of democratic centralism, ‘free criticism plus unity ff action,’ the first was a necessary element:
‘Without debates, conflicts, without a war between opinion, no movement, including the workers’ movement is possible at all. But without a merciless fight against the degeneration of conflicts into quarrels and squabbles any organisation is impossible.’ [9]
The idea that assertions of Lenin inexorably lead to Stalin suggests that ideas are like railway lines – once suggested, men are enslaved to continue down the same line, regardless of changed circumstance and purpose; in the beginning was the Idea. There are a multitude of assertions in Lenin’s work; out of context, as many can be construed as democratic as can be construed as authoritarian, and Lenin’s successors selected what was useful; in that choice the critique should begin. The same points apply to that hoary old chesnut, partiinost (party-ness or spirit), beloved of American Sovietologists. Lenin argued against Struve that an individual with political convictions should behave in intellectual controversy in consistency with those convictions, he should be ‘committed.’ There was no ‘science’ over and above the activity of men, independent of political commitments; ‘objectivity’ was often only a pretension to conceal implicit commitment to the status quo, and Marxists must argue in full awareness of their prior commitment, must behave responsibly, not as if they were idle dilettante by-, slanders. The attitude is as common to the bourgeoisie when faced with an immediate crisis as to Lenin. However, critics have alleged that this position is really the source of Stalinist censorship, again, as if Stalin needed such a modest notion to erect so tyrannical a weapon.
All that has been described so far derives directly from the concrete circumstances of the Bolshevik struggle for survival and Lenin’s attempt to sustain a disciplined party active in Russia, rather than exiled to Siberia or Switzerland. He was a hard man, made many enemies, and most of the subsequent criticisms were made at the time by contemporaries. But his vindication came in 1917, as Trotsky, who campaigned with the greatest bitterness against Lenin’s ruthlessness (and earned equal denunciation from Lenin), acknowledged:
‘Only the highest concentration on the goal of revolution, free from everything pettily personal, can justify this kind of personal ruthlessness ... His behaviour seemed to me inadmissable, terrible, shocking. Yet at the same time it was politically correct and therefore indispensible from the point of view of organisation.’ [10]
In philosophy, Lenin’s main pre-1914 work, Materialism and Empiric-Criticism (written in reply to neo-Kantian revisionism) merely repeated in clumsy and philosophically indefensible form, the crude materialism of Kautsky. However, the great climacteric of the first World War and the collapse of Social Democracy before nationalism, precipitated in Lenin a much wider-ranging investigation of the philosophic roots of Marxism, leading to Lenin’s rediscovery of Hegel’s dialectic and his assertion that no Marxists had understood Capital for a quarter of a century. But Lenin had little time to integrate the dialectic and materialism anew: the two continued in philosophic schism, with more profound consequences under Stalin. For Lenin, in an immediate sense, the dialectic both restored the primacy of human activity and threw a new stress on the contradictory elements in the new capitalism, summarised in Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism.
However, Lenin’s final attempt to extricate himself from the orthodoxies of German Social Decocracy took the form of pinpointing the crucial characteristics of Social Democracy that had disarmed it at the moment of supreme challenge: its bureaucratism, its heavy reliance on the State, and, correlatively, its implicit nationalism. Against this, Lenin passionately reaffirmed freedom as the essence of Marxism in State and Revolution. He refused to relegate the withering-away of the State to some Utopian limbo; he rejected the alliance of socialism and nationalism that had destroyed the Second International and was embodied in SPD acceptance of the State; and he reaffirmed the traditional aim of radical socialist movements: to abolish the State, and begin this task as soon as power has been won. He accused Kautsky of censoring the assertion of Marx and Engels that the State was a product of class antagonisms, an instrument necessarily of tyranny, and that when class domination ended, the administration of society would inevitably devolve so that all would participate and control society. He ends uncompromisingly:
‘So long as the State exists there is no freedom; when freedom exists, there will be no State.’
Once power was gained in Russia, the withering-away of the State had to begin if Lenin was to vindicate his entire position. In May 1918, he promised his audience that those who were not over 30-35 years old would see the dawn of communism. This immense optimism runs through the early revolutionary days; immediately after the October Revolution, he stresses to all Russian workers:
‘Remember, you yourselves now administer the State. Nobody will help you if you yourselves do not unite and take all the affairs of the State into your own hands. Your Soviets are henceforth the organs of State power, organs of full power, organs of decision.’ [11]
In January 1918, he explained to the Congress of Soviets: ‘In introducing workers’ control, we knew it would take some time before it spread to the whole of Russia, but we wanted the workers themselves to draw up, from below, the new principle of economic conditions.’ The affirmation of freedom is too frequent and too passionate to be the cold calculation of a Macchiavellian. The Revolution was the supreme moment of Lenin’s career, both vindication and yet, ironically, a partial critique of the flavour of elitism that sometimes appears in his early work. For Lenin had almost to abandon the Party he had created to win power in order to champion the real popular demands of the moment that brought power in 1917. Whereas he had sought by organisational tactics to keep the Bolsheviks together and sustain a consciousness more revolutionary than the workers possessed in non-revolutionary times, the workers were more revolutionary than the Party when the revolution actually arrived, and the Party had to be whipped into its proper role of championing popular demands – even to the extent of taking its programme straight from popular demands rather than what the Party had already decided. [12] But the winter of 1917-18 saw the administrative machine in ruins, the continuation of the war, the collapse of all authority, and the exhaustion of food supplies. The peasantry no longer sustained the revolution, and there was no European revolution filling the sails of the new Soviet craft. Lenin began slowly retracing his steps; he did not withdraw in explicit theoretical terms, but became increasingly immersed in day-to-day administration, in mere survival. His statements have a rising note of pessimism, a refusal to speculate on what had been achieved and what could be achieved, an explicit denunciation of increasing abuses but without any solutions. The civil war dealt a further staggering blow to the economy and the new Government was compelled to take back into employment thousands of Tsarist officials, forced to send its natural social basis, the urban workers, into the army to fight the White armies, forced to use increasing coercion to win some food out of the obdurate countryside.
Plekhanov once taunted Lenin with a quotation from Engels, and it became, from 1918, increasingly relevant as the claimed social basis of the Party seeped away:
‘The worst that can befall the leader of an extremist party is to be compelled to take over the government at a time when the movement is not yet ripe for the rule of the class he represents ... He finds himself necessarily in an insoluble political dilemma: what he can do is in conflict with his entire previous attitudes, his principles, and the immediate interests of his party; what he is supposed to do cannot be done ... he is compelled to represent not his party, his class, but the class for the rule of which the movement happens to be right. For the sake of that movement he must act for the interests of an alien class, and must feed his own class with phrases and promises along with the assertion that the interests of that alien class are really their own. He who gets himself in that false position is irredeemably lost.’ [13]
The great hopes disintegrated in increasing gloom, only heightened by the Kronstadt revolt, the waves of strikes and peasant revolts: it was clear that the Bolsheviks no longer represented a majority of even the working class. Yet what alternative existed? Only the clear threat that if the White armies were victorious they would institute the first fascist regime and terror in Europe. Lenin did not make his peace with Marxist theory, he left it in suspension. He did not offer an explanation for Bolshevik power in an underdeveloped country in the absence of the European revolution. And in such a forthright man, that is a significant lapse – for no peace with integrity was possible. He made do with piecemeal, pragmatic responses, with attacks on ‘bureaucracy,’ with increasing pessimism:
‘Can every worker know how to administer the State? Practical people know that this is a fairy tale ... The trade unions are a school of communism and administration. When they (the workers) have spent these years at school, they will learn, but it progresses slowly ... How many workers have been engaged in administration? A few thousands all over Russia, no more.’ [14]
The great trade-union debate of 1921–2, where Trotsky’s demand for the militarisation of labour (ie for an explicitly tyrannical regime) faced the demand of the Workers’ Opposition for the abolition of the State and control by Soviets, is significant as an exhibition of Lenin’s purely pragmatic tacking between two extremes. He seems to have lost his moorings, to be aware of the problem but see no social force capable of solving it:
‘If we take that huge bureaucratic machine (the State), that huge pile, we must ask: Who is leading whom? To tell the truth, it is not they (the Communists) who are leading, they are being led.’ Or again: ‘With the exception of the People’s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs, our State apparatus is very largely a survival of the old one, and has least of all undergone serious change. It has only been slightly repainted on the surface, but in all other things, it is a typical relic of our old State apparatus.’ [15]
In his final testament, it is remarkable that Lenin makes no attempt to offer a general theoretical picture of the situation and a perspective; he is reduced to discussing the relatively trivial personal characteristics of individual leaders as a substitute. In summary, Lenin created in thought and action a renaissance of Marx’s work. Given the demands of the time, the work is incomplete in theoretical terms; he was not able to supply a comprehensive critique of Social Democracy’s treatment of Marxism, but he did demonstrate in his own life the superb unity of theory and practice. From 1918, the validating conditions of his own position broke down in a way that offered no possibility of solution – his honesty and integrity prevented him offering some substitute for such a solution. As dusk fell, no Owl of Minerva took flight, and the tragedy of Lenin remained unrelieved. Around him, he could see clearly an entirely new and unenvisaged order beginning to emerge. The proletariat had gone, leaving the Party alone and isolated as its substitute. The immense struggle by the Russian proletariat to achieve freedom gave way to an even more implacable tyranny than before.
 
3. Stalin
The work of Stalin spans thirty years of vastly different conditions and problems and it is obviously impossible here to trace the nature of Stalin’s diverse responses, even though such an account would alone give a fully valid critique; particularly since some of the canons of Stalinism are no more than accidental positions in internal Party faction fights that have since been long forgotten. Stalinism is essentially deducible from practice, and Stalin’s exiguous theoretical output is no longer any sort of guide to understanding that practice, but is rather a rationale provided after the event to justify it – theory is not the guide to practice, but its description after it has happened. The change is implicit in the fact that practice has become a tyranny of immense brutality and irrationality that needs to be concealed by, not theory, but ideology. As a result, Stalinism has an opaque quality. We can no longer see its direct connection with the acts of the Soviet State, and we are constantly if dimly aware of a background echo of real but unspoken purposes. Discussion within Stalinism, as befits a false consciousness, retreats into ritual, text-quoting, semantic quibbles and terminological disputes. It is in essence idealist: it begins not with social reality, the facts of experience, but with ideas, the text, the axiom; facts, institutions, people, must be brought into conformity with the idea. Present intolerable practice must be brought into conformity with a past terminology of great hopes and vision that implicitly condemn that practice. Lenin’s writing is now treated in an even more extreme manner than the German Social Democrats treated Marx; it becomes doctrine, ritual, not theory as a guide to action. The texts of Stalinism itself are heavy with mechanical images of great clumsiness, with spurts of malevolence, with theoretical vacuity married to mindless militancy. Zhdanov’s attack on Soviet philosophy in 1947 characterises some of this empty militancy:
‘We have often used in our discussion the term “philosophic front.” But where is this front? ... does our philosophy resemble a real front? It resembles rather a stagnant creek, or bivouac far from the battlefield. The field has not yet been entered, for the most part, contact with the enemy has not been established, there is no reconnaissance, the weapons are rusting, the soldiers are fighting at their own risk and peril.’ [16]
Stalin’s writing is brief and poor in quality, but of central importance for the history of the Soviet Union since it dominated the entire intellectual scene. Its most interesting tendency is a groping for the characteristic forms of conservative thought, and its most striking characteristic, an immense unresolved contradiction. It has no real dialectic in any important sense, but it does have the unlimited voluntarism of Stalin’s actions. Stalin stressed simultaneously:
1 – A material base that seemed to be almost totally independent of men. Ideas merely ‘reflected’ material reality (a point from Lenin), and that political consciousness merely ‘reflected’ the state of technology – put crudely, gasometers produce poetry via men. The actual concrete lumps of the economic base – steel plants, cranes, factories etc – seemed to possess a life of their own and to compel society to transform itself in conformity with this life. E.P. Thompson describes the relationship thus:
‘Ideas are no longer seen as the medium by which men apprehend the world, reason, argue, debate, and choose; they are like evil and wholesome smells arising from the imperialist and proletarian cooking pots.’ [17]
There is no interaction between base and superstructure, only the base dragging the reluctant superstructure along behind:
‘The superstructure is created by the base precisely in order to serve it, to actively help it to take shape and consolidate it, to actively fight for the elimination of the old moribund base, together with its superstructure.’ [18]
2 – A crucial role for theory and the Party. He emphasised ‘the tremendous organising, mobilising and transforming value of new ideas, new theories, new political views and new political institutions.’ With the decline in the natural acceptance of an hereditary aristocracy, Disraeli also paradoxically stressed the crucial significance of ideology, married to leadership ‘charisma,’ in maintaining a status quo that was now industrial and therefore in continual change, for British Conservatism. The two Disraelian elements recur in part of Stalin’s work. For Stalin, his stress on the role of theory embodied his demand that the Party should reach a correct view of the world because its role was supreme in transforming society; theory was the weapon of the Party that could be publicly acknowledged. The Party’s monopoly of theory was heightened by the contention that mass consciousness always lags far behind correct theory. Indeed, in 1937, twenty years after the Revolution, Stalin explicitly argued that ideological errors would get worse the further Russia was from the Revolution:
‘We must destroy and cast aside the rotten theory that with every advance we make the class struggle here would of necessity die down more and more, and that in proportion as we achieve success the class enemy would become more and more tractable. This is not only a rotten theory, but a dangerous one, for it ... makes it possible for the class enemy to rally for the struggle against the Soviet Government. On the contrary, the farther we advance, the greater will be the fury of the remnants of the exploiting classes, the sooner will they resort to sharper forms of struggle.’ [19]
The narrow-eyed suspicion of the muzhik looms through the apparent framework of Marxism.
The central contradiction of Stalinism between determinist theory and voluntarist practice parallels one enforced by British Conservatism – the conjunction, in ideological terms, of complete determinism for the masses (trapped in ‘human nature’ or, in earlier terms, ‘original sin’ for Conservatism, and in the economic base for Stalinism) and complete voluntarism for the rulers (in both cases, through their magical qualities as leaders and their power of creativity in ideology); the division is a class division between the necessarily passive majority and the active ruling class with a monopoly of legitimate initiative. The contradiction in Stalinism was resolved in practice through Stalin’s solitary monopoly (backed by force) of the right to define at any given moment what the material base was or was becoming and therefore what correct theory was. Thus, as a theoretical system, Stalinism needs a Pope, demands the central defining role of one individual or group. In Stalin’s person, and his alone, is the synthesis; he is the substitute for the Party, the working class, the Russian people, the international proletariat, the substitute for the voluntary wishes of the majority.
 
A number of subordinate but complementary elements exist within the Stalinist framework, a few of which are cited below.
1 – The State. If Lenin had any doubts about the future of the Soviet Union or about identifying what had been achieved, Stalin had no such doubts. He asserted firmly that socialism was possible in one country; that is, that it was possible to create and sustain a proletarian dictatorship in a relatively backward country where the proletariat was a small minority without the aid of a European revolution or the peasantry at home. This was not just a statement of fact, but, for Stalin, a general principle applicable to all countries. Whereas the bourgeois revolution occurred only where capitalism was already fully developed (as Marx said), the task of the new socialist order was not so much to emancipate a highly developed proletariat but to build a new socialist economy which would in practice create a majority proletariat – the agent of the revolution only created itself after the revolution. In Stalin’s words, the proletarian revolution took place
‘when finished forms of a socialist order are either absent or almost completely absent. The main task of the bourgeois revolution consists in seizing power and making it conform to the already existing bourgeois economy, whereas the main task of the proletarian revolution consists in seizing power in order to build up a new socialist economy ... in the proletarian revolution, the seizure of power is only the beginning, and power is used as a lever for transforming the old economy and organising a new one.’ [20]
Not only does this statement generalise an ‘accident’ of the Russian situation to epochal dimensions, but in detaching the agent of the revolution, the proletariat, from the society that creates a proletariat, it leaves no meaning left for the phrase ‘socialist order’ except ‘a developed economic order owned by the State:’ the class content of the phrase is lost, and socialism is no longer about the proletariat but is a tactic for forced economic development. The statement also portrays a political superstructure that has the creative power to shape and expand the economic base, and is necessarily ‘classless.’ The Short Course (History of the CPSU(B), 1938), the standard textbook of Stalinism, in a similar vein describes the collectivisation of agriculture as
‘a profound revolution, a leap ... equivalent in its consequences to the revolution of October 1917. The distinguishing feature of this revolution is that it was accomplished from above, on the initiative of the State, and directly supported from below by the millions of peasants who were fighting to overthrow kulak bondage and to live in freedom on the collective farms.’
The State is thus, in direct contradiction of both Marx and Lenin, not necessarily an instrument of class domination, but a classless creative element.
2 – Complementary to this resurrection of the classless State is the change introduced in the notion of class, a concept central to both Marx and Lenin. Stalin slowly replaced an effective concept of class with the concept of nation. As in the German Social Democracy Lenin so bitingly attacked, nationalism is matched to the use and approval of the ‘representative of the nation,’ the State. If the dialectic is the crucially revolutionary element in Marxist philosophy, so the notion of class, and in particular the active agency of the working class, is the revolutionary element in Marxist social analysis. In emasculating both, Stalin was able to create a conservative ideology in which nationalism, etatisme, the inflated historical role of the individual played characteristically prominent and complementary roles.
3 – The Soviet Union was, then, a ‘classless society,’ in the effective sense – ‘class’ was merely a functional attribute: there was no class struggle between the two permitted classes, peasants and workers, but only harmonious interaction. What class struggle remained prominent was transferred from the domestic to the international scene where it became identified with a nationalist struggle. Class was then attributed to groups or individuals according to their international position, or, more specifically, their attitude to the Soviet Union; Chiang Kai-shek could, thus, be a credible proletarian before 1927. Ultimately, the struggle was said to take place between ‘proletarian nations’ and ‘bourgeois nations’ which, in practice, signified nothing about those countries’ domestic class structure for ‘proletarian’ meant only poor, predominantly peasant (not at all ‘proletarian’) countries driven explicitly by nationalistic revulsion from imperial exploitation, and ‘bourgeois’ meant only anti-Soviet rich countries. The appropriate weapons for such a struggle were primarily diplomatic or professional warfare, not international class struggle except as an adjunct to the two primary instruments of the nation-State. Accordingly the Comintern became not the leader of the international working class but an adjunct to Soviet foreign policy; foreign Communist Parties became the rearguard of the Soviet Union not the vanguard of world revolution. The transition cost the lives of most of the old Bolsheviks not ‘flexible’ or ‘pragmatic’ enough to convert themselves into all they had opposed for so long. Occasionally, the transition did pose problems for Stalin: consider the following nimble hair-splitting – bourgeois nationalism is rightly condemned by Marxists since it has
‘the object of doping the masses with the poison of nationalism and strengthening the rule of the bourgeoisie. What is national culture under the dictatorship of the proletariat? It is culture that is socialist in content and national in form, having the object of educating the masses in the spirit of socialism and internationalism. It would be foolish to suppose that Lenin regarded socialist culture as non-national, as not having a particular national form ... The period of the dictatorship of the proletariat and of the building of socialism in the USSR is a period of the flowering of national cultures that are socialist in content and national in form.’
Stalin goes on,
’It may be said that such a presentation of the question is contradictory. But is there not the same contradictoriness in our presentation of the question of the State? We stand for the withering away of the State. At the same time, we stand for the strengthening of the dictatorship of the proletariat, which is the mightiest and strongest State power that has ever existed ... Is this contradictory? Yes, it is contradictory. But this contradiction is bound up with life, and it fully reflects Marx’s dialectics ...’ [21]
The emphasis on the national solidarity and harmony of the Soviet Union was slowly increased to reach its maximum during the Second World War, and extended backwards to iron out the great class cleavages of Tsarism that had been the central elements in Lenin’s work. A decree of May 1934 condemned all previous accounts of Russian history and rehabilitated words like ‘homeland,’ ‘patriotism,’ etc. From 1940, the Russian people’s role in history was increasingly glorified, its origins traced back to the civilisations of the Chaldeans and Assyrians of the second and third millenia BC, its historical ingenuity laying claims to all major inventions ever made. As Stalin was the sole active agency in the Party, and the Party in the Russian people, so the Russian people became the sole active agency in the historical population of the world – a pyramid of value over time that reflected the recreation of a clear hierarchy in Soviet society. Even the intermediate people, non-Russian Soviet peoples, received a special intermediate stratum on the pyramid; the Russian people were superior to all non-Russian peoples in the Soviet Union, and should be acknowledged as such even by foreigners:
‘Love for the Russian people ... is not only one of the most important aspects of Soviet patriotism; it is a characteristic feature of every genuine (sic) proletarian movement, even in capitalist countries.’ [22]
Stalin tied together some of the ends of his practice in his two final works – Marxism and the Problem of Linguistics which stresses the common elements of a nation (pre-eminently its language) rather than its temporary class elements, which, in Marxist terms, create internationalism; and The Economic Problems of Socialism which lay down the economic conditions for the prelude to communism. The tone of the latter suggests almost indefinite postponement. Together, the two documents are relatively conservative and cautious – the great battles of industrialisation are over, and a certain mellowness and relaxation are permissible. What Stalin left of the terminology of Marxism could only be increasingly useless for his successors. The great transition from Marxism to ideology had been made, and subsequent ‘liberalisation’ of the Soviet Union takes place against the backcloth not of an open class balance of power, let alone a ‘workers’ State’ with residual bureaucracy, but within a fully-fledged class society, integrated in an ideology of nationalism and class harmony, common interest, meritocracy and accepted social inequality that does not distinguish the Soviet Union in any important respect from the United States.
 
4. Mao Tse-tung
Stalinism in some ways recreated the dogmatic straight-jacket excluding revolutionary action that Lenin had attacked in the German Social Democrats, and it has been necessary for any revolutionary movement to break out of Stalinism in order to create a revolution, whatever the class content of that revolution. Necessarily, any postwar revolutionary movement has had to act despite the Soviet Union, whether it be Tito, Mao or Castro, since the Soviet Union offered no theoretical framework capable of achieving revolution. However, in appraising this recreation of activism within Marxism, one must clearly and specifically identify the class content of the new activism lest it continue the ‘classless’ ideology of Stalinism merely married to increased activity, lest it be not so much a revival of proletarian socialism but rather the creation of a new rising class merely utilising the rhetoric of Marxism in order to force its own domination.
Of the three people examined here, Mao’s contribution to formal Marxist theory has been the smallest and the most primitive: at most, the loosening of a few themes, at least, repetition of some favoured Stalinist positions. However, Mao’s practice does show substantial divergence from Stalin. It is important to note that Mao’s picture of Marxism derives essentially from Stalinist texts of the thirties, so that transmission of the theoretical heritage is already a bit queer. The loose combination of agrarian populism and radical nationalism that constitutes Maoism in practice has its closest parallels, however, not with the Soviet Union, but with the ideologies of new ruling-classes in other underdeveloped countries; unlike the Soviet Union, Maoism had no proletarian heritage to live down or purge. A much more powerful and consistent theme in Mao’s radical nationalism is the nationalism of some of the May 4th Movement leaders; for example, Li Ta-chao who was similarly disinterested in the dynamic role of domestic Chinese classes, placing complete emphasis on the anti-foreigner, anti-imperialist struggle; he also identified China as a whole as a ‘proletarian nation’ and the white races as the world ruling class. [23] The nation supplants entirely the class, and thus no separate socialist theory is any longer required, for general ‘pragmatism,’ the assumptions of the existing ruling class, will be sufficient. If Stalin saw theory as a useful and perhaps necessary means of obscuring reality, Mao sees it as an entirely eclectically selected element in public relations work, something with mystical-magical qualities akin to the role of a central religious text within a religion but something that can be manipulated at will to suit the purposes of the Party – ‘ideological analysis has become just so much baggage, secondary to the central issue of power itself. With that issue settled, the rest is a matter of what the leadership deems expedient.’ [24] However, the implication of this attitude in theoretical terms is that Mao chose to abandon Stalinism’s heavy stress on historical necessity and the autonomous economic base, leaving alone and free the complete voluntarism of the Party and its leadership: here activism eliminates theory altogether. However, this ‘freedom’ is only possible given the social content and role of the Party itself, the Party’s ‘freedom’ from class content and control. If Stalin retained some identification with the industrial working class, Mao has none. After the shattering blow of the 1926–7 revolution, ‘proletariat’ came to mean nothing more than the Chinese Communist Party. [25] The CCP did not utilise urban classes at all after 1927, and the proletarian membership was less than one per cent in the period of Mao’s leadership before the revolution. The cities in general became the rearguard of the revolution, not its vanguard. That vanguard was a military force, not a class, composed of the tattered remnants of the 1927 Party (leaving their work place to go into exile), and a miscellany of elements – dispossessed peasants and labourers, torn out of the rural production process, professional soldiers, mutinous units of the Kuomintang or warlord armies, even bandits [26], the whole commanded by members of the intelligentsia. Necessarily, reliance for a long period on military force supplants the role of class with the role of an army with its own distinctive character separate from the class origins of its members. Divergence of opinion within the Party was naturally postulated as being divergence between the proletariat or the Party and non-proletariat, but here class becomes most exiguous and usually exists only in the realm of ideas, ‘non-proletarian ideas.’ [27] The cure for such deviations lay not in improving the class composition of the army, but through exhortation and education; consciousness could be shaped by the Party so that it did not embody the class of the person concerned:
‘The Red Army is like a furnace in which all captured soldiers are melted down and transformed the moment they come over.’ [28]
The productive and cultural level of the areas commanded by this new kind of warlord force permitted no sort of radical transformation of the social structure, nor were crucial social forces compelling the CCP to make radical innovations. On the contrary, the CCP was able to tack continuously between different social groups, including landlords, rich peasants and merchants, and had to do so in order to survive in economic terms. Indeed, in 1934, after four years of occupation, Mao complained that rich peasants controlled 80 per cent of the central district within the Hunan-Kiangsi Soviet Republic. [29] The resulting picture is of a fluctuating political force, detached from the Chinese social structure and based in power on its military forces, not its embodiment of social forces, necessarily varying in policy at different times from radical land confiscation to the mildest amelioration of conditions. Since the army was postulated as the vanguard of the revolution, it became the essence of the revolution and the dominant model after the revolution, the precondition for any revolution anywhere [30] and the substitute for the proletariat under the new regime: ‘Our army is the main instrument of the dictatorship of the proletariat.’ [31] This is very far from Marx or Lenin’s conception of the class struggle, and has almost fascist undertones: ‘War is the highest form of class struggle and continuation of politics. It is politics with bloodshed.’ [32]
Wherever possible, the Party bound the middle peasantry to itself by land-reform programmes (and since the Kuomintang was consistently dedicated on the land to the interests of the largest landowners, the political polarisation remained relatively clear), but as a means of winning support rather than something which embodied the raison d’etre of the Party. If land reform lost support, then the Party could temper its programme to the central aim.
In the actual process of revolution, the proletariat proper always remained something of a danger [33], requiring constant discipline as soon as the Party came to power. If workers misguidedly took over factories, they were ordered to restore them to the original managers, and factory committees created to represent the work-force were always rendered subordinate to the head of the factory. The new State trade unions created after the Revolution showed no reluctance to demonstrate their role, not as defensive representative organisations but as essentially disciplinary and propaganda agencies of management and State: the trade unions exist
‘to strengthen the unity of the working class, to consolidate the alliance of workers and peasants, to educate workers to observe consciously the laws and decrees of the State, and labour discipline, to strive for the development of production, for the constant increase in labour productivity, for the fulfilment and overfulfillment of the production plans of the State.’ [34]
Special tribunals were organised to gaol those found guilty of economic crimes including negligence, absenteeism, mismanagement of materials, failure to observe regulations, and so on. The implications of abandoning the concept of proletariat in practice are decisive for Marxism, nor is there a Leninism without the proletarian class struggle. In abandoning that struggle, part of a given social structure, a Communist Party abandons its sole theoretical justification within Marxism, as well as abandoning all possibility of effective proletarian internationalism. For Mao, the immediate enemy was a foreign occupier, and he argued from the common interest of the Chinese nation against that foreigner, not for the common interest of the Chinese working class and foreign working classes against their own and each others’ ruling classes. The nation becomes the most important operating concept in pursuit of a national revolution (class nature unspecified), and class merely a derogatory or commendatory term to apply to one’s friends or enemies. Like Stalin’s hairsplitting with form and content, Mao argues:
‘A Communist is a Marxist internationalist but Marxism must take on a national form before it can be applied. There is no such thing as abstract Marxism but only concrete Marxism. What we call Marxism is Marxism that has taken on a national form, that is, Marxism applied to the concrete struggle in the concrete conditions prevailing in China.’ [35]
Effective class internationalism is relegated to the realm of sympathy without any operational value in China itself – each ruling class is the problem solely of its own ruled class, and the historical accident of the borders of each nation-State provide the perimeters of operational consciousness. If there is no crucial class in the struggle, the emancipation of such a class becomes meaningless. The prime tasks become ‘classless’: anti-imperialism abroad and industrialisation at home, the two being the main pillars in a nationalist perspective distinguished in no crucial respect from any other radical nationalist movement in an underdeveloped country. The industrial working class, the heart of Leninism, becomes one of several auxiliaries of the ‘people:’ that is, a position explicitly condemned by Lenin and Stalin when it was advanced by Sultan Galiev and temporarily by M.N. Roy in the early years of the Comintern. [36] And if the peasantry is offered as a substitute revolutionary class, one is immediately face to face with the Plekhanov critique of the Narodnik position on the same lines, a critique Lenin shared. Mao escapes by identifying as ‘proletariat’ whatever force opposes imperialist monopoly capitalism on the international plane – and those forces exist solely in the most backward countries of the world. Just as Mao had no role for urban classes in the domestic revolution, so China now has no role for the people of developed countries; they can merely support Pekin’s military force.
If the tasks are ‘classless’ because the agent of revolution is ‘classless,’ all social forces willing to accept CCP leadership are equally relevant. Mao revived the ‘Four Class Bloc’ strategy originally formulated by Stalin, despite its disastrous results in 1926–7, and began to move towards a united front with the Kuomintang before the Comintern made such a policy mandatory, again, despite the terrible massacre of the CCP by the Kuomintang in 1927. The CCP demonstrated that no social forces within it inhibited purely political alliances with the class enemy – the Japanese were a greater evil. Indeed, Mao went much further to describe the Kuomintang in quite unnecessarily glowing terms:
‘In the course of its glorious history, the Kuomintang has been responsible for the overthrow of the Ch’ing, the establishment of the Republic, opposition to Yuan Shih-k’ai, establishment of the Three Policies of uniting with Russia, with the CP, and with the workers and peasants, and the great revolution of 1926–7. Today it is once more leading the great anti-Japanese war. It enjoys the historical heritage of the Three People’s Principles; it has had two great leaders in succession – Mr Sun Yat-sen and Mr Chiang Kai-shek ... One can foresee a brilliant future for the Kuomintang.’ [37]
No hint here of the 20–30,000 murdered per year between 1927 and 1930 by the Kuomintang, but rather the spirit of one warlord flattering another in the hope of a mutual division of spoils.
The ideological form of the new State embodied its ‘classless’ conception – new democracy. Mao described one of its functions in 1945:
‘The task of our New Democratic system is ... to promote the free development of a private capitalist economy that benefits instead of controlling the people’s livelihood, and to protect all honestly acquired private property.’ [38]
Nothing here divides Mao from a similar -classless’ conception in the hands of Gaitskell or George Brown. In the 1949 Constitution of the ‘People’s Democratic Dictatorship’ (class content unspecified) the ‘national bourgeoisie’ is part of the ‘people,’ but the ‘bureaucratic capitalists’ are not, being in league with imperialism; the means of identifying the ‘bureaucratic capitalists’ is not, however, their role in the structure of the economy or society, but merely whether or not they support the CCP. In practice, the ‘national bourgeoisie’ included many of the very largest capitalists (fully in league with imperialism when it suited their purposes), including the ‘four families’ of the Kuomintang period. The transition to full State ownership was similarly delayed in the interests of national unity and CCP power – Ch’en Yün, Minister of Heavy Industry, assured private owners in 1950:
‘In China, which is backward in industry, it will be progressive and beneficial to the country and the people for the national capitalists to develop industry and make investments in it for a long time.’ [39]
The ideology then continues, both before and after the Revolution, to place almost sole effective stress on common national elements, rejecting the idea of a necessarily divisive class system in China; the residue of class still utilised is a function of nationalist aims, describing those who are foreign or linked to foreigners versus ‘true Chinese.’ By implication, as with Stalinism, Maoism inherits, uses and praises the pre-Revolutionary achievements of the Emperors, implying a common national culture linking past and present that is more significant than temporary divisions, the unification of this common culture above class; and Marxism comes in the claim that Mao’s has created a ‘Sinification of Marxism,’ a Chinese or Asiatic Marxism. Of course, defining what constitutes ‘Chinese culture’ or Sinification is the prerogative of the Politburo. This nationalism also laps over into generalising the CCP experience as the only model for future revolutions, and as a profound ‘discovery,’ as if revolution were a matter of technique: ‘The tactics we have derived from the struggle in the past three years,’ Mao writes in 1930, ‘are indeed different from any other tactics, ancient or modern, Chinese or foreign.’ [40] This is historical nonsense, but it is interesting to note in the correspondence between the Yugoslav and Soviet Central Committees in 1948, the Russian ridicule of the Yugoslav claim to have invented Partisan warfare and, in doing so, to have made a major contribution to the 1945 Allied victory. [41] Of course, in China’s case, at this point, the demand for national revolutionary autonomy embodied in the claim to have created a ‘Chinese Marxism’ tends to contradict the claim that other countries should follow China’s road to power; the difference is that between a Party out of power, seeking to establish autonomy versus Russian domination, and the Party in power, commanding a position equal to the Russian and demanding like the Russians supporters in foreign Communist Parties. In power as a nation-State, the CCP becomes immediately aware of a world arena that was hitherto subordinate in the struggle within China. However, even if classes do not exist in China in the dynamic sense, disagreements do arise. As mentioned, the means to overcome disagreements lies in ideology, in theory, in public relations work by the Party, in the Party’s susceptibility to all manner of social pressures whatever its source. No domestic divisions (as opposed to divisions linked directly to imperialism) cannot be so overcome, for society has no structure necessarily engendering certain sorts of conflicts. Where conflicts take place, it is because the moral nature of the opponent of the Party has not been educated to indoctrination by the Party – it is not material reality which shapes certain forms of consciousness, but rather moral illiteracy and ignorance. In a country as terribly poor as China, material reality cannot be changed in the short term, but ideology can – a position with, again, strange echoes of Western conservative thought. Fidel Castro, being less implicated in the orthodoxies of Marxism-Leninism, has described this position more boldly in claiming that there is no ideology in a revolutionary struggle, only a road to power which ‘acquires’ different ideological beliefs en route (choosing them and dropping them according to the needs of the struggle for power). There is thus no role at all for theory proper in the revolutionary struggle. Che Guevara acknowledges this when he describes the Cuban revolutionary leaders as ‘only a group of fighters with high ideals and little preparation.’ [42] The concern should be then finding the road to power, rather than pursuing the right political aims and locating those aims in an appropriate analysis of the situation, and the assurance of success lies not in appraising the objective situation but in the group’s spirit, morale, will, drive, etc. The echoes of Sorel and anarcho-syndicalism’s activism without theory are here very loud. In the orthodox position, analysis of objective conditions should indicate how the struggle should be undertaken, and ‘armed struggle’ is only one of many possible means, not the ‘highest’ or ‘real’ one; indeed, the use of open force is likely to be the very last stage when most of the issues have already been settled, not the first. Continuous guerilla warfare means that military tactics replace revolutionary theory, that professional soldiers take the place of class struggle rooted in the existing social structure, and that power is concentrated in the hands of generals, with mass consciousness being a merely subsidiary factor not the dynamic; soldiers need to obey orders, not appraise their experience within work relationships. Again, historically, the stress on the magic of guerilla warfare is nonsense since it does not explain the larger number of failures – why did the CCP take such an incredibly long time to win power; why do the Malayan, Philippine, Burma Communists not win; why did the Telengana peasants, the Nagas and Mizos not win in India; why indeed do the Khampa rebels not win in Tibet against China itself? Resorting to military action depends crucially on having an enemy that is in a weak political or military position, that weakness being autonomous not the result of Communist activity.
The position is then essentially voluntarist – armed struggle creates the objective conditions for winning power, and, in Castro’s words, those conditions can be created in the ‘immense majority of Latin American countries’ if between four and seven dedicated guerillas can be found. [43] The CCP is not so cavalier about theory as the Cubans, but theory is seen as a weapon in the realisation of voluntarism:
‘Socialist ideology (sic) becomes a weapon in mobilising and organising the masses and becomes a material force in society ... it becomes instrumental in establishing a socialist economic base by acquiring political power and by destroying the capitalist economic base with that power.’ [44]
Another commentator argues,
‘men are not the slaves of objective reality. Provided only that man’s consciousness be in conformity with the objective laws of the development of things, the subjective activity of the popular masses can manifest itself in full measure, overcome all difficulties, create the necessary conditions, and carry forward the revolution. In this sense, the subjective creates the objective.’ [45]
It is in this context, allied with peasant superstition and belief in the power of magic, the magic of the formula, the text and the aphorism, that reading the works of Mao has been prescribed in China as a cure for any problem, from medically treating burns, or selling water melons, to winning a table tennis game. [46] We are here clearly in the world of popular medieval Christianity rather than Marxist theory. More broadly, the voluntarism is clearly a form of Idealism, with the CCP defining the nature of the Idea.
Given these elements, a number of crucial Marxist ideas lose all specific meaning. For example, ‘contradiction’ becomes not the central source of a variety of conflicts that necessarily derive from the structure of society (overcoming the contradiction entails transforming that structure), a dynamic concept insofar as it relates to analysing society over time, but merely any sort of conflict. Mao’s revision of ‘contradiction’ was begun by Lenin (from whom the suspicious ‘non-antagonistic contradiction’ derives [47]), and entails a separation of contradictions which demand the transformation of society and contradictions which do not: the decision on which sort is which being reserved to the Party and its estimate of the moral intentions of the opponent. The CCP has revived the Stalinist heresy, dropped by Khrushchev in 1956, that the ‘class struggle will go on for a long time in a socialist society until communism is attained ... for from five to ten generations’ [48]; the class struggle consists of irreconcilable contradictions, but reconcilable contradictions seem likely to exist always. In 1956, The People’s Daily (5 April 1956) said that contradictions would continue to exist under socialism and under communism since individuals would continue to be good and bad. Mao, after his earlier exercise in the field, subsequently theorised that any organisation contained leaders and led fulfilling different functions so that contradictions were inevitable. It was the role of leadership to manipulate such contradictions so that they were ‘non-antagonistic’ and fruitful for production. He went on to elaborate:
‘The contradictions between ourselves and our enemies are antagonistic. Within the ranks of the people, contradictions among the working-people are non-antagonistic, whereas those between the exploiters and the exploited classes have a non-antagonistic aspect as well as an antagonistic one ... Exploitation of the working-class for profit is one aspect, while support for the Constitution and willingness to accept socialist transformation is the other ... The contradiction between exploiter and exploited that exists between the national bourgeoisie and the working-class is in itself an antagonistic one. But in the concrete conditions existing in China, such an antagonistic contradiction, if properly handled, can be transformed into a non-antagonistic one.’ [49]
The statement of what seems a verbal quibble, could be accurately rephrased that the Party will accept the support of anyone provided they do as they are told. It should also be noted that Mao here implicitly sees the CCP as outside the social structure, above the clash of contradictions, not as embodying one side or the other.
The elimination of specific proletarian class content, the stress on the role of an elite regardless of its class content, automatically blurs crucial distinctions that Marxists have made and make it impossible, in terms of domestic social structure, to appraise a country like, say Egypt, based upon the coup d’état of radical army officers. Its classification is read off from its foreign policy, not its domestic class structure, even though its foreign policy may be entirely opportunistic and short-term. Thus, in the CCP, the test case of revolutionary position turns on one’s attitude to the United States, and any sort of critical stance, even from a conservative military autocracy like Pakistan (a member of US alliances and recipient of US aid) is greeted with great fraternal warmth. In similar terms, China in 1959 extended financial aid to the subsequently deposed Imam of Yemen, despite the nature of his regime. If the revolution abroad means opposition to the US, the revolution at home means industrialisation, building the national economy for purposes of national power. In the process, severe puritanism is needed to sustain capital accumulation, the atmosphere of a beseiged fortress. The puritanism, the poverty and severity, are justified as ends in themselves: ‘The kind of life advocated by Comrade Feng Ting,’ one Chinese Calvin maintains, ‘which would provide good things to eat and wear, good places to live in, and cordial relations between husband and wife and between parents and children, does not conform with the Communist ideal.’ [50] Production is an end in itself, and the apotheosis of Marxism as the instrument of primitive accumulation reaches completion.
 
5. Conclusions
The treatment of the three people examined here is very thin given the immensity of their life’s work, but it is necessary to put them together, even if inadequately, to demonstrate the evolution of an ideology. Lenin is presented here as an heir to Marx in a way that German Social Democracy was not. He broke out of the constricting non-activism of Social Democracy to reunify theory and practice, to restore the idea of the active agency of the industrial working class, to defend the aim of freedom as the essence of Marxism against the bureaucratic, étatiste and nationalist revision of Marxism in Social Democracy. For Kautsky, the revolution was ‘inevitable,’ predicted by a passive contemplative science, regardless of the activity of men. It was just this viewpoint that Stalin revived in his conception of the role of the economic basis: socialism was, by definition, the economic structure of the Soviet Union, not a system of social relationships and power. He similarly replaced State and Revolution by the Social Democratic alliance of State and nationalism, replacing class with nation. Mao Tse-tung made yet again the attempt to break out of this constricting dogma into activism, but, given the conditions of China, at the cost of Marxism, not its recreation in Leninist terms. His substantive revisions in theoretical terms are small, but his essentially voluntarist practice, his pursuit of national revolution rather than world proletarian revolution, his stress on military action from the most backward areas of a country over many years, constitute major revisions in fact. What constitutes the revolution here is not the most advanced urban masses securing their own emancipation by their own efforts, but guerilla warfare by the least advanced rural groups, operating outside the ordinary social structure over many years, in order to seize power and begin industrialisation. His revival of activism made tremendous achievements in defeating imperialism and beginning the immense process of development, but it should not obscure the social content of the Chinese Revolution since this social content will determine the future course of that revolution. It is precisely the ‘classless’ quality of Maoism which makes it particularly appealing for radical intellectuals, Marxist or liberal; the absence of specific class content, the romanticism and elitism, the special dominant role in manipulating ideology granted to intellectuals, make it attractive to those who are frustrated and outside the normal social structure with no social forces behind them. A would-be new class within a rotting social structure fits naturally into Maoism, although even more naturally into Castroism which carries less ideological baggage with it. Outside the underdeveloped world however there is little role for such intellectuals except identifying at a distance; Maoism in Western intellectuals can coexist comfortably with the elitism of the Labour Party or Scandinavian Social Democracy; the common aspiration to ‘classlessness’ makes this easy. The escape from class here is however little more than the demand to be the ruling class, to be the intellectual elite that guides society in ways the elite knows best, and links to a very ancient tradition among European intellectuals, at least as old as Plato. It is married in Maoism with the praise for ‘pragmatism,’ that is, escaping from a specific political programme embodying the demands of a specific class. Mao is said to have reshaped Marxism pragmatically, to have ‘discovered’ the peasantry as a revolutionary class, as if this were one of the elements which were optional in Marxism. However, the writing of Marx is explicitly put forward as the theory appropriate to the consciousness of the industrial working class in the most advanced countries. To see Marxism as a technical guide to revolution that can be ‘applied’ to quite inappropriate circumstances, is to try and exploit the tradition of one sort of revolution for the furtherance of a different sort, to see Marxism not as true consciousness but as ideology. The social content cannot be left out to leave a ‘technique,’ the purposes of the theory cannot be changed for other purposes except in non-Marxist and purely eclectic terms. If Marxism is to mean anything it must have some bearing on the works of Marx, and, more particularly, the central elements in that work; otherwise; it means no more than pursuing a revolution, any sort of revolution, at any cost with any purpose. And there is no obvious reason why a bourgeois revolution should not be executed under Marxist banners. More important, socialists completely disarm themselves before a new class regime: they no longer have the weapons of appraisal and criticism to determine the true and the false, they no longer have a vision of the end which determines the stages towards that end.
A number of other points emerge, and in particular, a critique of the assumption that holding a theory guarantees the holder against ultimate betrayal. Theory is not a thing that one holds, not an ideology that is given; it is the summation of certain concrete experience related to certain ends, constantly changed by new experience relative to the same ends. If the ends change, then the theory is likely to change, but, even where it does not, it serves a quite new purpose and therefore must be appraised quite separately. That the Soviet Union teaches its people certain ideas says nothing about what the Soviet people will do until we know the purposes those ideas are designed to achieve – theory has no life of its own independent of the men who use it, no autonomy or inbuilt logic that necessitates that men do things regardless of what they want to do. To believe the opposite is to reify theory, to be guilty of a form of idealism that is usually disowned as soon as stated, but is no less common among socialists. It is of interest to note that this view of theory, or rather ‘ideology’ as it is usually called, is usually associated with complete voluntarism – in fact, theory serves only a window-dressing function to disguise unstated purposes. It should be clear from what has followed that merely using a terminology, popular in this century for a number of reasons, offers no guarantee that the user is pursuing purposes for which the terminology was originally designed to achieve, that he is aligned with the right social force. Marxism in the Soviet Union has atrophied into an ideology, no less obfuscating than any other ruling class ideology but with interesting echoes of anti-Communist conservative ideologies. Ossowksi compares the evolution of Marxism to that of Christianity, also a radical doctrine at its inception:
‘After the words and practices that had served the revolutionary movement had been accepted, they were given a different content or their application was restricted to situations without relevance for everyday life. The sharing of bread and wine continued to bear the name “communion” when it was transformed into a sacrament given at the altar. On Maundy Thursday the Bishop continued to carry out the ritual of washing beggars’ feet, but this action did not involve any risk of lessening the gap which divided him from them nor help to make the relations between the Church dignitaries and the Christian population more democratic. Again, every worker who had the opportunity of making a direct approach to Stalin was able to address him as “comrade,” while a charwoman or porter would be called “porter” by those who had unlimited bank accounts, could shop at special stores and had access to special social services for themselves and their children.’ [51]
Given the objective structure of the Soviet Union and China and the roles Stalin and Mao chose to play, it was and is impossible for them to embody the will of the proletariat; in that sense, disputation on the question is as irrelevant as discussion as to whether President Johnson could or could not be a Marxist. Such discussion necessarily separates consciousness from the reality of experience and makes it autonomous, independent of reality; we are back with the Idea leading a life of its own.
Much of the obscurity attached to socialist attempts to appraise the Soviet Union and China turns on the irrelevance to the twentieth century of the classical idea of ‘bourgeois revolution.’ The point has already been argued by Lenin and Trotsky, but the full implication of their case has not been unpacked – in some cases, because they themselves have been interpreted as seeing the world as nothing but a dichotomy between a private and a State (equals socialist) economy. But revolutions to establish the bourgeois democratic republic on the basis of private property and a free market have not occurred this century except in very qualified forms – usually, with the State playing an increasingly important part, even so far as to extinguish the private and democratic elements. Private capital becomes not an alternative class, but a weak auxiliary of the class that holds the State, the bureaucracy, army or new intelligentsia. The immense convulsion of the underdeveloped world, bringing to power in many countries a new class to perform the functions of the old West European bourgeoisie, to smash the old society and begin the process of ruthless industrialisation, can now only be conceived in terms, not of private ownership, but of State capitalism. Primitive accumulation has its own ruthless logic, not impeded for long by the scruples of socialist consciousness except in the voluntarist propaganda of ideology. State capitalism, whether decorated with quotations from Marx or not, is no less a class society in fact or embryo than any other based upon private ownership, whether its genesis lies in a Communist Party seizing power, a non-Communist popular movement doing so, or a military coup by radical young army officers; and it is not legitimate to read off the nature of the present regime from how it reached power. The terminology of Liberalism which identified the West European bourgeois revolution was created by the rising class itself. The new State capitalists have not created their own terminology, but borrowed more or less extensively from the authoritarian traditions of European socialism – Fabianism, German Social Democracy, and Stalinism. This should not be surprising, nor mislead one’s assessment of the colonial revolution: Maoism is not the ‘new phase’ of Bolshevism, but its death. Together, Stalin and Mao from different positions have revised Marxism sufficiently to render it a contradiction of its original purposes. Such is the irony of history.
 



Workers of China
K.E. Priestley
Ampersand, 3s 6d.
China in Crisis
Sven Lindquist
Faber, 25s.
Twentieth Century China
Edmund Clubb
Columbia, 18s 6d.
Mr Priestley purports, in this addition to the list of Ampersand anti-communist tracts, to describe the condition of modern Chinese workers. In this he fails, largely because he omits any reference to time an4 his sources are in the worst tradition of modern Sinology, all paste and scissors from a pot-pourri of the Chinese press. He consistently distorts what is already known so that he achieves, whatever his own motive, mere Cold War propaganda. Mr Lindquist, a former student at Pekin University for two years, is at the opposite extreme – his anecdotal journalism is occasionally illuminating and entertaining without offering any deep perceptions. But at least his volume is honest, which marks it out from much modern writing on China.
Mr Clubb has written a serious and substantial history of China, a useful compendium of much factual information, strong on the military side even if a little weak on the broad perspective. The viewpoint is conventional by the standards of academic history, but the author is sympathetic to his subject and repudiates the horrors of Kuomintang firmly. However, he lacks any principle of organisation to which he can tie his account. Modern historians, faced with the same dilemma, are fond of locating the a priori source of initiative in the individual psychology of the leader or in some autonomous ideology. Mr Clubb opts for the ‘Chinese tradition’ – his citation of historical precedents for communist action becomes increasingly tiresome, and suggests a narrowness of perspective that prevents him seeing the even more impressive non-Chinese precedents. All this is only to say that Mr Clubb lacks a useful and rigorous concept of class; he further fails to see often what is at stake in political struggle – he convicts America, at most, of muddle and error.
In a factual history, these points detract from the overall sweep, although they leave the compilation of information still a useful service. All three works suffer from the passage of time – Priestley does not mind, but Lindquist’s ‘crisis’ is 1961. Clubb finishes in 1963 declaring the impossibility of a Russo-American alliance. But all this is by the by.



Education in Tokugawa Japan
R.P. Dore
Routledge, 35s
Professor Dore is already rightly well-known for his sensitive and disciplined studies of Tokyo city life and Japanese land reform. Here he offers a clear and historically documented account of educational facilities available and their likely impact on the late Tokugawa period, the prelude to Japan’s modern industrialisation. He deals with this by social class, and in relationship to content – both the balance between traditional and Western studies, and an examination of the likely ethics derivable from such studies. This is a useful work and fills in an important area of ignorance, particularly given the multitude of silly things said about the role of education in development generally. It points up the peculiar situation of Japan, and the different class nature of education as a political factor (the rulers encouraged the spread of education as a medium for ideological control – it was not seen as a means of popular emancipation). Dore carefully guards against the popular temptation to see education as the key to all social change, and sees the crucial ambivalence in the ethics instilled in the young.



Ideologies
Patrick Corbett
Hutchinson, cloth 30s, paperback 12s 6d
This is an odd book, intelligent but wayward. Professor Corbett presents his versions of what he calls ‘ideologies,’ three in number: Marxist, Catholic and Democrat. He follows this with an attack on all three by a ‘sceptic,’ and then offers his own comments and reply, ending with a plea for toleration in the common effort both to solve the problems of the world and to understand them.
The book is odd because the author is rather trapped in his conception of ‘ideology’ as a sort of dogmatic closed system of ideas, rooted in unjustifiable general assumptions that are only partial. Thus his account of each ‘ideology’ suffers from being both simplistic and abstract – the backcloth of human purposes and constant clarification, amendment, revision, constant argument, is omitted, so that we are left with schemes which do validate Mr Corbett’s assumptions, but do scant justice to real beliefs held by real people facing real problems. Crucial distinctions are thus lost, ironed out by the author’s doctrinaire assumption of what goes with what – his account of the ‘Marxist’ ends with the startling note that ‘The Soviet Embassy supplies pamphlets in which Marxist principles are applied to current problems’ (p.222). But to say this is to make a commitment that virtually robs his account of the sorts of distinctions that will alone illuminate what he calls ‘ideologies.’ The appearance of his entities is very rare, and their appearance is not the source of their life – that life derives from the continuing attempt by men to understand and change their world (or preserve it from change). And to abstract the residuum, the lowest common multiple, of such attempts is to locate a totally misleading series of propositions which very few people, in practice, believe. Tilting at windmills becomes a substitute for waging the continuing battle. Undoubtedly the best part of the book is its final section where Mr Corbett gets down to tackling concrete conceptual problems, but the section is good because it looks at political argument, not ‘ideologies.’ A quite unjustified optimism derives from Mr Corbett’s superficial portrayal of ‘ideologies:’ since they are so shallow, so manifestly silly, of course they will decline as we get increasingly ‘interdependent.’ But, leaving aside the central purpose of the book which is hopelessly trapped in its own assumptions, there is much clear thought and intelligent comment in the final section that does something to restore the value of the book. If Marxists (or Catholics or Democrats) were always as clear and careful as Mr Corbett, many rather trying problems would be eliminated; so long as clarity is not bought at the price of inaction, which sometimes seems to be Mr Corbett’s lesson.



Nigel Harris writes: The Spring purge of the Chinese Communist Party has left few clues as to its meaning, beyond being a further phase in the ‘socialist education campaign.’ After the disasters of 1960-61, the Party followed a policy of domestic conservatism and rehabilitation. The inevitable results of such conservatism were an increase in social stratification, and a tendency for privileged groups, Party cadres and army officers, to begin to express their privileges, to make their positions safe from central Party interference. To combat this, Pekin inaugurated in September 1962 the ‘socialist education campaign’ to attack deviations towards elitism it! the army, the Party and the intelligentsia. The best known features of this campaign included abolition of rank insignia in the army, despatch of urban intelligentsia, students and factory managers to rural districts to help with the harvest (a time of labour shortage in China’s otherwise labour surplus economy), and a purge of all works of literature, opera and the film. In July 1964, the campaign was intensified with the beginning of something called a ‘cultural revolution,’ and in September a Central Committee meeting decided to begin the attack on the Party’s most loyal intellectuals and most disciplined section, the Pekin Party. The public attack began in mid-November on Wu Han, historian and deputy mayor of Pekin. In January, a Pekin conference on Party work in the army reiterated many criticisms of senior officers for resisting Party control. The anti-Wu campaign lapsed, but was resumed on 3 April with renewed vigour; Wu was now accused of supporting Peng Te-huai, the former Minister of Defence purged in 1959 for criticising the Great Leap Forward. At this stage, many heads began to roll: Kuo Mo-jo, President of the Academy of Sciences; Ten T’o, editor up to 1960 of the People’s Daily, thereafter responsible for the Pekin Party’s Pekin Daily News and fortnightly Front Line; Hsia Yen, for nine years vice-Minister of Culture; Mao Tun, former Minister of Culture; Lu Ping, former deputy Minister of Railways and, since 1960, President of Pekin University; Chou Yang, deputy director CCP propaganda. The two highest people dismissed are P’eng Chen, Secretary of the Pekin Party since 1949, deputy secretary of the entire CCP, and formally ninth but effectively sixth within the CCP Politbureau; and Lu Ting-yi, Minister of Culture and CCP propaganda chief. However, the charge of ‘Rightism’ could not seriously be levelled at P’eng, a notoriously hard Maoist who was one of the leaders of CCP delegations to argue with the Russians when talking was still possible. The purge spread outwards. The Pekin Party was reorganised, its youth leaders replaced and three publications purged. Further purges followed in other major cities, concentrating on the Universities, education and propaganda departments, and press. Finally, the Party postponed the new University term for six months while it reformed admission procedures to raise the ‘proletariat’ content, even though in 1962, the Party claimed to have raised worker-peasant intake from 36 per cent in 1957 to 67 per cent.
Apart from P’eng, the target of the purge is clear, but there have been very diverse interpretations offered. One argues that Lin Piao, Defence Minister, has been purging the army for the past two years (his latest victim is said to be General Lo Jui-ching, Chief of Staff), preparatory to taking the Party over as Mao approaches death. The current purge in which the army paper, Liberation Army Daily, played a key role is seen as a prelude to this takeover – three army commanders have been appointed to key posts in the Politbureau regional offices, and two made vice-Ministers of Culture. Since Lin is very sick however, if the theory is to hold, there must be someone else doing the pushing. Others have seen the purge as evidence of grave disaffection in the Pekin Party or the universities, as a power bid by P’eng, or as Mao settling old scores before he dies. But in all cases, the theories have little more evidence than inspired guesswork.
More to the point is the evident need for the purge. Since 1961, the economy has been operated at relatively low capacity with only short-term conservative targets; Party control over the peasantry has been more relaxed, and financial incentives used to stimulate production. Neither the Third Five-Year Plan, originally scheduled for early 1963 but delayed till late 1965, nor any supporting information has yet been published, which suggests that conditions, undoubtedly better than 1961, have not improved so dramatically that figures would be anything but discreditable. Western and Russian estimates suggest total industrial output has not surpassed the 1958 claims; agricultural production may have kept pace with the 100 million population increase, but cannot have produced much surplus to invest in industry, especially given the diversion of resources and manpower to nuclear-weapon production. The social result of this relative standstill in development is that the privileged begin to act like a new ruling class, begin to resist Party demands to make the sort of social changes that increase production and stimulate mobility: the economy as a whole tends to relapse into its old inertia. Given that the limits of the economy prohibit for the moment real and dramatic changes (a second leap forward), the Politbureau can try to escape this tendency by campaigns specifically against the privileged strata, intelligentsia, Party cadres and army officers, and by focussing attention on the victories being won abroad.
However, the victories abroad are currently very thin. In Asia, the China axis has disappeared – Indonesia’s counter-revolution has destroyed the largest pro-China party in a non-Communist country; both North Korea and North Vietnam were tactfully absent in Moscow for the 23rd CPSU Congress, pulled by the sheer weight of Soviet economic resources, when China called its first world conference in Auckland, attended by Albania and fragments from Belgium, Australia and New Zealand. The flirtation with Pakistan has brought few concrete results – Pakistan remains centrally dependent on US aid, a member of SEATO and CENTO. In Vietnam, Pekin is trapped by its own military impotence, restricted to frustrated and purely verbal bellicosity while the US increases its military commitment with impunity and Russia extends concrete, if small, help to Hanoi. In the Middle East, Syria can likewise get more from Moscow (a new Aswan Dam in fact) than China; Egypt in December tried publicly 11 Communists accused of being paid by Pekin (the Chinese ambassador was tactfully absent). In Africa, despite China’s hasty recognition of Boumedienne (Albania attacked Ben Bella by name), Algeria remains out of China’s orbit; Ghana’s coup directly discredited China’s support for Nkrumah. Chinese diplomats have been drummed out of Burundi, Dahomey and Central African Republic for subversion. Only Brazzaville and Tanzania remain influenced, and in Tanzania’s case, at substantial cash cost – China promised 16 million pounds for Tanzania’s five year development plan, and in June gave a further two million pound interest-free loan and a one million pound grant, all of which has to be extracted from the sweat of the Chinese peasant. Finally, in Latin America, Cuba has publicly denounced China for cutting its rice exports and subverting the Cuban army – ‘this is not a matter of a few tons of rice,’ Castro maintained, ‘but of something far more important – whether in the world of tomorrow ... the world powers will keep to themselves the right to blackmail, submit to pressures and aggression, and strangle smaller powers, and whether they will also use the worst methods of piracy and oppression of Yankee imperialism.’ It is a long way from 1964 when China was chasing the Soviet Union hard. Neither diplomacy nor subversion nor straight bribery have been able to compete with Soviet power, and all three of the key powers on which China relied, Indonesia, Ghana and Cuba, have rejected it, a rejection symbolised in the collapse of the second Bandung congress last year and the trivial gains for China at January’s Havana tricontinental conference.
If intransigence abroad has so little success, how much greater is the need for ideological control at home, for increasing substitution of words for action (symbolised in Vietnam). Nove describes Stalinist economic campaigns as ‘among other things, a means of goading the goaders, of mobilising the controllers’ (The Soviet Economy, 1961, p.292) where the State, not the profit motive, is the growth-inducing agency. Chinese ideological ‘campaignology’ is the substitute for impossible economic campaigns: it prevents privileged groups using their position to root themselves firmly in their locality so that they can successfully resist the power of the Politbureau and create enclaves of independent power. But mere ideology only leads to cynicism after repetition; to add an edge, heads must fall, even if on the most ludicrous charges, and the higher the head, the more vivid the warning to everyone else. Wu Han should feel comforted, for even his sinfulness contributes to the power of the Party and China’s economic stability.



Nigel Harris writes: The full terror of the current Indonesian counter-revolution is only slowly emerging in fragments of information, but it seems, in terms of numbers brutally murdered, as terrible a blow as the Kuomintang destruction of the Chinese Communist Party in 1926-7, and not dissimilar in its reasons. Estimates of Communists (PKI) killed vary between 10,000 (including 45 of the 50 central committee members) and 200,000; on 15 January Sukarno admitted 87,000 had been killed since the abortive coup of 1 October. This is only the surface manifestation of a terrible purge affecting the whole of Indonesia – 4,000 civil servants sacked in North Sumatra; 30,000 gaoled in West Borneo; 2,500 gaoled in East Java (and 5,700 teachers sacked), 10,573 gaoled in West Java; the PKI proscribed in West Java, Moluccas, South and South-East Sulawesi, West, Central and South Kalimantan, Jakarta, South Sumatra, Atjeh. The gaps of non-proscription indicate the areas where the PKI is still too strong to ban or where local army commanders are protecting the Party, and, in particular, the Central Java PKI stronghold where there is now open fighting between the army and PKI. On top of this, there has been a mass exodus from the Party now it has been challenged to stand against the army and deliver the goods it promised. The powerful PKI following among agricultural labour in Sumatra is said to have dwindled to nothing now that it is clear the Party cannot execute its promised radical land reform programme, and has left it too late to declare revolutionary opposition to the Jakarta status quo.
The PKI, since its abortive rising of 1948 (part of the Comin-form Left turn that had such disastrous results in most of Asia), has pursued a Maoist policy of class collaboration, without guerilla warfare. Muso, one of the PKI’s 1948 theorists, stated the aims of the PKI as follows: to unify all social forces, including the bourgeoisie, to press for democratic reforms, the elimination of feudal remnants and anti- imperialism – the sort of programme Mao would have followed if the Kuomintang had accepted his often pressed request for an alliance (and outlined in Mao’s On New Democracy). The PKI, like the CCP, projected itself into a classless role, outside the social structure (but without the CCP’s military forces), a unification point for a purely and imperialist platform with a residual identification with radical land reform and state capitalism (neither overtly stressed at the national level lest it excite the opposition of threatened classes). This moderate platform won it acceptance by President Sukarno, himself desperately needing counterbalancing forces to the army and the Muslim-nationalist parties. But insofar as the PKI became accepted, it had to curtail its propaganda and activity within terms laid down by Sukarno and the army – the PKI demand for more democracy gave way in 1959 to a demand for strong government in order to underpin Sukarno’s suppression of other political parties in the name of ‘Guided Democracy.’
The Party’s reward came when Sukarno granted it 55-60 seats in the 261-member appointed Assembly (the Right parties then pressurised to increase the seats to 283, within what was in any case a politically neutralised Parliament). In 1962, Aidit and Lukman, two PKI leaders, were included in the ‘National Leadership,’ and the PKI received appointments to all the main organs of the State except the military security bodies. But again, the gains in inner influence were more than outweighed by the PKI’s total immersion in responsibility for government policy, at a time when the economy was in rapid decline and popular hostility towards the State increasing. The PKI was also trapped in its identification with China, given that the main block of Indonesian traders and merchants are Chinese; China accepts a watching brief over the interests of the Chinese segment of the Indonesian bourgeoisie, and the hostility towards the one accrues to the other, and thence to the PKI. This was demonstrated by the paralysis of the Party in 1960 when a wave" of anti-Chinese feeling swept Indonesia and temporarily strained Pekin-Jakarta relations. On the other hand, the real balance of power in the State was exhibited in June 1960 when Lukman and Sakirman, PKI Left leaders, openly attacked the Government’s economic policy and the rightist tendencies of the army – Sakirman was arrested, Aidit and Lukman held for questioning by the army, all PKI publications containing the criticism confiscated, Muslim mass demonstrations of protest against the PKI held in South Sumatra, East Java and South Kalimantan. Simultaneously, the army suppressed PKI organisations in parts of the main islands. Sukarno’s personal authority alone shielded the Party, but the price of that protection was the withdrawal by the PKI of all its criticisms.
If the PKI leadership was dedicated to collaboration, its local and front organisations had to be committed to at least some form of class identification, a situation similar to the KMT-CCP alliance in China before 1927. Riding both horses simultaneously, the Party grew – allegedly, to three million members (the largest Indonesian party), with eight to ten millions in the front organisations which included the largest trade-union federation, SOBSI, women’s, student, youth and peasant associations. What these figures represent in real revolutionary terms has been demonstrated since 1 October, and, given its terrible losses, the PKI at the moment is probably not much more than a hard core of 50-100,000 strong, heavily concentrated in Central Java.
The coup itself, the 30 September movement, has still not been conclusively demonstrated to have been a PKI initiative. On the contrary, it looks like an attempt by a small number of radical army officers to destroy the senior army leadership, and borrowing on rank-and-file PKI support without explicit sanction from the PKI leadership. Biassed army accounts have admitted that coup was supported by five battalions of the army, four or more senior officers (including Brigadier General Supardjo, and the Central Java Chief of Staff, Colonel Suherman), a number of Cabinet Ministers, and the air force chiefs.
The army alleges that the air force used its Jakarta Halim aerodrome to fly in arms from Pekin for use by the PKI. Thus popular hostility towards the Chinese merchants (and so China) is linked directly with the army’s own hostility towards Indonesia’s increasingly close links with China (which cannot supply the army with modern weapons, in contrast with the Soviet Union which can) and towards the PKI’s steady encroachment on State power] In defence of nationalism and Sukarno (like Chiang Kai-shek’s ‘defence’ of Sun Yat-sen), the terror has been launched against the PKI. Such being the suddenly changed balance of power, Sukarno’s protests can be ignored by the army with impunity – Sukarnoism is no longer linked to Sukarno.
But the army cannot rest content with merely destroying the PKI within the existing status quo. It has placed the entire administration of the country under its Council of Generals (military governors have replaced civilians in all regions), leaving the Cabinet and Sukarno as increasingly marginal elements in the real power structure. The army must now stabilise the class structure in order to stabilise its own power, and escape from the administrative anarchy that existed under Sukarno. It has banned all but one newspaper to each political party in each region, while permitting any number of government or army newspapers, and taken over direct military supervision of all the press. In December, it initiated a drastic revaluation of the currency, demanding that ten per cent of all currency given into banks for exchange into new notes should be retained ‘for the national revolution.’ It has slashed public expenditure, and made a substantial increase in the price of petrol (up 60 times over in one night), of post office services, bus and train fares. It has then sought to hold down all ordinary retail prices by direct military brutality, blaming the wild inflation that has swept Indonesia for the past two years on the Chinese shopkeepers. It is the Government’s price increases that precipitated the student demonstrations of mid-January, agitation that signifies the deflationary punishment being inflicted with the purge.
But the organisation which crystallised popular radical feeling is no longer available to oppose the army. It has paid the price of its success in conjoining defence of the status quo in its leadership with opposition to the status quo at its grass roots, a juggling trick which amounted to little more than gathering popular support for the regime through dishonest promises. Indonesia now faces the prospect of a military dictatorship under General Nasution, aligned with Moscow (Pravda has scarcely bothered to mention the liquidation of its Indonesian ‘fraternal party,’ nor have the 700 Soviet technical advisers in Indonesia been withdrawn in protest), on a platform of conservative state capitalism. No doubt CIA funds will be increasingly applied to help the new fledgling along.
Whatever the political criticisms of the PKI, this is a terrible blow for the Indonesian people, and one from which they will only recover with great difficulty. When the CCP was driven from the towns in 1927, the necessity of rooting itself in the most backward elements of the most backward rural areas was slowly converted into a virtue. This virtue Aidit rejected, as he rejected guerilla warfare. It can be presumed that he will now find it necessary, completing the last link in the Maoist strategy and making a final abandonment of the urban proletariat. Whether he will be as lucky as Mao was remains to be seen in the coming decades.



Nigel Harris writes: All the most obvious relics of Stalinism have disappeared in Czechoslovakia today, and the outsider finds it difficult to remember that this is still a State that is supposed to be dedicated to ‘Marxism-Leninism.’ To escape the implications of the short-term crisis in the Czech economy, the Party leadership has made substantial concessions to the intelligentsia so that direct controls no longer operate comprehensively over the mass media and cultural activity, with the result that, given its head, the intelligentsia is busily copying whatever is the latest fashion or fad in the West. All this has relatively little impact outside the intelligentsia, but it will begin to do so if the Party permits continued freedom. Cultural freedom may be a short-term expedient by the Party leadership to escape criticism, but it does represent also a response by Czechoslovakia’s rulers to come to grips with the long-term problem: how to adjust the crude imperatives of a command economy, administrative economics through all pervading bureaucracy, to the needs of an advanced economy where technical quality of output is the key consideration. Czech ‘revisionist’ economists argue that there is no alternative but to create a ‘market economy’ in Czechoslovakia.
The Czech economy was consciously reshaped to become the main machine-building supplier in the Eastern Bloc after 1948. War reconstruction, followed by the Korean boom, over-extended capacity but did create some Bloc division of labour: by 1953, the Czechs supplied half Roumania’s imports of machinery and equipment, nearly a third of Hungary’s and a quarter of Poland’s. However, after the Korean War, other Eastern Bloc countries began increasingly to develop their own machine-building sectors or, latterly, import technologically superior capital equipment from the West or, in some cases, from a new competitor, East Germany. Problems came to a head in the middle fifties, but were partly postponed by Soviet willingness to take an increasing proportion of Czech exports in return for Russian raw materials and foodstuffs – 1958-60 saw relatively rapid Czech economic growth accompanied by a stagnant agriculture, intense labour shortages (exacerbated by a virtual ban on migration of labour), apparent maldistribution of very scarce skilled labour, and a tight balance of payments (or rather, rouble surpluses but hard currency scarcity). An economy top heavy with a technologically backward but over extended heavy industry reached crisis in the early sixties when a Russian recession cut back Soviet purchases of Czech equipment (and Russian orders were also diverted to superior Western goods – e.g. ICI chemical and Fiat motor plants) and supply of foodstuffs. Between 1961 and 1963, the economy went into dramatic recession, forcing the abandonment of the third five year plan. A Western computation [1] from the relevant Czech indices reads:



 


(1948:100)




1961


1962


1963


1964




National income


268


272


266


268




Material personal consumption  


207


212


215


220




Accumulation


807


747


540


516



By permitting consumption to continue to rise at the expense of accumulation President Novotny purchased a breathing space in which, he hoped, external factors would improve the economy. The situation is said to have improved since 1964, and gross industrial output to be increasing by 4-5 per cent per annum.
Both Novotny’s faction and its opponents in the Party (led by the economist Otakar Šik) argue that the economy must be radically changed to raise labour productivity and technical advance, redistributing capital and labour to advancing sectors of the economy. Novotny argues these changes can be achieved only with tight Party control over the economy, but the ‘revisionist’ economists argue for the full creation of a capital and labour market with managerial independence, guided solely by realistic economic costs and the need to make a profit. A number of reforms along the Šik lines have been introduced. In 1958-9, decentralisation measures permitted enterprises to plan, initiate and finance more than half total investment with only marginal central supervision, and a price reform tried to relate industrial prices more closely to branch wide production costs. However, the ambitious Plan for 1961-5, the weakness of the entire Eastern Bloc, and the collapse of the China trade, precipitated a crisis in which the State had to intervene to cut investment and change enterprise programmes. By 1963, the pre-reform system was effectively reinstated, at a time of economic weakness, exacerbated by a harsh winter, producing a decline in national income, in gross industrial output and in labour productivity. Šik argued that the disaster was the direct result of trying to reintroduce bureaucratic control, and the Party leadership could offer no alternative perspective. A new series of reforms were announced in early 1965. These promise, by 1968, a price reform – fixed prices for one group of commodities (raw materials, semi-fabricated goods, essential foodstuffs), prices bargained within limits set by the State (most final goods) and free prices for minor goods (covering 7 per cent of consumption); prices are to include an element for interest on capital invested (6 per cent on fixed capital, 3 per cent on investment in services).
These are modest reforms, and do not create ‘economic prices,’ although they may make managers more independent. Other changes include attempts by the State to concentrate enterprises, attempts by the managers to obtain control of the right to promote, hire or fire managers, and Party attempts to raise unemployment as the first step to ‘redeploy’ (to use the fashionable word). 500 workers in the coal industry, traditionally the worst industry in terms of conditions, were sacked early this year. There is strong pressure also to increase differentials as an additional incentive to ‘redeploy.’ How far the Party will go in copying Mr Wilson without endangering its own control depends essentially on the perspective for the Eastern Bloc as a whole. How far the attempt to imitate a Western credit squeeze will create a Czech shop stewards’ movement or begin to activate a few local trade-union branches (as some Spanish syndicat branches were activated, despite State control, during the Asturian miners’ strike) remains to be seen.
 
Footnote
1. Michal, The New Economic Model, Survey, April 1966, p.63.
 



Aristocracy and the Middle Classes in Germany, Social Types in German Literature, 1830-1900
Ernest K. Bramsted
Chicago-Proenix, 21s
This revised edition of a book originally published in 1937 is very welcome. It is not the best of its kind, nor has it that depth of sympathy and penetration which characterises a classic, but it is nevertheless a useful and thoughtful account of the middle class’s view of the aristocracy (and vice versa) during a period of profound struggle of the former against the latter, as revealed in a selection of novels, with some reference to poetry and popular journalism. Mr Bramsted, in particular, relates the course of that struggle – from middle-class resentment at aristocratic political power, through a phase of feeling securely superior, and finally mutual identification of the two as their common interest against the rising proletariat became clear – to the actual historical background. Necessarily, he identifies crucial conceptions on both sides and helps in the sociological identification of general ideological tendencies in Europe during the rise to power of the industrial middle class.
The weakness of the book is in the limit of its scope – neither the working class nor foreign powers appear very prominently in the scheme. Again, the author to some extent himself reveals late middle-class or rather intelligentsia biases – this type of study necessarily tends to lack rigour, so that an increase in the discipline of the writer is even more necessary if he is to present a sociologically rounded account. However, given that most writers do not even attempt such analysis, this one is to be most warmly welcomed.
 



The European Right, a historical profile
Eds. Hans Rogger & Eugen Weber
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 63s
The difficulty of describing ‘the Right’ on an international scale is that, for the Right as defined in this volume, there is by definition no common pattern. The Nazis may have acknowledged, for temporary diplomatic reasons, some common interest with the Fascists, but this was purely an opportunistic manoeuvre: essentially, the Nazis opposed all other national movements, seeing them solely as potential challenges. On the other hand, it is precisely in the discontinuities between different nation states, in their economic and historical non-uniformity, that fascism thrives. Thus, there are as many different fascisms, loosely speaking, as nation states, and the fascism of a poor backward agrarian country has only superficial resemblances in terms of concrete politics with a major industrialised power. All this says little more than that the term ‘fascism,’ or even ‘Right,’ is too unspecific for an analysis on an international scale, although it may be perfectly adequate on the national. The international Right in terms of international companies, the cosmopolitan businessmen, is not the subject of this book, although here one would .find structural conditions for a properly international group.
What this book presents is a series of essays by different hands on something called ‘The Right’ (as if, between countries, it was strictly comparable) in a certain number of European countries – Poland, Yugoslavia, and most of Scandinavia are excluded without explanation. The quality; of the essays vary with the author, but there is an immense collation of useful, if not comprehensive or always new, information. The tendency of some contributions is to concentrate on what the movements said rather than did, on what they seemed rather than what they were: the ‘Right’ exists somehow as an entity with historical ‘attitudes,’ rather than as one response to a certain kind of problem, a response that bound together very diverse interests and changing attitudes. The central problem arises because there is no common framework of reference, and, in the case of some countries, no comparable object to be examined. The essay on Britain is weak for this last reason, since while there many ‘right-wing groups’ both inside and outside the Conservative Party (which itself fluctuates in policy), there is nothing that can be described as ‘the Right’ in the same way that there is in France; the writer tends as a result to invent ‘the Right.’ However, as a further addition to Weidenfeld & Nicolson’s recent interest in right-wing movements, this has much useful information and provides an introduction to the literature available.






While Tory ministers pray daily for an end to the world recession, they not only have no idea of what causes it, nor of when it will end: Nigel Harris, author of a new book, Bread and Guns, shortly to be published by Penguin, analyses the state of the world economy and indicates likely medium-term future developments.










1982 was the grimmest year so far in what will soon be a full decade of world economic stagnation. It seemed last winter that the low point must have been reached – ‘upturn’ just round the corner was the favourite comfort of Ministers. Even as late as July, the OECD (the club of advanced industrial powers) predicted a 2.25 percent rate of growth for the full year. But the prospect of upturn retreated like a mirage. The strategies – including monetarism – could no longer be justified without revival, and faded. All the sacrifices made because growth was just round the corner, became just sacrifices, a self-flagellation to ensure the survival, if not prosperity, of capital.
The revised estimates for the growth of gross products in the OECD group for 1982 now range from −¼ to +½ percent. For 1983, a rate of growth is proposed of 1½ to 2 percent, and for 1984, 2½ to 3. However, there is no more assurance than before that these figures will remain firm – they will possibly shrink, the closer we get.
In any case, whatever the figure, everyone freely admits it will not affect unemployment. Unemployment in Europe will increase by one million every six months up to 1984. The OECD Outlook notes:
‘It is not clear on present trends and policies, that the prospects for Europe would improve thereafter. Unemployment in Europe has risen every year since the first oil shock in 1973–74’.
And for the OECD group as a whole, unemployment should reach 35 million by 1985, or 9½ percent of the labour force (as against 5½ percent in 1979).
Customarily, it is assumed that a failure to revive in the OECD group is the stalling of the ‘engine of world growth’, which, in other words, implies that the world profit rate is primarily detetermined in this group. The rate will not rise despite the years of ransacking the ‘factors of production’, as represented in the level of unemployment, of bankruptcies and the reduction in the capacity of industry. The destruction is still not enough; the great overhang of decaying capital still holds down the profit rate. The longer this persists, the more stagnation spreads outwards from the oldest heavy industry to the newest, from there to the newest growth industries, from the geographical heartlands of the system in Europe and North America to those areas that continue to expand. Even as late as 1981, Mexico had a growth rate of over 8 percent, down in 1982 to possibly 3 percent.
The mechanism for the spread of contraction is seen through trade. The OECD markets are the largest in the world, taking some two thirds of world exports. As those markets contract, the demand for the exports of other areas falls, inflicting contraction upon them. The export revenue earned by the Third World fell by $40 billion between 1980 and 1982, both because markets contracted and because commodity prices collapsed. Payments made by the Third World to service medium and long term debt increased in the same two years by $37 billion. That turnaround of $77 billion is sufficient to end much of the growth that has persisted.
 
Activity continues
However, the picture is much more complicated than this. Slow or negative growth should not conceal that rapid. reshuffling of activity continues – between different sectors (say, industry and services), industries, types of operation (black and white economies; large scale direct production and subcontracted or cottage production) and geographical area. Even within countries the picture is mixed – between the devastation of the north of the United States and the southern States, between Glasgow and Slough. Slump does not depress all activities equally; it discriminates, forcing some activities to grow disproportionately. In the deepest slump, some activities boom – even if it is only scrap dealing, pawnbroking, second hand clothes.


 


Since a country is an area providing the basis for the production of a unique combination of output and services, the effect of slump will vary according to the commodity composition of national output. The OECD markets as a whole may stagnate, but some sectors will grow rapidly. For example, since 1973 the demand for cars in the United States has stagnated, but the demand for small cars soared – favouring those countries specialised in manufacturing small cars (Japan and Europe).
Indeed, some of the processes of change are accelerated by slump, as capital is obliged to redouble efforts to search out lower cost opportunities as the condition of survival. A more elaborate division of labour results. Quite often the statistics do not permit us to detect the processes, for they are organised to exhibit national shares of some crude output. For example, US statistics record only ‘domestic production’ and ‘imports’ of tyres, as if all tyres were interchangeable; in fact, the US manufactures heavy, special duty and aircraft tyres, makes and imports from Europe vehicle tyres; imports entirely bicycle and motor cycle tyres from the Third World. If the effect of slump is to contract the capital goods industries (using heavy and special duty tyres) but expand the use of bicycles and motor cycles, then it is clear how contraction in the US can produce a boom – or at least, growth – in those parts of a Third World country producing light tyres. Thus, the idea of the industrialised countries as an ‘engine of growth’ to the world is not at all a simple one – the effects of the relationship can be perverse (slump producing boom, not slump).
It is this reshuffling of a more elaborate division of labour that underlies the different growth performance of the world since the first slump (1973–74). There are at the moment four rough types, identified geographically although in practice each type is represented somewhere in the other three:


the ‘Atlantic economy’ (Western Europe and North America), the original ‘engine of growth’ of the world system. It is here that we can speak most accurately of the two slumps and intervening stagnation. In relative terms, the devastation of this area as the result of the last nine years has been most extreme, particularly in its core industrial regions, although the scale of sheer impoverishment still does not match that in parts of the Third World (but the seasonal features on the scale of homelessness, absolute destitution, suggest the First World is catching up with the Third).
 
The effects of the second slump from 1981 have been to drag down a major part of the high growth sectors of the seventies (that is, countries that maintained or accelerated growth when Europe and North America went into slump, followed by stagnation) – Latin America (particularly Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela), the Mediterranean (Yugoslavia, Spain, Greece), Eastern Europe (particularly Hungary and Poland) and South Africa. We could also include here the special case of the oil-producing countries.
 
However, the second slump has not reduced all the growth sectors equally. East and South-east Asia continue to grow, even if at reduced rates. The estimates for growth in gross domestic products in 1982 (excluding Japan) are as follows:




Hong Kong


 


(3.5 percent);




South Korea


(4.9);




Malaysia


(3.7);




Singapore


(5.0);




Taiwan


(4.0);




Indonesia


(4.0);




Philippines


(2.5);




Thailand


(4.8);




China


(4.0).



Despite some problems of cumulative debt – particularly South Korea and the Philippines – the growth figures do not indicate slump. They are in part related to the relative strength of the heart of the industrial region, Japan.

Finally, the rest, including the mass of countries of south Asia and subsaharan Africa. Many of these countries are the poorest in the world, participated imperfectly in the long boom (1947 to 1974) and have experienced continuous decline in the seventies, punctuated by the threat of famine. But it is a mixed bag, because, as we will see below, some of the countries, have also begun to accelerate the pace of capital accumulation.
 


National product
It should be noted in passing that the concern here is with ‘economic growth’, the expansion of national product, an indirect measure of the rapidity of capital accumulation, not with the increase in employment, incomes or consumption. In the context of the system, those elements are merely ‘accidental byproducts’ of the process of capital accumulation, not its essence. Thus, one can imagine the rapid growth of a sparsely populated oil-producing power that generated a complex of automated industry with very few direct byproducts in terms of employment or incomes for the mass of the population.
This is important since it is too frequently assumed that high growth produces high levels of employment and consumption. Take the interesting case of Sri Lanka which, after many years of relative stagnation through the long boom, has been swept into the wake of growth in south-east Asia. Per capita investment has increased 60 percent, and net capital inflows from abroad have soared – foreign capital inflow as a percent of Gross Domestic Product registered 4.2 percent in 1960, 3.1 percent in 1970 and 22.0 percent in 1980. But over the same period, per capita consumption has stagnated or declined.
Of more substance for the world system than Sri Lanka is the relative opening up of two giant Asian economies – China and India. China’s rate of growth seems to be reaching a fairly regular four to six percent per year, slump or not (and the only economic factor likely to drag this down, is a run of disasters in agriculture). Between 1974 and 1979, India averaged a 4.3 percent annual growth rate. Over the past twenty years, Indian investment as a proportion of Gross National Product has increased from 17 to 24 percent, and China’s from 23 to 31 percent, indicating for countries that are both very poor but, by world standards, possess very large industrial sectors (both would be among the top dozen industrial powers in the world), a remarkable increase in the pace of accumulation. The figures make no difference for the mass of the poor of both countries whose existence shows no tangible improvements whatever the rate of growth (and indeed, whose consumption is squeezed to sustain such high rates of accumulation). However, for the future of world capitalism the figures are instructive, again indicating a shifting balance in a world division of labour.
 


 


Impact is offset
Between the first (1973–74) and second (1981– ) slumps, the Third World and Eastern Europe offset the impact of depression in the heartlands of the system, the OECD group. Rates of growth in the Third World fell – from 5.8 percent (1968–72) to 4.6 percent (1972–80) – but they were still roughly twice as high as in the industrialised countries (where growth fell from 5.1 to 2.4 percent). From this increased differentiation in performance, we can infer that the relative profit rate in what we are calling the Third World (in fact, it is only a small part of it) became very high. This high profit rate was the basis for a rapid increase in local capital accumulation – many Third World countries increased investment as a percent of Gross National Product up to 25 percent (usually at the cost of consumption) – and a rapid inflow of foreign capital.
How could this happen when the most important market for the output of the Third World, the First, was stagnating? Of course, as we have noted, lower growth of output can go with rapid increases for some sectors (that is, the commodity composition of output changes), and lower growth of OECD imports does not rule out rapid expansion for some imports. Thus, stagnating markets in Europe and North America can mean also accelerated import penetration by those Third World countries with the capacity to exploit the opportunities.
In part, this happened – while total Third World exports to the OECD group increased relatively slightly in volume terms (although much more in money terms), in particular sectors the growth was much more rapid. But there were other factors that compensated for stagnating markets:


increased borrowing from banks in the OECD group, themselves with excess funds available to lend both because of the contraction in the demand for funds within the OECD group as the result of stagnation, and through the ‘recycling’ of OECD surpluses. The World Bank estimates that between 1975 and 1978, some 14 percent of total investment in the ‘ oil-importing Developing Countries came from borrowing abroad,
 
migrant remittances – that is, funds returned home by nationals working overseas. The total of officially recorded migrant remittances (a considerable underestimate of the total flow) rose from $2.6 billion in 1968–69 to $23.8 billion in 1978–79 (in the same period, the Middle East, a growth area in the seventies, increased its share of world remittance flows from four to 20 percent). By now, the value of remittances received is a large element in the overseas earnings of a number of countries – as a ratio, for example, of the value of merchandise exports, in Turkey remittances were 77 percent; Portugal 70; Egypt 89; Jordan 175; Pakistan 77 percent.


These factors allowed a group of Third World countries to expand their imports from the industrialised countries, so offsetting the impact of slump (that is, far from Third World exports to Europe destroying jobs, Third World imports from Europe created jobs). Industrialised countries’ exports to the Third World increased in value from $53 billion in 1973 to $117 billion in 1979; exports of engineering goods increased from $23 billion to $73 billion (the export surplus of the OECD group on the enaineering trade rose from $20 billion to $56 billion).
 
Shift of trade
Finally, there was a slight shift of trade away from the industrialised countries to faster growing markets – the oil producing powers, other Newly Industrialising Countries etc. ... 64 percent of Third World exports went to the industrialised countries in 1972, 62 percent in 1980.
Contraction or stagnation in the industrialised countries, with continued relatively high growth in parts of the Third World, accelerated a process of the redistribution of world manufacturing processes between different types of countries (the highly industrialised, industrialised, semi-industrialised, low industrialised etc). The redistribution was made possible by the cumulative effects of changes over the preceding two decades that, in effect, eliminated or reduced the differences in labour productivity in selected processes in the First and Third World – for example, the quality of labour (education, skills etc.); the quality and maintenance of equipment; the quantity and quality of associated services (power, transport, air freight, water supplies etc.).
Although still quite small, the process of redistribution of a growing output between the old and new centres of capital accumulation has been sufficient to register on a world scale. In terms of shares of world manufacturing output, the table shows how the picture changed.



Shares of World Manufacturing Output




 


1955


1960


1980




1      Western Europe


 


   30   


25   




2      North America


40


   30   


under 25




3 a)  Japan


 


     3.5


10.5




   b)  Eastern Europe


 


   11.0


11.0




   c)  Newly Industrialising Countries (20 countries)


 


     5.0


10.0



On the World Bank’s ‘best scenario’ (that is, assuming the highest realistic rate of growth in the OECD group), the redistribution is projected to 1990: by then, the share of the first two areas (Western Europe and North America) will have fallen in thirty years (1960–90) from around two thirds of world output to under half; the share of the third (a and c) will have risen from about one twelfth to over a quarter. The change constitutes an unprecedented structural reorganisation of capital, of which geographical location is only one element, without the re-organisation giving any assurance that the world profit rate will be restored to a level sufficient to recreate sustained world growth.
 
‘Globalisation’
It would be misleading to see the shift as taking place between states, so that the process is tied to the viability of particular states. The ‘Newly Industrialising Countries’ are only a convenient label for the front runners, and whether Mexico or Brazil or South Korea survive financially does not determine the process of redistribution. Once the ‘globalisation’ of certain processes in manufacturing becomes possible, those processes are no longer tied to particular locations, old or new. Indeed, there are already signs of certain sections of manufacturing leaving the Newly Industrialising Countries were labour costs are already becoming ‘uncompetitive’ for these types of production – Korean electronics are tending to move on to Malaysia; a number of low cost activities are leaving Mexico for the Caribbean and, particularly, Haiti; already an estimated 50 percent of the manufacturing capacity of Hong Kong textile companies is operating outside Hong Kong (in Sri Lanka, Mauritius and elsewhere).
The world market in slump forces an ever more specialised division of labour, leaving the Newly Industrialising Countries as, for the moment, ‘middle skill’ manufacturing powers, while low skill operations are located in a widening ring of Third World countries. Thus, a world production system has become intrinsic to the structure, not tied to the fate of either one or all of the Newly Industrialising Countries.


 


In sum, a series of factors operated after the first slump of 1973-74 to offset the impact of depression in Europe and North America, and thus to keep up the demand for the exports of the industrialised countries. However, many of these factors ceased to operate or, indeed, operated in a perverse manner during the second slump (1981– ). High interest rates and an unusually strong US dollar drove upwards the value of cumulative debts to the point where the largest borrowing countries were threatened by a possible default (Poland, Mexico, Argentina and Brazil). But many lesser borrowers came within striking distance of default and were obliged to seek the renegotiation of their debts (in 1981, Central African Republic, Liberia, Madagascar, Pakistan, Senegal, Togo, Uganda, Zaire; others reached special agreements with the banks – Bolivia, Jamaica, Sudan, Turkey). At the peak of interest rates in mid-1982, debts escalated with fearful speed – a one percent increase in interest rates cost Mexico or Brazil an extra £750 million.
The problem was compounded by the collapse in commodity prices (ironically, a key factor in declining inflation rates in the OECD group), so that the export earning capacity of big borrowers was affected, and so their ability to service debts. The most striking example was the collapse of the oil market, producing the beginning of the disintegration of OPEC, and increasing difficulties for major oil powers – Mexico, Venezuela, Nigeria, Indonesia. So dangerous became the increase on cumulative debt, that the slight pretext of the Falkland dispute set alarm bells ringing and led to a sharp cutback in the volume of new loans. The Eurocurrency credits advanced in the first nine months of 1982 were £62 billion, compared to £98 billion in the same period of 1981. The cutback increased through the year, and was increasingly harsh on the Third World – whereas the Third World took 50 percent of net lending in 1980 and 1981, in 1982 their share was 20 percent. The cuts were of maximum severity for Eastern Europe and Latin America, but relatively mild for East and South-east Asia (the rest of the Third World had never had much access to the commercial banks anyway).
Thus the compensating mechanisms of the 1970s are now lacking, and the full force of slump is being felt both in the industrialised, countries and a major part of the Third World. However, there are some changes that damp down the effect of sudden shocks, even if they cannot produce an upturn. The financial system has learned to live with large cumulative debts, discounted by larger reserves for default. Whereas the Polish crisis required more than a year’s negotiations to absorb, Mexico was saved from sudden collapse over little more than a weekend!
Reagan who had considered pushing Poland over the edge into default in the first major debt crisis, completely reversed his position for Mexico and Brazil – swift action by the US Government, the Federal Reserve Bank (sweetened by long-term contracts for Mexico’s oil at prices below the world market), and the Bank of International Settlements gave sufficient guarantees of Mexico’s credit to get the country through to October and an IMF deal; furthermore, the IMF has now made itself responsible for bullying the commercial banks into lending more to Mexico to prevent a default. On Reagan’s visit to Brazil in early December, he tossed a £1.2 billion credit to his hosts to reassure the commercial banks.
 
The oil market
Finally, Reagan who had originally opposed efforts to increase the reserves of the IMF (to increase its capacity to salvage debtors) swung into the opposite position as the result of the financial crises of Latin America. Of course, the turnround cannot be unrelated to the discovery that US banks were most exposed in Latin America – loans to Mexico by the nine largest US banks alone are said to equal fifty percent of their capital and reserves. Any default in the south by a major debtor would certainly devastate Wall Street, and through the interbank lending system, Europe as well.
However, the system is so unstable – and its systematic interrelationships so ill understood – that there is ultimately no way to offset all conceivable shocks. The turnround in the oil market was completely unexpected, and the time required to absorb the change sufficient to make possible a major default. Even the mild winter in North America can produce panic among the bankers – since the seasonal increase in oil prices as a result of cold weather is less than normal, cutting the capacity of the oil powers to service their debts. Indeed, the bankers now lose whether oil prices go up or down.
The attrition in the heartlands of the system generates waves of hysteria both against foreigners – immigrants – and now, most shrilly, against imports, against a world which is the source of domestic ills. In practice, governments recognise through their public adherence to free trade that their own ‘fate depends upon the survival of a global economy, but they constantly need to reassure their own inhabitants and voters that their fate is more important than some abstract world beyond the borders. This contradiction underlies the persistent wobbling between Scylla and Charybdis. Crumbs of protection must be thrown from time to time to marginal constituencies or to that minority of companies, the bulk of whose profit comes from the domestic market. With the crumbs go an elaborate structure of hypocrisy, lying and open cheating – whether it is Mitterrand’s instructions to video tape imports only to enter France through the tiny control point at Poiters, or the US House of Representatives Domestic Content Bill that instructs all sellers of 900,000 or more vehicles in the US market to use 90 percent US-manufactured parts by 1986 (the Bill is expected to be killed in. the Senate). The US Bill was actively supported by the car workers’ union, UAW, and actively opposed by the big car manufacturing companies who desperately need to import cheaper components to compete with imports and, overseas, with their rivals.
 
Protectionism
The contradictions in each campaign are painfully evident to governments. A ban on coal imports increases the cost of coal to BSC, and thus the price of steel; a ban on steel imports to protect BSC increases the cost of steel for the components for British Leyland and thus reduced its capacity to compete. In this case, on the government’s ledger the red figures are merely transferred from one corporation to the next. Only complete control of all imports would avoid such problems, but that would be a declaration of war on all those who have hitherto purchased British exports. Furthermore, insofar as import controls are effective they accelerate the ‘globalisation’ of production – to escape the closure of British export markets, British capital must invest abroad. The world market is not to be defeated by such manoeuvres.
Nonetheless, the political survival of governments now requires an increasingly dangerous flirtation with protectionism. The November meeting of trade ministers at GATT ended in confusion. The US and Europe are engaged in almost continuous economic warfare, currently at its most bitter over the trade in agricultural goods. US farmers are deep in debt and still ‘overproducing’, but US exports to third markets are constantly undercut by subsidised European exports. So desperate is Washington that, in the middle of a supposed trade embargo with the Soviet Union, it sold 100,000 tonnes of butter to a major butter exporter, New Zealand, presumably for onward transhipment to Russia. The Americans want to break into the European market; the Europeans want a cosy cartel with the Americans to divide up the world market without touching their home base.
At the Common Market Copenhagen summit in early December, the premiers were for the first time overtly protectionist, presumably as the only way of restraining the nationalism of Mitterrand’s France. All could unite in the attack on Japan for its wonderfully cheap machine tools, videos, stereos and colour television sets, as the prelude to blocking South Korea, Hong Kong and Brazil. The united abuse of Japan drowned the shouting over Spanish cars, Danish fish, French apples and the rest, The hypocrisy of the participants is best illustrated in steel – on the same day that the Financial Times published a major report on the new efforts by Brussels to eliminate illegal price discounts on the sales of steel within the Common Market, it reported elsewhere that BSC was about to offer special secret discounts on steel purchases by loyal customers.


 


The measures to control imports have effects in increasing the costs of goods, in reducing the level of activity, but at the end of the day, they do not control imports. Indeed, short of the introduction of a full seige economy, it is not clear that states can any longer control the trade flows that cross their territories. They may control the official movement, but only with the effect of expanding the unofficial – West Germany complains that, despite the supposed tight control of garment imports, 47 million illegal garments entered the country last year; the British, supposedly controlling South Korea with a firm hand, find half a million extra pairs of South Korean gloves in the British market. Or, if one element is controlled, it reappears in another form – the US controlled leather shoe imports from East Asia, only to be inundated by sneakers (rubber shoes), and when they were controlled, by soles and uppers, and if it is not these, it will be something else. The effect of controls is to reshape the output of the exporters to beat the controls, or to relocate the exporters so they dodge the control on their original country.
Thus the growth of protectionism neither hits the target nor assists world capital accumulation. It is part of the growing ‘irrationality’ of the system – that is, the pursuit of strategies that make the resumption of growth more unlikely but make the position of states more politically secure. The Falklands war is a vivid example of the willingness of a state to risk financial catastrophe (given the involvement of British banks in Argentina’s cumulative debt) for the sake of political advantage. A more impressive example would be Reagan’s dash for military superiority without increasing taxation. The resulting budget deficit – to be covered by borrowing – was great, it drove interest rates up just as slump hit the US economy. High interest rates drove into, or close to, bankruptcy a number of major US companies – International Harvesters, Braniff Airlines, Chrysler, and in Europe, AEG-Telefunken. Furthermore, high interest rates made the US dollar unusually strong, as the result of which US manufacturing became unusually uncompetitive, and imports unusually cheap – the trade war with Europe was one by-product. American manufacturing has been devastated, part of it fleeing abroad to escape the high costs. Finally, a strong dollar and high interest rates pushed up the debts of Mexico and Brazil, raising the possibility of the collapse of a major US bank and of Wall Street. Those whom the gods propose to destroy they first make mad.
 
Regional economies
It is utopian today to think any of the industrialised countries could recreate independent national economies. There is a growing realisation of this which has affected the case for import control as it has undercut the case for the control of the local money supply (in a financially integrated world). But if national economies have gone, there is still some political mileage to be made out of the idea of regional economies – North and South America, Europe, the Eastern Bloc, the Pacific seaboard. Economically, such units could not survive on their domestic markets alone, but the creation of political authorities to govern such regions could act as cartels to negotiate entry for selected imports from outside and for the division of undemarcated markets outside the regions. Politically, this seems to be one of the few things on offer at the moment; it escapes some of the objections to national protectionism, and offers fertile opportunities for geopolitical speculation.
However, it is least plausible for Europe, the largest single trading entity in the world system. It is perhaps slightly more plausible for the Pacific seaboard where, it seems, the impact of slump has produced a growth in internal trade between the countries of east and south east Asia and a relative decline in trade with Europe and North America.
However, again the case lacks realism. In order to dispense with the rest of the world, the region would have to inflict on itself a major slump. Japan, without the US and European markets, could not survive in its present form. And all this is to restrict the case to the simply economic. Politically, it is impossible to see how all the countries of the region – including China – would accept the hegemony of Japan, a revival of the prewar Co-Prosperity Sphere. The evidence is that the manufacturig powers of East Asia have bent much effort to escaping from dependence upon Japan – the proportion of South Korea’s exports going to the US and Japan has fallen from 74.3 percent in 1971 to 42.9 percent in 1981; and of imports, from 68.1 to 47.6 percent. In fact the shift by East Asia and South-east Asia away from markets in the old heartlands of the system is less a growth in regional self-reliance and rather more yet another aspect of the ‘globalisation’ of production that is also affecting the old heartlands.
Thus, in each region, the political contest jeopardizes the possibility of establishing effective regional organisations, and the more severe the slump, the greater the jeopardy. Direct conquest and military control still remains the only means to create .and hold larger effective entities than existing states. Furthermore, the point of
national protection was to secure the loyalty of the local population, regardless of its economic sense. But – as has been seen with Britain in the Common Market – regionalism is a poor substitute for old-fashioned nationalism. Indeed, in the common ruin of all, nationalism is a better bet in securing the survival of the power of the national ruling class, even if it simultaneously pulls down on their heads the temple of the economy.
 
Impotent state
The second slump has, more than the first, exhibited the impotence of the state. The state controls neither the world market nor that part’ of it which lies within its national boundaries – or rather, the state has the power to destroy it, but not to expand it. The answer – supranational regions – has little political reality in it, and even if it did, reducing the scale of capital to one region will only make the slump worse. Thus regions offer no hope of a restoration of employment. The only other proposal is to reduce the wages of the heartlands to the level of the Third World so that world profits are then restored The Economist (27 November 1982) has recently revived this ancient proposal, arguing that to increase the profit rate to 30 percent requires a cut in British wages of 19 percent and of Japanese wages by seven percent. The figures are, as one might suppose, suspect, and it may be that British wages need to be cut by 87.953 percent. However, whatever games are played with the figures, it is difficult to see how any such reductions could be achieved, short of a British version of General Pinochet or Jaruzelski. But to do that would be to risk the political survival of the ruling class.
In sum, the prospects remain grimmer than at any time during the period of stagnation since 1974. There will be some upturn – possibly in North America in 1983 – but it is likely to be so slight, it will not be noticed by the growing army of unemployed. If interest rates continue to decline, the financial pressure on companies will be eased. If the dollar continues to weaken, it will relieve the possibility of an open trade war across the Atlantic. And both factors will ease the possibility of a major default by a sovereign borrower. Such small changes may reduce some of the immediate dangers, but they give no asurance for a medium term future.
The system however has no self-destruct mechanism, despite the alarms and hysterical talk. If slump continues on present lines, there must be a sovereign default, but that will not produce the destruction of the system, only increased immiserization. Without a class capable of and comitted to the seizure of power, the ruling order will survive in whatever attenuated form. Thus, the discussion of the effects of an upturn are not of interest for their likely economic consequences, but rather for their implications in terms of worker confidence. The accumulation of silent bitterness through these years could make such a return of confidence a rapid and dramatic reversal of the trend.
 



Socialist Economic Review 1982
Edited by David Currie and Malcolm Sawyer
Merlin. £4.95
This is an odd book. It is a collection of fifteen papers from a 1981 conference on alternative economic strategies (for a Labour Government, presumably), with eight commentaries, but lacking either a common political conception or a central preoccupation. Thus, to the patchy quality inevitable in any collection of this kind, is added a central political difficulty. The best pieces are those most removed from any particular ‘socialist’ concern, the most academic pieces (see Rubery and Tarling’s Women in recession); the most ‘socialist’, those that rant. Only one contributor, John Palmer, steps outside the parochial concerns of this island to the awful realities beyond.
However, underlying the book or rather, many of the contributors’ pieces there is a unifying problem, a problem most people seem to want to evade: that of power. There are those whose primary concern is to identify a problem:
‘Women remain trapped in a vicious circle that can only be broken by a major and comprehensive set of initiatives on the part of a government committed to ending women’s financial dependence on men.’ (Gardiner and Smith, p. 39)
There are those ingenious in formulating remedies. But who is to do what needs to be done, and how plausible is it to assume they will do it? Most quietly assume the government will somehow do something in principle; the State is the friend of the reformers, not part of the problem (whoever forms the Cabinet). It is the lack of attention to means which gives what Schott calls ‘that certain air of Utopia that surrounds Alternative Economic Strategies’. (p. 176)
Can the State be an agency for reforms? Clearly it can, as the historical record shows. But it would be foolish to think it is with equal intensity at all times. Is this the time when reform is part of the potential agenda? What are the conditions of reform? There are two obvious ones. The first seems to be when the State is obliged to reform for fear of something worse (a question we will return to). Another is when the State’s revenue is buoyant so it has greater capacity to increase expenditure on worthwhile things. This second condition is lacking today; the slump, flat profit rates, squeezes the State’s capacity to reform. Thus, it might seem, the serious reformer must pay attention to raising the State’s financial capacity to reform that is, undertake measures to restore profit rates and so, buoyant public revenues.
The particular features of the present time do not receive searching examination, although John Harrison (the Left opponent of Alternative Economic Strategies) remarks that revolution is easier in present circumstances than reform simply because of the nature of the times:
‘It would be harder to implement a radical Alternative Economic Strategy than a fuller take over. In fact, it would be damned near impossible.’ (p. 126)
Some contributors embrace the belief that a reorganisation of the State and its relationship to companies can overcome the underlying economic problem. The ‘planning agreement’ at times comes to bear the magic of a wand. But the magic unfortunately varies also with the profit rate: with more profits, there might be more agreements; with less, companies are forced to fight for their survival. Then someone must decide who is in control: as Harrison asks:
‘Who decides when agreement cannot be reached? Capital or government? Who has real control?’
If the hypothetical government’s grip on business is slippery, what of labour? There is much loose talk of ‘industrial democracy,’ forms of organisation to mediate controls. David Lipsey (the Right opponent of the Alternative Economic Strategy) is no less brutal than Harrison:
‘Either the (National Planning – NH) Commission will tell the workers what to produce, in which case they are not behaving democratically. Or the workers will tell them what they will produce, in which case there is precious little planning.’ (p.113)
If the State is a weak reed for the reformers, they need a force capable of obliging the State to reform. But that logic goes in the opposite direction to the inclinations of many of the contributors. Of course, all are inclined at lagging moments in the drama to wheel in the secret weapon from the wings the ‘working class’. But it is play, a character without flesh, hypothetical. MacLennan notes regretfully that the Alternative Economic Strategy seems to be ‘something devised by the big battalions, institutions like the Labour Party or the TUC’. (p. 103)
Or, more accurately, not devised by, but devised for, by outsiders seeking to influence the ‘big battalions.’ Yet the big battalions cannot remain enamoured simply with good ideas for reform; they have to worry about the survival of the ‘British economy,’ which brings us back to the unpleasant problem of the level of profits.
There is one sad little piece by Owen Jones that pleads for a larger role for ‘working people’ in the Strategy. But, regrettably, the piece collapses into a plea to sugar the Strategy pill it needs to:
‘offer concrete advances (to workers – NH) while simultaneously promoting a sense of hegemony amongst working people.’
Leaving aside the hint of ‘economism’, much deplored by other contributors, the last proposal smacks of persuading workers that they can ride the horse without actually doing any riding.
The ‘working class’ is a myth for the contributors beside the well-trodden paths of economic analysis and speculation. Indeed, apart from wanting to do workers good and talk of ‘industrial democracy’, there does not seem to be much that is socialist about the volume at all. All too often the issue of power fades into ‘opening up space for socialist, and feminist ideas and greater equalitarianism to flourish’ (Gardiner and Smith, p. 39). Hearts and minds may run society, not capital; and even if they don’t, the Left can find some corner to hide.
The harder people keep their eye firmly on the State. Here the elasticity of language allows the ‘abolition of capitalism’ to merge imperceptibly in ‘the defence of capitalism’, just as it did between 1945 and 1951. Then a Labour Government, in order to ‘abolish capitalism’, implemented a programme which was a diluted version of one put forward by Harold MacMillan in 1938 with the intention of protecting capitalism. In 1964, Harold Wilson borrowed the same bag of tricks. Then the fight for reforms becomes a means of recruiting the Left for the defence of established society. Meanwhile, the struggle for socialism goes on.
 



I am most grateful to the editor of this journal for allowing me
to comment on Phil Marfleet’s review of my recent book in International Socialism 101 (Winter 2003). It is bad taste to comment
on a review of one of one’s works, but since Phil is – like a few
other SWP members – an old friend, it would be discourteous not to
note his hard work and his stout defence of the faith. It is also an
unexpected pleasure, as a former editor of this journal’s immediate
ancestor, to contribute to your discussions. Phil has misconstrued
some things, but has got much of my case right. I list some points:
 
The context: a little history
In the spring of 1960, when Tony Cliff and Michael Kidron with a
small group of us started the first series of International
Socialism, it had a subtitle, Journal of Socialist Theory.
By implication, what passed for socialist theory – after the
ravages of Stalinism and the successive dilutions of social democracy
– was quite inadequate for an understanding of the modern world,
let alone for undertaking action that connected aims and strategy.
Without constant reconnection between aims and a rapidly changing
world, theory easily became a set of quasi-religious mantras,
esoteric marks of group identity rather than guides to action – and
the history of Trotskyist sects is sadly replete with too many examples.
Tony Cliff began this reconstruction of theory in his application
of the concept of state capitalism to Russia, Eastern Europe and
China, and his rejection of Trotsky’s absurd idea of a ‘degenerated
workers’ state’. Mike Kidron set out to understand why world
capitalism, characterised before the Second World War as apparently
in permanent stagnation (in Trotsky’s 1938 Transitional
Programme, the epoch was one of war and mass unemployment) was in
the 1950s expanding with unprecedented speed (and far from mass
unemployment, was sucking workers in from the rest of the world). His
answer turned upon unprecedented levels of peacetime arms spending,
lowering the organic composition of capital and thus offsetting the
tendency of the rate of profit to fall, a thesis later absorbed into
his idea of permanent waste in the system.
However, more important in my view was his analysis of foreign
investment in India and the transition from the old order of
capitalism, imperialism (identified in his last unpublished
manuscript as ‘middle capitalism’, between the primitive
accumulation phase and the present order), with a built-in
competitive drive to the expropriation and incorporation of
territory. By 1960 that drive had largely gone into reverse and
decolonisation was all the rage. In his work on India he identified –
in my view, with remarkable prescience – the transition to a
post-imperial order, ‘world capitalism’. He showed that much of
what we identified as essentially capitalist – for example, the
size of firm and its relationship to the state – was in fact only a
feature of the old order. In the new order that was emerging, he
found what we were to describe a decade or more later as
‘multinational corporations’ which did not depend on any one
state but related to many states.
In the second half of the 1960s, with a radical transformation of
the political scene, IS turned to building a party, to intervene in
events rather than analyse them. Mike Kidron, already identifying the
green movement as the most appropriate spearhead of radical social
change in the current phase of the system (a commitment most fully
worked out in his final manuscript in the 1990s), reacted to the
proposal to transform IS into a revolutionary party as characteristic
of the old order of capitalism, imperialism and the centralised
fusion of state and capital. He left IS to service the new radical
movement through publishing. However, he continued some work and
seems to have remained fascinated as late as 1977 by the dominant
role of the state in modern capitalism, the onward march of state
capitalism [2], a view in my opinion justly reproved by Chris Harman
for omitting the phenomenon of globalisation. By contrast, I had gone
in the opposite direction, believing that globalisation would wash
away the foundations of state capitalism and privatise the state, a
thesis explored in my current book. But in the end Mike completed his
project, in the 1990s, in his unpublished manuscript. [3]
However, the purpose of this little excursus is not to indulge an
old man’s sentimental reminiscing, but to indicate that the
founders of this journal saw the bold critical rethinking of theory,
with the overall objective of the self-liberation of the working
class and of humanity, as crucial for action. Much of Phil’s
self-righteous indignation seems to be directed at any such
enterprise. Like those Muslims who believe that the whole of useful
human knowledge is already incorporated in the Koran, Phil
seems to imply that everything we need to know is already known.
I started my work from the accelerating globalisation of the 1980s
and 1990s, propelled initially by trade, then by capital movements,
and now by services and the migration of labour. The work Phil
reviews is the fifth book [4] trying to understand the implications
of globalisation for our theoretical inheritance. In many of these
earlier works I dodged what was apparently the inadequacy of the
traditional Marxist view of the relationship between private capital,
business and the state, merged in the single concept, capitalism.
Globalisation, however, glaringly exposes this inadequacy, and
reveals just how narrowly national the analysis of Marx and the
Marxists has been – with the ‘international’ (relationships
between states) grafted on as an afterthought. Of course, we could
not have seen this in the heyday of a system then dominated by states
and national capitals, nor perhaps could we have seen that,
historically, those who wield the forces of physical coercion,
states, always dominate all other social forces, including capital
(not the other way round).
 
So what is ‘globalisation’?
It is, in my book, the tendency for the emergence of a single
world economy out of the national components of the old system.
Economic networks, political boundaries and citizenry come apart. It
is a blind process, driven by markets, not the intentions of the
participants. Governments, out of short term interests, sometimes
facilitate the process or are forced to do so; sometimes they fight
it, but even when they facilitate it, they do so with great
reluctance since they recognise that it undermines the forms of their
old domination over a clearly defined territory, a share of the
world’s population and of the world’s capital stock. Above all,
globalisation allows capital to escape the state, to go offshore –
the old national economy becomes a fragment of a global whole which
is ultimately outside the control of the state. There are a host of
ramifications which are the substance of my book.
If my formulation is correct, it transforms what we suppose is the
historic relationship between capital and the state. I was obliged to
re-examine the historical record. That was the point of my historical
introduction. I was not concerned with history in general, only a
narrow slice related to my theme. Phil does spend a lot of time on
the history and obviously feels more comfortable here, away from the
two thirds of the book which concerns the modern period. [5] He is
full of suggestions as to what I have left out, but it is all
irrelevant to my theme. [6] What Phil does not say is what, if
anything, globalisation means; perhaps he thinks it is a fashionable
falsehood got up by the chattering classes, and the real world is as
it was in 1960 or 1930 or whenever – capitalism is, as in some
religious doctrine, always the same and ever will be. He says, as my
book does, the relationship between capital and the state is
complicated, changing at different times, but on what it is now,
where history doesn’t help, he dodges the issue. But he gets cross
when I suggest that business has in general no more power over
governments than populations (though electorates can be pretty
decisive); that is the point of the Nazi example – German business
had nearly as little influence over the Nazis as the mass of ordinary
Germans but, again, he dodges the point.
 
Moralising
Phil says I allege that the state is ‘an incubus, an alien
force’ (I do not – this is his invention), and in Phil’s
Manichean world, ‘a struggle between good and evil’ (p. 135),
business is ‘innocent’. And then again (p. 137), I am
supposed to say that ‘commercial capital has an unblemished record’
(I don’t). In the middle of a Parmalat crisis, and just after
Enron, what can he be talking about? It seems that – like President
Bush – unable to argue, he must resort to moralising. [7] It allows
him, like an old lady faced with a flasher, to whip himself into a
lather of shock, horror and dismay. Yet we all know the business
class is full of crooks, thieves and rip-off artists, none of them
with an interest in globalisation or free trade if they can get their
noses in the trough of state contracts and monopolies or can rig the market.
What business does not generally do is direct the forces of
physical coercion, the terrifying remorseless brutality and
destruction that is normally the exclusive monopoly of the state.
These are Lenin’s ‘bodies of armed men’. Perhaps Phil thinks
otherwise and really it is Israeli businessmen who are killing
Palestinians, Yukos which is bombing Chechnya, Esso which is strafing
Afghans and Iraqis? By confusing the undoubted horrors of some forms
of exploitation with those of sheer physical slaughter and
destruction he is hiding the enemy – without saying why.
Later he lapses into invention again – I am supposed to believe
that if ‘only governments would understand’ (p. 141), they
would embrace globalisation. This is a staggering distortion – the
book is all about states fighting globalisation because it undermines
their power. He has completely missed the point. But I suppose if you
see the world in moral categories, a more complex case is difficult
to follow (witness George Bush again).
 
Reform and revolution
I am surprised Phil did not attack my argument that reformism
works. The millions of NGOs which, in every tiny detail of the
system, police, campaign, attack, sue, have had remarkable successes
even against the mightiest corporations. Phil is just grumpy – and
ungrateful – about this amazing affirmation of popular power, the
most spectacular political transformation of a globalising world.
More important, however, is the fact that capitalism has worked
and for the foreseeable future will continue to work, far more
spectacularly than anything expected in 1938 or lauded in The
Communist Manifesto. There is no space to lay out the evidence here
(and Phil dislikes facts). Suffice it to say that in 1870 the average
British person had an expectation of life of 41 (and the average
hours worked, 2,984 per year); in 2001, 78 (and 1,653 hours). In
developing countries, the change was very much more dramatic –
average expectation of life in India, 32 (1870 and 1950), now 66. And
the quality of life behind these figures, despite all the failures,
has improved at breathtaking speed over the past two decades.
Furthermore, poverty has decreased – the population said to be
living on less than $1 per day has fallen from 37 percent in 1970 to
29 percent in 1980 and 22 percent now. True, not enough, full of
hideous distortions and failures, but still fairly impressive. If you
can’t see a victory when it appears, how will you know when you’ve
been defeated? Did Phil not notice or is he wedded to the ancient
religious proposition that the end of the world is always nigh? In
the 1950s Tony Cliff had much fun mocking those Trotskyists who said,
because of what Trotsky said in 1938, that there was, contrary to all
appearances, mass unemployment and the Second World War had not ended.
However, there is also a conceptual argument as to why revolution
has become outdated. If globalisation has allowed capital to escape
the national state, then revolution in any one national component
will no longer capture the material foundations of that society. And
indeed, any post-revolutionary order will be bent to fit the
prevailing world material foundations. The whole revolutionary
project was national and has now fallen apart. More – and I am
surprised at Phil’s lack of rage at this account – classes were
not fashioned, I argue, in the relations of production, but in the
class struggle to conquer the central focus of national power, the
state. Thus, at the world level, there can be no class ‘for itself’
because there is no world state. Of course, there is a world ruling
class in itself, fractured between different states, corporations,
international agencies, but it cannot be a class for itself without a
state. Globalisation does not mean just scaling up to a world level.
Of course, many countries can only make progress if the local
state can be overthrown, and it will resist by force, making
revolution the only option. But this is no general case, and I prefer
to accept Marx’s 1872 observation that workers could gain their
ends in the advanced world without revolution. [8] If there’s
anyone left who remembers the origins of IS, Henry Collins was right. [9]
The state
Phil has again got it so wrong, the reverse of what I said. He
writes: ‘Harris believes that the state has always been
dysfunctional’ (p. 134). No, I don’t. The core argument of
the historical introduction, following Marx, is that the state played
an absolutely decisive role in forcing the accelerated accumulation
of capital. By implication, without the state, this process would
either not have occurred or have been immensely delayed. How could
Phil have missed this? It must be my opaque style. However, by the
20th century, in a different age, the competition of states
threatened, in two world wars, the very dissolution of the system and
of all capital.
 
The Third World
Phil thinks I believe that ‘if only such growth [of the 1950s
and 1960s] could be resumed, all would be well’. No, I don’t, and
there is no such suggestion in my book since it would be absurd. What
happened in this little corner of the Atlantic economy in those two
decades was tiny in comparison to the gigantic boom – far, far
bigger in terms of the numbers of people involved – that occurred
in the 1980s and 1990s. Was Phil asleep and missed it? Did he not
notice the spectacular growth of what we used to call the four little
tigers (Korea, Taiwan, etc.), the no less spectacular growth in South
East Asia (now resumed after the blip of 1997), followed by the quite
stupendous growth of China, making it now the third largest trading
power in the world. And now it seems, at long last, that India has
begun to grow. And yet just like Africa – well described by Phil –
these were all colonised (and China was wrecked). How do we explain
the extraordinary difference in recent history? But more important,
how could Phil have missed it? Or perhaps he thinks all those vast
square miles of factories in Guangdong or the Yangtze delta are a
bubble that will be pricked, that the mirage will disappear leaving
his archaic assumptions comfortably intact: in the beginning was the
faith and reality must never penetrate it.
And how does this change square with Phil’s amazingly archaic
picture of the Third World as the Congo writ large: ‘the
multinationals have made merry while hundreds of millions have been
pushed to the margins of survival’. It’s a fine picture, dated I
guess about 1966 in the heyday of dependency theory – the Third
World as a prostrate victim, savaged by predatory multinationals –
but a fantasy. Famine, savage perpetual civil war, crippling
corruption are all there – the only absentees are the
multinationals, off in Asia making profits (there are precious few of
those in Africa). Furthermore, as Mike Kidron argued so well in the
1960s, ‘Third Worldism’ – blaming everything on the foreigner,
imperialism, etc. – has the result of exonerating the local rulers.
If I may be allowed to emulate Phil’s style, he is quite shameless
in his defence of the Idi Amins, the Charles Taylors, the Kabilas,
the Mugabes who have so catastrophically wrecked Africa, with barely
any help from outside (apart from the provision of banking facilities
for the loot).
 
The future
The Asian example suggests that the economic stagnation of the
Third World was more exclusion than exploitation, being locked out
during the interwar economic crisis (and in the 1950s, making a
virtue of this exclusion with import substitution programmes). For
short term tactical advantages the leading powers opened the door a
little (while all the time trying to cheat), leading to this quite
unanticipated but momentous change, perhaps the most momentous since
the industrial revolution. It is set to continue and grow stronger
due to the conjuncture of a unique set of circumstances:

some 90 percent of the addition to the world’s labour
force will occur in developing countries over the next 20 to 30
years, at the same time as they will already have, for demographic
reasons, a great bunching of the population in the working age
groups;
 
in the developed world, the labour force, particularly the
younger workforce, again for demographic reasons, is set for radical
reduction, and the response will, in the medium term, mean major
worker migration flows;
 
the continuing massive investments in education in
developing countries will mean that the overwhelming bulk of the
world’s literate workers will be concentrated in developing
countries; [10]
 
technology will continue to facilitate the unbundling of
manufacturing and services, locating interdependent activities
worldwide wherever profits can be maximised;
 
with the almost complete mobility of capital, this would
suggest the relocation of most of the world economy to the
developing countries over the next half century – already we can
see what has happened in manufacturing in China, and now, in
outsourcing services to India (and these two alone account for
nearly a third of the world’s population).

But this transformation is only possible if the dominant powers do
not try to block the process. Poverty in the Third World is sustained
not by the multinationals, but by things like the EU Common
Agricultural Policy (which simultaneously robs European consumers,
especially the poor, and Third World exporters) or US subsidies to
its handful of cotton farmers, screwing two of the poorest – but
cotton-exporting – countries in the world, Mali and Mauritania.
In this enormous transition, between, say, 1970 and 2050, it is
markets which are reorganising the world’s economic geography, not
governments, much less those tiny international organisations which
arouse such ire (and so let governments off the hook). The WTO is an
arena for states to bargain dominated by the biggest states, not a
force in its own right, and even then there’s a strong argument
that it has had little effect on trade. [11] The IMF, for short term
external crises, has a greater role for some countries, but in
serious crises (Mexico, 1994; Argentina, 2001) only the US Treasury
has the muscle to intervene; again, the IMF is very small in the sum
of things, and there is evidence that it is fairly ineffective –
governments flout its conditions with impunity. In the end it is
governments which decide what to inflict on their citizens, but they
love to dodge responsibility by blaming the IMF (as Callaghan did in
Britain in the 1960s). As to the World Bank [12], the funds it
mobilises are tiny – $12 billion to $15 billion net per year, or
roughly equal to the cumulative debt of Parmalat (and compared to,
say, the $400 billion defence budget of the US or $200 billion daily
foreign exchange dealings in London); it is institutionally if not
financially corrupt (it is bent to suit the politics of the dominant
powers who run it, and to the interests of the borrowers). It is an
official body, i.e. non profit making public sector, and essentially
social democratic in stance, focusing its low interest loans
officially on reducing poverty and cutting defence spending (in
favour of health and education). Above all, it is ineffective, a
secret it tries to conceal at all costs. It is – compared to Chase
Manhattan, Citibank, Barclays and the rest – a pretty implausible
symbol of modern capitalism. Unlike them, the World Bank is
surrounded by an excellent army of NGO piranha fish, waiting to
pounce on its vitals with every error. Many people have argued,
because of its ineffectiveness, it should be abolished, and maybe it
will be – without anyone noticing.
If I am right about globalisation, it means the anti-globalisation
movement has its guns pointing in the wrong direction (although with
the second Gulf War the real enemies became clearer). The real
obstacles to progress are in the governments of the developed
countries who are not at all averse to turning people’s rage onto
the three international agencies, hiding their own decisive role
(with Clinton identifying with the Seattle anti-WTO demonstration,
Chirac with the anti-OECD demos). In this context Phil makes a very
important criticism of my book – that I failed to incorporate the
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. In fact, the manuscript was in the
press during these events, but a more general point is absolutely
correct. The dominant states may not continue to allow, as they have
so far, the peaceful redistribution of the world economy (with the
dismantling of their old national economies). In a system dependent
on popular voting, stimulating increased popular nationalism – with
a real anti-globalisation movement, focused on hitting immigrants and
asylum-seekers – may be the dominant states’ response to
declining economic leverage. Then politicians may seek by all means,
real and invented, to instil perpetual fear and insecurity in their
citizens, and a hatred of foreigners, spliced with periodic war
panics to rouse and cement support. In particular, the US, with its
unprecedented lead in military power, its terrified population and
new doctrines of unilateralism, has the capacity to seek to
substitute military and financial muscle for its declining economic
hold. If the newly emergent powers, China and India, do not concede,
then the next half century may see, not the development of the world,
but a determined stand to protect the old war-making state – with,
to rephrase Marx, ‘the common ruin of the contending states’.
The greatest impudence of the modern state was to insert in each
citizen’s mind a national identity that anchors loyalty to the
state in the psyche. Hitherto Marxists and others have barely had
significant success in weakening this, even though it is now
increasingly dysfunctional. The loyalty of Americans to Washington
could, in the coming period, spell disaster for us all.
At the end, I have my gravest doubts about Phil’s politics,
which seem to combine archaic theory, a kind of populist Marxism now
turned into faith, an absence of any connection with the current
system, and a bundle of moral postures (as a substitute for theory
and a way of indicating action), a position normally associated with
reformists. [13] Not that I expect to persuade readers of this
journal of my central theses and, after Phil’s comprehensive
rubbishing, no one is going to lash out on buying the book. But I am
grateful to him for giving me this opportunity to make some of my
points less opaque.

Notes
1. The title of Phil’s review, All Praise the Market!,
omits the obverse in the book, war. The entire account is about the
tension between markets and war, so to exclude one is a major
misrepresentation.
2. See M. Kidron, World Capitalism: Two Insights Don’t Make a Theory, and C. Harman, Better a Valid Insight Than a Wrong Theory, International Socialism 1 : 100 (July 1977), pp. 1–13.
3. Here nature and the human psyche become pivotal in an
identification of a system set upon auto-destruct.
4. Of Bread and Guns: The World Economy in Crisis (London 1983); The End of the Third World (London 1986); National
Liberation (London 1990); The New Untouchables: Immigration
and the New World Worker (London 1995); The Return of
Cosmopolitan Capital: Globalisation, the State and War (London 2003).
5. I noted the same tendency in my review of C. Harman’s A People’s History of the World (London 1999): Consolations
from the Past, Economic and Political Weekly (Mumbai), 3
June 2000, pp. 1911–1913.
6. The same goes for his odd reproach that I did not quote my book
on Mao’s China. Of what possible relevance would it be?
7. Which is appropriate when theory becomes mere faith. Phil
reproaches me for chiding Marx – when, I suppose, we should
restrict ourselves to genuflection and hosannas-without realising
that my entire book is an argument with Marx. And then, plaintively,
he laments, ‘Nowhere does he suggest an alternative to Marxism’
(p. 136). Now, as a lifelong freethinker, I don’t feel at all
confident to advise on matters of faith – I could say Buddhism or
Catholicism or whatever, but it would be unreasonably frivolous. But
why does Phil not copy Marx, escape faith and start thinking?
8. On the Hague Conference (a correspondent’s report of a speech made at a meeting in Amsterdam, 8 September 1872), K. Marx and
F. Engels, Collected Works, vol. 23 (London 1972), pp. 254–255.
9. The Case for Left Reformism, International Socialism
1 : 6 (Autumn 1961), and Rejoinder,
International Socialism 1 : 9 (Summer 1962). [Note by ETOL: Nigel Harris misremembers the title of the latter article, which was actually called Left Reformism Restated. The initial article provoked four “rejoinders”: (1) Rejoinder to Left Reformism, by Alasdair MacIntyre, International Socialism 1 6 (Autumn 1961); (2) Reform and Revolution: Rejoinder to Left Reformism II, by Michael Kidron, International Socialism 1 7 (Winter 1961); (3) Reform and Revolution: Rejoinder 1, by Ken Coates and  (4) Reform and Revolution: Rejoinder 2, by Peter von Oertzen, both in International Socialism 1 8 (Spring 1962).]
10. I am reminded of an offhand remark by Michael Kidron in the
1960s that we could never move on to socialism until all the world’s
peasants had become workers. At the time, it seemed absurd, but half
a century later, it seems almost within our grasp.
11. See A. Rose, Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases
Trade?, CEPR Discussion Paper.
12. I am hurt that Phil doesn’t think I’m up to being
corrupted under my own steam, only through association with – to
use his language – an evil organisation like the bank. I’ve also
worked for the British government, which, unlike the bank, strafes
Iraqi women and children, which in my view is far more morally
objectionable. On a more humorous note, with my first temporary
consultancy with the bank in the 1970s, I mentioned it to Tony Cliff
who replied as I expected, with a grin, that he didn’t care a hoot
who I worked for – ‘After all, Engels was a capitalist and we
didn’t expel him’. Of course, Tony would never play the childish
politics of moral posturing, but perhaps Phil expects different moral
standards of non SWP members.
13. If I’m right, it adds another twist to Tony Cliff’s
paradox, ‘The only good reformists are revolutionaries’ – but
they also become reformists.
 



DUNCAN Hallas is dead. Like most of us, he will not be remembered outside a small coterie of friends and comrades. But he was in many ways a man of remarkable talents whom it was a privilege to know. He was made – or made himself – for the great events of history, but history did not call him. His death is the end of an age, and those who mourn, mourn also the passing of that age and of themselves.
Duncan was born in 1925, perhaps of Irish mining stock. It was a different world in which the material reality of the nineteenth-century working class and its localities – the great working-class districts and slums of Glasgow, Manchester, Sheffield, Birmingham, East London – still existed: Welsh mining villages, back-to-backs in northern mill towns, steel mills, giant factories and docklands. They are all now swallowed up, their sharp and bitter teeth extracted, in the polite fictions of Coronation Street and a handful of nostalgic telly soaps (except that now there are few old enough to be nostalgic). On the land, a different army of impoverished labourers farmed with horses and pitchforks and lived in tied cottages, evicted when their work was no longer needed. Most people walked or cycled to work – car and air transport were for the rich. Few travelled much beyond the locality where they were born or worked – except men and women who went to war or emigrated. The wireless was brand new and still rare. There were no fridges, no television, no computers or credit cards, few telephones or bathrooms, outside lavatories were still the norm. It had become a world of seemingly perpetual war between countries and classes. Above all, the working class was a massive and palpable reality; its armies, organised in giant unions, seemed a force so great and growing, they could never be defeated. Their sheer massiveness was mirrored in giant places of work, and the institutions of the state – they seemed solid, immovable, eternal.
Of course, it was already partly illusion. Half a century before, when those institutions of the working class were still being built, Marx had become uncomfortably aware that the more organised and powerful the working class became, the more realistic became the objective of the self-emancipation of the working class, and the more its leaders came to temper revolutionary rhetoric with doing practical deals with the status quo, with reformism. And only 10 years before Duncan’s birth, the outbreak of war had shown that Europe’s organised working class had feet of clay. The Second International not only could not stop Europe’s ruling classes going to war, they did not want to, and they positively exulted – so it seemed – in the opportunity afforded each national working class to slaughter the other. Nor, a year after Duncan’s birth, could the brave and massive British organised labour movement defeat the government in the General Strike.
Nonetheless, for a working-class boy, growing up in one of the strongholds of organised labour, Manchester in the 1930s, the organised working class would have a material, not, as for many of us later, a hypothetical, reality. It could not fail to impress. He seems to have been prematurely conscious of the political world – he remembered being aware of the 1935 General Election (and the stunning defeat of the Labour Party), of the Spanish Civil War and the Abyssinian crisis. He was the child of a municipal employee, a paver, and his mother (born Edith Cretney) worked in a mill (starting, as he said, at the age of 10; his grandmother started at eight). The family were at some stage rehoused out of the slums (not so different from those described by Engels 70 years earlier) into the brand new Manchester council estate of suburban-style semi-detached dwellings of Wythenshawe (70 Sale Road). If Duncan was aware, it was again a massive demonstration of the power of the working class and of municipal socialism. It is now, once more, a slum, smelling of poverty and degradation. The housing, when new, may well have been a major upgrading for the inhabitants, but it could still conceal poverty. The Hallas family at some stage fell on hard times, and there is talk of chopping up the furniture to warm themselves in winter.
Working-class children in those days were usually excluded from the institutions of education beyond the age of 14, an exclusion which created, among some of them, a lifelong thirst – and respect – for learning. Through their lifetimes, they built up amazing libraries covering an immense diversity of subjects, from geology to the speculations of the utopian socialists. Of course, after the 1944 Education Act, many of their children were lifted out to go into higher education and into the middle classes. But Duncan missed that and left school at 14 in 1939, the year of the outbreak of the Second World War. By then, his self-education had already begun and was to continue for the rest of his life. That life-long passion gave his adult life an unmatched authority – his knowledge could match the best in the land even if he retained to the end the accent and style of his origins. His identity, rooted in Wythenshawe, never wavered.
Duncan became an engineering apprentice, joining the ‘aristocracy of labour’ in another great fortress of working-class power, the giant Metro-Vickers engineering plant in Trafford Park. It had produced some of the iron giants of organised labour, from Hugh Scanlon of the Amalgamated Engineering Workers Union to Harry Pollitt of the Communist Party. At the age of 14 in 1939, he joined the Young Communist League. It was the year of the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact between Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia, for many the unequivocal sell-out by Moscow and its flotilla of dependent communist parties abroad. However, it was a brief liaison. On day-release to the Engineering Apprentices College in 1940, at the age of 15, he shopped for left-wing pamphlets, and outside the shop he met a woman, Rachel Ryan, selling Socialist Appeal, the publication of the Trotskyist Workers International League. He joined. He made the wager, no doubt, with that careless courage of which usually only the young are capable, as if, like cats, they had nine lives and could afford to lose half-a-dozen before worrying about mortality (as clear for Duncan as for the stunning courage of the Palestinian suicide bombers). But it carried him through his entire life. The sheer dazzling power of the word is nowhere grander than for Trotskyism, where the paltry means to do anything are so ill-matched to its gigantic historical ambitions. In 1944, the very tiny WIL was absorbed into the slightly less tiny, but short-lived, Revolutionary Communist Party.
Duncan can hardly have absorbed much before the Second World War summoned him to the slaughter of the young and brave of Europe. For many young working-class men, it was the most inspiring event of their lives. Duncan obeyed the RCP line which was to follow the workers into the armed forces and continue agitation there. He joined the infantry, the First South Lancashire Regiment, and served in France, Belgium and Germany. There is some talk that he was at Caen at the Normandy landing, was wounded in the leg, and grieved at the terrible task of killing young German workers. He became a marksman, proud of his capacity to shoot well with a lifelong passion for, and knowledge of, guns, a stout defender of the unpopular – and American – doctrine of the absolute right of the free citizen to bear arms. A lifetime later, he used to keep his shotgun at our cottage in Suffolk so that he could assault the innocent pigeons.
In 1944, word came that his mother was ill, and he was released to return to Manchester to find her already dead. Years later, in his cups, he would weep for the mother who faced such hardships to bring up Duncan and his sister, Margaret. This was perhaps the first great emotional crisis in his life. In later years, he rarely mentioned his family, apart from his great attachment to his mother, for his life was single-mindedly consumed by politics. His sister emigrated to New Zealand, and he lost all contact with her. Of his father he spoke little, although there is one story that a floating cable sliced off part of his face as he was riding his motorbike and sidecar.
Duncan was a corporal when the regiment, instead of being demobbed, was drafted – to its general outrage – to Egypt to hold down the restless natives and keep it British. He served in barracks in Cairo and Alexandria, and in tents in the Suez Canal Zone. He regularly sold the RCP paper, no doubt to the fury of his officers, the Military Police and intelligence services. He became a sergeant when the mutiny, demanding immediate demobilisation and not the defence of Empire, reached Egypt. It spread from the Royal Air Force in India. He must have been overjoyed at his first – and spectacular – opportunity to be effective. That episode earned him three months in military prison. But when he emerged, there was such a chronic shortage of good sergeants that he was immediately reinstated. As he told the story years later, with gales of laughter, he was even made military police sergeant on the ship coming back to Britain.
He returned to Metro-Vickers, to engineering and daily life with the RCP. That lasted until 1948 when, with the inevitability of Trotskyist sects, the RCP wrecked itself into three fragments on the contradiction between an obdurate reality and Trotsky’s predictions of 1938 – that the Soviet Union would not survive the war without a proletarian revolution, and that postwar capitalism was set for a return to the long-term irredeemable slump and stagnation of the interwar years. Duncan had already earned a name for being a ferocious anti-Stalinist (so ferocious, some of his comrades thought of him as right-wing and pro-American), so it was obvious that he would go with those who regarded Russia as state capitalist, grouped around the Jewish immigrant from Palestine, Ygael Gluckstein, known as Tony Cliff. The tiny Socialist Review Group, of which Duncan was a founder member, was the forerunner of the International Socialists and the Socialist Workers Party. He wrote in almost every issue of the group’s paper, Socialist Review.
But, as he put it, making weapons and panels for military aircraft deadened a mind now enriched with immense reading and lifted by the broader experience of war (and mutiny). Friends from that time remember the brilliant talk – of the Assyrians, of the Oriental Mode of Production, of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire. Despite leaving school at 14, he had now attained the capacity to teach. Through the good offices of another party comrade, Jock Haston, working for the TUC, he was appointed as teacher and organiser in east Scotland for the National Council of Labour Colleges, under the direction of a right-winger, J.P.M. Millar. He moved to Edinburgh in 1953, and stayed with the NCLC until he was sacked for excessive outside political activity in 1957.
Before that, a major formative event in his life occurred. At a Labour League of Youth weekend rally at Butlin’s Holiday Camp in Filey, he met Irene Gosling, a beautiful and talented young woman in her early 20s. They were both active in the Salford Labour Party. She must have brought out in him his immense resources of affection, of kindliness and sensitivity, his capacity – so vital in a teacher – to explain everything with care, starting from precisely wherever the listener was. He was, by all accounts, dynamic, energetic and, as Irene’s sister said wistfully years later, devastatingly handsome. They married in 1950, and set up house in Crumsall in Manchester. They honeymooned in what must have been for them then a deliriously exotic although still heavily war-torn Paris. They went to Paris the following year too, and Duncan met a host of people on the left (including, it is said, Sartre), in between consuming prodigious amounts of film, drama and café life. He was at this stage a voracious reader of novels, Dos Passos, Jack London and the other American greats. Back in Manchester, the couple resumed the incessant feverish pace of daily life, the writing, reading and speaking. Then they moved to Edinburgh, and Duncan became a teacher in workers’ education. But Irene made it possible that Duncan might have had, in addition to all this, a normal life.
It was not to be. Irene was peculiarly vulnerable, fragile. At 16, her mother had died, and six months later, she came down one morning to find her father had hanged himself. Indeed, perhaps she and Duncan bonded so well because both were orphans, both had the same emotional need. Whether these terrible events in Irene’s teens precipitated the psychiatric crisis of her time in Edinburgh, we do not know; psychiatry in those days was less sensitive than today. Prestwick Hospital in Edinburgh seems to have done her little good, and she was taken back to Manchester in 1957 where psychiatric care was said to be better. Duncan visited her several times, but Irene was now silent, immured in a private anguish that could not be reached, and she would remain so for much of the rest of her life.
This was perhaps the second, and by far the greatest, emotional crisis in Duncan’s life. It must have been a shattering and barely tolerable experience for him. Ever afterwards, he remained peculiarly hypersensitive to the problems of psychiatric vulnerability. But the tragedy cut him loose from the moorings, the anchorage, of ordinary life. He became exclusively a political bachelor, obsessed with the feverish pace of daily life and the great political issues of the time, to the exclusion of normality, of owning things and a decent living environment. He developed the indifference to these material things of the saint or the communist or the vagrant, an indifference to where he slept or where he lived. Most of his income was now devoted to the political task in hand. Stan Newins remembers going up to see him in Edinburgh on his motorbike (with Tony Cliff on the back) after Irene had returned to Manchester; the drains were blocked, but Duncan, a skilled engineer, had neither time nor patience to unblock them. The talk, the reading, the scribbling rolled on while the washing-up piled up in the sink and the lines of mugs, dark stained with tannin and half-filled with cold tea and fag ends, and the saucers with more fags stubbed out, marched up the draining board. It was a style of life – so similar to middle-class drop-outs – likely to horrify any decently brought-up working-class girl.
He continued to be active in the SRG, and helped create the Edinburgh chapter of the Socialist Fellowship to oppose the Korean War. Then the Suez Canal War, the Hungarian Revolution and Khrushchev’s speech to the Twentieth Congress of the Soviet Communist Party broke the spell of the Cold War and the fossilised Stalinism of the left. At last there was a chink in the armour of established society on both sides of the Iron Curtain. It seemed there might be an end to the awful intellectual oppression of the Second World War and the years that had followed, and of the marginalisation and silence enforced on the revolutionaries. Stalinism had imposed an awful intellectual mangling on Trotskyism, despite the best intentions. Now there was a new young audience, desperate to learn from the ancients as to how all these horrors had come about. It was a giddy and heroic time, bliss to be young at such a dawn. The New Left, fashioned out of the best of a group of former Communist Party intellectuals and a new generation, not only rediscovered Marx and his unknown early writings (the famous 1844 manuscripts), they rediscovered – courtesy of the splendid historian, Isaac Deutscher, whose three-volume biography of Trotsky was published then – the tragic hero of Leon Trotsky. It seemed suddenly as though Trotsky’s time had come; the little Trotskyist boat, so long becalmed in the side channels of history or pitilessly persecuted by Moscow and the combined forces of the communist parties and the social democrats, might now at long last escape and reach the broad waters of history.
Duncan threw himself both into creating the New Left in Scotland (and particularly, the Glasgow and Edinburgh Forums) and trying to pull together what was left of the Trotskyist fragments. The NCLC, understandably enough, resented paying a salary for this, and sacked him. He decided, with a small government stipend and the earnings from outside work, to rectify one of his great regrets and go to university. In 1961, he graduated from Edinburgh with a first in chemistry, and was offered a postgraduate place at Manchester. He turned it down to become a schoolteacher in the south. But before that he linked to a girl from Birmingham, visiting her sister in Edinburgh, Jenny MacArthur. She was herself psychiatrically fragile, but they moved together down to Wandsworth and set up house. The relationship lasted until 1968.
By then, however, Duncan had emerged as a magnificent leader of the rank-and-file teachers of Wandsworth. At last, his immense talents as a speaker and political leader – his authority, founded upon his prodigious knowledge, his debating strength, his sense of tactics (founded upon his detailed reading of the historical record) – were being seriously engaged, no doubt to the horror of the leadership of the National Union of Teachers. Had he been willing to bend, like so many of his working-class contemporaries with any talent, he might well have been propelled in the fullness of time into high office in the union and from there to the Labour benches in Parliament and finally then, to ermine cap and gown of Lord Hallas of Wythenshawe. Fortunately for his self-respect (and our great benefit), he remained obdurately true to the wager he made at 14, and scorned both the undoubted comforts of the route to the top and those who did not remain true to their wager.
He returned to his original home and joined the Balham branch of the SWP (or IS, as it then was), almost immediately joining the national leadership. It is said that when he rejoined, he offered the party two-thirds of his salary as subscription but was refused. He joined the IS at a special time. There were remnants of the intellectually innovative thinkers and thinking of the early 1960s still remaining, led by Michael Kidron, undoubtedly the most brilliant member ever of the SWG tradition (and among the most brilliant of the followers of Leon Trotsky which, in the 1930s, contained a galaxy of stars), married to both a new young cadre coming out of the rebellion of the universities then and a mature working-class cadre with solid roots in the organised labour movement, the best of whom, like Duncan and Jim Higgins, were now in the national leadership. For Duncan, it must have been the realisation of a dream – the first real opportunity for Trotskyism since the 1920s. That absurd wager, the heroic gamble he made when he was 14, seemed at last to becoming credible.
His 27 years in the SWP – he retired in 1995 – were perhaps his happiest, assuaging a little the tragedy of his loss of Irene. He had a secure political and intellectual framework within which his knowledge and his authority were put to best use. A lifetime of preparation – the long period of wandering in the wilderness – was now to come into its own and to be fully exploited. The SWP was now big enough to employ people with Duncan’s talents, and even though it was still a small stage, there seemed never to have been such high hopes.
He remained in the national leadership for the rest of his working life, a tireless speaker and writer with weekly contributions, masterly editorials and articles in Socialist Worker, in Socialist Review, and in the journal he edited for a time, International Socialism, as well as a stream of pamphlets and booklets. In 1969, he was briefly National Secretary. It was brief because he proved a hopeless administrator, and he was moved in 1972 to being ‘Political Secretary’, a post specially invented for him.
But it was in public debate, before the giant audiences and rallies of those days, that he was at his most brilliant (and it is surely most appropriate that his Canadian comrades should remember him with a CD of his 10 greatest speeches). Of course, to say he was an ‘orator’ would be impertinent. Not for him the rounded mellifluous cadences of a Churchill, let alone the enraged prose of Enoch Powell. Duncan’s strength was in a plain republican style, honed before the mirror in the morning bathroom. His speeches were remarkable for clarity, precision and consistency, without frills or pretensions – and for a solid non-conformist northern Englishness. In the great debates of those giddy days (now returning once again), he led the charge, and to the delight of us all, invariably laid waste the challengers. Even in the small events this was true. I remember a gang of us driving to Paris to negotiate collaboration with Lutte Ouvrière; they were a hard bunch of old-style Trotskyists. Immediately, they launched a heavy artillery bombardment upon our positions – we had scandalously betrayed proletarian principle by promoting that petit-bourgeois MP, Bernadette Devlin. We scattered in panic, searching desperately for any miserable hole in which to hide amid a blaze of shells, only to be astonished amid the smoke and confusion to see Duncan, for all the world like some latter-day incarnation of an imperial red-coated VC of the Brigade of Guards, marching into the enemy lines, steely-eyed with bayonet fixed, ready to smite all the unrighteous.
Or take a grander occasion, the pretentiously-named Debate of the Decade. Duncan was not even on the platform, which was divided between the Labour left (Wedgwood Benn, Audrey Wise, Stuart Holland) and the revolutionaries (Tariq Ali, Paul Foot and a third I have now forgotten), with the now Right Honourable Peter Hain in the chair (but not the now Right Honourable Lord Gus MacDonald, then an SWP Glasgow militant). After the great and the good on the platform had spoken, a forest of hands were raised to speak. At last, by dint of sheer persistence, Duncan was awarded his two minutes. I can see him now, leaning slightly forward with his hands on his hips like that picture of Lenin at the Finland Station. There was not a sound as he spoke – ‘Comrades! There are three points here – One…; Two…; Three…’ It was masterly, riveting tour de force. He sat down to tumultuous applause. He sliced through the guff with unerring accuracy. Of course, mere words never win real battles, then or now, but it raised our spirits no end to have won the skirmish if not the battle or the war.
And there were women, a moment of warmth and comfort amid the ceaseless activity. Duncan was amazingly gentle and caring, the model for a good husband and a father. But as he aged, the women were increasingly too young as if he endlessly searched for an Irene who had never aged. They lasted a time and passed on, and then at a certain point, ceased.
The period between the May events in Paris in 1968 and the mid-1970s (before Mrs Thatcher delivered the coup de grace from 1979) proved, not as we had all hoped, the beginning of a triumphal march to revolution and universal liberation, but rather the last grand flaring up of the old politics of the old labour movement, of the old working class and its ideals whether communist or social democrat. And what was a brilliant rebirth, rediscovery, of Marxism, faded with exactly the material foundations that had given rise to it. It was like Marx on the Paris Commune (although that was a much grander affair and ended in a terrible bloodbath) – he said it was the first herald of the arrival of a mass industrial working class and its politics of self-liberation, socialism. But it wasn’t. It was the last dying spasm of the old politics of the French Revolution, of the Jacobins, of small urban craftsmen and the poor. Something similar happened with the Russian Revolution. It also was not the herald of proletarian socialism in Germany and the advanced capitalism of Western Europe. If it was a herald at all, it was of the great national revolutions of the Third World, of China, of Vietnam and Cuba (with a leadership drawn from the intelligentsia and a rank and file from the peasantry, a force far closer to the politics of Bakunin than of Marx). How we did addle our brains on long sleepless nights trying to square the circle and discover a Chinese industrial working class hidden in the entrails of the Chinese Communist Party just so that the absurd theory could preserve its immaculate conception.
Organisations acquire a life of their own, independently of their rationale or purpose. The methodology might be straightforward, as it is with people who claim to follow the traditions of Marxism – we act on our theory and draw lessons from our successes and failures to guide future practice. But it is painful to admit to being wrong, and the instinct to preserve the organisation by refusing to admit failure usually takes priority (especially for governments). But we were wrong on so many things. The fact that there never had been a revolution in any advanced capitalist country (let alone a working-class one) nor anything close to it (pace war-wrecked Germany in the early 1920s) was dismissed as the result of the wicked ‘betrayal’ of the leaders of the workers, not the immovable lack of revolutionary feeling in the working class; reality thus made the aim of revolution here utopian. All the evidence suggested that the likelihood of a proletarian revolution here was as strong as that of the Second Coming. In the desperate search for revolution of any kind, we abandoned the industrial working class for the more backward countries – and were again wrong again, as in Portugal, as in Southern Africa (Rhodesia, Apartheid). And then most grandly in the Soviet Union. Indeed, the theory of Permanent Revolution, Trotsky’s triumph, never seemed to have worked. In a desperate struggle to avoid the mortal sin of sell-out, betrayal of the true faith, we adhered to the heroic language even if reality irritatingly diverged. But without test, theory degenerated into false consciousness, religion, faith; or as with Stalinism or Maoism, a decorative façade for actions decided on other unannounced grounds. In practice, the Trotskyists were the best of the radical reformists, albeit burdened with a bizarre doctrine that we opposed reformism and were doing everything for some revolution. In an ideal world, we should have drawn our absurd theory into consistency with our practice and dispelled this strange ‘Marxism’ (as opposed to learning something useful from some of the writings of Marx). Then we could have settled on the tasks of reformism where the prospects were not at all as ridiculous as they were for revolution. We usually forgot the old man: ‘No social order ever appears before the productive forces for which there is room have been developed.’ Could anyone doubt that capitalism is far from having reached its limits as it extends development to the limits of the world (and still there is Africa to go), as one after another, giant innovations – now IT, then biotechnology and so on – rush with ever-increasing speed to transform our way of life? There may be centuries to go. The ‘Marxists’ had grafted on to the works of the old man a Christian – or Judaic – sense of the immanent Apocalypse, the Second Coming. And we were endlessly disappointed when, yet again, it failed. In the early days, it was still possible to say such things – I remember Michael Kidron saying with a sigh that there would not be a revolution until the world had got rid of all these peasants.
Whether Duncan ever entertained any of these heresies before the old world collapsed, we cannot now know (he would never have been shocked by them or hiss in his teeth like Chris Harman). He had suspended disbelief as we all had. But in a more limited sense, perhaps some such thoughts occurred to his inspiration, Tony Cliff. The successive defeats of the great legions of organised labour – the miners, the printers, the dockers and so on, and the painful contraction of the others, the railwaymen, the steel workers, etc. – could not help but raise doubts about the old agenda. In the early 1970s, long before the picture was blindingly clear to all, perhaps there were doubts. Mrs Thatcher did not come to power until 1979, and when she did, the old labour movement had been so hollowed out by restructuring, by de-industrialisation, it had no fight, it was a paper tiger. All that remained were the proud titles, brave banners and an heroic past. Privatisation only delivered the death knell. The millions had gone to early retirement or obedience, their children into dot-com. The cultural origins of the working class were not now in the back-to-backs or Welsh mining villages, but in Jullundur, Jamaica, Lagos or Karachi.
Did Tony Cliff sense this? He always had an unrivalled nose for where society was going before society ever dreamed of it, even if this peasant shrewdness failed to be able to explain why the line must be changed now and immediately. Mike Kidron was even better. I remember him saying, years earlier, when, to universal mourning, he left the SWP, that we should scrap all this archaic nonsense about revolutionary parties and the working class; the cutting edge of future social change was with the Greens (a doctrine to which he remained loyal to the present and his large book is just about due to hit the bookstands). This was not for Duncan. He was, unlike Cliff, at his strongest only working within a codified tradition, although he could fully appreciate the genius of new thoughts in other people (like Kidron or Cliff). But he was suspicious of Cliff’s mercurial inventiveness (and, you might say, as some did, thorough unreliability), with his congenital inability, until long after the event, to explain and justify the need for change.
Perhaps, as early as 1970, Cliff was beginning to sense the implications of de-industrialisation, the audience slipping away into retirement homes, and the need to find a new clientele. Perhaps he never said – as the opposition maintained – that the shop stewards and rank-and-file movement were going and the SWP needed to find a new cadre of youth outside the old structures, but he roused in what was becoming the old guard of the SWP a furious defence of the old agenda. Duncan with his roots solidly in the old working class, in the ‘organised labour movement’ could not fail to oppose Cliff. Indeed, Jim Higgins (and he was not necessarily the most reliable source) later said Duncan had been among those most embittered by Cliff’s betrayal of the tradition, like Mao’s embrace of the Red Guards against the party establishment, ‘those in positions of authority within the party taking the capitalist road’ (by then – 1974 – of course, Mao had shut down the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution and viciously suppressed the poor Red Guards). Much of the best of the old SWP cadre, the experienced working-class leaders and the intellectuals – Jim Higgins, Roger Protz, John Palmer, the Birmingham engineers and so on – felt equally betrayed. Higgins, as National Secretary, was peremptorily dismissed, but dug in obstinately with Roger Protz as editor of Socialist Worker. There was panic, alarm and confusion among the membership at large. Cliff could not dislodge his opponents so he conjured up the barons of the north – the SWP strongholds in Liverpool, Newcastle, Glasgow, Manchester, etc. Ironically, these were what were left of the old northern working class, now in unlikely alliance with young zealots of the south led by the old magician from Palestine. Most of us in the leadership were bewildered, rooted from our beginning in the politics embodied in Hallas and Higgins, but knowing Cliff’s genius for sensing trends ahead of us all and knowing that, even if the opposition won, they would never rebuild a new SWP out of the fragments left behind by the split. We were given only one wager, and if it failed, we could not start again. We suspended disbelief and voted for Cliff. With the benefit of hindsight, we can see that Cliff was about the future, the opposition about the past. Others said, wearily, that Trotskyism was born with a virus that never allowed it to get beyond a certain size before it shot itself in its foot. Yet others said it was all personality squabbles, so absurd in the light of the great ambitions.
In fact, it seemed – and one could not always trust the figures – that the organisation continued to grow and capture new areas of the rank and file. That made it even more bizarre to launch a split. Yet everybody knows that mere faith can for a long time defy reality. And if mere numbers vindicated an organisation’s theory, undoubtedly the Jehovah Witnesses – with 20 million members world-wide – would have the edge on anything the Trots ever achieved.
The opposition would not yield. The more messy the fight, the more Cliff dug his feet in until all his efforts were single-mindedly directed, not to persuading anyone, but to digging out Duncan, Jim and the rest, regardless of the cost to the organisation. In the end, Cliff and his supporters carried the day, and the opposition was expelled or left in rage. The famous old Trotskyist, Harry Wicks, who had met Trotsky in Copenhagen in the 1930s and whose blessing on the SWP had been a kind of Papal benediction, a laying on of hands, a recognition that the SWP were indeed rightful heirs of Leon Trotsky, went in disgust with Higgins and the International Socialist Organisation. But before the final catastrophe, Duncan had a long talk with Cliff, and decided to join him. He not only betrayed the politics of his past, he stabbed in the back his closest comrades.
After the split, many of those who had backed Cliff, the bright young newcomers, students of the 1960s and the working-class cadre, dropped out, tired of the failure. The heart for a time seemed to have gone out of the organisation, and it retreated into the theory of Cliff’s youth – none of the bold intellectual innovations of the 1960s survived. Cliff now seemed impatient of new thoughts, as if only endlessly-repeated dogma could hold the cadre together. I was dumped from the leadership by the new guard a year after the split, and was effectively out by 1980 (although, always loyal and not wishing to rock the boat, I did not formally break my link until 1987). My wager on the SWP tradition, two decades, had failed.
Was Duncan, approaching 50 now, taking his 30 pieces of silver, as Higgins and the rest said bitterly, or was he, like the rest of us, suspending disbelief and accepting that Cliff might be right and it was important to save the organisation? He never said, and the participants who might know are now beyond the grave. What we do know is that when Cliff died, Duncan wrote a most bizarre obituary. It was extraordinarily short, mentioned none of the remarkable achievements of Cliff, and made only the gnomic observation in passing that ‘Cliff had his idiosyncrasies. He always refused to learn to drive, but insisted on telling Chanie [his wife – NH] who was driving how to drive.’
Was this the third and final great emotional crisis of Duncan’s life? It was not now personal as it had been with his mother. Nor, with the second and Irene, one that shaped the rest of his emotional life. It was a crisis that fused his personal life with the great political task he set himself at 14, that gave the first warning that the working class had gone; the vehicle of revolution had been dismantled behind our backs.
The years that followed only brought further destruction of the old world and the ‘Marxism’ we had all believed. In 1989–90, to the shocked gaze of the world, an event entirely unanticipated by the Trotskyists (or by anyone else for that matter) occurred: the implosion of the Soviet Union, an even larger fortress, ‘the Socialist Third of the World’. And it occurred without serious challenge from the Russian working class, and certainly no opposition to the transition to Russian capitalism. Trotskyism was defined by the Soviet Union, and we all knew it could not be change without either a military coup or proletarian revolution. But, whatever the theoretical wriggling, there was neither, and the conceptual framework of 60 years was blown apart. It was not that Trotsky had made a mistake. It was that the entire conceptual framework that had produced the prediction collapsed like a house of cards, leaving the Trotskyists, you might say, following the Communist Manifesto, free at last to confront their very existence. The collapse was not with a bang for most Trotskyists – or any others (the Stalinists suffered more grievously) – but a whimper, since theory no longer disciplined perception or practice.
Less dramatic, the 1980s saw the beginnings of the amazingly swift development of the Third World (those of us who knew something about it had boldly said in the 1960s it was impossible before the world revolution took place – wrong again), and simultaneously the beginning of the supersession of national capital and the state by ‘globalisation’. And never before in the history of the system had it been so globally triumphant, so universal and so successful. Its prophets, let alone its opponents, were shocked, astonished at this unlikely outcome. Of course, Marx would have seen all this, not as a refutation of his analysis, but as a triumphant vindication. But then, unlike the ‘Marxists’, he took theory seriously.
Duncan was by now 65. Cliff and his followers, despite winning, had discovered no new mass revolutionary party of youth. The opposition, the ISO, had disappeared. And the new movement, bursting out globally with astonishing vigour and unprecedented numbers, had no interest in the narrow philistinism of the revolutionary party. It filled the NGOs in their thousands, perhaps millions. They were, if anything, anarchists and reformists. It was an extraordinary revival of opposition, now, to the world order. But it was all single issues, not a revolutionary platform, and they did not need the tedious scholasticism of ‘Marxism’, nor the self-appointed historical leadership and its centralised party discipline. Whatever Duncan’s thoughts on all this, he was silent. Still feverishly writing, travelling the length of the country and beyond to the far-flung satrapies of the SWP, speaking now less to the great meetings, more often to the tiny group in a pub in the pouring rain, drilling the cadre in the lessons of history. He was tireless, but he was loved. However, even when tired, he could not seek consolation, with his ‘Marxism’, like some old rabbi, lift his wrinkled eyes to the sun and say: ‘See you in Jerusalem next year.’ His mind was still razor sharp, an uncompromising, unflinching class warrior. But his body was decaying. Severe arthritis and circulatory problems, made worse by a lifetime of gargantuan drinking and chain-smoking, increasingly made it difficult to walk, and obstructed his punishing regime of work. At the SWP centre, he was still a calming and kindly influence over the wilder young who saw crisis around every corner.
Increasingly he retired into solitude, into silence, despite all his friends. It was perhaps a silence imposed on his parents and their parents by the sheer demands for courage, the tight lip, required in two World Wars and a Great Depression. Around him, younger generations, the children he and Irene never had, chattered of a different agenda – ecology, feminism, gay rights, poverty in the Third World (the place where revolution of whatever colour was still so often urgently needed – in China, in Egypt, in Pakistan, in Iraq and so on). The young bypassed the terrible thickets of ‘Marxism’ and the revolutionary party that waylaid our generation.
What did Duncan make of all this, and how did he reconcile it with his lifelong agenda? Perhaps his SWP friends know; as someone without the faith, I did not. I think he would not have been willing to follow the unequivocal logic of this account even if he came a little way. Someone remembers him saying that his world had changed so much, theory must be radically rethought, and that must lead to intense debates that would reopen all the old questions anew. When the SWP decided to ditch its US followers, I could not draw him out, but he remained on very friendly terms with Ahmed Shawki of the American ISO. On the occasion of an American edition of his account of the Comintern, Ahmed asked me to ask him what were the lessons of the Comintern experience; he replied tersely: ‘None. The world has changed so much, there are no lessons here.’ And again when they republished his little book on Trotskyism, he said also there were no lessons.
The evidence is too slim to support a conclusion, but in any case, it no longer matters. When Marx failed with the First International in 1872, he retired to the library and wrote millions of words, but published nothing. Duncan did the same. In a succession of places – with friends, on his own, and after his leg was amputated, in sheltered accommodation – he ploughed through enough books for 10 lifetimes – in ancient history and archaeology, in anthropology, in religion, in everything of the past, but little of the future. The window sill in his last place was always heaped with 30 or 40 volumes – from the library and from friends, spilling onto the ground. And he puffed his way through fields of tobacco, at first the devilishly strong Capstan Strong, the milder untipped Senior Service, till at last, punished by the doctors, he retreated shamefaced into tips and mild, ‘women’s fags’ in the masculine world of Metro-Vickers. And he drank the brewers dry until this was also forbidden. Some had earlier noticed that when some hint of his past was mentioned, the sadness at the centre of his being would overwhelm him and he would retreat to an alcoholic bender for several days at a time When he was still active, he was sometimes moody and would, in his cups, rage at enemies, real and imagined, but never with aggression.
He was always polite and charming (especially to women) – one cannot imagine him talking to a fascist without the normal courtesies, even with humour. He was a well-brought-up working-class boy. He was calm in a crisis when all around panicked, and always willing to talk, kindly and gently, far into the night. As someone from the working class, he never played that cheap trick, so favoured by the middle-class cadres of the SWP (to cover their insecurity) of saying you were wrong because you were middle-class, as if class were a form of logic (not unlike the Maoist treatment of class as a species of racism – you could be purged merely for being descended from a landlord family, as was Mao himself). Raise the major problem of the class nature of the Assyrians, and he would rummage among his books and in his phenomenal memory and deliver you a lecture of profound insight and scholarship on this vital question. And so it was on the rôle of ethnicity in the interwar Czech trade unions and their great debates of 1938. He did all this without a trace of vanity, of malice, of ambition separate from the cause in hand, of exaggeration, of pretension.
Of his sadness, his inner solitude, he said nothing. As the years passed, he shed more and more of his past, his belongings, the detritus of a long life, as if he recognised they no longer fitted the new age. At the end, there were no traces of a past, no mementoes, no souvenirs, no vanities. Even vagrants or travelling men have something stuffed in a plastic bag. But Duncan left nothing, no trace except in the minds of friends. He went naked to his grave as he had come to his birth in Wythenshawe so long ago in a different world.
Duncan, like hundreds of thousands of men and women, perhaps millions, some from the working class, some not, was a person of extraordinary integrity. They sacrificed much of their lives, their hopes and ambitions, and in some cases, much of their possessions, careless of personal gain, to help humanity liberate itself from the evils of the past. They remained true to the wager they made in their youth, the wager on proletarian revolution. It is not their failing that history betrayed them, moved the goal posts and thus invalidated the means they had chosen to push humanity on. The cause, the self-liberation of humanity, remains as valid as ever even though their ‘Marxism’ proved a false god. [1]
At the end, in Newham Crematorium, the brave tossing banners of the SWP, dipped in silent tribute to the passing of a remarkable old warrior. Like so many, he fought the good fight by his lights. One could almost hear in the ghostly background, the dignified painful cadences of the last post as we said goodbye, weeping for Duncan, for ourselves, for an age which will not return, for the years for the locust. [2]
Note: Many people helped in reconstructing Duncan’s life. I should hate to think that I have made too many mistakes, taken advantage of their confidences or been presumptuous, in, being outside the faith, daring to speak of someone so very much within it. I can only plead for indulgence and say that now Duncan belongs to us all.
Response by Ian Birchall

Notes
1. I suppose this account is part of the old Marxists making their peace with the record. Others from other directions are feeling the need to do the same, a decade after the fall of the Soviet Union. See Eric Hobsbawm’s recent autobiography. Megnad Desai has now produced his wonderfully cheery and readable defence of Karl Marx against the Marxists, Marx’s Revenge: The Resurgence of Capitalism and the Death of Statist Socialism (Verso, 2002). My own much more lumbering and pretentious The Return of Cosmopolitan Capital: Globalisation, the State and War (Tauris, 2003) appears, Insha’llah, next February.
2. I have mislaid my copy, so the proper title evades me – but this is Jim Higgins’ bitter and wonderfully funny account of the split by the International Socialist Organisation.
 



Capitalism is a world system governed by competition. Of course, people ‘competed’ before capitalism was invented. Feudal lords competed to build the largest castles, to capture the largest number of serfs or kill the largest number of soldiers in other lords’ armies. But that was just a small local affair. and. for much of the time, it left the serfs much as before, poorer but essentially the same.
Capitalism is the first society organised exclusively on the principle of competition between people, between firms, between States and between groups of States; It drives everyone. For the capitalist, the drive is not so that he or she can eat more. Most capitalists receive so much, they cannot possibly spend their income on consumption a fifth car or a fifth house is hardly worth the effort. The drive is to survive. Unless the capitalist continually reinvests, he is liable to be bankrupted.
The capitalist is not interested in what happens to what he produces, only in whether he can sell it at a profit. For the profit determines whether he can then invest and whether he can survive against his rivals. The drive for profit, not the drive to produce goods which people need, is the central principle. It is that which perpetually transforms our lives.
One day the revolutionary breakthrough is the invention of the steam locomotive. Steel railway lines spread out across the country like a web, smashing their way through cities, ploughing across the fields, tunnelling through mountains. Thousands of people are pulled into making trains, building lines and stations.
But scarcely a lifetime later, it is the petrol engine, the car, which suddenly explodes. The miles of railways, platforms, tunnels, become ghost towns. And then men and women who manned them become redundant. Now motorways gouge out the fields, oil refineries flare in the night, giant tankers nose their way into ports. Thousands more, sons and daughters of those who built the railways, are sucked into a new industry. Only to find as in British Leyland that capitalism has moved on in the feverish search for profit.
It does not matter what sort of a person the capitalist is. Perhaps he thinks he is human. He reads poetry at the weekend and falls in love. He worries about the hungry. and is kindly to the old and sick. But in his office, he has few choices. He mans a machine that consumes people, and if he does not consume people as ruthlessly as his rivals, he also will end up redundant. The machine must constantly be rebuilt, wages constantly reduced as a share of the costs. And if people starve, there is not time to think of it.
The capitalist is not just one man or woman. It is also the state. Indeed, today only the state makes it possible for the individual capitalist to survive. The employer cannot lower wages on his own, he needs the state to introduce an incomes policy or a wage freeze. And the state needs to do so to cut the prices of its exports to defeat its rivals, other states. In the past companies hired private armies to beat up their rivals and to frighten workers into accepting the dictates of competition. States have always meant armies and policemen to do the same thing. War is the ‘most advanced’ form of competition. Neither the capitalists nor their state are willing to wait to see if the market will favour them. All of them are into cheating to make sure they win and if they look like losing, then pure physical force will be used.
In the 1820s Lancashire millowners did not wait to see if Indian weavers would be bankrupted by British competition; they hired thugs to cut off the hands of the weavers. General Motors did not wait to see whether the car would defeat tramways in Los Angeles: they brought up the tramways and tore up the lines. Rich farmers don’t wait for prices to fall in a bumper harvest – they burn the wheat or plough in the cabbages to make an artificial scarcity.
If people starve, that is just a regrettable necessity. Full granaries and empty stomachs always go together in capitalism. For the starving have only their need they don’t have the money to buy, the money to ensure the profit. Without profit, the capitalist always finds it cheaper to destroy what his workers have made. Wheat is not grown to be eaten by the hungry; it is grown solely to be sold.
But capitalism is not simply the sacrifice of needs to profits, of workers to capitalists. It breeds a culture that soaks into every pore of society. It drills into every head the perception that the survival of each one of us depends on defeating every one else. If you can’t overtake them, at least push them down till they drown.
The competition inevitably generates nationalism let us all rejoice when foreigners starve; it breeds racialism: the only good Indian is a dead Indian. Competition divides us all ito separate competitive units so that profits remain king. Each individual is driven every day to calculate his or her saleable potential. For how much can I sell myself, how much as I worth in cold pounds or dollars or yen?
And then the market says: “Nothing! You are worthless too old or too young or too stupid or too clever or too ugly or too beautiful”. In the logic of competition, the unemployed face despair and suicide, removing themselves from a market for which, in any case, they do not exist.
The logic of the market, however, cannot conquer all. Capitalism can survive only insofar as competition continues to expand the whole system. Then it can buy people’s tolerance if not their love. But a system of production for exchange, for profit, not use, can in no way guarantee infinite expansion. On the contrary, it guarantees slump.
Just as the cabbages are ploughed in, so now people are thrown in the scrap heap. The ethics of capitalism – you can win if you fight hard – now return to fight capitalism. Survival for the majority means they must unite. All the competitive squabbles on the shop floor have to be overcome for the shop to fight. Unity is forced on the squabbles by the logic of capitalism itself – unite or die separately.
But it is not now simply unity of the shop, nor between shops, nor between workplaces. Unity between the peoples of different States, all gripped in a single world capitalist system, is the necessity.
Capitalism can be destroyed but not in one factory or one country. A change in one factory or country does not conquer competition. It is a small temporary step a vital step forward, but only one step.
 



IT STARTED in the airport in Mexico City.
A youth and a girl in black berets and tee-shirts emblazoned ‘Free Nicaragua’ were playing tapes of revolutionary songs and speeches.
All through the flight it continued.
The excitement rose in waves. Returning exiles singing and cries of the Sandinista slogan ‘A free country or death!’
When the air hostess began to announce ‘Ladies and gentlemen, we are about to land at Sandino Airport, Managua, in Free Nicaragua,’ then the shouts and cheers and clapping became deafening.
And there they were, the compañeros.
In jungle green, girls with machine guns and unshaven young men, slouching round the air terminal and grinning as we streamed out of the aircraft to the sound of the hymns of the revolution. And everyone was hugging and weeping and kissing and cheering: ‘Long live Free Nicaragua!’ So it was throughout that time.
For it is the festival of the Nicaragua revolution.
The savageries of the Somoza regime are still there to be seen. The many little crosses along the side of the road. The pathetic red and black bandanas tied to a lamp-post to mark where a compañero fell. The gutted shells of factories, the houses splattered with innumerable bullet holes. The walls of a cottage that enclose only a rain-filled bomb crater.
Each day, the newspapers are filled with the photographs of those still missing, most of them in their early teens, with appeals from parents for any news at all. The news columns still record the discovery of unmarked graves and unidentified corpses. But the irrepressible bubbling excitement of victory hides the tragedies.
’It was hard, Señor,’ the old market woman, selling bananas, says. ‘It was hard – but now we have hope, and then we didn’t.’ The compañeros are everywhere: shy teenagers in jungle green or tattered cast-offs, in US Marine tee-shirts and ‘Love me, baby’ hats – but all with automatics over their shoulders and pistols in their belts.
And they grin and giggle, and demand to have their photographs taken, for now what they do is history and needs recording. ‘We are going to build a new world,’ says one older man gravely, ‘lifting ourselves out of the ruins.’

What sort of revolution?
WHAT SORT of revolution is it in Nicaragua?
The Sandinistas (FSLN) are a coalition of forces, including some of the sons and daughters of the employers and landowners. They were united by the single aim of destroying Somoza’s gangsters.
The core of the leadership was unofficially united by what they call ‘Marxism-Leninism,’ which, as so often, seems to amount to little more than a recognition that the existing social order must be overthrown by violence.
The FSLN showed extraordinary audacity and tenacity in action. Their example evoked from the mass of the population an equally extraordinary spontaneous courage – local militia sprang up, and the barrios were organised with committees to maintain food, medical and rebuilding activities.
The politics did not include a revolutionary transformation in the basis of Nicaragua – the seizure of the land of the big farmers by the small peasants and landless labourers, the seizure of the factories by the workers (although there were two general strikes of protest at various stages).
In fact, in some areas the peasants did seize land. But the Sandinistas persuaded them to leave, with the promise of getting land when the farms of Somoza and his supporters were expropriated.
By taking over the property of Somoza, his family and friends, the new government acquired about half the country’s land and possibly 60 percent of its industry. The government has also nationalised local banks (and restricted foreign banks to external transactions) and foreign trade.
But the problems began immediately. For example, the government decreed that workers should be paid back wages for June and July (when fighting paralysed business).
Private business is already on the edge of bankruptcy after the war, so the protests have been vigorous, and most employers are probably not paying the back pay.
Unlike both Cuba and Portugal, the revolution in Nicaragua reached down much deeper into society in fighting a peculiarly savage war.
But nonetheless the contradictions are extreme. Only the politics of permanent revolution – moving on from the conquest of state power to workers and peasants conquering the means of exploitation – could resolve the contradictions.
There is no evidence that such matters are part of the calculations of the FSLN leadership. They have explicitly denied any intention of exporting revolution, spreading its politics well beyond the boundaries of Nicaragua. And they are carefully restricting any spontaneous process of change at home lest that set off what they see as grave danger in the midst of the fiesta. The ultimate fate of the revolution hangs in the balance.
The prospects for socialism – as opposed to a new form of state capitalism – seem, at the moment, limited.
But that should in no way affect our rejoicing at what the Nicaraguans have achieved, our commitment to defend their victory, to organise solidarity support, and to watch carefully in order to react strongly if there is any attempt from Washington or its satellites to intervene.
 



The Works of Joseph de Maistre
Ed. Jack Lively
Allen & Unwin, 21s
The French Revolution precipitated the currents of political ideas that have dominated Europe since that time. However, ideas on the Left needed much more than the Revolution; industrial society and its subsequent changes were needed to continue the fertility of Left thought. Speculation is of the essence of Left-wing thought just as defence of a constant idealised social order is a necessary part of the Right. Thus while the Left changes continually, the Right has an uncanny constancy despite immense historical changes. There are few theorists of stature on the Right, but a very large number of writers who participate in the same continuum of thought, working out identical ideas over and over again. Burke in Britain and Joseph de Maistre (1753-1821) for France provide some of the most comprehensive expositions of these basic formulations. Naturally the two are different in emphasis since one faced a real revolution and one did not, but essentially the basic scheme is the same: the organic and hierarchic society, governed with strict authority through one Church or one nationalist ideology in the hands of an accepted ruling class, uninhibited in its righteous use of violence, its superiority founded upon blood or birth. As with all Right-wing writers, the case recedes into mystery at some stage – the blood, the national genius, the genius of one great leader, the word of God, popular prejudice, the irrational or the righteous myth. Unfortunately, de Maistre’s work has not been translated hitherto, and Lively’s excellent rendering of these extracts from the major works is very welcome. Lively writes also a useful introduction to the texts.
 



Monopoly Capital
Paul A. Baran and Paul M. Sweezy
Monthly Review, 62s.
The great transition in capitalism between 1929 and 1950 swept away the existing rationale of the system. Both the old ‘free enterprise’ system and its ideology, Liberalism, received death blows from the succession of disasters beginning with slump and ending in war. It is relatively recently that both the defenders and the attackers of the surviving status quo have sought once more to put together the pieces left in order to offer a coherent picture and perspective of modern capitalism and an explanation for its survival. Strachey tried the exercise in the fifties in order to reconcile the radical birth of socialism with the anaemic conservatism of the 1950s Labour Party; Crosland devoted attention to justifying the second. More recently, Shonfield in Britain and Galbraith in the United States have tried to offer a rationale of ‘planned capitalism’ from a similar viewpoint: after all, any overall plan requires some coherent picture of existing reality. All of these authors more or less presupposed an audience on their Right, defenders or proponents of laissez-faire, but that audience – despite Enoch Powell and the IEA – has been slowly disappearing throughout the postwar world, leaving this case increasingly as the case for capitalism per se.
The Left has long needed a substantial counter-case, one that reanalysed the whole of modern capitalism as a system, incorporating the immense structural changes that have taken place since 1930 and relocating both the central drives of the system and its perspectives in relationship to the immediate action of socialists. Ernest Mandel’s Treatise on Marxist Economics (London, 1967) was one attempt to come to grips with the voluminous material of modern bourgeois economics, and Michael Kidron’s Modern Western Capitalism (London, due for publication at the end of the year) should locate some of the key features of contemporary capitalism relative to socialist action. Baran and Sweezy’s work is a similar attempt to grasp the whole system, to provide a basic critique of capitalism and a textbook for socialists: as such, it is an immensely welcome attempt.
The book takes as its central datum the modern large scale corporation (rather than the market as in classical accounts), arguing that it effectively controls its market and thereby can maximise its returns over the long term. The problem of the system arises in what to do with its rapidly increasing ‘surplus.’ The authors document the outlets involved in capitalist consumption and investment, in an expanding expenditure on manipulating consumers to buy, in Government expenditure, in militarism and imperialism. They consider separately the quality of life in American capitalism – the race problem, poverty and welfare, work and leisure, and so on.
There is much in this which is of value, particularly some of the factual material collated, and it is only inevitable in a work of synthesis that it should include much that was well known before. However, apart from this, there are very serious deficiencies which make the work weaker than earlier books by the same authors, and of much more limited significance for serious socialists. First, Baran and Sweezy’s capitalism seems to have no central drive as a system, for when the struggle between capitalists themselves and between capitalists and workers is removed (as they imply it has been removed by monopoly organisation), the drive in the original Marxist scheme – the drive of capitalists to accumulate capital – disappears. The authors’ capitalists do seek to accumulate, but for no necessary reason. This result follows from an over-emphasis on the possibilities of administered capitalism, and a failure to see that both the struggle on the factory floor continues – particularly fiercely hi the United States – so pushing capitalists to invest to reduce their labour needs; and, at least as fiercely, the struggle between capitalists continues, monopoly or not. Coal may constitute a monopoly, but only of coal; for oil, electricity, gas and soon, atomic energy, are all competitors for the same buyers. Even for particular commodities, there are always foreign corporations waiting to grab a section of the monopoly’s domestic market – American steel breathes down the necks of British, and European cars nibble at the edge of the US market. Thus ‘monopoly’ is only one stage in the war, not its end, and at best, a stage which is a relatively temporary one within a protected market enclave. But it is the continuing war which drives the system forward, both domestically and internationally (even if in different ways). In correctly seeing the decline of the small competitive firm, of the open market in particular commodities, the authors have excised just the element that continues even more fiercely to drive the system forward. In a similar way, their analysis of both the international market and of the role of the State is very weak. In the case of the second, the extension of the State is surely one of the key elements in the ‘administered’ nature of capitalism, and this role gives the State a quasi-independent position above warring corporations: the State becomes, not merely the cork floating on the wave of the bourgeoisie, but the central pillar and major organising agency of the ruling class as a whole. This is, perhaps, more obvious in the more highly centralised European States, all attempting overall planning in one way or another, but it is a process also far advanced in the United States (so leading one US economist [1] to argue that the United States is, by reason of organisation and development, one of the most highly planned non-Communist economies in the world).
This failure to see the contradictory elements in the system has wider implications in this book, for there is no real endemic conflict in the authors’ capitalism. The class struggle has ended, there are no real classes at all, only a recreation of the old Populist image of an ‘oligarchy’ (C. Wright Mills’ ‘power elite,’ not a ruling class properly so defined), wielding virtually unlimited power, and a mass, bribed, coerced, demoralised. This is a muckraking view of American society, usefully polemical, but not really a scientific analysis of a going system. As a result, the economics of ‘monopoly capitalism’ which are reasonably clear do not cohere with any adequate picture of American society. The authors denounce things indiscriminately, the kind of attacks varying from the querulous resentment of aged slightly prurient intellectuals bored at a cocktail party to a hodge podge of remarks about the dreadful nature of work in factories, seen quite clearly from the safe vantage point of a comfortable study. Any authority will do to support the kind of prejudices deployed at excessive length (Freud is dragged in for much of this section), but at no stage do the authors indicate how what they dislike is integrally related to the system they want to analyse.
Without anything like an adequate view of capitalist society, it is understandable that the authors see no social force available to change it. In any case, it is the implicit burden of much of their argument that monopoly capitalism has got its domestic challengers licked – only increased neurosis is the future for the majority; tormented from every direction, the utterly impotent mass can do no more than raise a cry of anguish. The authors early on say, somewhat startlingly in an analysis that claims to be Marxist, that they intend to neglect the ‘labor process’ (p.8), and at the end of this long work, assert without serious argument that ‘The answer of traditional Marxian orthodoxy – that the industrial proletariat must eventually rise in revolution against its capitalist oppressors – no longer carries conviction’ (p.363). There is no suggestion that whether or not the proposal is ‘convincing’ turns in part on what the authors propose to do. The poor and the negroes constitute something, but again, they are ‘too heterogenous, too scattered and fragmented, to constitute a coherent force in society’ (p.364). The best that can be hoped is that the negroes will act as the agents, the ambassadors, for the deus ex machina, the Third World, which will ultimately somehow bring revolution or at least destroy capitalism (the mechanism of this change is not explained).
Now unfortunately the abandonment of the proletariat is not an optional element in Marxism – without it, Marxism becomes nonsense, and socialist critics of society are driven back to the position of French philosophes, individuals with nothing but a higher morality or rationality to put in their guns. The search becomes one for any kind of revolution, not the lynch-pin of the Marxist system, a proletarian socialist revolution, and the promise of a proletarian revolution disappears: we have no guarantee that the same old tyrannical system will not reassert itself. Without the proletariat, class struggle becomes struggle between nation-states or groups of States (the Two Camps of days gone by), or between the white and the coloured, a conflict which directly contradicts the non-racial internationalism of Marxists. Inevitably, nationalism or racialism are the only exits available from an impossible dilemma. The authors have reached that impossibility, and would have no hope at all if they could not project them on their distant hero, the Third World, much as Marx suggested men created God as a peg for their frustrated hopes, a reification of the possibilities for themselves if oppression were ended. Yet, the authors offer no account of the ‘Third World,’ no analysis of the complex relationships between capitalism and the backward and the radically transformed content of those relationships – at times, the authors seem to suggest that the US role in the world today is a mere repeat of Britain’s in the nineteenth century. There is almost no suggestion at all that the Third World consists of millions of people of very different kinds, that the ‘Third World’ is an almost meaningless term, designed to hide reality for Western intellectuals and cover the crude materialism that asserts that sheer poverty wherever and however it occurs, is an adequate seedbed for socialism (a point specifically contradicted by Marx among others). To do these things would be to spoil the roseate vision, to introduce reality and perhaps curb the only hope the authors have. Thus, in their scheme, the emancipation of the working class is not to be its own act, but is to be secured by substitutionism, by a noble invader. Since the authors fully accept the Soviet Union as socialism (not even ‘degenerated’), and accept the acquisition of Eastern Europe by Russia after 1945 (the East European working class was thus ‘emancipated’ by the Red Army), their case is not inconsistent. But they have none of their sympathy for the American exploited left over for their Russian and East European brethren.
There is no real account of the Eastern Bloc, despite its crucial significance for ‘monopoly capitalism’ in the future, and the authors are grossly misled by the Cold War ideological froth of the 1950s – Russia is passive virtue, America active evil, implacably devoted to the complete destruction of Russia (this pseudo-psychological drive does something to make the authors’ system move). Thus the authors cannot foresee the possibility of a Washington-Moscow détente (even if, like a monopoly, a limited one), nor the break-up of the Eastern Bloc into competitive polycentric nation-States, nor the equal and matching breakup of the Western Bloc alliances, NATO, Cento, SEATO, etc. Cold War postures remain the dominant modes of operation, which in their turn exaggerate the absence of any perspective beyond a few pious hopes.
For Marxists, it is this last factor which vitiates the entire book, whatever the specific nature of the analysis. The authors try to keep their spirits up, but the basic tone is inevitably pessimistic, and not pessimistic in the sense that one keeps struggling on even though one can see relatively few results (or can acknowledge the immense obstacles to success), but pessimistic in that there is really nothing worth doing at all. The glint of a silver lining is just the faraway tumult of other people in Asia, Africa and Latin America, fighting the good fight where there is the possibility of some – any – radical change. Our task is no more than to bear witness to that fight, to serve while we only stand and wait for the saviour from across the seas.
This review has concentrated on the substantive elements in the authors’ analysis, but it should also be mentioned that their methodology is a serious obstacle to clarity. They employ the concept ‘surplus’ in seeking to demonstrate their view of American capitalism, but it is never clear what this means. Baran used the concept usefully to examine backward economies (The Political Economy of Growth, 1957) where the reproduction and improvement of capital are relatively minor factors, but in an advanced economy, it is difficult to see its relevance. The authors do not say very clearly why they dispense with the labour theory of value (indeed, they seem not to understand the purpose of the concept ‘surplus value,’ p.10), and variously define their own concept as ‘the difference between aggregate net output and aggregate real wages of productive workers’ (p.125) – presumably not including capital; ‘the difference between what society produces and the costs of producing it’ – that is, including new investment; and ‘the difference between the product and the socially necessary cost.’ Apart from being three different things, in an Appendix, a further series of elements are added together without very searching discrimination [2] to produce the conclusion that the ‘surplus’ has increased and continues to do so. Since much of the volume is devoted to tracing the difficulty in ‘absorbing the surplus,’ this basic muddle vitiates the whole book and makes nonsense of the attempt to lay out the system as a whole. More than this, the authors cannot extract from their static economic machine any real perspective, certainly not one which includes the current phase of relatively sustained growth.
Overall then, despite the authors’ disclaimers, they have escaped from class and contradiction, from any unification of theory and practice, and thereby from what is crucial in Marxism. Their account offers a relatively primitive rationale for a Maoist in an advanced country and a perspective of ‘wait and hope.’ As such it has little to offer to serious socialists with both dedication, a perception of the contradictory reality of struggle and stability within capitalism, and less patience than Baran and Sweezy.
 
Footnotes
1. Cf. W. Malenbaum, Prospects for Indian Development, London, 1962.
2. For a useful and more lengthy discussion of this, cf. Ernest Mandel in International Socialist Journal, July-August 1967.



Hitler’s Social Revolution
David Schoenbaum
Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 50s
Nazi Culture
George L. Mosse
W.H. Allen, 50s
Mr Schoenbaum has tried to gather together the fragmentary information available on Germany between 1933 and 1939 to present a composite picture of the Nazi impact upon German society. He examines in turn the social elements of the Nazi programme, its general ideology, and the Nazi impact upon labour, business, agriculture, women, the State and social mobility. There is much in this book which is of great value, and it embodies a great deal of die new research of recent years (including Mr Schoenbaum’s research). In particular, the incompetence and muddle of the new regime, in contrast to its propaganda (and thereby, the estimate of foreigners), is clearly portrayed. The style of the book is journalistic in parts, and this perhaps exacerbates the relatively poor theoretical framework within which this excellent material is presented. In particular, Mr Schoenbaum has only the most exiguous notion of ‘class,’ and thus infers that the Nazi regime was anti-business because it was nasty to many businessmen. The intentions of particular Nazi leaders, how far they accepted bourgeois society, is imperfectly discriminated from the objective effects of Nazi rule. However, the account of the sheer opportunism of the Nazis, their lack of any real programme, is excellent.
Mr Mosse presents edited extracts from writings and speeches by Nazis to recapture the flavour of their peculiar silliness. It is like any collection of bad literature: it does convey the flavour, but, unlike the joyful blurb which calls the book a ‘shockingly vivid picture,’ it is very dreary. The Nazis, without any particular view of society, retreated to the poorest kind of lower middle-class taste or mediocre scholarship which was duly dressed in the glad rags of ‘true German culture.’ The editing is competent although the editor does tend to take some of the material a little too solemnly. After all, much the same kind of material can be found with ease in any west European country from the mid-nineteenth century onwards.



The Soviet Middle East, A Communist Model for Development
Alec Nove & J.A. Newth
Allen & Unwin, 30s
This very short book (132 pages of text) presents a great deal of hard economic information on the eight Soviet republics between Georgia on the Black Sea and Kirgizia on the Chinese border. The book includes some account of the general geographical and historical situation, on industrialisation, agriculture, the social services, finance, incomes, and comparisons with non-Soviet Middle Eastern neighbours (Turkey and Iran). The Middle Eastern republics began as put of Tsarism’s imperial possessions, were reintegrated into the Soviet Union, and have, by and large, been swept along by the process of Soviet development. What hard information the authors can gather suggests a very high rate of growth since the War, relatively high and rising standards (given that the starting point was low).
It is useful to have this factual material in one place, and to have what was known brought up to date. The authors are a little weak on the general social picture – no mention appears of the extensive French material on social change in the Soviet Middle East – and the book bears witness to having been rather rapidly written. More serious, however, is the lack of any general theoretical analysis, the lack of the ‘model’ promised in their title. In their final chapter, they do look at various general topics, but rather from the viewpoint of assessing whether Soviet control of it) Middle Eastern republics constitutes imperialism – a most boring side issue in the context, since the criteria for imperialism the authors offer are rather shallow. This theoretical weakness is a pity, but to remedy it would have required perhaps a much larger and more wide-ranging book.



Soviet Ideology Today
Gustav A. Wetter
Heinemann, 35s
Old soldiers never die; they only fade away, and the same is true of ideologies. They are not ‘confronted’ by the ‘facts’ or refuted by new clever people who have discovered the truth, they merely become curiously irrelevant, inappropriate, so that former fanatics wonder how they could ever have believed such gibberish. The essential change is not one which takes place in the intellectual world at all, but rather in the general social environment. Soviet ideology is today fading; it is not meeting valiant critics or responding to the marvellously cunning arguments of capitalism; rather is affluence corroding the philosophy of poverty and industrialisation without even bothering to answer Stalin’s elaborately marshalled arguments.
The sign of the evaporation of an ideology is when people start describing it, for until a certain amount evaporates, few people can even see it: it is just common-sense. Professor Wetter is, however, disappointing as an Owl of Minerva, particularly given the quality of his earlier book, Dialectical Materialism. His style is terse and rigorous, and he carefully examines in the most economical manner all the arguments mobilised in the latest Soviet philosophical textbooks, relating these arguments to those used by Marx, Engels and Lenin, and offering a criticism. But this is not an ideology, and is, at best, a most esoteric academic exercise. It leaves out almost entirely the immense contradictory changes that have taken place in ‘Marxism-Leninism,’ the gap between Marx and Kosygin, and, above all, the relationship between the precepts of the ideology and what the Soviet leaders actually do. It is as if someone sought to analyse modern Western ideology by examining popular religious textbooks, noting that both Wilson and Johnson claim to believe in God, that scripture is taught in all schools, that Capitalism has been historically Christian, and so on. The legitimate answer when all the arguments for the existence of God have been mobilised is: So what? Does that explain why Western leaders do what they do?
Without history, without a concrete society, without some explanation of practice, we are left not with an ideology, but with a series of precepts, the determinate meaning of which is scarcely clear until we see how they are used in practice. What Wetter offers are some precepts, taken to be roughly the same as those offered by Marx. A great deal of time is then lost by ‘answering Marx’ with arguments which are rarely new, the real task of delineating ‘Soviet ideology’ being lost on the way. This is a pity for all except those who enjoy philosophic disputation for Its own sake, regardless of the issue. As a whole the book is stimulating, good on the fallacies of a dialectic of nature, on the muddles of Stalinism as a purely intellectual system. But it is poor as a description of a real system of beliefs passionately held by a large number of people over a long period of time, and it offers no explanation at all as to why such a system should exist.



New Evening Post, Hong Kong, November 1966: ‘The sentence “Chairman Mao and his close comrade-in-arms, Lin Piao, Chou En-lai ...” in yesterday’s edition should read “Chairman Mao and his close comrade-in-arms Lin Piao; Chou En-lai ...”.’
February 1st
Despite the increasing wildness of Western interpretations of what little hard information comes out of China, the phases of the cultural revolution are, retrospectively, fairly clear. In November 1965, as a new phase in the socialist education campaign, criticism was launched against a number of distinguished Party intellectuals (cf. The Notebook, IS 26, autumn 1966). After a pause in the new year, the campaign was resumed in the spring and became merged in a more general attack first on the Pekin Party and then on national Party and State organs concerned with education (including universities and schools), culture and propaganda (including the press). This phase lasted until July when there was another pause, during which Liu Shao-chi despatched ‘activist groups’ to the provincial parties. The August Central Committee meeting ended the lull, and launched the Red Guards on an even more wide-ranging attack on the Party structure as a whole and, in particular, its leadership other than the Politbureau. However, the onset of cold weather in November damped down this phase, and there was another lull in December, ended by the People’s Daily editorial of 26 December and 1 January announcing that the cultural revolution must now spread out to encompass factories, mines and communes.
Despite the noise, the campaign up until January did not directly affect ordinary production (although it afflicted transport heavily), but the present phase is directly threatening the ordinary output of the Chinese economy. After the disasters of 1960-61, Chinese industry has been raising its capacity only slowly and in certain restricted fields, and production is only just returning to its previous level; agriculture has not done nearly as well as this – 1964 might have achieved 190 million tons of foodgrains, and perhaps the total today is over 200 million tons, but alongside the population growth this is not much more than standing still. On top of all this China’s defence programme is a heavy burden, putting China among the leading countries of the world in the proportion of its national product it devotes to arms. Thus any check to production is very serious. On the other hand, if the economy stagnates, there is little to push Party men at the local level to exert themselves – those holding local power begin to take on the perquisites of power, the short working day, the fur-collared jacket, the Party car, long holidays, best house; more than that, to safeguard their position, such men through dispensing favours build up cadres of men loyal to them personally, lacing the administration with relatives and friends. This becomes true at each level – how many single families now control particular villages as in old China, or a particular commune? At the level of the province, power over the provincial industry, agriculture and military forces combines in the hands of the same individual or committee. The situation is always possible where there is great scarcity as there is in China, but economic stagnation, like crisis which makes the central leadership heavily dependent on the willing co-operation of its provincial representatives, exacerbates the situation: local power grows as long as the national centre does not challenge it. The longer the centre delays its challenge, tries to survive through negotiation, bribe or threat, the more vulnerable it becomes: when it needs power, it finds it is helpless, a servicing centre for the real decentralised power groups or the front organisation of a coalition of powerful provinces. The popular myth that a Communist Party is somehow protected from the inevitabilities of politics in a poverty-stricken country does not deserve attention.
The Party centre has consistently sought means to enforce a common subjugation to its will since it came to power, and particular purges (as with Kao Kang in 1953-4) have carried off a host of embryonic warlords from the provinces. The socialist education campaign which began in 1962 frontally attacked elitism in the army, Party and intelligentsia – forcing those that could not escape to undertake manual labour for periods lest their souls grow proud. It was of doubtful use – six weeks or even six months on a farm does not create a peasant – and the Party press still complained in, for example, 1964 that there were army officers lording it over ordinary folk, treating village women (even married ones) ‘without dignity;’ that Party cadres protected their children from manual labour or military service, gave them special privileges in the administration, and so on. Poor peasant informers were employed to spy on rural cadres, ‘to conduct supervision over cadres and prevent some of them degenerating’ (People’s Daily, 7 July 1964). Stalin verbally abused but nevertheless pampered industrial managers and enforced a grossly exaggerated inequality of incomes, but the Chinese have always pursued a more egalitarian pattern out of necessity: great inequality in China is potentially explosive:
‘The system of high salaries for a small number of people,’ said the People’s Daily (14 July 1964) ‘should never be applied. The gap between the incomes of the working personnel of the Party, the Government, the enterprise, and the people’s communes, on the one hand, and the incomes of the mass of the people on the other, should be rationally and gradually narrowed and not widened.’
For army officers, came the mid-1965 abolition of marks of military rank with the same end in mind. But changing the externals does not change the substance, any more than the succession of campaigns – Strengthen Political Work, Imitate Lei Feng, etc – could change consciousness in the absence of a change in material conditions. After seventeen years of struggle, the victors demanded some tangible fruit of victory, and a common equal subjugation to Chairman Mao offers less than they already have.
Perhaps to make the lesson quite clear to all provincial parties, the Pekin Party, the most tightly disciplined of all, received the worst savaging of all, launched by Mao from Shanghai. A Red Flag editorial pinpoints the flavour of warlordism in this, the least likely, culprit:
‘The small handful of anti-Party elements in the former Peking Municipal Party Committee regarded the Peking Municipality as an “independent kingdom,” watertight and impenetrable, and nobody was allowed to intervene or criticise it – it was like a tiger whose backside no-one dared to kick.’ [1]
But if Pekin was a separate enclave, under the very nose of the Politbureau, how much more baronial are the provincial parties far from the Pekin Emperor, particularly where they have less need of the national centre, are distant from it, where their agriculture feeds their own population, they have no vulnerable international border and no industry that spreads far beyond the provincial borders. There is also another dimension – the Liu-Teng faction no doubt had its major base in the Pekin party, and Mao won a significant victory in destroying it. Perhaps, Liu’s ‘activist groups,’ despatched to the provinces in early July, were his counter-attack – to rally a coalition of provinces against Mao and warn provincial secretaries to be firm with the impending Red Guards without having to go through the normal Party apparatus where there might be spies for Mao. Certainly, Lin Piao and Chou have attacked these activist groups furiously, and for sending them, Liu and Teng were required to ‘confess’ in October (a ‘confession’ withdrawn in January when the anti-Maoists were stronger).
The struggle between the provinces and the centre, one of many tensions in China, only periodically breaks surface. Normally, what hard bargaining goes on remains secret. But the present struggle is quite unprecendented in scale, and, because it seems to have split the Politbureau Standing Committee, exceptional in that there are two alternatives at the national level. Again, the likely outcome of the struggle has grown increasingly less and less clear – the initiative changes from one side to another, and each province presents a different picture (the information available is itself a separate mystery). Until July, events seem to favour the Mao group, and the three major targets, Peng Chen of the Pekin Party, Lo Jui-ching of the army, and Lu Ting-yi, Minister of Culture, were effectively eliminated. In addition Maoists, in classical revolutionary style, were seizing all the media of mass communication. In July, Liu counterattacked with his activist groups, only to be reprimanded by the August Central Committee meeting. The Red Guards, an extra-Party force to keep them pure (the schools were carefully closed after Maoists seized the educational structure in order to release people for the Red Guards), were launched on the Party, but by October Maoist control of the Guards was weakening, different factions existed (the Red Guard paper, East is Red, said there were three separate Red Guard headquarters in Pekin alone, fighting among themselves) and threatened Party leaders could themselves organise separate Red Guard support no matter how hard the Cultural Revolution Committee stressed that Guards must be loyal not to the Party but to the person of the Emperor himself. In December, after a series of unsuccessful attempts, the Guards were, except for a minority, sent home: they had revealed the strength of the opposition to Mao’s central power without being able to defeat it. Mao’s final thrust was the most dangerous of all – peasants and workers were urged for the first time to revolt against the local Party. The Maoist perspective of more work and less pay can have little appeal for the mass of the working population, but perhaps Mao counted on his personal following to rouse support. However, the richer provinces have a surplus which is available for distribution if not taken by Pekin for national investment, and it is a surplus provincial leaders can use to bribe support, and they seem to have done so. The Maoist move has much more profound dangers for all who govern China: the campaign could stir hostility against all aspects of the Party, and this would be the signal for a genuine revolutionary movement of the masses against both Mao and the provincial leaders. Such a change would force national and provincial leadership back into each other’s arms as fast as would an invasion from Taiwan.
Currently, the course of the struggle is unclear although evidence suggests Mao is having to withdraw: the provincial enclaves are too powerful to be defeated without an open military operation, and this cannot be undertaken since the army itself is divided in loyalties, provincial units being lined up with the provincial Party leadership in many cases. Mao is left with control of the press and radio, control of public ideology without control of private consciousness or Party power. Pekin radio claims a patchy territory for Mao, and, interestingly, mainly control of urban centres (there is only Maoist information available) – Shantung, Shansi, Kwangsi, Hopei, Heilungkiang. Fighting continues, it is said, in Kiangsi (a rebel peasant army?), Shanghai, Nanking, Foochow, Kwantung, Tientsin, Chekiang, and Changchun in Manchuria. On the other hand, control in border provinces in the south, west, north-west and north seems to be unchallenged in the hands of the provincial party – both Sinkiang and Inner Mongolia are said to be firmly controlled by their respective warlords, Wang En-mao and General Ulanfu (however, Huhehot has had a riot). More significantly, Mao has retreated by appealing to workers and peasants to return to work since he cannot count on their support. Nanchang radio (Kiangsi) called on 20 January for workers to cease travelling about the country ‘to exchange revolutionary experiences’ and get back to work. Pekin publicly appeals to banks not to issue currency for the payment of higher wages, presumably private instructions having no effect. The severe absenteeism that has now afflicted production has called Mao’s bluff, showing the razor’s edge on which the Chinese economy operates. Nor, it seems, can China afford the last holiday in the calendar, since Pekin has ordered the cancellation of Chinese New Year (beginning on 9 February) lest workers get into mischief when their hands are idle. At the same time, it is abruptly announced that schools will reopen by 1 March (earlier, they were not to open until the summer) – Red Guard hands must also be put to work since they have failed.
However, a stalemate settles nothing, and drift makes the problems facing the national centre ever more severe. The Maoists will need more guile and less frontal assault, playing one province against another: open assault threatens the whole structure of power in China. The strength of the opposition has been shown too great, although, fortunately for Mao, not a united opposition – each province fights for its own, and can only survive if all the rest do. No cohesive coalition seems to exist although Liu and Teng may have sought to organise one: without it, Mao can return to the policy pursued traditionally by China’s rulers, playing provinces against each other.
Meanwhile President Johnson has a completely free hand to bomb whatever parts of Hanoi he wishes, and both Moscow and Washington can join in a smug, sly condemnation of all events Chinese: the détente is speeded since it is clear China has no foreign policy (apart from rowdy demonstrations in Moscow and Paris over returning students). What is happening in China has been, so far, irrelevant to the poverty of the mass of the population: it is relevant only to which group rides the ruling class. It is inconceivable that China should disintegrate, that the warlords of the twenties should return: the country is integrated, but this says nothing about the degree of tolerable centralisation or who will command the centre on what terms. Ultimately it is to the common interest of the provincial rulers to stick together, but there is a world of bargaining over the terms. The battle then is between different factions of an embryonic ruling class – embryonic because it does not yet accept a uniform definition of its class interest – and it is disastrous if socialists try to argue for one rather than another. In Russia, the Left sided with the ‘Leftist’ Stalin against the ‘Rightist’ Bukharin, at the cost of their own lives.
 
Footnote
1. No.9, 1966 in Peking Review, No.28, 8 July 1966, p.30.



Li Ta-chao and the Origins of Chinese Marxism
Maurice Meisner
Harvard (East Asia Series 27), 40s
Li Ta-chao was one of the two main founders of the Chinese Communist Party. As a young intellectual during and after the fall of the Manchu dynasty, his life embodied many of the contradictory tendencies in the Chinese intelligentsia during a long phase of revolutionary upheaval. As professor of history at Pekin University and Chief Librarian (Mao Tse-tung was for a time one of his assistants), he was the first important intellectual to declare his support for the 1917 revolution. As a Communist leader in Pekin and north China, he turned the infant party towards agitation among workers’ and peasants, and placed very heavy stress on activism. He was murdered in April 1927 at the age of 39 by Chang Tso-lin, the Manchurian warlord who currently controlled Pekin.
Mr Meisner has written an exceptionally good portrait, and one of some importance for the history of Marxism in China. Unlike many modern sinologists, Mr Meisner has a sympathetic understanding of Marxism and some comprehension of its complexities, so that his account of Li’s intellectual life is sensitive and informed. It is a rare accomplishment in this field, but one which is essential in relationship to Li. For Li translated the Marxism he received from Europe in a form that embodies the main changes subsequently associated with the name of Mao, and he did so in the early twenties, long before Stalinism had been created and before Li became familiar with the works of Lenin. Thus, the inheritance came direct from some works of Marx and Engels, yet in Li’s hands, it still became a populist creed, pitched by an enlightened minority of intellectuals at the peasantry. It is remarkable to see the emergence of Narodnik assumptions from Marxism, generated by the particular personality of Li in conjunction with the material conditions of China at that time. It was not an ‘inevitable’ transformation, for Ch’en Tu-hsiu, the other main founder of the CCP, remained very much more anti-nationalist, anti-populist and oriented on the urban proletariat.
There are some weaknesses in this account, but compared with similar works on modern China, these should not detract from the book’s immense value. Thus, the social context is relatively lighter sketched, Li appears as slightly isolated from ha backcloth. Again, Mr Meisner’s account of the philosophic .roots of Marxism is good, but he accepts uncritically the American view of Lenin as What is to be Done? seen in its worst possible interpretation. There are also occasional suggestions that personality is prior to political position – Li is an ‘activist’ by nature, so his Marxism is of a particular kind. However, leaving these points on one side since they do not in this account affect the basic estimate, this it an excellent book and an important one for understanding modern China.



The Revolution in Egypt’s Economic System, From Private Enterprise to Socialism, 1952-1965
Patrick O’Brien
RIIA Oxford, 55s
In a long, carefully presented account, Mr O’Brien describes the economic history of Egypt over the past fifty years, immediately before the military coup d’état of 1952, the period 1952-7, the interregnum of 1957-60, and the structure of economic institutions since 1960. The account covers in detail the growth of state capitalism and seeks to suggest why the Egyptian army officers pursued or were driven by events in this direction. In addition, the earlier chapters trace out the endemic trend towards state capitalism.
There is an excellent chapter on the nebulous ideology which has been thrown up to ‘explain’ Nasser’s extensions of the State. The book contains a wealth of factual information, and is clear and direct. It lacks much account of the social basis of change in Egypt, and its account of classes is primitive (at points, there is exaggerated examination of the views of private businessmen), but as a compendium of factual material and as an analysis on a relatively narrow front, the book is excellent.
 



The Role of the Chinese Army
John Gittings
RIIA Oxford, 50s
Britain and the Rise of Communist China
Brian Porter
Oxford, 35s
John Gittings’ account of the Chinese army summarises virtually all the publicly available information on its subject. The book follows a roughly historical plan from the Civil War period, through the Korean War, the Great Leap Forward, to, roughly 1965 (that is, before the cultural revolution began). It is a solid and straightforward account, and useful for those reasons. It is also however rather lost in the detail and does not hazard much analysis, a standard feature of much modern work on China. The account seeks, in the terms of ordinary political debate on China, to be eminently ‘fair,’ and this does not help the clarity of analysis. There is very little on the social content of the army, and less than necessary on the social role of the army. However, given these limitations, it is a useful piece of work. Mr Porter is concerned to describe British opinions of China between 1945 and 1954. He does this straightforwardly by illustrating Right and Left views drawn from Parliament, the press, and other works. When the survey is complete, it is unclear what exactly has been achieved since we do not know how representative the views are, and in any case, we do not know whether it matters – policy is not a simple function of opinion or ‘attitudes.’ The book also makes many judgements which it would be irksome to challenge, but which do not enhance the slightly thin quality of the account.
 



Nigel Harris writes: South Korea and Taiwan (Formosa) are currently being offered by Washington as vivid examples of the possibility of ‘free enterprise’ development. The growth rates of both are high, but it is very unclear how far that growth is due partly or wholly to the Vietnam war. Nor is it clear whether the growth is much more than an increase in exchanges between the same American companies operating in the US, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
From 1965, South Korea (and Taiwan) has achieved an annual growth rate of 8.4 per cent. At the same time, South Korea has vastly expanded the flow of capital it receives from the US either as direct aid or credit, civil or military, private US investment in Korea, payments for local supplies to US troops in Korea, and so on. In 1966, for example, Korea earned 73 million dollars from Special US procurements. By the end of 1967, South Korea’s foreign currency reserves had reached 350 million dollars (Taiwan 430m; Philippines 180m; Thailand 1,000m).
Two separate economic networks have begun to transform the Far Eastern trading pattern. The first, and oldest, involves a three-way flow – US capital to south Australia to finance ore exports to Japan, which then exports manufactured goods to the US. But the Vietnam war has imposed a different pattern, ousting the former imperial powers (Britain and France) and replacing them by the US with a cluster of very much smaller satellites or allies – Japan in particular, followed by Thailand, the Philippines, Taiwan and South Korea. This network has its centre in Vietnam. All of the subsidiary powers are more or less deeply involved in supplying materials and men for Vietnam, the costs being met by Washington. One recent estimate suggests that 25 per cent of recent annual exports from Japan are based upon the Vietnam war, and another argues that South Korea’s earnings on the export of men, materials and services to south Vietnam in 1967 reached 100m dollars. However, these figures often mis-estimate different national shares in the loot of war, for under each individual countries’ figures are concealed the operations of companies of different nationality. South Korea’s exports notoriously conceal a large volume of Japanese exports, diverted via South Korea (either by the Japanese, to evade US quota restrictions, or by the Koreans, to make something on buying cheaper in Japan than they sell in Vietnam). Of their nature, US companies are likely everywhere to get the lion’s share, since the US administration naturally favours ‘reliable’ sources (even when disguised with foreign names), and US companies have experience of the quality required and the best contacts or colleagues in the US-directed or influenced purchasing agencies.
There has still been a capital inflow into South Korea. Yet the investment of this capital by the South Korean government is still powerfully influenced by the US Government and companies. Take for example, the case of the proposed petro-chemical complex, one of the four pillars of the second five-year plan (1967-72). This began as an attempt to replace imports of refined oil; South Korea has no indigenous crude oil, and this was to be imported and refined in Korea by the US importing companies. The major part of the refined oil was needed for the armed forces – South Korea has the fourth largest army in the world, thanks to US foreign policy.
What South Korea does have is extensive coal deposits, low-paid miners and substantial unemployment. Yet once begun, the Government’s dependence on imported oil from the US has gone on growing, culminating in the decision to permit nine major US companies to put up 250 million dollars to create a whole petro-chemical complex. The new Plan, moreover, lays it down that henceforth oil will be the principal energy source for the future economy. Meanwhile, coal stocks accumulate, miners are being laid off, and there are relatively few jobs available in the highly automated refineries. The oil imports will take an increasingly large bite out of the foreign exchange earnings, which will increase Korea’s dependence on the US purse. Nor is this all. The Korean government is now borrowing money abroad to set up 11 thermal power stations, all to burn oil, and has received an AID loan to buy 62 US diesel locomotives.
The same goes for the proposed Korean steel project. South Korea has no indigenous ore, and the US Kopper’s Corporation (part of Gulf Oil), the major initiating company in the Korean project, will no doubt be buying its ore from itself in the US – at the highest going ore prices possible. Of course, the plan might come unstuck if the US continues to ban steel supplies from Korea to Vietnam (to eliminate Japanese steel flowing via South Korea) – or if the Vietnam war ends.
Thus, much of the so-called growth of the South Korean economy is no more than elaborate shadow-boxing between different segments of US capital, its profits and capital guaranteed by the US State in order to encourage ‘investment in backward countries.’ US capital, bribed by the US Government, goes to a backward country where it distorts that economy in its own favour for years to come (and squanders scarce capital supplies), purchases its own high-priced products from the US to supply, in Korea, the US army or the massive US-financed Korean army, or itself or the US Government in Vietnam. The unemployed Korean miners look on.
 



The Social Democratic Movement in Prewar Japan
George Oakley Totten III
Yale University Press, 90s
The Japanese Communist Movement. 1920-1966
Robert Scalopino
California University Press/Cambridge, 52s
Mr Totten describes the fragments of the Japanese Left in the interwar period, fission and fusion, culminating in alignment for a small minority with the illegal Communist Left, and for most, absorption in the wartime nationalist Right, inactivity or gaol. Totten first relates the history, then examines the leadership, the politics and strategy, and finally the electoral significance. His account is straightforward but uninspired, focussing rather on organisational questions and formal political differences than on social or political significance. As it is, the account makes melancholy reading, as the moth of Social Democracy swings closer and closer to reaction. The book is a mine of information, but supplies only limited explanation: the detail tends to swamp possible analysis.
Mr Scalopino supplies a reasonably straightforward history of the JCP, but is, again, less concerned with political and sociological significance, and rather more with laying out the formal politics of the Party. There is much of interest here, particularly the account of the abortive Left phase of the JCP and its idiotic perspective of peasant revolt. Yet the account hardly comes to life, and, as with Scalopino’s numerous earlier volumes, the wealth of factual material is poorly disciplined by a clear theoretical structure which would explain events rather than merely present them. As it is, the author introduces oddities to fill the gap – as for example:
‘One cannot always fathom the psychological motivations that may induce or compel an individual to participate in an extremist cause, but the compulsions that operate in totally alienated individuals are many and fierce. Many of these individuals are, in reality, substituting political action – often of the most daring type – for needed psychotherapy’ (p.45, cf. also p.295).
Overall then, much valuable information but ungeared to rigorous explanation.
 



I
The détente between Washington and Moscow, the partial ‘ thaw’ in the Cold War, permitted the expression not just of nationalistic polycentrism between nation-States, but polycentrism within each nation-State. The forces of revolt were not merely expressed in a Gaullist foreign policy against NATO, but also in France’s May revolt against de Gaulle himself. Nowhere has this double process been more vividly illustrated than in China where the basic problems of survival for the majority are greater. Between the slack expansion of agricultural output and the inexorable pressure of a rising population, in a world overshadowed by the industrialised powers, by the military threat of the United States and the Soviet Union, there is almost no room for manoeuve. China, like the other underdeveloped countries, is trapped in a stifling straightjacket where despair and bold rhetoric mingle on equal terms.
But just because it is an underdeveloped country, China’s economy can survive much of the Cultural Revolution when it is isolated to a few urban centres. The rural majority continues its life much as before. The economy does not depend in the same way upon a single integrated structure. The villages depend much less upon the cities than in a more developed country. Thus, in some of the wilder talk about ‘civil war’, one must be careful to see how many people and places were really involved. Sometimes, it seems, a minor scuffle between two bands of teenage thugs has been duly reported with solemnity on Red Guards posters as a major struggle, and thence transmitted to the world press as a collapse of the social order. The information emerging from China is more fragmentary than that on any other country in the world, and must be treated with a certain initial scepticism.
On present evidence, the Cultural Revolution is drawing to a close. It may, still be a long time before the entire country is once more at peace, but the leadership does seem to be committed to establishing peace. Nothing has happened since the climax of January, 1967, to change the basic balance of forces in the country. Up to that time, the central Party leadership held the initiative and set the pace. It was able to escalate its war against opposition forces in the Party in successive phases, until it virtually abandoned the Party altogether. The climax was reached when the students, the Red Guards, were shown to have failed in their task of remaking the Party, and the Peking leadership appealed to the workers and peasants to ‘bombard the Party headquarters’, ‘to seize power’. It thereby released a host of new forces which rapidly came to threaten itself. Despite many short-term zigzags in policy, since January, 1967, the leadership has been trying to draw back from the abyss. It has been forced to devote itself to the problems raised by its campaign, rather than to the purposes of the campaign itself. It first sought to use the army (PLA) to impose a single unified order on the country, and then, when this proved inadequate, to promote conservative deals with whatever local provincial leadership, in collaboration with the army, would co-operate.
But to do this was to deny the earlier rhetoric of the Cultural Revolution, to rehabilitate the discredited Party cadres and reject implicitly the competing demands of Red Guards and Revolutionary Rebels. Peking had too little power over the whole country to secure its will, and sudden spasms of violence and conflict have swept through provincial capitals as new and old groups competed for first place in the new order. Despite the merciless exposure of the old provincial Party leadership, many of them returned to power. The stalemate between Peking and the opposition could not have been illustrated more vividly. Neither side could defeat the other, and in their common interest in domestic order against the mass of the population, both were forced back into co-operation. The crucial problem – namely, the balance of power between Peking and its provinces – remained unsolved. Indeed, if anything, the Cultural Revolution has immensely exacerbated the problem rather than approached its solution. [2]
As the campaign proceeded, it connected different layers of the population and Party in different areas at different times. This immense complexity of issues and loyalties is the background to the twists and turns in Peking’s policies. Once opened, the contents of Pandora’s Box threatened to take control. But each change in policy ran the risk of inciting new groups of people to begin to compete for the prizes, and ultimately, a real – rather than rhetorical – class war. There are some signs that a few of the rebels made the transition from attacking ‘a handful in the Party taking the capitalist road’ to war on ‘the Red Capitalist Class’, a phrase from the manifesto of a Hunan rebel groups, Sheng-wu-lien. [3] The rise and fall in Peking’s attacks on the ‘ultra-Left’ and ‘anarchism’ gives an indirect indication of how serious the threat at times has been, and, perhaps, still is.
The twists and turns in policy embody Peking’s search for an agency to replace or reform the Party, to sidestep localised webs of power in each province, and thereby impose a new centralised regime. On the ‘Left’ swings, it tried to use new forces – Red Guard bands, Revolutionary Rebel groups; on the ‘Right’, it brought in the army (PLA) in the first instance, and then the Party cadres themselves once again. The PLA is only three million-strong, unlike the 17-20 million cadres in and around the old Party, and provincial PLA units in any case are likely to have loyalties to the province concerned. The stresses within the PLA threatened the sole remaining coherent framework in the country as a whole, as well as exposing China’s vulnerability to Soviet or American threats. In the end, Peking was reduced to trying to rehabilitate the Party itself. Nothing was solved; two and a half years had been lost with nothing to show – except, perhaps (for 1967 alone) 86.4 million copies of Mao’s Selected Works and 350 million Red Books.
 
II. The Centralisation Issue.
The Cultural Revolution was an attempt to overcome the sluggish rate of China’s economic growth, and one of the results of that sluggish rate, localised power groups which inhibited central direction. At the beginning of the campaign, the most important of the localised groups were in control of provincial administration! At the end, new groups had blossomed at every level, and, indeed, outside the administrative structure altogether.
The battle is, then, over the distribution of scarce resources. It is partly between town and country, between different provinces, between the provinces and Peking; it is also partly between workers and managers or Party cadres, and, in some areas, between peasants and Party cadres. The first kind of conflict is one between different geographical areas; the second, between different national classes (or fragments of such classes). Territorial conflict is endemic in most underdeveloped countries, and has been central to the pre-industrialization history of the developed countries. However, in developed countries today, interdependence between the different territorial parts of the economically centralised nation-State has long since superseded conflict. There are, of course, some kinds of regional conflict still – Welsh and Scottish nationalisms are currently embodying certain regional demands. But these are only possible on the margins when social and class conflict is relatively mild. When class conflict rises, it tends to eliminate much of the significance of regional clash in modern developed countries. Rather than Welsh employers and workers combining to fight London; Welsh, Yorkshire, Scottish and other miners combine to fight the National Coal Board, part of an employing class which includes Welsh, Scottish and so on employers.
In a backward country, national interdependence is weak, for the economy consists of much more independent segments. National classes are therefore very underdeveloped as well. The ruling class is ‘embryonic’; that is, its members have not all identified a common class interest, and particular groups are prepared to press their opposition to the national centre to the point of open rebellion. Thus each territorially defined ruling group is open to pursuing its own narrow interest at the cost of the national ruling class interest; the final stage is pursuing this narrow interest, is to secede from the parent State altogether and create an independent State. Whether or not a group does this depends upon its assessment of its strength (how far it is economically independent in fact, how far its own subordinate classes will follow it) and its assessment of the strength concentrated in the parent-State (if the parent-State has a monopoly of military force and is willing to use it, the local group is unlikely to rebel except where it can get foreign assistance on a comparable scale).
An exacerbating condition in this relationship is the demand the parent State makes upon the local ruling group to relinquish a share of the surplus generated in the group’s territory. If the group’s territory is economically advanced, its surplus is likely to be an industrial one; in return, it may receive foodstuffs, without which is cannot survive. Thus, the industrialised areas are likely to have, initially, a greater interest in a strong national centre which can provide them with adequate foodstuffs. By contrast, the food-surplus areas are likely to resent central control since their product is taken, yet, in conditions of high accumulation, they see few returns in terms of manufactured goods. If foodstuff is plentiful, these tensions may be minor ones, the real debate surrounding the national distribution of investment resources – which area gets the next steel mill. The foodgrain surplus areas have power to influence national investment distribution when food is short; the food-deficit areas, often (but not always) the industrialised, areas, can attract the major share of investment resources when food is easy to obtain because they already provide an infrastructure of previous investment which will maximise the use of such resources.
On the other hand, every local ruling group has some interest in securing as much as possible of the surplus its territory produces in order to strengthen its own power within the territory.
This is a very oversimplified account of a complex issue. There are many other factors at stake in the bargaining between different areas, and between areas and national centre – for example, whether or not the area is also an international boundary; or whether or not communications and distance preclude the centre actually moving force against a recalcitrant province. In China, Peking has, in the short term, to trust the Lhasa administration because it cannot move large numbers of troops into Tibet rapidly. Peking needs to maximise the rate of capital accumulation if China is to develop as a national economy. To do so, it must secure unimpeded control of the surplus generated in every province. To do this, it must prevent provincial Parties skimming the provincial surplus for their own purposes, and distribute the national surplus as it thinks fit. If Shanghai can make the best use of new investment, then that is where new investment must go, even if it deprives the poor provinces and increases regional differentials in terms of income and power. However, a number of features over the past decade have steadily strengthened local power and thereby progressively inhibited Peking’s ability to plan. Overcoming these inhibitions cannot indefinitely be postponed. The longer entrenched enclaves of provincial power are permitted to stand against Peking, the more powerful they become, the more difficult Peking finds it to accelerate the overall rate of development. Thus, the Maoist stress upon the need for poverty and self-sacrifice is a stress on the need for a common subordination to central control, a common sacrifice of consumption for national accumulation.
In Imperial China, the conflict between provinces and centre was one important theme at different times. When the Imperial dynasty was strong, it sought to inhibit the creation of a provincial opposition by keeping the mandarins in circulation between provinces. Provincial mandarins were supposed never to have sufficient time and opportunity, to build up a proper base within the province. This circulation of officials has not happened in Communist China. The provincial administration of 1965 was still manned by many of the people who originally took power in the province after the fall of the Kuomintang, and the regional bureaux are still, broadly, the original occupying armies.
Between 1948 and 1957, the country as a whole was steadily centralised, a process culminating in the period of tightest central control during the First Five Year Plan. Yet the unity of the country still depended upon the local Party cadres: indeed, holding the Party together meant holding China together. But there was in this period room for Peking to manoeuvre . A respectable rate of economic growth and rising foodgrains output made central control tolerable. This does not mean there were not provincial tensions. For example, in the 1953-54 rectification campaign (which, at the national level, pudged Kao Kang and Jao Shu-shih), the first secretaries in six provinces and two autonomous regions were changed. Again, the purge of 1957-58 affected 12 provinces and autonomous regions. It seems there had been much grumbling among provincial leaders during the speed-up in collectivisation in 1956-57, and the purged were accused of favouring a slower rate of economic growth and qualifying national directives. In Honan, the Party first secretary was said to have argued : ‘Honan is different from Peking and Shanghai, and what is marked out by the central leadership can serve only as a guide.’ [4] Small personal cliques were said to have seized control of some provincial parties for their own benefit, the cliques appealing to provincial loyalties. For example, the purged Governor of Shantung is alleged to have said: ‘I am a native of Shantung, I am for the people of Shantung and the cadres of Shantung’; by implication, against the Pekinese. He was accused of packing the party with his own supporters and blocking national directives. But the purge in practice affected mainly the middle ranks of the provincial Parties rather than its top leadership. During the Cultural Revolution, others have been accused in identical language – for example, Peng Chen, the Peking Party leader until 1966, was accused of making Peking an ‘“independent kingdom”, watertight and impenetrable’.
Perhaps one of the motives of the central leadership in the Great Leap Forward was to break the provincial leadership’s power by decentralising the economy to the under-province level, to the county (Hsien) and Commune. Peking relinquished substantial controls over management, finance, grain procurements, price control and planning. There was some decentralisation of control and planning. There was some decentralisation of control over new capital projects, and in some parts of the economy, control was divided between the province and the centre (’dual control’ of the railways, for example). Peking remained in control of interprovincial grain balances, even if not of grain procurement. [5]
From 1960, Peking tried to reverse the results of this disastrous loss of power which, far from destroying the provincial leadership, had only strengthened it. But the agricultural disasters of 1960-61 made it, in the short term, even more dependent upon provincial co-operation. Any slight variation in local administrative control could produce famine in such conditions. Peking concentrated on a cautious, conservative economic policy, described earlier by Cliff as a phase of ‘neo-NEP’. [6] The margins were far too narrow to gamble, even though permitting the situation to continue only made it more, difficult to solve later on. Differentials between rich and poor, advanced and backward areas, town and country, between social strata, widened, underpinned by the provincial Party’s toleration of its own friends and supporters. The longer Peking permitted local power to continue unhampered – or rather, checked by little more than Peking’s propaganda rhetoric as in the ‘socialist education campaign’ – the more powerfully entrenched provincial leaders might become, the more slippery Peking’s grasp of provincial surpluses. The threat implicit in the shifting power balance was that Peking might become just a servicing centre for real power groups in the provinces or the front for a coalition of powerful provinces. Indeed, it has been argued that Peking’s purchase of grain on the world market was not so much to meet a general deficit at home as give it an edge in the hard bargaining over the distribution of interprovincial grain balances. [7] Peking imports about six million tons of foodgrains a year, which is a mere three per cent of China’s total grain output, but 12 per cent of central procurements and probably much more of interprovincial balances. However, the grain is not solely for domestic use; it has been used as an instrument of foreign policy – grain was exported to Egypt last year so that China could compete with Soviet foreign policy.
However, breaking the provincial leadership is only one part of the problem. Once the web of control at the provincial level is broken, it might merely be that a multiplicity of groups would be created at the under-provincial level, each vying for power in the province, each exhibiting what the Peking press calls a ‘mountain stronghold’ or ‘small group’ mentality. At least, in the old situation, Peking had only to deal with 28 local authorities (provinces, autonomous regions, autonomous municipalities). Destroying that level of administration could create thousands of different groups to be dealt with. In addition, both the central leadership and the provincial leaderships were not necessarily united. At the centre, within the small leadership groups, different perspectives were available, and as the struggle outside developed, so it connected with this inner struggle, fragmenting the inner cliques, which in turn fragmented the forces outside. At every level, factionalism threatened to dissolve what unified structure remained, producing an immensely complex picture where easy identification of the forces became impossible. And the disagreements came to range over the whole spectrum of foreign and domestic policy – from the best way forward for the economy, to China’s relationship to Russia, the US and Vietnam.
The PLA seemed to be the sole force left to hold the whole together. Securing the sowing and harvesting of crops was one of its persistent responsibilities. Yet it was too small to take up the burdens of the Party properly. If the rural Party administration weakens, the peasants may fail to relinquish the grain. Honan radio, for example, rebuked selfish peasants for hoarding grain, for ‘economism’, in mid-1967. But once the grain is hoarded, a force as small as the PLA cannot possibly find it. Fortunately, 1967 seems to have been a very good year – officially, 10 per cent above 1966’s output. But the limitations of PLA control were vividly illustrated. The centre of necessity had to begin the process of rebuilding the Party, whatever the economic cost.
The central leadership – or the dominant faction within it – closed all educational institutions in mid-1966 in order to make available an extra-Party scourge of the cadres. It was ironic, since earlier Mao had said the youth was the weak factor in China’s progress since it had not experienced Kuomintang rule. At every stage, the Red Guards needed official encouragement and support for survival – for transport, telegraphic services, food, accommodation, newsprint, etc. – and were subject to subversion by different factions in the central and provincial leaderships. By November, 1966, it was clear the Red Guards were no longer a useful instrument for the central leadership, but, on the contrary, merely engendered factionism and violence. From that date, the Peking leadership began the long task of trying to get the students back to school and University.
In February, 1967, primary schools were officially reopened, with secondary schools and universities supposed to open in March: all, despite earlier promises, unreformed. By June, it was clear work had not been resumed in the schools. They were used as faction headquarters, as dormitories; the teachers were often too demoralised to risk returning to work; university textbooks had been denounced, but no new ones written. One correspondent [8] estimated that on average a half to two-thirds of all school pupils attended school for one or two hours per morning to read or sing Mao quotes and undergo military training.
The summer violence of 1967 sucked in the Red Guards groups once more and made them, at particular times and places, briefly important. The campaign in the Party had little effect – the Red Guards were determined to get their foot in the door before the old order returned. Hsieh Fu-chih, Minister of Public Security, reproved the youth for squabbling in October [9], and said some of them might gain admittance to a reformed Party after a probationary period.
None of this had very much effect, and the summer of 1968 found bands of Red Guards again awaiting the opportunity to participate in the struggle for power. However, throughout 1968, the central leadership shifted its emphasis almost entirely away from youth – the ‘working class’ should now be the main element in the Cultural Revolution. The Party recruited squads of ‘workers and peasants’ to do the task the PLA had failed to do, and moved them into all educational institutions to reimpose discipline. The first such team entered Tsinghua University in late July, and was rewarded with a basket of mangoes from Mao himself. [10] A much greater stress appeared in the Party press on the errors of ‘intellectuals’, and the need for them to submit to discipline.
However, there were some suggestions that the more radical elements in the Cultural Revolution Group in Peking still saw the youth as a possible replacement for the Party. On September 7th, a rally to celebrate the end of the long agonising process of forming Revolutionary Committtes in all provinces was held in Peking. But it was not held before the famous Tienanmen, nor did Mao or Lin Piao attend. And Chiang Ch’ing, Mao’s wife and one of the most important members of the Cultural Revolution Group, gave a most curious speech to the assembled students which included the following ambiguous comment on her predecessor’s speech: ‘You will notice that – unlike Chou En-lai – I have pointedly omitted to mention the workers and peasants who are trying to break you up’. It had other waspish asides, and ended with an injunction to the audience to keep its spirits up. Clearly, someone had been defeated.
 
III. The Cultural Revolution in 1967 and 1968
The brief climax to the Cultural Revolution in January, 1967, was followed by an immediate and rapid retreat by the central leadership. A central directive of January 21st ordered the PLA to intervene and restore order, seeking to create conservative coalitions, the ‘triple alliances’, between the PLA, reformed Party cadres and Revolutionary Rebels (the ‘worker’ successors to the Red Guards) in all provinces. However, whatever the rhetoric about triple alliances, at this stage military control was the first priority to overcome urban disorder and stiffen the, administration for the tasks of spring sowing in the countryside. The PLA instructions were very wide:
’In all institutions where seizure of power has become necessary, from above to below, the participation of the PLA and militia-delegates in the temporary organs of power of the revolutionary triple alliance is indispensable. Factories, villages, institutions of finance and commerce, of learning including colleges, secondary and primary schools), Party organs, administrative and mass organisations, must be led with the participation of the PLA ... where there are not enough PLA representatives available, these positions should better be left vacant temporarily.’ (Red Flag, Mar. 10th, 1967)
Press and radio urged the peasants to concentrate on the sowing, and Red Flag (Feb. 22nd) even criticised those who launched indiscriminate attacks on all persons in authority – such a policy ‘robs the nation of the mature political and organisational skills of experienced men’. On March 6th, it reported that the Central Committee (which had not, apparently, met) urged all rural Party cadres to take the leadership in the spring sowing: ‘Those cadres who have made mistakes’, it said, ‘should redouble their efforts in spring farm work to make amends’.
However, the more the PLA extended itself, the more it became the target for criticism rather than the old Party order. In particular, the Rebel group it failed to choose as its partner in a triple alliance sooner or later appealed over its head to Peking for arbitration. Sheer military involvement made the PLA vulnerable politically. In Peking itself, the PLA was midwife to a revolutionary municipal committee (the sixth ‘triple alliance’ formed to that time; 22 to go) of which Hsieh Fu-chih, Minister of Public Security, was chief; two of the four vice-chairmen and 14 of the 97 committee members were from the PLA.
On April 6th, the Party Military Affairs Committee issued a directive forbidding PLA units to suppress any rebel faction or to use force to secure order. It was to be a free for all, and through the summer, the maximum violence and disorder of the Cultural Revolution occurred. The scale of the violence is impossible to estimate reliably, for the evidence is fragmentary and from biased sources. One Red Guard source retailed a speech by Hsieh Fu-chih in which he is supposed to have said that production in Peking fell by 7 per cent in April because of ‘armed incidents’. However, it is unlikely that the statistical services of Peking were up to any such precise estimate so soon after the event. He is alleged also to have said that between April 30 and May 10, there were 130 armed struggles around the city, involving 63,000 .people in all, with 50 to 100 casualties per incident.
Radio and press continuously appealed throughout the summer for an end to violence, to attacks upon soldiers and interference with public property. [11] The PLA was probably at the limit of its tolerance when the Wuhan incident in July dramatically illustrated its vulnerability and the central leadership’s dangerous dependence on the PLA. The Wuhan Military Region commander was Chen Tsai-tao, a veteran Party soldier who had commanded the 4th Army in 1934 and become a full general hi 1955. In the formation of Wuhan’s Revolutionary Committee (the ‘triple alliance’), he backed the One Million Heroes Rebel group as his collaborators. A coalition of seven Red Guard groups appealed to Pekin against this, saying that the One Million Heroes was just a front for the old ‘capitalist readers’ of the provincial party. Hsieh Fu-chih and Wang Li (head of the Party propaganda department) visited Wuhan to plead for the excluded Red Guards, and were promptly arrested by the PLA. Demonstrations against Chen in Peking, furious protests from the centre, rumours of the personal intervention of Chou En-lai, of paratroop drops on Wuhan and gunboats being sent from Shanghai up the Yangtze to Wuhan, finally secured the release of Peking’s emissaries. The air force was said to have taken over security functions in Wuhan. Most of the military command acknowledged their errors and returned to the fold, although Chen himself was replaced by an officer from the Peking Garrison.
The details are suspect, but the substance of the incident dramatically revealed the weakness of the PLA as a substitute for a popular revolutionary force. Attacks on the capitalist roaders in the PLA followed (e.g. Red Flag, Aug. 17), but briefly, since to turn the attack on the PLA itself was to threaten the only safeguard left to the existing leadership, the sole framework left for holding together the country. Lin Piao is said to have restricted himself to urging patience upon the generals who met in military conference in Peking on August 9th. However, there were contradictory tensions within the national leadership. On the one hand, some leaders sought to protect the PLA; on the other, some of the Cultural Revolution Group were said to be pressing for selected Red Guards to be armed to help safeguard public property. It was perhaps the second group which sponsored or encouraged the attack on the Foreign Ministry in the same month, and the attacks on foreign embassies, culminating in the sack of the British Chargé d’Affaires office on August 22nd.
But the violence was not restricted to Peking. ‘A wind of armed struggle is developing in several regions’, the People’s Daily noted on August 19th, and the New China News Agency reported opposition to the formation of Revolutionary Committees in eight provinces. Ceaseless adjurations and edicts from the central leadership seemed to have little or no effect. Tougher measures were required to repudiate the wilder men. On August 20th, Wang Li of the Cultural Revolution Group was dismissed, and others immediately around him accused of being Kuomintang agents. The honour of the PLA had received its sacrificial victim. On August 25th, the national press launched a campaign: ‘Support the army and love the people’, and the PLA was ordered at all costs to restore the tattered urban administration to order. On September 5th, Red Guard sources reported that Chiang Ch’ing had publicly defended the central leadership, the Revolutionary Committees and the PLA against ‘a gust of foul wind’ on the ultra-Left and the Right among the Red Guards.
In the same month, Mao toured some provinces in order to examine the situation at first-hand. His verdict stressed the need to re-educate the Red Guards and Revolutionary Rebels lest they turn to the extreme Left. They must stop trying to be active in reforming society as a whole, and return to their schools and workplaces to form triple alliances there – where, we might add, the dangers were much less, and in any case, overseen by the PLA. It was clear that the situation had to be stabilised as rapidly as possible, the glaring gaps in ruling class solidarity closed lest it incite outsiders to try and get in. However, the Party administration could not just be restored in its old form or the opponents would redouble their efforts to destroy it and might, in addition, destroy the Peking leadership as well. Revolutionary Committees must be created as rapidly as possible, even if in practice it meant no more than a new name for the civil administration of the PLA or the old Party organisation itself. Revolutionary Committees must be created in the remaining 22 provinces by January, 1968, it was announced. Where disputes occurred, factions should send representatives to Peking for arbitration. As it happened, only seven more provinces received their Revolutionary Committees by the deadline, suggesting how difficult the stalemate had become in many provinces.
One major source of grievance, then, was who was to share in the prizes of new order. In October, Hsieh Fu-chih offered some clarification to the aspirant groups in announcing a new Party Congress in 1968 – in May or June, or just before October 1st. [12] The Congress, he said, must be organised from the top downwards lest the old guard dominate it – ‘In this way, it will be possible to ensure that the rebels among the Party members will be in a majority’. And it should be much larger than past Congresses, not 1,000 but 10,000 representatives. [13] This would be a Congress with a vengeance, swamped with Peking nominees and incapable, by reason of its size, of deciding anything of significance. The 8th Congress was held in 1956, and, under the constitution, Congresses were to be held at four-year intervals. Yet the 9th, so long delayed, was not mentioned again in 1968, and one must presume that, with all safeguards, the Peking leadership still could not be sure of a majority.
With the winter, activity tended to fall. The Peking press concentrated on conservative themes, and the joint New Year editorial of the People’s Daily, Red Flag and Liberation Army Daily stressed the need to consolidate, to complete the rectification of the Party organisation and strengthen it. In order of precedence, the Party and the Young Communist League (supposed to have been disbanded in 1966) appeared before the Red Guards. This did not mean that there were no dissonant voices at all. In Shanghai, troubles were reported, and in February, the press was once more taking to task ‘anarchism’, indiscipline and disobedience among workers and students. It was clear also that the events of 1967 had created a subterranean network of contacts and communications in particular areas which defied the Peking attempt to reimpose silence.
A further 12 Revolutionary Committees were set up by April, but many of them were little more than PLA-cadre fronts. Increasingly, criticisms were levelled at over-hasty rehabilitation of those disgraced – the ‘mass organisations’ were under-represented, and many of the old cadres were sneaking back into the new order, cadres which were ‘“Left” in form but Right in essence’. Mao’s current instruction (reported, People’s Daily, 12th April) described the opposition to the Cultural Revolution as the same as that of the Kuomintang. The hardening of the line was a prelude to further violence. It came with the first intimations of spring, and blossomed in the summer heat. Yet it did not reach the proportions of mid-1967, perhaps because only one faction of the central leadership was supporting a greater role for the Revolutionary Rebels, the others being more concerned with the restoration of order.
The August 1st Army Day editorials unequivocally .demanded absolute obedience by all to the PLA. On August 5th, the People’s Daily denounced domestic polycentrism and demanded absolute obedience to centralised control (the paper said it was merely reiterating instructions contained in orders issued on July 3rd, 24th and 28th). The agency of social change, the leadership of the movement, was the ‘working class’ (People’s Daily, August 15th). In practice, this meant the recruitment of teams of workers and peasants to take over detailed execution of policy from the hard-pressed PLA units – to assume control of schools and universities, of factories and urban administration. The PLA remained in command, but its agents now became squads of civilians under military and cadre supervision. In the cities, teams of vigilantes were able to fill the gaps created by the erosion of the old public security organs.
Kwantung boldly set the target of one million men to join such teams, and Kweichow announced that up to 10 per cent of the workers in any one factory could participate in the takeover of educational institutions. Mao’s instruction on such teams stated that they ‘should stay permanently in the schools and colleges, take part in all the tasks of struggle-criticism-transformation there and always lead these institutions’. [14] Either there was a great deal of surplus labour hi the factories, or overall production was likely to suffer by cutting the labour force.
At different stages, the leadership had tried to control the Red Guard factions – by placing them under PLA command, by sending them to the Communes for labour, and, even, for a brief despairing moment, oh fruitless Long Marches. The shift to ‘the leadership of the working class’ can similarly be seen as a way of ridding the labour force of Revolutionary Rebels, shunting the worker factions into detailed and isolated work which would permit the restoration of order under PLA control. The Chinese working class has no independent class organisations with which to identify itself, to crystallise its policy. It exists in the Maoist teams by permission of the Party leadership. No doubt De Gaulle, testing the mild temperature of ‘participation’, would quite like to create teams of ‘working-class’ youth to bloody student noses, but nobody should be misled into thinking that this is somehow an authentic proletarian act. As will be suggested later in the article, wherever authentic proletarian organisation has in fact appeared, the central leadership has been quick to try and crush it.
On September 5th, it was announced that the last two Revolutionary Committees had been formed. The national press returned to the point from whence the Cultural Revolution began in the spring of 1966 – a critique of journalists and ‘some intellectuals’. Liu Shao-chi remained the prime casualty, the scapegoat and warning to all the other cadres now to be rehabilitated. On National Day (Oct. 1st), the Peking press said that the ‘handful of capitalist readers’ had now been overthrown and power returned to the proletariat (the same claim was made, somewhat prematurely, by Red Flag on July 1st). On October 15th, Peking radio said that China’s Krushchev had been deprived of all Party posts, although presumably he still remained President of the Republic, and on November 1st, Liu was the first time publicly named by the radio in a broadcast reporting the decisions of an enlarged (sic) plenary session of the central committee, meeting since October 13th. Liu had been formally deprived of all powers and rank and expelled from the Party.
Is this all it was supposed to be about? For two and a half years, the Party’s power had been systematically eroded, for no better reason than ‘an extremely small handful’ of ‘renegades, spies, counter-revolutionaries, and cadres taking the capitalist road’, led by Mao’s erstwhile heir, now described as ‘the main traitor, workers’ thief and Kuomintang running dog’. It would strain the imagination too far to think so much had been gambled for so little. While the Red Guards rampaged in Peking streets, Liu and the Party Secretary, Teng Hsiao-p’ing, remained untouched in their Government residences. Liu is still not officially destroyed, since only a full Party Congress can ratify his expulsion from the Party, and a National People’s Congress, his dismissal as President of the Republic. Such devotion to constitutional niceties suggests how vulnerable the leadership feels itself to be: violence against an important member of the Party can be the precedent for violence against those that inherit.
 
IV. The Provinces.
The provincial level is the crucial area to observe the Cultural Revolution, and yet it is the area where there is least information. The essential issues have been decided here, rather than in the Peking leadership clique. What follows are some notes on Sinkiang, Szechuan and Tibet, not at all because they are representative – indeed, they are among the least representative provinces of China – but because they illustrate some features of the opposition.
(i) Sinkiang is in the far north-west, with a long common border with the Soviet Union and a large non-Chinese population (Turkic tribes, who inhabit also the adjacent Soviet territory). Since 1955, the head of the administration has been a Hunanese, Wang En-mao, controlling the provincial Party, government and Sinkiang PLA units. The last is particularly important, since there are said to be 600,000 troops in Sinkiang along the Russian border. Lop Nor, the main nuclear testing site, is in Sinkiang, as well as plants pf nuclear significance; the main gaseous plant producing enriched uranium is at Lanchow in neighbouring Kansu.
The Red Guards in Peking launched successive poster and press attacks on Wang in 1966, accusing him of ruthless brutality in controlling his fief. He is said to have repressed Red Guard attempts to enter Sinkiang – turning their trains round and despatching them back to Peking, gaoling others, and even driving some to a death by starvation in the Gobi desert. The attacks did not meet their target. Wang is said to have been received amicably at Mao’s court in Peking on December 31st, and in February, 1967, the Cultural Revolution was officially suspended in Sinkiang on the grounds that it was a sensitive border region. The suspension coincided with a rumour that Wang had threatened to seize the nuclear installations in the north-west unless he was left in peace.
However, in June there were reports of fighting in Urumchi (Sinkiang’s capital), and again in August. In between – in early July – again it was rumoured there had been a settlement between Wang and Peking. The Red Guard verbal attack continued unabated, as did reports of more trouble through 1968. Certainly, Sinkiang was one of the last provinces to establish a Revolutionary Committee. In the Peking announcement of its creation, Wang, the chief leader of the province since 1955, was not included among the list of ‘capitalist readers’ ousted during the Cultural Revolution, but he was included as ‘third vice-chairman’. However, when an important Albanian delegation recently visited Urumchi. it was Wang who met them on behalf of the province and made the main address of welcome. He was described as vice-chairman of the Revolutionary Committee and Political Commissar of the PLA Sinkiang Military Area Command. [15] Thus, in practice, very little appears to have changed in Sinkiang, whatever the rhetoric.
(ii) Szechuan is in the south-west, adjacent to Tibet. It is vital as a key grain producing area. It is also what the Red Guards called the heart of the empire of the south and south-west. The former Party head, Li Ching-chuan, the ‘local emperor’, came under heavy attack. Kweichow radio (Kweichow is a neighbouring province) permitted a former Party secretary from Ipin in Szechuan, Liu Chieh-t’ing, to broadcast his criticisms of Li (presumably he could not broadcast them in Szechuan itself). He accused Li of seeking to maintain Szechuan’s grain capacity as a bargaining counter against Peking; of suppressing Pekin’s instructions to collectivise agriculture and create Communes; of giving collective agricultural property over to private peasant production; and of gaoling him, Liu, for two years for criticising the way the province was administered.
Liu, like many of the rebels, had his own fortune to think of – regicide is one way of trying to inherit the crown (Liu and his wife were subsequently both named as members of the Szechuan Revolutionary Committee). So that the truth of these accusations cannot be taken for granted. However, there was a fairly violent struggle for power in the province. In May, 1967, fighting was reported in Chengtu (the provincial capital), and also in June. On June 11, Red Guard sources alleged that 300 had been killed on June 7th in Chungking because the PLA political commissar had led 30,000 workers in defence of the old guard and against the attacks of 800 Red Guards (the figures seem very unlikely). Peng Chen, the Peking chief purged in the spring of 1966, is said to have visited Szechuan for talks with Li, to create, as the posters said, ‘a stronghold of opposition’ for the capitalist roaders. When Marshal Peng (purged in 1959) was re-arrested in 1966, it was in Szechuan.
In early July, a Peking team visited Szechuan, and also Yunnan province in the south; the leadership of Yunnan was said to be in league with Li to control the whole southwest. The visit did not settle the issue, for further fighting was reported in August, and also in the summer of 1968. A Revolutionary Committee was not established until May, 1968, one year after the announcement of a Preparatory Committee. All this, despite the fact that the strong-arm general of Tibet, Chang Kuo-hua, was transferred to Szechuan in late January, 1968 (he became subsequently Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee).
(iii) Tibet is certainly the most backward and barren province, geographically isolated from China proper and yet crucial for defence purposes by reason of its long and troubled border with India. Given the border problem and the Tibetan history of sporadic revolt against Chinese rule, the PLA has inevitably played the dominant role in Tibet. Tensions between the immigrant Chinese and the Tibetans are, however, probably less important for the Cultural Revolution than friction between the military rulers and the immigrant workers, exiled from their homes to work impossible hours in impossible conditions.
The conflict in Tibet, according to Red Guard sources, was between the Rebel Headquarters, supported by the mass of Chinese workers in Tibet, and the Great Alliance, sustained by the PLA under General Chang Kuo-hua (appointed in 1951). Very few Tibetans seem to have been involved at all. Chang was accused of suppressing the Red Guards and supporting the local Party leaders. In early February, 1967, the old guard was said to be in control of Tibet, and the PLA to have declared martial law. On February 17th, some 120 were said to have been killed in fighting in Lhasa, and on February 18th, Lhasa radio reported that three PLA divisions had been drafted into Tibet. Simultaneously, Red Guard sources said the Cultural Revolution in Tibet – as in Sinkiang – was suspended. The Military Affairs Committees of the Party in Peking issued a statement saying that Chairman Mao fully supported General Chang, and Chang’s critics were evil liars.
Some disturbances continued in 1967, and in August, some 500 Tibetan refugees crossed into India (the highest figure since 1962, when the border dispute with India broke into hostilities) with lurid accounts of persecutions. Again, Tibet’s Revolutionary Committee did not make its debut until the very last minute. Yet, Peking must have felt moderately confident when it transferred Chang out of Tibet in January, 1968, to become Commander of the Szechuan Military Region; although not so confident that it appointed a successor – Chang remained in de facto control of the Tibetan Military Region and head of its Military Control Commission.
Other provinces also had bitter and sustained conflicts, although the exact alignments are not always clear. In Kwantung, for example, there have been persistent reports of violence from Canton, of clashes both between workers and students, and between Rebels and the PLA. Canton’s proximity to Hong Kong makes it particularly subject to inflamed rumours, transmitted by excitable travellers. But there are more objective indices of some disturbance – the 90 per cent fall in passenger traffic between Canton and Hong Kong in August, 1967; the 41 bodies washed up in Hong Kong in June, 1968. On June 8th, the Canton Southern Daily said that some ‘class enemies’ had ‘fanned the evil wind of economism on a large scale in order to corrupt the combat spirit of the revolutionary masses. Some have incited the reactionary ideology of anarchism and sabotaged socialist labour discipline.’ [16] On the other hand, the Canton international trade fairs have continued on schedule, and food and water supplies to Hong Kong have not been dramatically interrupted.
 
V. The People’s Liberation Army.
The PLA has been an additional casualty in the Cultural Revolution. Spread too thinly over too wide a range of duties, its military capabilities can only have been weakened The Peking Garrison has provided senior officers wherever needed to fill doubtful provincial gaps – for example, to head the Inner Mongolian Revolutionary Committee or take over Wuhan. It has also been purged, as when the deputy commander, Fu Chung-pi, tangled with a Red Guard faction and was dismissed. [17] The PLA generally has had also to submit to factional onslaughts – as Chiang Ch’ing put it in September, 1967, when she rebuked the Red Guards for attacking the PLA: ‘Everywhere we seized their guns, beat them up and reprimanded them. But they did not strike back or argue.’ [18] If they did not strike back, then the experience must have been a demoralising one for the troops.
The administrative tasks constantly expanded, and PLA senior officers were expected to take the initiative in setting up and manning the Revolutionary Committees. [19] On the other hand, the supply of officers was pruned by purges. [20] As the PLA seemed almost to be dissolving into a civilian administration, so the US escalated its war in Vietnam, the Russians were said to have installed missile sites along the Chinese border, and Moscow indicated how far it was prepared to go in subjugating critics by invading Czechoslovakia. The pressure within the PLA and the Party leadership to call a halt to the Cultural Revolution so that the army could resume its military rôle must have grown steadily stronger.
 
VI. The Workers.
Since the Cultural Revolution was primarily an urban phenomenon, the industrial working class inevitably played an important role. In the older cities, there is now a settled core of urban industrial workers with a relatively long history. It is a group which is highly privileged relative to newcomers to the city, and even more so relative to the peasants. The core of the urban industrial working class still includes men with political experience which long predates Communist rule, and possibly, for a few, stretches back as far as the great general strike of 1927. Such experience is at a premium during the turmoil of the Cultural Revolution, perhaps suggesting what the Party leadership attacks as ‘ultra-Leftism’.
Theoretically, the settled core of industrial workers is protected by movement controls from massive dilution with new rural immigrants, but in practice, urban working conditions are so much better than rural that there is constant pressure from peasants trying to get into the city. The municipal authorities through check-points at railway and bus stations, on incoming highways, by use of the ration card, try to prevent illegal entry or the expulsion of illegal immigrants. [21] Any breakdown in the administrative structure permits both new immigrants to enter the city, and those previously exiled to distant provinces (where labour is scarce) to return. Officially enterprises are permitted to recruit labour only through local labour departments, and, where rural labour is concerned, only with the agreement of the city and rural Commune authorities. When the economy is slack, the pressure to recruit labour is weak, and the problem of the authorities is how to expel the unemployed from the city. But every increase in the tempo of industrial activity tends to threaten the control system – enterprises have a strong incentive to evade the regulations in order to employ cheap rural labour. Over a long period, migration raises the urban population well beyond the employment capacity available when the economy is slack. For example, after the disasters of 1960-61, the Government officially sought to cut the urban population from 130 million to 110 million up to 1963, and banned the recruitment of rural labour. The effects of these proposals were probably not dramatic, since it is beyond the capacity of the urban administration to check everyone (despite the organisation of ‘Street Committees’, District Committees, and so on, designed to check the urban population). In any case, the steady expansion of the economy since 1963 has probably prompted enterprises to recruit rural labour once more. If the urban labour force were not diluted in this way, the labour scarcity would become such that there would be a substantial pressure to raise wages.
If individual enterprises have an incentive to evade the controls on recruitment, the Government itself is also seeking to squeeze industrial costs. It has proposed the ‘worker-peasant’ system to span the credibility gap. This system is supposed to overcome the distinction between town and country, but in fact it is the revival of a rather nasty capitalist tactic to employ cheap labour on temporary contracts from rural Communes, while sending expensive permanent urban workers out to the Communes. Rural labour is not a charge on the city, receives few fringe benefits (housing, medical services, old age pension), and urban labour is paid by the rural Commune (if the worker is old, the city avoids the cost of his pension while he is retired and therefore unproductive). However, rural labour is suitable only for a limited range of jobs, particularly seasonal and unskilled work (such as loading and unloading on the railways, in ports, mines and lumber plants). The clash between temporary and permanent workers and their mutual attack on the Party officials that sustain the system is one thread in the Cultural Revolution as it affected the cities and key industries, particularly the railways.
At the end of 1966, there were reports of large-scale sackings among temporary and contract workers in Shanghai. [22] Retrospectively, we might guess this occurred because the Shanghai Party officials feared a purge and sought to appease the grievances of permanent workers and damage production in order to discredit the Cultural Revolution. Peking ordered the reinstatement of such workers, and this, in conjunction with massive immigration of Red Guards into Shanghai, precipitated a wave of industrial disputes, including strikes, demands for increased pay and lower hours. Just before Christmas, a harbour strike had begun, and the railways subsequently went on strike: together, this could have provided the beginning of a general strike. Some Party officials are said to have raided the banks to pay increased wages and year-end bonuses as a means of safeguarding their own position against a purge threat.
In the middle of this, some eleven Revolutionary Rebel organisations combined in the Shanghai Revolutionary Rebel Headquarters to seize the city administration. In retrospect, it seems, this coup was executed not so much by workers as by the faction that hoped to replace the existing Party administration (and probably included a good many ambitious cadres) but was frightened by the appearance of a complete collapse in order. For the city was not only flooded with thousands of Red Guards, but also youth returned from exile in the provinces or rural areas, and peasant immigrants. Strikes threatened to paralyse the entire city, different factions were righting openly for supremacy, and thousands of workers took the pretext of the Cultural Revolution to down tools and take free trains to visit Peking and complain of their conditions.
The revolt in December and January, according to Wen Hui Pao (Jan. 21st, 1967), ‘swept over the whole city and quickly spread to the rural areas with temporary crushing success’. In the middle, ‘hundreds of thousands’ of temporary and contract workers demonstrated against the system of their employment, imposed, according to instant official explanations, by the evil capitalist readers. Chiang Ch’ing offered the same explanation when she met a delegation of contract workers on December 26th. [23] Yet the new Revolutionary Municipal Committee made no move to rectify the anomaly, and a bold statement of the All China Federation of Trade Unions in mid-January went so far as to say existing policy on contract employment was to remain as it was.
Temporary workers did not give up. Despite a ban on the independent organisation of temporary workers [24], they continued to organise and agitate. Red Guard sources even said that one organisation of temporary workers launched an attack on the Shanghai Revolutionary Municipal Committee, saying that conditions for workers were no better than in Kuomintang days. The unemployed held a rally on February 20th, demanding that they be permitted to keep their jobs in order to help the Cultural Revolution. The Municipal Committee, now firmly in the saddle and protected by the PLA, sternly rejected their demand and ordered them to leave their jobs; it reproved them for ‘egotistical ideas’ and ‘economism’.
The Revolutionary Rebels were clearly not in the main ordinary workers, and, indeed, there was much friction between workers and Rebels. Wen Hui Pao (May 3rd, 1967) urged the Rebels not to ‘regard all workers as conservatives and to fight “civil wars” against them. We must be aware’, it went on, ‘that, except for a few diehards, most of the workers misled by conservative groups are our class brothers’. In June, press and radio continued to attack ‘economism’ and also what appeared to be the formation of embryonic independent trade unions, officially stigmatised as workers’ ‘guild organisations’. These ‘guild organisations’ had earlier featured in a People’s Daily article [25] where it was said that they were extending to cover busmen, cooks and technical school students, and were designed to ‘formulate economic demands and raise the egotistical interests of particular groups’. The People’s Daily would not have attacked such organisations if they had been solely restricted to the Shanghai area. [26]
In July, the Shanghai Municipal Committee again denounced a second wave of demands for higher wages, improved welfare facilities and a changed labour system. It accused some of a conspiracy – ‘they even put pressure on the new revolutionary order by threatening to slow down work or refuse work assignments.’ [27] Again, in December, the Shanghai Liberation Daily condemned ‘some persons (who) are once again demanding greater benefits and higher wages’ and others who were trying to organise temporary workers. [28] Early in the New Year, Wen Hui Pao [29] attacked ‘civil wars’ among ‘proletarian revolutionaries’ in Kiangsu, Chekiang and Anwhei provinces. These battles, it said, had started in January, 1967, and in some cases, had not yet ceased. In particular, it mentioned a plot to seize the railways – ‘These few people (the plotters) were so mad as to make out a plan for first controlling the towns and villages along the Shankhai-Nanking railway lines, occupying south Kiangsu, and advancing to control Shanghai and Chekiang’. Forces, it said, were assembled in south Kiangsu, and included former Party cadres. [30]
The railways were a particularly sensitive area throughout 1967 and 1968, a sector most easily sabotaged since there are very few lines and what there are, are crucial for the economy. In addition, the railways must have been very overburdened with traffic, since Red Guards and Revolutionary Rebels had been using them free since mid-1966. The authorities persistently warned railwaymen to stay at work, to prevent sabotage and resist all attempts to stop trains running. In August, 1967, troubles were reported from Canton, and in the following January, a conference of railway workers was called in Peking to discuss the problems of keeping the lines open. In the following months, stoppages, disputes and fighting were reported on the route to Lanchow in the north-west, in Kwantung in the south, and, in particular, in Kwangsi on the route to North Vietnam. On August 9th, Red Guard sources mentioned an instruction issued to railwaymen to end all violence along the Kwangsi route, to dismantle all factional strongholds along the Kwangsi line, return materials stolen from the shipments to Hanoi, ‘and return arms lifted from the PLA (the order was supposed to be dated July 3rd, and to repeat orders issued by the Kwangsi provincial authorities on June 13th). Again, another conference of railwaymen met in Peking in mid-May, and Chou En-lai is said to have pinpointed the place of maximum difficulty on the railways as Liuchow, a point on the line from Nanning in Kwangsi to Hanoi. On August 1th, Peking radio celebrated the victory of its supporters over the faction that had seized the Liuchow line. [30a]
Some of the major oil, coal and steel centres were also said to have been affected by spasms of revolt. It has been estimated that two-thirds of the mining labour force is ‘worker-peasant’. In 1967, clashes affected the main steel centre, Anshan, also the industrial city of Wuhan, as well as Paotow, Shanghai and Chungking. The leading rôle of the ‘working class’ was embodied in factory reorganisation to set up ‘collective control’ of production. Again, this was a ‘revolution from above’, designed almost certainly to inhibit authentic revolt rather than enshrine it, and to prevent wage pressures. It was said collective responsibility had replaced individual responsibility, wages had been made more egalitarian, and the clerical staff heavily pruned. [31]
The overall evidence is fragmentary in the extreme, but it does suggest that some workers have been stirred into activity by the Cultural Revolution. The sediment will not settle in the coming years.
 
VII. Stability
China is a very large country, and thus quite capable of supporting apparently large conflicts in a few isolated places without this affecting the majority of the population or even being seen by visiting foreigners. Thus, there is a grave danger that the impact of the Cultural Revolution will be exaggerated. Probably the mass of the peasantry (excluding those immediately around large cities) has been untouched, and the rural cadres only slightly affected. The 1967 harvest is officially rated as very good, and there is no evidence of real hunger in the accessible parts of the country (although some reports have stressed the increase in the urban black market over the past two years). The middle level cadres in the cities have probably suffered much more, with significant effects in terms of urban administration, the demoralisation of the urban Party, and a probable decline in official initiative. Yet even here one must not exaggerate. Many of the important local cadres have probably learned to swim in the new tide of the Cultural Revolution, and learned to swim on top. [32] Perhaps around the cities, peasants have been affected, and possibly there has been more peasant hoarding of foodgrains (both because the procurement administration is weaker, and because the black market offers high incentives to those prepared to risk trading on it).
The speed with which the last Revolutionary Committees were created suggests that the process was not much more than the re-baptism of the old order. That order has kept the countryside moving, and kept up the foodgrain output, without which the cities could not have made ‘revolution’. The concessions made to the peasants in 1960-61 – for example, the right to cultivate private plots for a private market – have not been withdrawn.
The trade figures show no dramatic variation over the two and a half years of the Cultural Revolution, and the export figures (from non-Chinese sources) are some index of the state of agriculture (cf. the table below). In 1966, exports to the West reached a record level for the fifth year in succession. In 1967, exports to the non-Communist world fell by 12 per cent, but imports were roughly the same. Sales to Hong Kong in the first half of 1968 were slightly below the comparable period for 1967; the lowest point in 1967 in sales to Hong Kong was reached in September, and affected textiles and livestock the worst. [33] This is fairly mild stuff beside some of the wilder accounts of the Cultural Revolution. It means that important Communes and factories have kept up output, and transport has shifted the goods.
The Canton trade fairs have continued to attract foreign businessmen, and routine trade negotiations have been sustained (Chinese trade missions visited Bonn and Paris in the spring of 1967, and Sino-German negotiations continued over a 3 million ton steel rolling mill). China’s purchases of gold on the London market continued – a routine shipment of £49 million bullion left London for Peking in May, 1967. External assistance also continued – to Nepal, wheat to Egypt (50,000 tons), the promise of &pound;100 million to Zambia for the Zambia-Tanzania railway.
Quite clearly also the nuclear programme continued. Although no scientific publications have been received from China since October, 1966, and the fate of University science departments is unclear, the Government research staff have been excluded from the Cultural Revolution. [34] China’s sixth H-bomb test took place on June 17th, 1967, and a seventh was suggested by foreign seismographs on December 24th although not officially confirmed (the Japanese also alleged a further test on July 13th). This does not just mean that the nuclear sites, plants and labour have been free of trouble, but also that the massive inputs of power from the national economy have been available. When US diffusion plants were working full blast to stockpile Uranium 235, they consumed an eighth of national electricity supply. Although China has probably found a cheaper way of doing this, it must still impose a major demand on national energy resources, a demand that must have been met despite any disturbances. In the longer term, the programme might be affected by the decline of the output of appropriately skilled manpower from the institutes of higher education.
Industrial output in 1968 is compared favourably by Peking with 1966, which suggests that possibly 1967 was a poor year. Foreign estimates propose a 15-20 per cent drop in total output last year, but a slow expansion in 1968. Virtually nothing has been said officially about the Third Five Year Plan, of which this is, theoretically, the third year. Other projects have been completed this year – for example, the Yangtze bridge at Nanking was completed in October, some ten years after it was first begun under Soviet guidance.
Thus, although this evidence is indirect and fragmentary, there have been narrow limits to the Cultural Revolution. In particular areas, there have been major changes, but these have been perhaps relatively isolated. In Peking, in the central Party leadership, the limits have been least. One estimate suggests that, of the 11 members and alternate members of the Politburo active in 1965, eight have been dropped; of the 11 active members of the Party Secretariat, three have survived; of the 10 known directors of Central Committee departments, only one seems still to be active; 52 and 40 per cent of the Central Committee membership have been attacked during the Cultural Revolution. [35]
 
VIII
The Cultural Revolution was an attempt by a section of the central Party leadership to re-establish central control over the whole country, perhaps as a prelude to accelerating the rate of overall economic growth. To do this, it had to destroy opposition at every level of the Party. It secured a monopoly of all official propaganda agencies, but it did not secure victory. On the other hand, the opposition remained (so far as one can tell) fragmented.
The national crisis which originally precipitated the Cultural Revolution remains as before. China’s rate of economic growth is too slow to give any assurance that it will ever catch up with the advanced powers, that it will ever be able to institute a tempo of growth which will submerge domestic cleavages and integrate the country. What was lacking to institute Mao’s order was an agency for social change sufficiently powerful and diffused throughout the country, sufficiently separate from the old Party, to execute his will. The central leadership was forced to rely on the army, and then, to rehabilitate the Party, lest disorder sweep away both sides in the conflict. Yet this retreat has settled none of the important issues, and indeed, it has exacerbated the solution of those issues. The Party administration, bowed but unbeaten, remains the sole effective guarantee of China’s unity and continued output. That administration has been itself fragmented by the Cultural Revolution, and perhaps, in part, demoralised, so that although it is the only framework holding the country together, it is now even less likely to take bold initiatives in development.
Outside the Party, the youth and some sections of workers have been involved in action, have seen the local ruling class completely discredited, have read reams of dirt on all the bureaucrats, and have perhaps glimpsed freedom. They cannot all be bought off with places on Revolutionary Committees, for there are too many of them. Subterranean communications survive, and pockets of resistance will continue, probably through to the next explosion. For Mao’s defeat is a defeat for Chinese development, and he will once more be forced to take up the same issues again if Peking’s power is to survive. Next time he tries, he may find an authentic revolt on his hands.
Thus, as China returns to silence once more, a legacy remains. On the one hand, stalemate within the fragmented ruling class; on the other, a legacy of simmering hostility among the other urban classes.
 



We have recently seen a public resurgence of racialism and, on a less dramatic scale, nationalism in Britain. The economic background to this change is fairly clear, but the mechanism by which the change is achieved is not clear. The resurgence of racialism has prompted comparisons with earlier periods of history, precisely because we are so unfamiliar with the mechanisms by which men change their ideas. Sometimes, the comparisons are useful, but sometimes – as when, in the German context, the NPD is compared to the Nazis – positively misleading. For the denunciation of the NPD as ‘neo-Nazi’ helps to conceal the much more significant changes taking place in the centre of German politics, and forces people to stress the ‘non-Nazi’ (and therefore, liberal) nature of the governing coalition. Labour’s denunciation of Enoch Powell helps to conceal the fact that the Labour leadership has itself played an active part in the racialist auction, has betrayed its liberal promises of the opposition days and, with cold brutality, excluded Kenyan Asians on grounds solely of colour. Enoch Powell is not Sir Oswald Mosley, and the undoubted elasticity of thought among British Conservatives is still not elastic enough to permit them to incorporate fascism proper without a major social crisis. These comparisons suggest something of the confusion which exists about Right-wing ideology and about its relationship to working-class thought. This article is a very preliminary introduction to a discussion of this relationship, and an attempt to relate its conclusions to a socialist strategy.
 
The Nation
The two central ideas of any modern Right-wing ideology are ‘race’ and ‘nation.’ The nation is supposed to be the popular basis for the State, and ‘race’ is the underlying biological relationship between the members of the nation, what makes them one group. It is as if a family was simultaneously a group linked by common parentage (its race) and was also in sovereign political control of the territory it inhabited (in which guise, it would be ‘the nation’). In practice, the ‘nation’ means the existing State, the status quo, the ruling class, although for obvious reasons, it implies a majority of the citizens of any country. When the majority are quite clearly committed against the status quo, when there is a major social crisis, the idea of ‘race’ is recreated to suggest that, whatever temporary ‘differences’ may exist, a common biological unity still unites all the inhabitants.
Today, the world is entirely parcelled up into exclusive segments of territory under the control, actual or theoretical, of particular governments. But this is a very recent phenomenon. The imperialist phase of capitalism was also the last phase in extending the control of particular governments over un-demarcated areas of territory. Imperialist competition settled what have now become known as nation-States. But in the past, the more common pattern seems to have been power concentrated in particular important cities or families. Their power extended only over the immediate area of physical control or potential control. Between the areas controlled by particular cities or families, there could exist extensive tracts of land unclaimed by one or other major power centre.
Cities grew as centres of economic and military power, controlling their hinterland. In the process of growth, they struggled to subordinate neighbouring cities, and when they had done so, extended their territory to include the area formerly controlled by the vanquished. This is certainly not the only kind of power to exist historically – clan and tribe organisation, without what we would call a ‘city,’ was also a system of power. However, in the European case, the class which controlled the cities was ultimately able to subordinate all other sources of power, just as one city was most often able to subordinate all other cities in a given area. The accident of power thus determined borders which subsequently became the boundaries of nation-States. Once in control, the major city began to centralise not merely economic resources – through trading and credit networks – but also established a common culture. It enforced a common language and literature, it created some of the key elements associated with a ‘nation.’ Out of the medley of clans and tribes, defined by the limited territorial area occupied, it created an overriding loyalty in common subordination.
All this, however, does not add up to nationalism. Enforcing a common subordination does mean that all inhabitants of a given territory must, for survival, understand the language of the dominant group, but it does not mean the inhabitants give positive support to that group. All that the dominant group needs is an apathetic acceptance, a willingness to avoid death by paying taxes and, for some, performing services. Provided the peasants grow the grain, the lord can collect it by force and the merchant by fraud.
But capitalism needs far more than this. It is no longer primarily a city-based power unit, but rather one in which one class successfully incorporates a whole area into its power, cities and rural areas alike. The network of its trade and banking pulls the whole territory into one unit, and its manufacturing requires a stream of willing labour beyond the resources of the traditional city. As the economy becomes more complex, its parts become more interdependent and therefore more vulnerable to the sudden effects of revolt or the long drawn-out results of apathetic resentment. Capitalism needs increasingly the psychological participation of all the inhabitants of the territory, the willing co-operation of all. Pure physical force will not keep the wheels of industry running at their most profitable pace. It is an essential part of gaining the willing co-operation of all that all must feel that the existing regime is, in some sense, ‘their’ regime (without all trying to make it their regime in practice).
In a very over-simplified form, this suggests the need of a capitalist ruling class for nationalism. But the territory controlled by the ruling class, the nation-State, is too vast for it to be clearly perceived by all; nationalism is an abstraction, apparently remote from the concrete reality each man faces in his own locality. To make nationalism stick, it must be related to any affection men feel for the places in which they live. Yet the affection does not develop except where men experience districts other than their own (and for many not even then). The mobility of the labour force under capitalism, particularly the migration of peasants to the city, does produce in many a nostalgia for their birthplace. Of course, a necessary part of this nostalgia is a rejection of the place where they have settled. But this is true only of the first generation migrants. Their children experience the nostalgia as ideology, unrelated to their concrete experience. For the nationalist, this ideology is something to be exploited. The memory of a golden past, when the true values of the native culture were unsullied by foreign and urban corruptions, can be a potent one for a population harried by the problems of existence. The ‘foreigner’ here lives in the midst of the native city and seems to embody all that is threatening and evil in the city, but at a later stage, he can just as well be living in other nation-States, threatening the ‘national’ territory, the national exports, ‘flooding’ the natives with immigrants or dumping his inferior exports at cut rate prices.
 
Minorities
It is understandable that when the rural newcomer arrives in the city, he seeks to defend himself against the threats he faces and to console himself for the insecurity he feels, by trying to recreate something of the place from which he came. He chooses his friends and wife from among those who come from the same place, who speak the same language or dialect, share the same customs or religion. The association may remain at a purely sentimental level and even disappear in the second generation if it is possible for the migrant’s children to be as successful as those whose families have always lived in the city. This sentimental level will include discriminating between those from one’s own background and all the rest, but it need not mean hostile rejection of all the rest as ‘foreigners’ or outsiders.
What creates the hostile rejection is the inability of the migrant or his children to operate on terms of equality with all the urban population. He is excluded, and his origin is the sole basis for his exclusion. He has the choice of trying by every means to pretend he was born and bred in the city – or, what is the same thing for members of different language groups – change his name and family history; or accepting his ‘peculiarities’ with defiant pride and rejecting the local population as intrinsically inferior.
What can make the situation explosive is if the new migrants are large enough and are forced to play a specific role in the division of labour of the economy. Then the ordinary tensions become inextricably tangled with, at least, the rivalry between different occupations, at most the whole class struggle. Jewish capitalists are singled out as the worst capitalists in Poland or Germany, just as, today, in – for example – Bombay, Gujerati capitalists face Marathi workers. Here all the trivial symbols of different backgrounds – what you eat, wear, the language or dialect, religious customs and so on – become major issues of principle. Men seriously settle down to try and create arguments as to why Sikh busmen should not wear turbans. Where there is so much potential for fragmenting a common class interest into separate sectional demands, any ruling class will automatically play upon the elements which divide different sections in order to preserve their own power.
But people’s willingness to side with ‘their’ minority or majority within the working class is not a simple question of how easily the members of the minority can act on a basis of equality with those of the majority (and so dissolve their minority). The choice as to whether to try and belong to one or the other is crucially determined by what can be gained from membership of one or the other. Membership of the minority entails one kind of strategy for survival for its members; membership of the majority another. Where the majority has no strategy at all for change – it is, at least passively, committed simply to preserving what already exists – then the potential member of the minority who needs change to overcome the peculiar problems he faces, has no option but to join the minority. Thus, where there are no alternative political strategies available to the working class – in particular, class solidarity – to tackle common problems, the class fragments, and one of its fragments may be a cultural or ethnic minority.
 
The Immigrants
If newcomers to the work-force like to remember home (and this applies as much to people moving, say, to London from other parts of Britain, as to people coming from abroad), they do not thereby become in a serious sense a ‘minority.’ Minorities, in the political sense, are invented, created, by the equally fictitious ‘majority.’ To invent one is to create the other, to suggest that what divides the ‘majority’ is less than that which separates the majority and the minority. In practical terms, the divisions in the majority status quo are concealed in order to highlight the separateness of the minority, the gap between the ‘coloured immigrant’ and ‘us’ (i.e. Harold Wilson, the Queen, Sir Oswald Mosley, Enoch Powell, me, and Mrs Hubbard down the road). It is explained that ‘they’ have a different culture (not, of course, colour) even though it is quite clear that on any definition of culture, there is very little uniting newcomers to this country. What does or can alone unite them is a majority hostility which forces the immigrant to identify with each other. It is the British, and in particular Enoch Powell, who are inventing a ‘coloured minority,’ and doing so, consciously or not, in order similarly to invent the unity of the majority, the unity of rich and poor, the unchallenged stability of the status quo.
Inventing a minority is the easiest tactic for any ruling class threatened by a new set of problems that might stimulate challenge to its rule. It is, of course, most easy where physical characteristics partly coincide with the minority so that people’s immediate perception connects with the abstractions of a national politics. But where the population is physically the same, the same creation of minorities goes on. It was not so long ago the Irish in Britain, and it could as well be in some areas the Poles, the Cypriots, the Jews, or whoever else can be found as scapegoat for current problems. In their colonial rule, the British perfected the art of inventing minorities in the name of protecting them against majority hostility. They thus safeguarded their own power as the only outside force capable of arbitrating. Whatever the intentions of the colonial officers involved, they succeeded in creating groups which cut straight across class divisions, which for a long time effectively prevented the majority seeing that the British were the first minority of all.
With the narrowing of the perspective for British capitalism, the sporadic sense of crisis, national-speed-up, unemployment and rising prices, a whole range of new problems faces the British working class without it having a common strategy to overcome them. The sense of pervasive insecurity threatens the status quo unless it can be deflected off on to some harmless scapegoat. Of course, the British ruling class has no use for a pogrom at this stage – it needs immigrant labour urgently. No doubt many of the largest employers strongly deprecate anti-immigrant feeling, yet on the other hand, such feeling is a trump card in their hand when the game gets fiercer and unemployment makes the demand for labour less pressing.
Thus the battle on race is not over whether the fictitious majority should be decent to the ‘minority,’ the pursuit of ‘racial harmony,’ but is a struggle over concepts and strategies for change. It is a struggle over what concepts are most useful to workers in understanding the world and seeking to change it. Indeed, anyone who assumes that ‘race’ exists (and ‘we have to live with it’) is playing the racialist game, is accepting the racialist terms of the argument. Men certainly have differently coloured skins, but unfortunately for the racialists, these do not fall into neat groups of ‘minorities.’ It is the same with the other supposed grounds for discrimination, language, culture and so on. Many of the immigrants are, ironically, better versed in what goes under the name ‘British culture’ than most of the natives. It is the native population which forces the newcomer to become a ‘minority,’ forces him into dependence on other newcomers for help, friends, welfare assistance and so on, forces him to live with other newcomers in the worst housing. But none of this follows from the fact of being a newcomer. It follows from the conflict endemic in the ‘host’ society; from deflected class struggle.
Those that assume that ‘race’ in principle exists, assume yet again a common interest on each side of the fictitious ‘racial’ border. In doing so, they assume the common interest of the majority, the ‘nation,’ and thereby line up with the interests of the ruling class. The battle has been conceded to the Right without any fight at all. It is not that ‘black men are as good as white men,’ but that the statement is as silly and irrelevant as ‘bald men are as good as spotty men.’ The liberal approach to ‘race relations’ is thus essentially one which helps to invent and sustain the problem the liberals are supposed to be trying to overcome. To say that a racial problem exists is not to make a statement about the world so much as to recommend a way of seeing the world.
Where, as in the United States, men have been seeing the world in this way for a very long period of time, ‘racialism’ can perhaps exist partly independently of other factors. But in Britain, this is not so, although if the liberal approach to racialism wins out, the liberals will have successfully helped to created a US-style situation.
Of course, prejudice exists. Some people do insist on choosing in an irrational manner. They want to buy a packet of soap, but they refuse to buy it from a particular kind of people; what defines the kind of people is in no way related to soap, its purchase or use. Such people are very rare in general, and crackers. Yet less rare is a much vaguer kind of prejudice against someone who is darker than the average. And this prejudice is only one of an amazing range of idiotic prejudices. The working class, being the most exploited class, has more than its fair share of such prejudices, and the members of the class not directly involved in collective work – for example, working-class mums – sometimes have an even larger share. One dimension of their attitudes to other workers is contempt for poorer neighbours or petty snobberies about who washes whiter or who plays bingo; the savagery emerges most strongly when child-murderers are caught.
But only a fool would think this was the whole story. Such trivialities abound, at the same time as workers (including their wives) are able in battle to commit immense resources of solidarity, self-sacrifice, bravery, and active sympathy with those poorer than themselves. The dockers who supported Enoch Powell are the same dockers who will come out on sympathy strikes with other workers, who are just as capable of battling to help coloured workers.
What this means is that what people think, consciousness, is not a thing, defined simply and clearly at any given moment. At every moment, it has contradictory tendencies, not just within the working class as a whole, but within the same individual. The contradictory elements are the roots of contradictory strategies to overcome the problems people face. On the one hand, people threatened by a certain problem – speed-up in the factory, how to survive on the housekeeping money when the supermarket prices have yet again gone up, how to get a flat – try to preserve what they already have and to assert that what they have entitles them to a better deal in the hierarchy; they are, they say, superior to all those others around them who betray the morality or standards of the ruling class. On the other, the worker throws in his lot with a wider collective, submerging his private demands in the demands of his factory or district. Insofar as the second is possible, the first becomes trivial. If the second is not possible – whatever the reasons – the first becomes an ad hoc strategy for mere survival. The first takes the situation which faces the worker for granted, and stresses piecemeal measures for self-survival. The second begins the task of transforming the situation, of changing the rules altogether. Of course, the first cannot be successful for the survival of the many.
Fragmentation of the working class as a class – creating particular groups of workers seeking solutions which benefit only their group – has its reflection in fragmented consciousness. What overcomes the contradictory and irrational elements is the possibility of real collective action, action which embodies the power either of all workers or a particular group of workers. That possibility transforms the available strategies for each individual worker. He is no longer left with only his own resources to fight an impossible battle. At one moment, he is faced with – say – the threat of sack, and nothing to fight with against this; at the next, his battle is lost in the collective campaign to fight sackings. In the first, he cannot be militant and he can win very little – indeed, he may ruin his work record for the next job. In the second, the utmost of his militancy can only do good, and he can, positively, win.
The degree to which contradictions co-exist also varies with the degree of organisation and traditional militancy in the factory. In some factories, the tradition consistently militates against seeking private solutions, particularly solutions which depend on betraying other groups of workers. The further one moves from such factories, the higher the possibility of contradictions. For the working-class housewife who experiences factory solidarity only indirectly and district or locality solidarity only rarely, the collective strategy is necessarily more remote.
It is because of the transforming effect of collective power on what strategies men choose that the orthodox machinery of parliamentary elections is so often irrelevant. The referendum measures nothing except what a simple question asks. It excludes the vast range of contradictory strategies available, and most important, strategies which demand collective power. A strike vote in an open meeting measures what workers think should be done, assuming everyone does it here and now. A parliamentary vote measures a choice between strictly limited alternatives, without assuming any collective power under the control of the voters.
Open discussion is thus vital in exploring the different strategies proposed to overcome the immediate problem. And in this discussion, the role of the militants is crucial. For their experience of past battles can crystallise the maximum commitment of the rest, can prompt workers to see as possible courses of action things they would ordinarily dismiss as impossible. The larger the group, the more radical the strategies that become possible. Nor is there some great gap between ‘economic’ and ‘political’ strategies, for the same principles apply. Without the militants, some strategies remain unspecified and it takes much longer for the same group of workers to reach the same conclusions.
Ruling classes always accuse rebel movements of being the invention of a few ‘rabble-rousers,’ wreckers or saboteurs. In the Barbican, Cameron found his ‘pocket-Napoleons’ just as in other battles, there are always Reds under the bed. The accusation has a small grain of truth in it. Politically dedicated men certainly cannot invent a revolt. There have always been such men, and they fail consistently to raise revolts except for brief moments. But it is true that such men can, on the one hand, provide an example of what action to take, and on the other crystallise a programme, a strategy, out of their experience and the current problem. In the first instance, ruling classes understandably try to knock off particular individuals or leaders just so that this function is not performed. Theoretically, we could say that where a rebellion is really massive, such tactics cannot stop it. But more often, people are restlessly seeking a strategy to overcome their problems, and in this situation, the militants in the factory and the political minority in society as a whole, play a crucial role. They do not know any God-given answers; they also experiment with the ideas thrown up in the battle, but they have sufficient knowledge and experience, a sufficient grasp of the aims, to play a key role in crystallising what is to be done. The best militants have long since overcome the contradictions which impede rational action, and can thus help the mass of workers to do likewise.
To return to the original theme then, inevitably hostility towards newcomers, immigrants, becomes politically important where both are competing for the same thing – for, say, jobs and houses – and there is no collective strategy available to force an expansion of these things so that everybody can have enough. The maximum hostility attaches to the largest and most easily identified competitor. The hostility in its turn forces the newcomers to organise in defence, to turn what may be no more than clubs of sentiment to remember home, into proper minority organisations which enforce a common discipline and solidarity on their members. These organisations themselves can become avenues of power for some, entry points, for example, for the black bourgeoisie into the status quo. They can also defensively exaggerate the differences between outsiders and insiders, very effectively preventing solidarity between the two. In some cases, time stands still; second generation immigrants practice rituals already obsolete in their parents’ homeland. The ritual consoles the member for the hostility he experiences from outsiders. And even where the rituals do not exist, they can be invented or acquired (as with Islam for some American negroes).
But again, it has to be stressed that all this is a function not of some intrinsic racial or cultural differences, but of the hostility of the wider society, the deflection of class struggle. There is nothing inevitable about the group a person chooses to belong to. Take the case of a West Indian clerk, aged 30, married with children, working for Ford’s at Dagenham. In that brief description, we have already mentioned a whole host of groups which, for particular purposes, this man might join. He is a West Indian, a man from one rather than all of the islands; he may be coloured (and so identified with other ‘nationalities’ of which he knows nothing); but he is also a white-collar worker, a Ford worker, a worker, a citizen of Dagenham, a man (versus women), a married man (versus bachelors for tax purposes), perhaps a member of the ‘younger generation’ for those older and older for those younger; a family man, a parent, a father, and so on. For each of the contrasts, there may be a club or association to bring him in contact with others distinguished in the same way. In general, the occurrence of a specific problem will make one of the discriminations loom larger than others – say, as a white-collar trade unionist, or as a parent in a Parent-Teacher association, or a tenant in a tenant association. The one thing which forces him to abandon all these other possible groups and see himself as nothing but a ‘coloured immigrant’ in all circumstances is the attitude of the non-coloured non-immigrants in these other groups. And the non-coloured nonimmigrants will behave in this way when faced with some central threat that makes most of these groups irrelevant and when there seems to be no alternative means of survival except by acting as a craft union to exclude newcomers. Any grounds at all will be used to prevent competition where there is no collective strategy available to challenge the system.
 
Racialism
’Race,’ then, serves the purpose of eliminating from men’s minds an awareness of the divisions within the ‘nation.’ It may also disconnect workers’ concrete experience of struggle here and now and national politics. Nations are not as exclusive as races, and the second only becomes fully effective in times of great crisis. A ‘race’ is by definition completely exclusive. You cannot join it. You are born into it, a member by ‘blood.’ By contrast, classes are not at all exclusive. Not only can you join them, but they are not particularly circumscribed by national boundaries. The working class has no direct material interest in the territory controlled by the ruling class. The obverse of the attempt to force unity at home is the export of violence. War between ‘races’ and ‘nations’ is permitted, even if deprecated, and international war is itself the final expression of deflected class struggle. The two concepts of internationalism and class stand sharply contrasted to nationalism and race.
Racialism is pervasive in our society simply because we lack an alternative strategy for change. But racialism is not fascism. All Right-wing ideologies are, to a greater or lesser extent, racialist, even if some Right-wing employers need the additional labour. But this kind of racialism, while it may indicate a crisis of working-class strategy, does not demonstrate that the ruling class is already so threatened that it needs to import fascist thugs to rule the State for it. A widespread hostility towards foreigners is an essential basis for fascism as for any Right-wing nationalism, but there are many more forces dabbling in racialism, positively or negatively, than just the fascists. A fascist regime is created not so much directly by what the mass of the population thinks (though this is important by default), but rather by the willingness of the ruling class to gamble on this strategy, to play with the rhetoric of revolution while instituting a radical conservative government. Hitler came to power when the German ruling class swallowed its doubts and invited him in, not through a mass popular movement seizing power. Some popular basis was there, and infiltration in the organs of the State was important, but at every stage Hitler had to control his movement lest it exceed the limits he imposed, lest it frighten the ruling class and become genuinely revolutionary.
 
Tactics
There are certain lessons for our tactics in all this. While we can see that the dockers’ march for Powell was a vicious and contemptible act of aggression on the most exploited section of workers, while it vividly illustrates how far the canker of fragmentation has gone and how generalised is the feeling of threatened impotence among some sections of workers, this is only one part of the picture. The march and the strike were also political acts, attempted collective intervention to secure a political solution to some of the problems dockers feel. On the one hand, it shows the bestiality of one docker strategy; on the other, the dockers connecting the problems they face with political action. How temporary the movement was, how quickly dockers recognised that an anti-immigrant action would not solve the problem, is perhaps shown by the feeble turnout on 7 July.
This said, racial prejudice will continue to exist on the docks. We cannot fight such prejudice directly everywhere it exists. The fight would be endless and hopeless since we would not be coming to grips with why racialism exists. As a result, we would not affect very much the level of prejudice. It is no use telling people just that men with a darker skin than theirs are harmless, any more than merely repeating the facts and figures adds up to a strategy. The facts and figures must be known and used in argument, but they will not clinch the case on their own. If you are desperately searching for a house for your family, and you see darker people from abroad living in such houses, it does not help you to be told that darker people are decent or there are only so many of them. That does not provide any houses, nor dissuade someone from the argument that if all darker people (or lighter people for that matter) were removed from the housing market, more houses would be available. In this position, most anti-racialists have no option but just to urge the importance of being nice.
What can alone in the longer term overcome prejudice is an alternative answer to the problem, an answer that is realistic in terms of collective action. This does not necessarily eliminate prejudice, but it makes it relatively unimportant. A father may remain reluctant to let his daughter marry a black man, but he is not going to join a campaign on the streets to expel all immigrants. But the strategy has to be practical. It is as useless saying that, after the revolution, there will be houses for all, as that, if everyone had a million pounds, we could build enough houses. To be practical, the strategy has to start from the actual power available to particular groups of workers here and now, and to incorporate politics.
This is part of the background to International Socialism’s appeal to other groups and individuals on the Left to join a common organisation. If the militants are linked together in a common organisation, we can fight the real battles and demonstrate that there is collective power available for an alternative strategy. We can go a long way towards preventing the deflection of the class struggle up the cul-de-sacs of racialism or nationalism. For if the Left had been able to mobilise ten or twenty thousand socialist opponents to Powell, the dockers would have seen that there were other alternatives, that they were not absolutely alone in facing the dock employers, the State and the press. Racial prejudice would not have stopped, but it would have been relatively unimportant. We could have afforded to laugh in Powell’s face, to lampoon his exotic terrors at being overwhelmed by letter-box excreta.
But the alternative strategy has to focus clearly on the real problems workers face, not be diverted off on to whether or not people want their daughters to marry black men. No doubt some St Petersburg fathers were anti-semitic, but this did not prevent them helping to vote Trotsky in as President of the St Petersburg Soviet. There is a racialist minority who will use any grist for their insanity, but by and large, the majority are not similarly committed. The jokes will go on, the petty backbiting, but it will be, in the struggle to overcome specific problems, trivial.
For us today, politically significant racialism means the attempt by groups of people to overcome the problems of jobs, wages, housing, schools, hospitals, of generalised insecurity. The racialist answer to these questions assumes that the status quo cannot be changed, that the housing stock and rent levels are God-given, and that therefore the only solution to a shortage is to cut down the number of people seeking houses. The population of the country should retailor itself to fit what there is. It is here the argument must begin. The problem is not idiotic landladies who refuse immigrant lodgers, but a housing shortage which makes landladies’ idiocies matter at all. If there was enough housing, racialist landladies would either have to change their practices or go bankrupt.
Of course, where rampant prejudice occurs, we must tackle it. But we must also recognise that this is only a negative, defensive reaction. It does not attack the basis of racialism, nor ultimately can it overcome either prejudice or politically significant racialism. Only a revolutionary movement can do that by creating a credible strategy and a credible collective force. The strategy links together the real problems people face and ultimate solutions; the movement links together the sections and groups of an entire class. The two are inseparable, uniting the militants of the class in terms both of organisation and consciousness. Collective action as part of such a movement and to achieve the aims of the strategy creates priorities which sort our prejudices, which offers hope, forces rationality: and puts first things first.

Note
1. This article owes much to Insiders-Outsiders by Ruth Glass, New Left Review 17, Winter 1962.
 



Control Imports Now!
TGWU Research booklet (based on a Special Discussion Conference of the Transport and General Workers Union, April 1980)
TGWU, London, August 1980, 52 pp., 50p.
Textiles and Clothing, the fight for survival
Transport and General Workers’ Union, London, June 1980, 16pp.
Import Controls Now!
A policy statement by TASS, the union which fights for British engineering
TASS, London, n.d., m 50p.
‘A “restoration of industry”, of which the utopians of capitalism dream, is impossible. The only escape is for the lower links of the system, the basic productive power of capitalist society, the working class, to take a dominating position in the organisation of social labour. In other words: only the building of communism is the precondition for a rebirth of society.’
(N. Bukharin, Economics of the Transformation Period, Moscow 1920)
The trade union campaign for the introduction of import controls has produced three pamphlets to outline the case. All three are well produced and well documented. They will no doubt supply the ammunition for arguments throughout the labour movement – or at least, at those rare points where there is argument on such questions. For generally, the case for import controls wins by default. The gale of unemployment seems so fierce, people clutch at any straw if it seems to offer hope.
It would be useful to outline the arguments presented in the three pamphlets. But on the main issue, there is none. The main TGWU contribution does not seek to prove that the cause of decline of some British manufacturing is increased imports. It assumes it, and offers by way of illustration impressive sets of figures on industrial decline and increasing imports. But where is the causal connection?
The argument about import controls is not settled by gut reactions. It is in part a question of science. We need a fuller picture of British capitalism if we are to discover what is wrong. We need, at least, to see whether there are industries which have not declined despite increasing imports, and industries which have declined but without any increase in imports. After all, there are still some seven million people in Britain employed in manufacturing, and British capitalism is still among the top half dozen exporting countries of the world (out of over 150 countries). Indeed, 1980 saw a startling surplus on the balance of trade, caused largely by declining imports! The TGWU case makes it sound as though there is scarcely any manufacturing left, and Britain is down with Tanzania or Bolivia in the world capitalist pecking order.
All three pamphlets present a cast of curious characters – ‘our export performance’, ‘our industry’, ‘our rate of growth’, ‘our main competitors’, ‘our balance of payments’, etc. Perhaps some of the readers will wonder who this ‘our’ refers to. The case is not argued in any of the pamphlets, but it seems to suggest that British capitalism belongs to the British people, not to British capital. Indeed, the employers are somehow marginal to it all.
The TGWU goes further, arguing that it has a better perception of the interests of British capitalism than the capitalists themselves. It quotes with approval the appeal of the TGWU general secretary, Moss Evans, to the employers, the CBI:
‘The CBI ought to end its silence and represent the interests of its members properly ... If they do not respond, and if it becomes necessary for an initiative to come from the unions, for us to forge direct links with employers’ associations against the government, then we will do it.’
Both of the main pamphlets admit something other than imports may be wrong with manufacturing. But in tackling this other factor, they are gravely jeopardising the possibility of the alliance with the CBI. The TGWU speaks of the need to expand the economy and ‘to adopt tough socialist economic policies aimed at planning the massive companies who control our industry and trading activities, and the financial overlords whose grip on the economy remains as supreme as ever’. Fighting talk, but the point disappears after one mention; there is no elaboration in the headlong rush to indict the rotten foreigners and their rotten exports to Britain.
TASS is much more sophisticated. It half recognises that import controls on their own mean nothing except propping up the profits of the most backward sectors of British capitalism. It admits investment has been inadequate and that import controls if anything but temporary, would dangerously protect the inefficient. So import controls are only a temporary respite for manufacturing while the government vastly expands the public sector to expand the economy to full employment, bullies and bribes businessmen to increase investment, and clips the wings of the multinationals. Expansion, TASS agrees, would entail an increase in imports (the TGWU must blanch at this admission), and this would make it possible to protect third world exporters to Britain and not to hit other exporters to Britain too hard, so warding off the possibility that they would retaliate by closing their markets to British exports.
On the face of it, it seems a plausible case: the restoration of British capitalism without a revolution. Doubt begins with bits of the case which are clearly specious. For example, the expansion of the public sector is possible without increasing taxation because expansion would ‘pay for itself’ – that is, the revenue the state would employ to expand would come as the result of expansion! Or again, the United States and the rest would not retaliate against British import controls because ‘they’ (i.e. the rest of the world) export more to Britain than Britain exports to them; but since Britain’s share in, for example, US total imports is small, the US could retaliate with impunity, if for no other reason than to warn all the others not to copy Britain (in 1980 there were some important examples of actual or threatened retaliations – with Indonesia, Australia and the US). Or again, prices would not rise with import controls – TASS quotes the Cambridge Economic Policy Group in support – because industry would expand, there would be increasing returns to scale and. costs would fall; this is as charming a bit of nonsense as you might find, for prices are not governed by costs but by competition, and if you exclude foreign competition (imports) then you give British capitalists the advantage of a local monopoly and of monopoly prices.
These oddities apart, it is most strange that neither pamphlet discusses the burning issue of the hour – worldwide slump. It is thus possible to discuss British problems as if they were fairly unique, and to suggest that this bit of a world system could expand in isolation, independently of the rest.
 
Lessons from the past
There are fairly few examples of the independent expansion of a national bit in a slump; three come to mind – in the 1930s, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, and currently a handful of backward countries. They are awkward examples. The Soviet Union expanded on the basis of a relatively backward economy with fully nationalised means of production – an example to alarm poor Moss Evans. Germany did it by robbing Eastern Europe and subordinating all to the drive to war. TASS wants to cut defence spending. And the contemporary ‘Newly Industrialising Countries’ have done it so far with a relatively very small industrial base and very low wages – again not a set of ideas the trade union leaders can be seen to embrace publicly.
However, the lack of a concrete example of independent capitalist expansion in the midst of world slump does not invalidate the case. But it highlights another important evasion: capitalism itself. Everyone knows capital responds to different profit rates. At the moment, as the TGWU rushes to offer support to capital, large lumps of it are fleeing the country. This is not merely the mysterious evil, multinational capital; it includes thousands of little British capitalists, moving finance into US or Japanese bonds. It is not because the British food or climate is poor, nor because British workers are stroppy – would that they were – nor because they are paid too much (British wages are now the lowest per hour of any advanced industrial country), nor because capital is irrational. The TGWU – like the National Front – is fond of presenting the British as kindly dodos, and foreigners as sharp crooks.
It is because the profit rate is – and in the past has been – lower than many other places in the world. A cumulative failure to invest is the result so lowering the capital per worker, lowering productivity and creating poorly produced goods at relatively higher prices. The whole problem is now made extreme by world slump, much fiercer resulting competition, and an oil-buoyant pound sterling.
So anyone concerned to restore British capitalism must direct their attention not to imports which are merely the result of this process, but to the causes of low profit rates. Indeed, people who identify imports as the problem are not merely looking at the consequences rather than the causes, they are positively diverting attention from the real causes and thereby protecting the position of capital.
And if we look to the question of how profit rates are to be increased – so that investment increases, so that productivity here can be used to smash foreign manufacturing with cheap British goods – an unprejudiced observer cannot fail to be impressed with the efforts of Mrs Thatcher! Here she is, slashing the labour force, cutting public expenditure, keeping the pound high to hammer British capitalists into efficiency, all so that in the end capital will stay put here or be attracted in by higher relative profits. Of course, you might rightly doubt whether her gamble will in the end succeed, but for capital it is certainly the best option currently on offer.
By comparison, the import controllers appear as utopian daydreamers. For there is no ‘British’ capital, no ‘British’ manufacturing. There is capital, some of which has a relationship with this island which entails that, if profits are tolerable, it will stay. Manufacturing is an international creature, linking production in many different countries – so-called ‘British’ exports are merely the processed results of ‘British’ imports, themselves partly the result of earlier ‘British’ exports, and so on.
Again, this is not just the internal transactions of multinationals, ‘selling Britain short’. Every little Birmingham widget maker depends on imports to manufacture, and sends widgets to Germany or elsewhere for further manufacture. That is why, as imports rise, so do exports – they are both merely part of a continuous production line spanning countries. In modern advanced capitalism, only reactionaries dream of tearing one part of a continuous line out of the process and proclaiming it ‘Britain’. They hold only the bleeding limb of a body that remains ‘abroad’.
This is why the main source of increasing imports is not the foolish addiction of British consumers to foreign-made goods, but British manufacturers searching to lower their costs by finding the cheapest inputs. The TGWU want workers to inspect all factory inputs to start a witch-hunt against foreign goods (themselves involving British exports at an earlier stage!)
‘The TGWU must take the initiative, through the collective bargaining machinery, and, look at raw materials, equipment, components. The employer must be made to sit down and talk about finding substitutes for imports.’
But this is daydreaming. It is the price and quality of the input which is decisive, not the last country of origin. British Steel Corporation wants to cut its losses – by using Australian coal which is far cheaper than British.
British Leyland wants to cut car prices and must do so to survive, so it needs to import ‘foreign’ steel. Meanwhile, the National Coal Board invests in South Australian coal mines. Rhetoric – even an earnest shop steward with a glint in the eyes – is not going to prevent capital trying to prevent its bankruptcy.
 
Reformist Nationalism
All three pamphlets thus dodge the central issue. Import controls, on most reasonable grounds, will increase unemployment and cut real wages. The ‘alternative economic case’ escapes the problem by conjuring up ‘economic expansion’ in the midst of world shimp. But if capitalism can be manipulated into boom by the activity of socialists, why the socialists are so powerful they might as well abolish it.
If the perspective is so unrealistic, surely it doesn’t matter? It matters not because the economic strategy can work – it cannot – but because it increases loyalty to the existing ruling class; it encourages chauvinism and class collaboration. Mrs Thatcher needs British nationalism as the sedative to keep workers quiet so that capital can be as international as it likes. She needs nationalism, but not the catastrophe of full blooded import controls. The trade union response ought to be, not a retreat into the British slit-trench, mouthing the reactionary slogans of the last decaying segments of the most backward British capital; but pursuing capital wherever it goes, building an international workers challenge from which it cannot escape.
That is part of revolutionary politics, not reformist nationalism. If that were the position, Moss Evans would have to stop muttering darkly about ‘greater social control’ – using socialist rhetoric as a threat to improve a weak bargaining position – and start talking boldly about the expropriation of capital. But then that would upturn the applecart, make impossible the tact and politeness required for an alliance with capital.
Neither Moss Evans nor Ken Gill (who introduces the TASS pamphlet) want a revolution. They want only stable and prosperous trade unions within a stable and prosperous capitalism. They want things to stay as they are and workers to be content – or, as Moss Evans puts it, ‘social harmony’. Socialists however ought never to want things to stay as they are.
 



Three Faces of Fascism
Ernst Nolte
Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 70s.
This is an important and useful book, and one of the first attempts to place fascism in a comprehensive and sophisticated theoretical framework: as such, it deserves close reading and understanding by all socialists.
Professor Nolte seeks to place fascism in its historical era, outline its essence, integrate it with general cultural history, and then identify it as both general phenomenon and unique configuration in three countries and three organisations: Action Française, the Fascisti and the Nazis. Each of these main case studies examines the relationship between the organisation concerned and its contemporary fascist organisations in other countries, the reasons for its rise and intellectual background, its history, practice and doctrine. Finally, Nolte seeks to define fascism in relationship to three conceptual views of bourgeois society, those of Marx, Nietzsche and Weber. The methodology provides fruitful insights, and the philosophic framework gives a depth to the analysis which is notably lacking in both ordinary bourgeois accounts and the crudely mechanical Stalinist explanation of fascism, as well as encompassing the valid insights in both. More could certainly have been said on the intellectual traditions, not necessarily related to particular thinkers, and on the crucial transmutation of late Liberalism – from the individual to the Individual to the Fuhrer, from market competition to the struggle for power. But Nolte is particularly good in mapping out the tradition of racialism and integrating it as a crucial aspect of fascism as he defines it. His book is of primarily theoretical interest, so his sociological insights are no more than is already known – much detailed work is still needed on the generation of fascist consciousness. However, Professor Nolte quite rightly takes fascism very seriously as a phenomenon of consciousness, and, as such, has presented an extremely fruitful framework for examining it as well as providing much useful analysis within that framework. It is to be hoped that the publishers will shortly produce a paperback edition so that this work can reach a far wider audience than its present price permits.
 



Communism in North Vietnam
P.J. Honey
Ampersand, 7s. 6d.
Mr Honey is one of the few authorities on North Vietnam, a country about which remarkably little reliable is known, and he has here written a short popular guide to the politics of Hanoi. His viewpoint is sharply even if conventionally anti-communist – he tolerates no mild qualifications to his analysis – and he seems to believe that history is guided primarily by the plots of the few against the many. He assumes in addition that a communist is a very peculiar chap – the gap between him and the non-communist is one of startling immensity, so that plots, betrayal and brutality by the second are somehow never as bad as by the first, or at least, not to be described in the same tone of indignant emotionalism; thus, communism extends its tentacles, but the United States only helps her friends. Since the information is in any case very thin, conjecture replaces evidence – there is much Hanoi-ology, deductions of great moment from trivial happenings, and Mr Honey sometimes gives way to the temptation to try and fill in what might have happened as if it happened. Given that the account was in any case written before the fall of Diem and the subsequent rapid decay of the Saigon regime, much of what is suggested becomes unreal. If you know nothing at all about North Vietnam, this is one of the few books at present available that might tell you something, even if heavily biased. The second half of the book’s account of the balancing of Hanoi between Moscow and Pekin is, however, better and a useful piece of research.
 



Leadership in Communist China
John Wilson Lewis
Cornell University Press/OUP, 40s.
The subject of leadership in general is one of great difficulty – for obvious reasons, the complex of common-sense and mythology is here at its most fetishised. Disentangling the significance of particular external conditions, of personalities and leadership organisation (separating the last two again into ‘independent factors’ and the product of peculiar conditions, both contemporary and historical) is an enterprise full of pitfalls as the awful distortions embodied in the loose use of the word ‘charismatic’ demonstrate. (The evolution of the use of this word is itself worth examination; intended in part to describe popular legitimisation of a special sort of leadership in transitional periods and carrying magical connotations, it is now used to ascribe magic to any successful leader anywhere at any time.) Leadership in China multiplies the problems indefinitely since the evidence is extremely sparse and there are no means available to check hypothesis on the fine distinctions. Mr Lewis has gathered together what evidence is available, supplemented by refugee interviews, and he discusses at length the evolution of the Chinese leadership’s rationale for itself, although he is not so good at deriving the nature and explanation of Chinese leadership implicit in its role before 1949 – naturally, he tends to share some of the assumptions of the Chinese leaders about the general nature of leadership so that he cannot prise away the deeper elements of the myth by counterposing it to the reality of popular interests. Maoism is different from Stalinism but its precise differences are difficult to evaluate – a flat recitation of the stress on continuous mass participation, the flexibility and pragmatism (which usually means rightish deviationism) of policy, the periodic institutionalisation of inner-party struggle, the recruitment of any local leadership elements almost regardless of political considerations, the vast size of the party, the mild use of the purge to maintain conformity, and so on, the mere list does not definitively differentiate Maoist practice from Stalinist. Key differences between China and the Soviet Union explain much difference in stress, but ultimately do not measure how far the CCP has succeeded in spanning the class gap, has succeeded in the total identification of mass interests with its own from the point of view of the average Chinese. The evidence on disaffection is too thin in: China proper or comes from too suspect sources (viz. Taipeh) to help much.
To the rationale of leadership, Mr Lewis adds what is known of party organisation down to the commune level, of growth in membership and social distribution, and so on. There is a little lacing of fashionable sociological jargon and the happy game of seeing how Confucian Maoism really is, but in general the work is serious. For reasons implicit in the subject, the work cannot be definitive but it raises topics of interest (for example, the reinfiltration of ruling family systems into the commune leadership) even if there is not much new light to be shed (for example, on the rumoured struggle between Chou’s State-military faction and the Teng party group). In general, the book’s merit is to collect much useful information in one place.
 



The Hidden God, A Study of the Tragic Vision in the Pensées of Pascal and the Tragedies of Racine
Lucien Goldmann
Routledge, 70s.
The Hidden God is a most difficult, complex and profound work, the problems of which are compounded by any sort of Anglo Saxon philosophic background. Goldman, a distinguished French philosopher and dialectical materialist, presents Lukàcs’ concept of a tragic hero (Lukàcs’, Die Seele and die Formen), extrapolates from this a tragic vision which he discusses at length, and then goes on to use this as his basic analytic concept in an examination of Pascal and Racine; conjoined to this, he identifies the essence of Jansenism in seventeenth century France as encompassing this tragic vision, and, in Pascal, as being the preliminary formulation of the central contradiction of all modern philosophy (between fact and value, understanding and action, science and God, individuals and. totalities), superseded only by dialectical thought in Hegel and Marx. This crude resume does no more than cite the more obvious features of this work, the richness and subtlety of which cannot be evoked in a review. At each stage, the concrete particular is integrated with the whole, and the whple brought to bear on the particular – Pascal is linked and contrasted with Descartes before him, with the earlier example of a tragic vision in Greek tragedy, with Kant after him, and, above all, with Marx.
The certainties of existence, presumed within a stable world vision, dissolve in the transition between world visions, between different types of society, and are replaced in marginal groups (that is, groups not belonging either to the old order or to the new) by a pervading sense of tragic doubt or philosophic demoralisation –
‘All forms of consciousness express a provisional and mobile balance between the individual and his social environment; when this balance can be fairly easily established and is relatively stable, or when it can pass fairly easily from one form to another, men tend not to think about the problems raised by their relationship to the external world. On a social as well as on an individual plane, it is the sick organism which creates awareness, and it is in periods of social and political crisis that men are most aware of the enigma of their presence in the world. In the past, this awareness has tended to find its expression in tragedy. At the present day it shows itself in existentialism’ (p.48).
The tragedy lies in simultaneously comprehending the essence and promise of each vision, of each order of society, despite their irreconcilability – God is and He is not; He is both the central pivot of existence, the concept which gives meaning to all the particulars of experience and to the future, and, in Descartes, no more than a useful term to cover the gaps in rational knowledge. Pascal, on Goldmann’s interpretation, both shared in the excitement of scientific discovery, whose philosophic presuppositions he recognised, shared in a social world where God was no more than a piety, and yet held beliefs that were firmly integrated into the pursuit of a vision of the divine. The contradiction constitutes an unsupportable agony that demands compromise, even though that compromise can only deny the truth of both thesis and antithesis. In seeing the truth of incompatible propositions describing existence, for Goldmann, is the essence of the tragic vision, and a truncated version of dialectical thought – in the truncatedness lies the tragedy.
Goldmann suggests, tentatively, that Jansenism was the social embodiment of the tragic vision of a social group, the noblesse de robe, the class of lawyers and administrators, created and maintained by the French monarchy; the King, allying to the Third Estate, used this hereditary legal class, to gain supremacy over the nobility proper, only to abandon the noblesse de robe on attaining the power to balance class against class: the noblesse de robe was superseded by royally appointed officials, corps de commissaires. Thus rejected by the power that had created it, the noblesse de robe was trapped between its own loyalty (the former condition for its advancement) and its hostility, compounded by political impotence. Goldmann schematises three Jansenist responses to the contradiction – in Barcos, total withdrawal from and rejection of the world; in Arnauld, a compromise that attempted to accept Descartes in the natural world and God in the supernatural; and in Pascal, an acceptance in full measure of the contradiction –
‘The clear voice of the judgement of God no longer sounds out above the march of human destiny, for the voice which once gave life to all has now fallen silent. Man must live alone and by himself. The voice of the Judge has fallen silent for ever, and this is why man will always be vanquished, doomed to destruction in victory even more than in defeat’ (Lukàcs, op. cit., pp.332-3).
Pascal continues his scientific work and lives in the world, both of which are, in principle, meaningless; he continues to strive after a God who gives no reply. Conscious of thesis and its negation, but without dialectical synthesis, Pascal offers only the wager: ‘learn from those,’ he tells the man intellectually convinced of God’s existence but unable to believe, ‘who have been tied as you are now tied, and who now wager all they have’ (Fragment 233, Pensées, Everyman edition). Goldmann comments:
‘Once practical philosophy is no longer centred around an ideal of individual wisdom but comes to deal primarily with external reality, man’s life takes on the aspect of a wager on the success of his own action and, consequently, on the existence of a force which transcends the individual. This force must accompany or contribute to the efforts which he makes, so that his life becomes a wager that God, Humanity or the Proletariat exists and will triumph’ (p.301).
‘It would be just as absurd for Pascal or Kant to deny the existence of God on empirical grounds as it would for Marx to use the same criterion to assert or deny the validity of the idea of progress or of humanity’s march towards socialism. In both cases, the initial wager depends upon an act of faith, on “reasons of the heart” in Pascal, or the validity of reason in Kant and Marx, a wager which goes beyond and integrates theory and practice’ (p.92).
But the contradiction of Pascal can, of its nature, achieve no synthesis, even if he cannot escape the gamble of being and acting. Goldmann argues that Pascal could have no conception of time, of development and process. Thus, the synthesis which integrates Marxism is denied him – the propositions of the contradiction are absolute and eternal, their essence cannot be superseded in this world. Pascal’s Pensées are then, for Goldmann, both a profound contribution to philosophy, a document in the conquest of man’s essence, and a cry of anguish for an integrated vision where God is real and the centre of a meaningful universe. From Pascal, he moves to the tragedies of Racine, culminating in the identification of the same complex of incompatibilities in Phèdre. Only at the end, does one fully comprehend the opening sections of Goldmann’s book where he attempts to integrate his conception of Western culture for the purposes of this study, identifying the crucial concepts in his methodology and the criteria to be employed. Jansenism provides the specific context, a concrete historical situation and an expression of a continuing tradition, both a historical by-way and part of the mainstream. The reader travels from totality to particular, from Pascal to Marx, each illuminating the other. The substance of Goldmann’s contributions seems too important initially to carp, at distortions – indeed, only Pascal scholars will be fully able to appraise his contribution on this narrow score. His schematisation is necessary and fruitful even if it tends to distort the evidence at points. The importance of Goldmann lies less in what he has to say about Pascal or Jansenism than in his general approach and its implications – this will have to be ruminated on for a long time before one can reach a general assessment. Overall, it is a very impressive work, an event of a high order in Marxist scholarship.
 



The article which follows describes certain features of Japanese trade-union development, but it is worth citing beforehand some of the peculiarities of general Japanese development. The following notes, necessarily impressionistic as well as schematic in the space available, are designed for this purpose.
1 – The large labour surplus throughout Japan’s development has had a number of implications: high unemployment or underemployment, very low wages and poor conditions, low efficiency in the use of labour but high in use of capital, weak unionism, and, among employed workers, a higher priority attached to security of employment than to increased pay. Employers have been able to divide the work force (as in India also, for example) into permanent employees with high job security despite relatively low pay, and temporary employees, taken on in a boom but dropped immediately the pace begins to slacken; they have also been able to avoid paying continuously a living wage – the actual wage was long ago devalued by inflation, and to it has, over the years, been added a multiplicity of ‘additional’ payments under many different headings – this makes wage bargaining extremely difficult to all except the expert (tending to put unions under the control of intellectuals who can devote all their attention to the complexities of the pay structure), increases worker mystification, and permits the employer to drop various items from pay during a recession, esepcially items explicitly linked to the employer’s ‘generosity.’
2 – The historical economy in Japan during development can be seen as divided into three sectors: (a) land, the source of unskilled labour and its retreat during unemployment; (b) small industry, sucking labour off the land during a boom and training it in industrial skills for large industry, but expelling labour back to the land during a slump; the size of units in this sector constantly encouraged workers to feel they themselves might become small owners, and the personal relations between employer and labour encourages the maintenance of continued ‘feudal’ ethics of industrial organisation; small industry kept in partial employment the temporary labour of large industry, and, in its own size as a sector, absorbed the fluctuations of the world market and thus insulated large industry from varying with these fluctuations; (c) large industry. The middle sector has historically been very important. Often crucially dependent on large industry (through providing parts or ancillary services), small industry both identified with the interests of the large monopolistic companies (zaibatsu), and resented them, so being responsive to a radical Right appeal against the zaibatsu. The erosion of small industry during slump provided a strong ‘anti-capitalist’ fervour to Japanese politics, for in an economic downturn it became clear how little the zaibatsu needed small industry. In the post-war expansion and particularly recently, with increasing labour scarcity, the zaibatsu have a positive interest in the destruction of labour-intensive small industry so that the middle sector’s labour will become available to large industry. Growth in the economy is sustained throughout recessions simply because small industry takes the strain in bankruptcies, while the large-scale investors keep up the rate of investment and the rate of inflation so that wages constantly lag behind. Necessarily, the elimination of the middle sector will make the Japanese economy less ‘flexible’ and more vulnerable to a generalised impact from recession.
3 – The lack of indigenous resources makes Japanese growth crucially dependent on world trade, on the long-distance import of raw materials and export of processed goods. With the shift of world trade to the Atlantic area, freight charges to the most expansive sector of the world market necessitate that Japanese costs be kept well below Western ones, a condition easily achieved in conditions of labour surplus by keeping wages down and starving welfare facilities. This factor concentrates Japanese attention on securing raw material supply points and markets closer to Japan, in Asia and Africa; in conditions of autarchy in the world economy, this means imperialism in East and South-East Asia. However, in the post-war period when Japan has been excluded from the Asian mainland, its attention has been forced eastwards to help the formation of a Pacific economic community, currently taking some 70 per cent of Japanese world trade: US capital is currently developing raw material sources in Australia and Canada to export the products to Japan, the processed commodities then returning to the area as Japanese exports.
4 – There was no bourgeois revolution proper in Japan. The Meiji Restoration of 1868 was the overthrow by the outer nobles of the inner feudal lords dominating the centre, with almost no role cast for the Tokugawa merchants (wealthy as they were). The coup was impelled by foreign aggression (admittedly, against a regime already very weakened), not as the natural expression of the economic supremacy of a new bourgeoisie; on the contrary, the Restoration was required to permit development. The initial drive of the new State was therefore to industrialise for military purposes, not for private profit. Briefly in the 1920s, as in Germany, the weak Japanese bourgeoisie, inflated by the World War boom and destruction of Japan’s European competitors, sought to take over the political stage, but its efforts were crushed in the 1930s by the resurgence of the military successors to the samurai. This military clique (itself internally divided) was rooted in the slump misery of the petite bourgeoisie and the peasantry, and proclaimed a programme of anti-capitalist agrarian revival and expansion in the Far East to exploit the weakened position of European imperialism, to secure raw material supply points for war potential and to complete the creation of a territorial buffer zone round Japan. The military claimed to lead a nationalist crusade against the ‘selfish’ zaibatsu, and demanded a cultural regression to romanticised feudal norms, without actually infringing the basic zaibatsu position, indeed strengthening it by massive rearmament. The inability of the Japanese bourgeoisie to attain full political power meant that the forms of Japanese society survived – the Emperor system, for example, and ‘feudal’ ethics in industry.
5 – The ‘delayed’ revolution was executed by the American occupation – from above. Initially, the reforms introduced were radical and far-reaching, but the development of the Cold War compelled the US to seek Japan’s participation as an ally, and accordingly the reforms went into reverse gear. The switch between phases engendered much confusion and cynicism among the wide urban sections that had welcomed the reforms, but since the US seemed committed to reopening a war, the shift strengthened pro-Eastern Bloc opinion.
6 – Most recently, the very fast rate of economic growth, accelerated and exacerbated by continuous inflation, has increasingly limited the labour surplus, so giving great strength to the labour movement and to open wage pressures, stimulating capital innovations with resultant redundancies, and further tending to erode the middle sector as wage payments reach a level too high for small business and big industry itself begins to appropriate the functions of small industry; agriculture is abandoned to children and the aged, while the able-bodied adults work in the nearest towns. The pace of technological change in large industry repeats the same pattern as in Europe and America: power more dispersed between private owners (zaibatsu) and professional managers, and the generation of new large white-collar bureaucracies.
The pressure of wages, generated by labour scarcity, employers’ wage competition for labour and the tendency for wages to equalise themselves throughout similar industrialised economies, crucially threatens the margins for freight necessary for Japanese exporters. Possible solutions to this dilemma include:

a rapid acceleration in the introduction of labour-saving innovations, provided sufficient capital is available. Since the Korean War, US capital has been very important in Japanese investment, but is now checked by US measures to strengthen the dollar (e.g. ‘tax equalisation’ schemes, Buy American policies, curbs on US military base expenditure, etc). The capital flow from Europe has not yet attained commensurate proportions, and is in any case threatened by the current general increase in monetary autarchy.
a return to direct imperialism to establish localised raw material sources and markets in South-East and East Asia. For this to attain pre-war proportions would obviously require the complete collapse of the post-war international status quo, not at present a visible possibility. Again, the area concerned does not provide high-income markets for Japan’s modern mass-produced and relatively highly priced production. However, tentative changes are visible in relations with Korea (cf. The Notebook, IS 22), Indonesia, and South-East Asia generally.

Necessarily, the question of the political recognition of China (and implicit repudiation of the US) is the symbol of the choice between the East Asian and the Atlantic areas facing Japanese business just as it is the crucial United Front tactic for the Japanese Communist Party. The different sections of opinion favouring each alternative are partly reflected in the factions of the Liberal Democratic Party and in different groups in Japanese business:

The most modern section of business tends, by reason of the technical nature of its output, to be oriented on trade with the US or the Atlantic area; its interests suggest further integration into the Atlantic area, staving off the shrinkage in margins by a capital inflow from that area, provided that both trading and monetary policies in the Atlantic area remain liberal enough to permit Japanese expansion through exports.
The more backward section is in a more dominant trading position with underdeveloped countries, and has, in Asia, the freight edge on its Western rivals. The relationship between these firms and their foreign customers includes both Japanese capital exports and low income commodities, themselves under threat of competition from similar developing industries in Asia itself (e.g. textiles or light engineering products from India, or textiles from Hong Kong).

Both groups would agree on the need for a wage freeze of some sort, but the second group would be much tougher in resisting pressure and would be prepared once again to resort to some form of modified imperialism to achieve its aims – even if this was no more than gaining access to the unskilled labour (which such industry can use, unlike modern industry) of Korea, Taiwan or Indonesia. The more backward group naturally places more stress on the independence of Japan’s interests from the West, on possible independence from the US and the resumption by Japan of a position as leading foreign supplier to China. Naturally, the largest multi-product corporations span both groups (particularly where underdeveloped countries desire to purchase large-scale technologically intensive plants, as India and China do), but necessarily, given the technical nature of the most modern firms, they will tend to be in the first group. The decision one way or the other naturally turns on the rate of expansion of the world market as a whole (and the relative proportions of trade between developed and underdeveloped). Continuing past trends will continue to integrate Japan into the Atlantic area, and the longer this continues, the less is the likelihood of any reversion to integration into the East Asian area. Currently, the Japanese economy is continuing to dismantle its protectionist barriers as a quid pro quo for access into the markets of other developed economies: the Yen became convertible in April last year, and by December, some 92 per cent of imports (whether by value, by volume or by number of items was not specified) were liberalised. This exposes the economy to tougher competition and to stronger world economy discipline compelling Japan to conform in technology to the other developed countries, this in its turn eroding the middle sector and strengthening the integration of Japan with the Atlantic area. Whatever the case, the precise juncture of the Japanese economy has certain decisive implications for the Japanese class struggle and the immediate perspective for Japan’s trade unions.

The Trade Union Movement in Japan
by David Baker
 



Japan’s New Middle Class
Ezra F. Vogel
University of California/Cambridge, 52s.
One begins this volume with considerable interest in the hope that it might complement the work of Lockwood in Britain or Wright Mills in the United States on the historical middle class and its evolution into the quite different white-collar worker, the characteristic expression of modern industry and of vital political significance (as both Harold Wilson and Adolf Hitler in different ways recognised). However, this book is rather more diffuse and limited than this. The result of intensive interviews by Vogel and his wife (both Americans) in a white collar suburb of Tokyo, it contains confirmation of many earlier impressions of the white collar family, with particular stress on the inner relationships between parents and children and family relationships to certain outside institutions. The description of the world of white-collar men is less than adequate, and the study is clearly more at home on the purely family hearth than out in the busy world of men.
This is sad since the subject is of great importance, and the white-collar worker exercises a profound influence throughout modern Japan, particularly in politics – his potential political position is vital for the Japanese perspective. On the other hand the family as understood here is not very sharply delineated nor is very much new information presented – it is, in the main, a static study, and only rarely is the white-collar family seen as also a victim of its social situation, part of broad Japanese history. Again, since the study is by Americans, it is unclear how reliable it is, how far Japanese housewives can confide in a foreign questioner. Many of the things related as if peculiar to Japan are in fact as common to white-collar workers (and, indeed, many others) in Europe, even if not in America, and represent no more than pragmatic acultural adjustments to particular problems. The reader’s disappointment would perhaps have been less if the title had been less ambitious. The book does not describe a class; it describes certain aspects of the family, and particularly certain aspects of the rearing of white-collar children. In the last respect, the results are more interesting – particularly the grotesque compulsions on both parents and children to conform to a given educational structure of advancement, the dramatic contrast between being outside and inside a large company and the neurosis of ‘those attempting to pass from outside to inside. However, the delineation of Japan’s new middle class in its most vital respects (and particularly its operation as a class) still remains to be done.
 



The Hidden God, A Study of the Tragic Vision in the Pensées of Pascal and the Tragedies of Racine
Lucien Goldmann
Routledge, 70s.
The Hidden God is a most difficult, complex and profound work, the problems of which are compounded by any sort of Anglo Saxon philosophic background. Goldman, a distinguished French philosopher and dialectical materialist, presents Lukàcs’ concept of a tragic hero (Lukàcs’, Die Seele and die Formen), extrapolates from this a tragic vision which he discusses at length, and then goes on to use this as his basic analytic concept in an examination of Pascal and Racine; conjoined to this, he identifies the essence of Jansenism in seventeenth century France as encompassing this tragic vision, and, in Pascal, as being the preliminary formulation of the central contradiction of all modern philosophy (between fact and value, understanding and action, science and God, individuals and. totalities), superseded only by dialectical thought in Hegel and Marx. This crude resume does no more than cite the more obvious features of this work, the richness and subtlety of which cannot be evoked in a review. At each stage, the concrete particular is integrated with the whole, and the whple brought to bear on the particular – Pascal is linked and contrasted with Descartes before him, with the earlier example of a tragic vision in Greek tragedy, with Kant after him, and, above all, with Marx.
The certainties of existence, presumed within a stable world vision, dissolve in the transition between world visions, between different types of society, and are replaced in marginal groups (that is, groups not belonging either to the old order or to the new) by a pervading sense of tragic doubt or philosophic demoralisation –
‘All forms of consciousness express a provisional and mobile balance between the individual and his social environment; when this balance can be fairly easily established and is relatively stable, or when it can pass fairly easily from one form to another, men tend not to think about the problems raised by their relationship to the external world. On a social as well as on an individual plane, it is the sick organism which creates awareness, and it is in periods of social and political crisis that men are most aware of the enigma of their presence in the world. In the past, this awareness has tended to find its expression in tragedy. At the present day it shows itself in existentialism’ (p.48).
The tragedy lies in simultaneously comprehending the essence and promise of each vision, of each order of society, despite their irreconcilability – God is and He is not; He is both the central pivot of existence, the concept which gives meaning to all the particulars of experience and to the future, and, in Descartes, no more than a useful term to cover the gaps in rational knowledge. Pascal, on Goldmann’s interpretation, both shared in the excitement of scientific discovery, whose philosophic presuppositions he recognised, shared in a social world where God was no more than a piety, and yet held beliefs that were firmly integrated into the pursuit of a vision of the divine. The contradiction constitutes an unsupportable agony that demands compromise, even though that compromise can only deny the truth of both thesis and antithesis. In seeing the truth of incompatible propositions describing existence, for Goldmann, is the essence of the tragic vision, and a truncated version of dialectical thought – in the truncatedness lies the tragedy.
Goldmann suggests, tentatively, that Jansenism was the social embodiment of the tragic vision of a social group, the noblesse de robe, the class of lawyers and administrators, created and maintained by the French monarchy; the King, allying to the Third Estate, used this hereditary legal class, to gain supremacy over the nobility proper, only to abandon the noblesse de robe on attaining the power to balance class against class: the noblesse de robe was superseded by royally appointed officials, corps de commissaires. Thus rejected by the power that had created it, the noblesse de robe was trapped between its own loyalty (the former condition for its advancement) and its hostility, compounded by political impotence. Goldmann schematises three Jansenist responses to the contradiction – in Barcos, total withdrawal from and rejection of the world; in Arnauld, a compromise that attempted to accept Descartes in the natural world and God in the supernatural; and in Pascal, an acceptance in full measure of the contradiction –
‘The clear voice of the judgement of God no longer sounds out above the march of human destiny, for the voice which once gave life to all has now fallen silent. Man must live alone and by himself. The voice of the Judge has fallen silent for ever, and this is why man will always be vanquished, doomed to destruction in victory even more than in defeat’ (Lukàcs, op. cit., pp.332-3).
Pascal continues his scientific work and lives in the world, both of which are, in principle, meaningless; he continues to strive after a God who gives no reply. Conscious of thesis and its negation, but without dialectical synthesis, Pascal offers only the wager: ‘learn from those,’ he tells the man intellectually convinced of God’s existence but unable to believe, ‘who have been tied as you are now tied, and who now wager all they have’ (Fragment 233, Pensées, Everyman edition). Goldmann comments:
‘Once practical philosophy is no longer centred around an ideal of individual wisdom but comes to deal primarily with external reality, man’s life takes on the aspect of a wager on the success of his own action and, consequently, on the existence of a force which transcends the individual. This force must accompany or contribute to the efforts which he makes, so that his life becomes a wager that God, Humanity or the Proletariat exists and will triumph’ (p.301).
‘It would be just as absurd for Pascal or Kant to deny the existence of God on empirical grounds as it would for Marx to use the same criterion to assert or deny the validity of the idea of progress or of humanity’s march towards socialism. In both cases, the initial wager depends upon an act of faith, on “reasons of the heart” in Pascal, or the validity of reason in Kant and Marx, a wager which goes beyond and integrates theory and practice’ (p.92).
But the contradiction of Pascal can, of its nature, achieve no synthesis, even if he cannot escape the gamble of being and acting. Goldmann argues that Pascal could have no conception of time, of development and process. Thus, the synthesis which integrates Marxism is denied him – the propositions of the contradiction are absolute and eternal, their essence cannot be superseded in this world. Pascal’s Pensées are then, for Goldmann, both a profound contribution to philosophy, a document in the conquest of man’s essence, and a cry of anguish for an integrated vision where God is real and the centre of a meaningful universe. From Pascal, he moves to the tragedies of Racine, culminating in the identification of the same complex of incompatibilities in Phèdre. Only at the end, does one fully comprehend the opening sections of Goldmann’s book where he attempts to integrate his conception of Western culture for the purposes of this study, identifying the crucial concepts in his methodology and the criteria to be employed. Jansenism provides the specific context, a concrete historical situation and an expression of a continuing tradition, both a historical by-way and part of the mainstream. The reader travels from totality to particular, from Pascal to Marx, each illuminating the other. The substance of Goldmann’s contributions seems too important initially to carp, at distortions – indeed, only Pascal scholars will be fully able to appraise his contribution on this narrow score. His schematisation is necessary and fruitful even if it tends to distort the evidence at points. The importance of Goldmann lies less in what he has to say about Pascal or Jansenism than in his general approach and its implications – this will have to be ruminated on for a long time before one can reach a general assessment. Overall, it is a very impressive work, an event of a high order in Marxist scholarship.
 



Asian Economic Development
Ed. Cranley Onslow
Weidenfeld, 36s
It is difficult to know how Mr Onslow enveigled six Asian economists into contributing the first two thirds of this book, dealing in sections with the six countries, Burma, Ceylon, India, Malaya, Pakistan, Thailand, and their various attempts to stimulate economic growth since the War. Difficult because in the last third of the book, Mr Onslow roundly tells off four of them for being wedded ‘rigidly’ to economic nonsense, and counterposes with equal rigidity his own brand of free enterprise nonsense. Mr Onslow has difficulty both in discriminating the propaganda from the practice of his four ill-doers, and in understanding the total process of economic development, in separating actuality from the propositions of economic theory. Mr Onslow rightly and accurately isolates some of the myths which dominate the economics of étatiste development, but he cannot see why they exist, or at least not in sufficient depth to go beyond his own cosy prescriptions: the result is superficial comparisons between top marks Malaya and bottom marks India; why doesn’t India produce rubber and tin, scrap all this planning nonsense and launch on to the world market? Why don’t the American Negroes paint themselves white?
The main block of the book, despite Mr Onslow and the myths he identifies, is more interesting. Lim on Malaya is very good, and most of the others are useful, even if on occasions a little too removed from economic actuality – in so short a space, perhaps little more is to be expected. V.K.R.V. Rao on India deserves all Mr Onslow’s strictures, for he presents the customary wishful thinking, illusions and platitudes, larded with irrelevant nationalism, which characterises the least intelligent section of Indian economic thinking – there are far better accounts emerging from India that would at least go some way to put Mr Onslow in his place. Overall, in all accounts, ‘planning’ is most praised where it is least possible – where the monsoon and the world market are the two determinants which defy all others. It might have been from these that this analysis could more fruitfully have begun – which would have saved us some of the ideology.
 



Southeast Asia, Illusion and Reality in Politics and Economics
Lennox A. Mills
University of Minnesota Press, 45s.
Professor Mills has written a 345-page survey of south-east Asia which is, in terms of mere information, competent if limited – most of the elementary information is here in one way or another. But then such information is in many other places also, so it is difficult to take this compilation as its own justification. Behind the information, the understanding of the author is rather shallow, and his style a little wooden – he sees no broad trends, and scarcely ever speculates. Occasionally the style lapses into a casual jocularity that grates, and the author’s viewpoint is solidly for current American foreign policy: there are robber barons ringing the Northern borders, and poor misguided lambs here in the south. Like Hermann Finer, Mills sees politics in the bric-a-brac of facts, unrelated to a general critical viewpoint.
If this book is an introduction for students, there are better anthologies written by different hands, specialists in each of the countries concerned. If it is for specialists, it is singularly lacking in new information or interpretations. If it is meant to bring the existing text-books up-to-date, it is itself already very much out-of-date: the shape of Burma is now clear, Diem is only an echo, Sarit has gone, Malaysia is a question-mark. Mills very usefully combines discussion of the economic problems of the area and its politics, and at least that is a mercy, but there is little else to be said for this survey which marks it out from its predecessors. It will be fortunate when such books can no longer be written because there is too much information available on each country.
 



The Prevailing Wind
Michael Field
Methuen, 42s
Mr Field was the Daily Telegraph correspondent in Indo-China between 1956 and 1962, and he has pieced together his recollections over this period. On Laos he is interesting and most fully versed even if his views seem, given his job, very muddled; on Cambodia, he is too much under the spell of Sihanouk to give as sharp and delineated an account; on Thailand and Vietnam, he is relatively weak. The book would have benefited from stringent pruning, the elimination of much repetition and the rather tedious philosophic speculations that seem to lead nowhere, seem never to be affected by the course of events, and to be at one with the English middle middle class that has never set foot in Indo-China. Mr Field sees the contradictions in the American position, sees the non-viability of neutralism, sees some of the ‘good-points’ of the Pathet-Lao, and remains a dedicated anti-Communist – the good-hearted but muddled American beast is tormented by the nasty Communist rattlesnake. He sees none of the Communist mistakes or muddles or defeats – he sees little of the dedicated rationalism of American policy.
All this may be suitable for the Daily Telegraph, but it does not help in Indo-China – the muddle of the middle man is merely muddle. Mr Field is saved by never having to choose, by being an outsider, by being able to pity the Lao for being trapped in the incompatibilities of world politics but never having to do anything about it. In Hanoi, he complains about ‘drabness’; in Saigon he notices the brothels, but chooses them if choose he must.
 



DELEGATES OF 75 Communist Parties have been meeting in Moscow. The last such conference – of 81 parties – was held in 1960.
That was the last time when the divisions within the Communist movement still permitted all the parties to meet together.
Since 1960, the public split between Russia and China has made it possible for many other parties to develop political positions in opposition to Moscow’s. As a result, the Russians have had the greatest difficulty in calling another conference. and it has taken five years of sporadic negotiations (including two postponements) to achieve it.
Russia would clearly not permit China to attend, and China would not agree to do so. Therefore automatically a number of other parties would not attend, not because they agree with China but because they do not want to agree with Russia.
Thus, the ‘75 Communist Parties’ is a little misleading. Many of the 75 are of no importance, except in Moscow’s propaganda, or if the Russians want an ‘independent’ spokesman for their views, or to get a majority vote through.
In practice, Moscow chooses to rely on orthodox diplomacy to achieve its foreign policy ends rather than local Communists.
At the conference, one must rather look to see which are the important parties. In Europe, Moscow can rely on its loyalists – pre-eminently East Germany and Bulgaria, with Poland; Hungary, with more reservations; Czechoslovakia, by courtesy of the Russian army.
It could not rely on Rumania, but the Rumanians did come to the conference. Albania, China’s closest ally, was of course absent.
The Italian and French parties were there, but critically. In Asia, the only loyalist is satellite Mongolia.
All the other governing parties – China, North Korea, and the centrepiece of Moscow’s revolutionary rhetoric, North Vietnam – stayed away. So also did the important Japanese party, and most of the south-east Asian parties.
And from India came only the right-wing Dange group. From Latin America, the Chileans came, but the much more important Cubans sent only an observer.
In terms of numbers, the conference may even have represented a minority of Communists. But the breakup of the unity of the Communists, originally embodied in the Communist International (Comintern), is not simply a conflict between different national parties.
The Cold War supplied the cement which most recently held the alliance together, and it also held in place loyal Stalinist leaderships in each individual party. But now, just as the relationship between Moscow and each party has changed, so also have the relationships within each party.
Some parties have split – into three fragments in India and Japan, or into two, in Finland or Norway. In others, despite losses, a centrist leadership has been able to hold different factions together by political balancing acts.
 
Marooned
Take for example, the French Communist Party, uneasily marooned between ‘liberal’ (or social democratic) groups and a strongly entrenched Stalinist faction. The first prompted the party to condemn the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia; the second neutralised much of the condemnation by following the Russian criticisms of Duhceck’s policies.
Even the governing party in Rumania seems divided between a more and a less ‘national communist’ faction.
Thus, at the conference, there could be no simple alignments. Only by default could the issue become nationalism versus Moscow’s ‘internationalism’, independence versus unity on Moscow’s terms.
By default, the cause of national independence from Russian foreign policy brings into temporary collaboration parties pursuing quite contradictory strategies – the Chinese Maoists, the Dubcekite Czechs, the Rumanian Stalinists, the Italian social democrats.
Even that stronghold of Chinese ‘dogmatism’, Albania is now prepared to defend the arch-revisionist, Yugoslavia, against Russia.
But the alliance is necessarily temporary. Neither internationally nor at the Moscow conference could there be a real political alliance in opposition to Moscow, not even one of the ‘non-aligned’ as between Russia and China. This disunity within the opposition obviously gives Russia its trump card.
With such diversity, the minimum level of agreement inevitably became either platitude (we must all unite against imperialism) or reactionary (the defence of the existing frontiers of the Soviet Union is the mark of a true proletarian socialist).
If the press reports are to be believed, not one delegate presented to the conference the case for proletarian internationalism and offered the concrete tasks which flow from it for 1969. For the Russians, ‘internationalism’ means ‘support of the existing socialist society by all fraternal parties’ (Brezhnev, June 7), which, unwrapped, means defence of the Soviet Union against, for example, China.
 
Trumped
For Rumania’s Ceaucescu, ‘internationalism’ means the essentially bourgeois principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of another state. Ironically, Husak, the new trendy Stalinist of Czechoslovakia, trumped Ceausescu by declaring that to discuss the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia (as all the rebels wanted to do) constituted interference in the internal affairs of another party.
So for the rebels, the minimum platform possible came in affirming their absolute independence in formulating policy. Britain’s John Gollan dotted the ‘i’s with his unequivocal declaration: ‘Each party is sovereign. It alone, through its highest authority, its national congress, can decide its policy, its activities and its role’.
Few of the delegates can have remembered Lenin’s criticisms of the Second international and its failure to prevent war in 1914 precisely because each party was responsible only to itself.
As a result of this lack of any coherent socialist position, the conference seems to have neglected all the important issues. Certainly, John Gollan raised the issue cf the need for a unified struggle against the new ‘super corporation’ of capitalism, but it was only ‘an issue’, not the centrepiece
Underlying Gollan’s position is a commitment to the ultimate necessity of winning a parliamentary majority, and this is the centrepiece domestically. Zhivkov of Bulgaria went so far as to criticise some of the rebel parties for giving up the class struggle in favour of purely electoral strategies.
Gollan replied that ‘struggle’ was indeed the heart of the party’s strategy, but it must lead to an ultimate Parliamentary majority. Unfortunately, the ‘ultimate’ tends to dictate how the present ‘struggle’ is seen and fought
But parliamentary politics means also that the Moscow conference is a conventional foreign policy assembly, rather than a meeting of a class alliance. Issues such as Moscow’s hysterical chauvinism over the Chinese island of Chenpao loom much larger than the interests of the proletariat.
And when they do. Communists lose their class bearings so that both Stalinist Russia and Dubcek’s managerial market economy become possible runners as the model for socialism.
Of course, socialists cannot say ‘a plague on all your houses’. We must support the right of national self-determination against Russian oppression, but – unlike some of the rebel Communist Parties – we cannot see this as the same as the struggle for socialism.
 
Verbal
Concretely, the conference will assist Moscow’s image. Despite the reservations and qualifications, the Russians will be able to present their policies as having been sanctioned by the movement.
The Russians did get in a verbal condemnation of China, and did present a discussion of Czechoslovakia.
More specifically, the conference is pledged to a day of protest against the Vietnam war on July 20. The day is unfortunate, since it is the anniversary of the signing of the Geneva agreernents when North Vietnam was sold out by Russia and China. Even so, as a gesture of opposition to the war it is feeble, amazingly too little and too late.
The conference has achieved little of interest to socialists. It has been a holding operation in the Sino-Soviet dispute, and has incidentally underlined the absence of reliable Russian supporters throughout Asia.
Nothing will change in terms of the individual Communist Parties. There is, it seems, nothing for them to be ‘international’ about, except slogans.
 



The sheer diversity and immensity of the rural population in the world’s backward countries makes general discussion of ‘the peasantry’ very difficult. However, certain important generalisations can be made, but it must be borne in mind that such generalisations may have different implications for groups as different as owner-occupier peasants, subsistence tenants, share croppers, landless labourers – for the serfs of Latin American haciendas, for the depressed small tenants of South Asia, or for the tribal farming groups of sub-Saharan Africa.
But, on the other hand, the sheer size of the peasantry in the world suggests something of its possible political importance. What that political importance is, however, is the subject of considerable disagreement. In particular, this article is concerned with the debate between those socialists who identify the industrial proletariat as the sole agency for the achievement of socialism (the Marxists), and those who identify other groups or classes – including the peasantry – as capable of achieving socialism. The debate is an old one. Its themes are an important element in Marx’s disagreements with Bakunin and the anarchists, in the critique by the Russian Marxists (in particular, Plekhanov and Lenin) both of the Narodniks (Russian Populists) and the Social Revolutionaries. And they recur again in the debates within the Comintern in its early years. The themes are certainly important today – even if in a distorted way – in the Sino-Soviet dispute, in the repressed disagreements between Moscow and Havana; and, much more generally, between the ‘Third World’ socialists and others.
However, in the past the Marxist position has been reasonably clear. Supporters of ‘peasant socialism’ have, quite rightly, seen the Marxists as critics, and, in some circumstances, as opponents. Today, so great is the muddle about Marxism after its systematic perversion in the Soviet Union and China, that Marx (and Lenin) has been called in as supporter both for peasant socialism and against it. It is ironic that the Maoists and their sympathisers call themselves ‘Marxist-Leninist’, with so little knowledge of how sharply Marx – and even more so, Lenin – condemned some of the most favoured positions held by the Great Helmsman. Thus, it is important to restate – even if crudely – what the Marxist view of the peasantry has been [1], and why the proletariat – that is, the industrial working class – was identified as the sole agency for the achievement of socialism.
 
1. Marx on the peasants
In analysing the perspective for socialists in France and Germany, Marx noted that in countries where the peasantry constituted a majority of the population, the peasants held the power to decide whether or not the proletariat could win and keep power. Where the peasants were solidly conservative, then the proletariat would not be able to hold power indefinitely. But in Germany, the peasants were fighting the feudal aristocracy on their own account, to establish freehold land rights and rid agriculture of feudal restrictions. Thus, the peasantry were waging the bourgeois revolution. The proletariat accordingly must win the support of the peasantry in the proletarian struggle against capitalism by supporting the peasant struggle against feudalism. The two battles must be synchronised for either ally to win its aims.
But clearly a common struggle would include contradictory elements, and socialism could not be won unless the proletariat was clearly the leader of the struggle. The leadership of the proletariat was essential because the nature of the peasantry made it impossible for it to lead, and in any case, the peasants were aiming at ends not necessarily consistent with the achievement of proletarian aims. What was this ‘nature of the peasantry’? Perhaps Marx’s best known outline of an answer to this question – in relation to the small French peasantry – occurs in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, and it is worth quoting at some length:
‘The small peasants form a vast mass, the members of which live in similar conditions but without entering into manifold relations with one another. Their mode of production isolates them from one another, instead of bringing them into mutual intercourse. The isolation is increased by France’s bad means of communication and by the poverty of the peasants. Their field of production, the small-holding, admits of no division of labour in its cultivation, no application of science, and, therefore, no multiplicity of development, no diversity of talent, no wealth of social relationships. Each individual peasant family is almost self-sufficient; it itself directly produces the major part of its consumption and thus acquires its means of life more through exchange with nature than its intercourse with society ... Insofar as millions of families live under economic conditions of existence that divide their mode of life, their interests and their culture from those of other classes, and put them in hostile contrast to the latter, they form a class. Insofar as there is merely a local interconnection among these small peasants, and the identity of their interests begets no unity, no national union, and no political organisation, they do not form a class. They are consequently incapable of enforcing their class interest in their own names, whether through a parliament or through a convention. They cannot represent themselves, they must be represented.’ [2]
It is true that we cannot jump directly from this description of the small French peasantry in the middle of the 19th century – a peasantry with half a century’s experience of relatively unfettered private ownership of land – to the rest of the world’s rural population at all times and places. But certain key aspects of the conditions of material existence of virtually all peasants are outlined in this quotation, and it is these aspects which underlie the Marxist position.
 
2. The nature of peasant life
Thus, the peasants are isolated from the national society, isolated physically in villages which have little consistent need for continuous communications both with each other and with the cities. At most, the peasant is likely to be aware of his district, within which members of his own family meet or secure marriage partners, and of the local district town, perhaps the source of the merchants who buy his crop, the market place, the site of the police station and so on. Second, the peasant is dependent almost entirely upon himself and his family for his way of life. He is not part of – or at least, is not aware of – a complex interdependent national division of labour. Since there is little division of labour outside the family, there is little specialisation, and as a result, production is primitive, the peasant is poor, the cultural and technical resources of the village are most backward.
The peasant’s important relationships are not to a wider economy of which he sees himself as a constituent part, but rather to nature, to the rhythms, to the arbitrariness of soil, weather and season. The production unit is the family, and personal relationships are thus also production relationships. Family relationships, rather than competence and technical specialisation, determine the primitive division of labour within the family (the relationship between man and wife, between man and his eldest son, his youngest son, his aged father, and so on), and the production relationships exaggerate and intensify the family relationships. The desperate family feuds within the village exhibit the intensity generated within what is simultaneously the basic personal, production and property unit. The rural family embodies all the exploitative relationships of the wider society, and it is the peasant household father who is of necessity the agent for the worst forms of exploitation of the members of his own family; the agent which sustains all that is worst in pre-capitalist society in terms of personal relationships. The violence locked up in the family is matched by the violence between families, the violence intrinsic in the gross subordination of the peasantry as a whole.
Thus, if achieving a socialist revolution were merely a function of the savagery of exploitation, then undoubtedly the peasantry would always have pre-eminently qualified for the role of agency of the revolution. But revolution requires also collective organisation, a mass division of labour, a concentration of advanced technical and political abilities. And it is these which the peasantry – by the nature of its way of life – cannot produce. It cannot, as a class, produce the abilities required to operate a society with a collective division of labour. It can only duplicate the ideal of its own members, the small peasant holding. The aim of peasant rebels thus becomes, not the advance of society as a whole, but no more than a just sharing of a common poverty. This is certainly egalitarianism, but it is the egalitarianism of communalists, of independent identical participants, not the egalitarianism of collectivists, of interdependent people organised in a social division of labour. The peasantry cannot, as a class, constitute itself the ruling class in order to realise the full economic potentialities of society. On the contrary, it can, on its own, only drag society backwards into the poverty of the past.
 
3. Peasant opposition
It is for these reasons that the revolt of the peasant is so often a purely localised occurrence, restricted to the district he knows. His enemy is the local landlord or landowner, the local money-lender, policeman or merchant, not a national ruling class of which he is inevitably only very dimly aware. But without destroying the national ruling class, the local peasant’s cause is lost. The destruction of only the local minions of the ruling class will invoke massive reprisals on a scale with which the local peasant cannot cope. Indeed, so muddled may be the peasant’s view of the world outside his district, he may completely exonerate the ruling class for responsibility for the crimes of its local officials. In Tsarist Russia, the peasants often certainly hated their local noblemen, but they worshipped the Tsar as the ‘Little Father’, explaining that the Tsar did not know the crimes committed in his name by his noblemen. For them, there was no ‘system’ within which Tsar and noblemen fitted as complementary elements within a common exploitative class. Thus when the Narodniks assassinated Tsar Alexander in 1881 with the expectation that this would precipitate a peasant revolt against the regime, the peasants were appalled, and blamed yet again the evil nobles for depriving them of their only defender. Lewin suggests that Stalin was similarly exonerated by the Russian peasantry for the Communist rape of the countryside during collectivisation. [3]
Thus, historically, the peasant is a figure of the utmost tragedy. He is grotesquely exploited, forced into self-subjection, forced into preserving all that is most backward and reactionary. And yet he makes his own strait jacket. He cannot, by his way of life, conceive of a real alternative. He cannot emancipate himself, and self-emancipation is one of the pre-conditions for socialism. His opposition to his own exploitation, when he is solely dependent upon his own resources, is thus either purely negative, or marginal to the system – that is, the opposition does not challenge the existence of the system so much as check certain practices within it. The most common form of this opposition – and the least effective in revolutionary terms – is social banditry. Small bands of armed men prey on the forces of authority, acting as Robin Hoods to take from the rich and give, at least in principle, to the poor. The small size of such groups, their great mobility, and the willingness of the dispersed peasant families to protect and supply the rebels as a sort of ‘counter police’ force, make them almost invulnerable to counter-attack by the authorities. Hobsbawm has described the features of such forces in parts of southern Europe [4], and perhaps these features are shared with the Indian dacoits and similar bands which operated in China. Hobsbawm also notes the similarities between social banditry and guerilla warfare, and how the second sometimes absorbs the first (thus, no one should be shocked to find that the guerilla forces of the Chinese Communist Party incorporated erstwhile bandits [5]). Banditry is the most primitive form of taking sanctions against the system, where self-interested criminality is scarcely distinguishable from socially conscious rebellion, and where the sanction is no more than a marginal irritant to the system.
The sporadic riot in densely populated agricultural areas has more possibilities. Here, rural Luddites directly attack the symbols of immediate oppression – the merchant hoarding grain, the big farmer cutting his labour force or the wages he pays, the State reducing the price it regulates for wine. If such riots are a response to a general condition on the land, the riot may spread. And if it coincides with movements in the towns, it may provide a contributory element in a movement for radical change. But it is only one tributary to the river. Alone it can do little. When Wat Tyler’s rebels took London, as when Zapata’s warriors reached Mexico City, they did not know what to do with it. Finally they could only retire back to the world they knew, to the village and the dispersed land holding. They left the real power of the ruling class, chastened perhaps, but not destroyed. Of course, if the status quo is already under threat from other sources, the possibility may exist for a temporary enclave of peasant power. Makhno and the Green armies in Russia relied on the Civil War raging around them to defend their islands of power. And in China, the decay of the Manchu dynasty under the corrosive forces of imperialism, permitted the Taiping rebels similarly to establish their own domain along the Yangtze. But once the wider issue is settled or moderated, the national ruling class can react with a force capable of destroying the enclave.
More effectively and more characteristically, the peasantry can in certain conditions control much more massive sanctions of a purely negative kind. They can refuse to obey the law, and if this spreads far enough, the ruling class has insufficient power to garrison the whole countryside. But the organisation capable of co-ordinating such a strike usually can only be found in the cities. The intellectual formulation of this tactic is clearest in the doctrine of passive disobedience as advanced by Tolstoy in Russia and Gandhi in India. [6] But what is to be done when the countryside is paralysed? It is at this point that again the strategy breaks down, for the peasants have no positive alternative to present. The same applies to a similar tactic: withholding the food on which the survival of the cities depends. This is unlikely to occur normally, since the peasants also depend on the cities for certain goods, and many need to sell their crop quickly to meet their debts. But in Russia between 1927 and 1929 when the cities could not supply the goods the peasants wanted, there was something of a strike which produced a major crisis in the society as a whole. The strike was not an organised act, one of collective solidarity and depending on political consciousness. It was a simultaneous reaction to a market situation. And the peasants had no defence when Stalin launched his counter-attack and set about destroying the Russian peasantry once and for all.
 
4. Rural strata
What is lacking in all of these examples is the role of a national class for itself. In the citation from Marx, he makes this point explicitly. The peasantry as a class of men certainly exists. But by the nature of its way of life, it cannot become aware of itself as a class, a body of men sharing a common class interest which extends throughout society. In the sense of recognising a common interest, peasants are normally only a class in one district. And the peasants of one district may regard those of another with as much hostility as representatives of the ruling class. In some cases, the hostility is greater, for at least they know their own rulers in the district, and the known generates fewer fears than the unknown.
Some Marxists have tried to apply a class analysis to the countryside to overcome some of these problems. They have identified poor, middle and rich peasant strata (with other, more complex, patterns as well), landlords and landowners, and argued on the basis of the conflict of interest between these strata, for identification with the poor peasantry. In a feudal land distribution system, socialist identification with the peasantry as a whole against the large landowners is reasonably straightforward. Again, in certain circumstances, and in some localities, a proletarian alliance with the poorer peasantry may embody a real class struggle. Indeed, on some occasions, the poor peasantry has attacked its rich brethren, as seems to have been the case in the Telengana revolt in India in 1947 (to the horror of the Maoist sympathisers in the Indian Communist Party who wanted an alliance of all peasant strata). But these cases are not necessarily the standard ones, particularly where the land distribution system is a complex one. For some peasants may also be landlords, and the social mobility (up and down) of peasant families may be high. Thus, a rich peasant father with many sons may divide his land among them all, making all his descendants poor peasants. There may be constant interchange between strata – the landless move into and out of cultivation; the small peasants into labouring, or, if their families are small for a couple of generations and there are no outside crises, into the ranks of the middle or richer peasantry. And one peasant family may fit into several strata – it farms some land, it rents another small piece, it works as labourer on someone else’s land, at different times of the year. With such complexity, it makes little political sense to identify the ‘natural allies’ of the proletariat in general.
The peasant situation itself can also make nonsense of such identifications. The poor peasants, like the landless labourers, are the most depressed group – less analogous with the proletariat than with the lumpenproletariat. And the poor peasant’s natural sense of identification is more usually upwards, to the richer peasant strata the poor peasant aspires to join, rather than outwards to poor peasants in other – unknown – districts. The rural society is bounded by the district boundaries, and it is within these boundaries that the strata can be identified most accurately. Outside the district one usually has only statistics, not a political strategy. The instability of the lower strata has prompted socialists and Communists more frequently to rely on the middle and richer peasants for radical organisation, for they are the village leaders and, as such, most likely to be more aware of the outside society. In times of relative peace, a ‘poor peasant movement’ is likely to be a myth of urban politics. For identical reasons, radical attempts to set up all-India alliances of the lowest castes have always proved abortive. The natural identification of village Untouchables is, sadly, with the dominant peasant castes of the village (even when they murder some of them) rather than with the millions of Untouchables in other districts. To know of the existence of those other Untouchables, to recognise a common interest, is already to be part of another – urban, and so national – world.
Thus, the peasant revolt needs the intervention of parts of other – national – classes to take it beyond its prescribed role. It is not accidental that the peasantry has always been more oppressed than any other class, has a history of revolt, and yet has so few successes. Success comes when other ambitions are allied to peasant grievances. In classical China, peasant revolt was successful when members of the nobility came to lead it, came to use it in order to establish a new dynasty. On rare occasions, peasants themselves became members of the new ruling order, but only on terms which negated any real revolutionary transformation of Chinese society. In the bourgeois revolution, the struggle of the bourgeoisie to establish its own political power borrows heavily from the peasant struggle to destroy the great feudal estates, and is the precondition for the success of the peasants.
 
5. The crude materialist case
Socialists who have seen the peasantry as an agency for the achievement of socialism – leaving aside what could be meant by ‘socialism’ in this context – have usually been impressed by the violence of peasant struggle [7], by the complete alienation of the peasant from the forms of urban (or ‘bourgeois’) life. But the violence is a function of the backwardness of the peasantry and its relative weakness, the lack of political means to change other than violence, rather than revolutionary fervour or vision.
Such socialists also often utilise a particularly crude materialistic explanation of political militancy. This materialism does not, however, rule out a simultaneous romantic idealism about the possibilities of human action whatever the material circumstances. The case runs something like this: revolution is a function of exploitation; so that those who are most exploited will be the most revolutionary; those who are the most exploited are the poorest; thus, the poorest peasantry, the most backward tribal groups (in some countries), the lumpenproletariat, are all candidates for the agency of revolution.
There are obvious surface similarities to a Marxist case, but a major difference lies in the obscure word ‘exploitation’. In this case, ‘exploitation’ means impoverishment. In the Marxist case, ‘exploitation’ means ‘the degree to which surplus value is produced’. Thus, for the Marxist, sheer poverty is not a necessary index of ‘exploitation’, nor is it a guide as to the agency of revolution. If Marx had believed that poverty of itself was the source of revolution, then it is a signal failure on his part not to have identified the 19th century peasantry (or the lumpenproletariat) as the agency of socialist revolution: the peasants were undoubtedly poorer than the proletariat. Again, within the proletariat, the poorest strata would obviously be more revolutionary than the richer, the unskilled more than the skilled. In fact, for Marx as well as historically, revolutionary political consciousness tended to develop in exactly the reverse order. More to the point, Marx actually allowed for an increase in the real consumption of the working class, a decline in its absolute poverty, without this affecting his case. He writes, for example:
‘If, therefore, the income of the worker increases with the rapid growth of capital, the social gulf that separates the worker from the capitalist, increases at the same time, the power of capital over labour, the dependence of labour on capital, increases at the same time ... Even the most favourable situation for the working class, the most rapid possible growth of capital, however much it may improve the material existence of the worker, does not remove the antagonism between his interests and the bourgeois interests, those of the capitalist.’ (Marx’s emphasis) [8]
The dimension missing in the crude materialist case is power. Skilled labour is not only more ‘exploited’ than unskilled, the proletariat than the peasantry, but it is clearer to skilled labour how much capitalism depends upon it, just as it is clearer to the proletariat how much the whole of society is sustained by its efforts. There is thus a real, daily, contradiction between the economic power of the proletariat, and its political impotence – the proletariat is the economy, but it does not run the economy. Thus, it is exploitation in the Marxist sense, not in the sense of ‘impoverishment’, and the contradiction of power and impotence rather than depressed consumption, which are the driving forces for the revolutionary mission of the proletariat in the Marxist scheme.
 
6. The proletariat
One can take the case further than this. For on all the criteria mentioned earlier in relationship to the peasantry, the proletariat is contrasted. It is heavily concentrated in great cities, and within those cities, in particular districts; not dispersed over an enormous area, and isolated in small units. Daily, the workers operate the most advanced sectors of the economy, where innovation and change are constant dynamic elements destroying the inherited customs of the past. They have forced upon them, as part of their very daily existence, a mass division of labour which includes high specialisation, including the most advanced technical knowledge, and elaborate interdependence. Of necessity, the workers are a collective, covering the whole of the most important parts of the economy, not a community of independent producers. By their daily work and daily struggle, they are aware, that society as a whole is the arena, not one district, nor even just one factory. The employer is part of an employing class, standing in a certain relationship to the State and its agencies.
Of course, in practice, many different levels of perception exist among workers and make for many variations from this rather abstract pattern. However, the difference between the proletariat and the peasantry is that, in principle, workers can comprehend society as a whole, and given the Marxist perspective for the development of capitalism, will be driven to do so. The peasantry, in principle, cannot comprehend society as a whole, and are not driven to do so by the nature of their way of life. On the contrary, the peasant who acquires a knowledge of society as a whole is an anomaly, someone who has to fight against the intrinsic conditions of his way of life rather than being led necessarily by those conditions in that direction.
Where the proletariat is a majority, its own emancipation is within its own power, and its self-emancipation is the emancipation of society as a whole, including the peasantry. Thus, the role of the proletariat is not an optional element in Marxism. Without it, Marxism becomes nonsense, and we have to start from scratch all over again. Whatever form of ‘socialism’ could be formulated on different grounds could not, validly, borrow from Marxism except by changing the essential meaning of the words involved (as we have seen is the case with the term ‘exploitation’).
 
7. The Worker-Peasant Alliance
In countries where peasants are a majority of the population, Marxists have had to formulate what should be the relationship between the proletarian struggle and the peasantry. Marx himself always supported the small peasant struggle against large feudal owners – a constituent element of the bourgeois revolution – but he opposed the struggle of small property owners against large capitalist concerns – a counter-revolution. [9] Large-scale capitalist enterprise had to be preserved for collective ownership, for it was the source from which the wealth of socialist society would come. When the proletariat begins its battle against capitalism, making socialism for the first time possible, large-scale production was not to be broken up among the producers. In the 1850 programme for the Communist League in Germany, Marx proposed that the Royal and large feudal estates should not be distributed to the peasants, but preserved under State ownership. [10] Similarly the Bolshevik programme in Tsarist Russia demanded the nationalisation of commercially important landed estates, not their redistribution among the peasants. In this, the Bolsheviks went flatly against the demand both of the peasants and their main political champions, the Social Revolutionaries.
In the event, the Bolshevik programme was irrelevant, since the peasants just seized the land, and the Bolsheviks could do little about it except ratify the seizure. But in seizing the land, the peasantry created a new class of owners of private property. It was an albatross around the neck of the Soviet regime. The regime only freed itself by Stalin’s Final Solution of the peasant question, the complete destruction of the peasantry in collectivisation.
Implicit in both Marx and Lenin’s writings is a stress upon the inconsistent aims of peasant and proletarian, their different targets. Many Populist socialists have refused to accept this sharp distinction, even though the distinction is a crucial line between libertarian socialism and the autocratic State socialisms which occur when outsiders ride the back of the ‘People’ into power. Since the peasants are not a national class for themselves, they cannot control their own leaders, they must be represented (cf. the quotation from Marx above). When these leaders are intent on ends other than those of the peasants – ends such as industrialisation, national unity, and so on – the populists can be the worst dictators of all.
Thus, the distinction between peasant and proletarian is not a pedantic aside, a piece of irrelevant sectarianism. It defines different roads to different things. Lenin was particularly emphatic in stressing the difference, in refusing to muddle all the issues in the ‘People’. He constantly criticised the Social Revolutionaries for doing just this. For example, in 1909, he wrote of the Social Revolutionary programme:
‘The fundamental idea of their programme is not at all that “an alliance of the proletariat and the peasantry is necessary”, but that there is no class abyss between the former and the latter, and that there is no need to draw a line of class demarcation between them, and that the (Marxist) idea of the petty-bourgeois nature of the peasantry that distinguishes it from the proletariat is fundamentally false.’
The peasant movement was indeed fighting, but not capitalist relationships so much as pre-capitalist relationships. The complete victory of the peasant movement ‘will not abolish capitalism: on the contrary, it will create a broader foundation for its development’. [11]
This does not mean that peasants will not play an important role in the battle for socialism, but that role is only possible under leadership from the proletariat. Without that leadership, the peasant struggle leads to other things. Of course, like Lenin, we must ‘support the peasant movement to the end, but we must remember that it is a movement of another class, not the one that can or will accomplish socialism’. [12]
 
8. China and the peasantry
If the foregoing case is broadly true, then it becomes important to explain a number of modern revolutions which have been claimed as ‘peasant revolutions’. What follows mainly concerns China, although elements of the analysis could also be applied to other countries, for example, Cuba. The leadership of the Chinese Communist Party was drawn in the main from urban classes, particularly from the urban intelligentsia. It utilised different segments of the population in its advance to power, but undoubtedly the bulk of its support was drawn from the peasantry. The struggle for power was, for various reasons which cannot be cited here, not a class struggle in the Marxist sense. It was not primarily a struggle taking place between elements of the contending classes within the same production unit. Rather was the struggle a military-territorial battle, while the social struggle – which certainly occurred – was no more than a supporting element for the military operation. Of course, the final phases of any revolutionary movement may be a military-territorial struggle – the Civil War in Russia was just such a struggle. But in China, the essence of the movement was military-territorial, and the direct class struggle marginal from 1928 through to 1948.
The Party used different demands in different localities to build up its support, demands designed to build not a class force so much as a national force, drawing on different sections of the population. Nationally, the Party restricted itself to demands for relatively mild reforms in order to carry the whole coalition against the main target. Thus, the Party opposed the demand for land reform up to 1945 in order not to frighten the larger land holders, and its only concession to its poor peasant supporters was the reduction of rent and interest to be paid to landlords. Even after 1945, it appears now that it was the discredited Liu Shao-chi who championed land reform in the face of the opposition of Mao Tse-tung who resisted such ‘sectional’ demands in the interest of national unity. All that Mao would concede was that ‘excess land’ should be compulsorily purchased.
Thus, the Chinese Communist Party cannot be seen as the agent of the Chinese peasantry, and indeed, cannot be seen as the agent of any class. It sought to operate outside the peasant social structure, drawing support from all rural strata. It was not responsible to any particular segment of the population, nor yet to the peasantry as a whole. No section of the peasantry controlled the Party. Rather did the Party and the People’s Liberation Army control sections of the peasantry.
If the Party had not operated outside the peasant social structure, it would have been infiltrated by the richer peasants and subordinated to their interests, a change which would have led to the disintegration of the Party between different districts. At times the Party was threatened with this. For example, Mao complained in 1933 that 80 per cent of the central district of the Hunan-Kiangsi Soviet was controlled by the landlords and rich peasants. [13] Again, in the early fifties, when peasant Communists returned from military service to their homes, the rural Party threatened once more to become no more than a rich peasant organisation. The peasant cadres expected to be rewarded for their services, and to be left alone to till their new land after the sacrifices of War. The rural Party was used to make cadres rich peasants, and rich peasants became cadres as a means of advancing their position. Kao Kang in 1952 castigated cadres who had become exploiters, lending money and hiring labour:
‘If no active steps are taken,’ he argued, ‘to lead the peasants towards the path of co-operative economy rather than to the rich peasant economy, then rural village government is sure to deteriorate into a rich peasant regime. If the Communist Party members all hire labour and give loans at usurious rates, then the Party will become a rich peasant party.’ [14]
The same phenomenon occurred in the Soviet Union during the New Economic Policy, rendering the rural Party useless as an agency for change. [15] It is a striking demonstration that the Chinese Communist Party is not a peasant party – that it did not degenerate in the way Kao Kang feared. It was possible for the Party to purge its rural organisation and to whip errant cadres into line simply because it was not a peasant party.
Thus, the Chinese Communist Party was not a ‘peasant party’ in the sense in which we might speak of a ‘proletarian party’, or, indeed, a ‘bourgeois party’. Certainly people of peasant origin provided the bulk of the Party rank and file, but even then, such recruits had usually long since left the land to become professional cadres or soldiers. The Party’s ability to transform China depended upon it being independent of peasant interests, and in this respect, it was largely successful. Rather was it the case that a section of the urban intelligentsia organised peasant discontent. And even then, success depended heavily upon the occurrence of the Japanese invasion and the Japanese policy of ransacking and burning villages in the wake of their advance. By and large, peasants do not seem susceptible to nationalist demands – unlike the urban middle class, and for fairly obvious material reasons – unless such demands are closely linked to demands of immediate concern for peasants, demands over land, or, in this case, sheer survival. It is open to doubt whether the sections of the Chinese peasantry which did respond to Communist appeals would have done so if the Party had not provided the only real opposition to the Japanese whose actions directly affected the existence of some of the peasants. In India, certainly, tying the demand for independence to the demand that those who supported the British, the landowners, should be expropriated and their land redistributed among the peasants, was a vital factor in eliciting peasant support. And in Vietnam, without the Vietminh and National Liberation Front’s land reform programme, it is unlikely the war against the American army could have been waged.
Because the leadership of the Communist Party in China was not securely tied to the interests of any class, it was able to act as an elitist force, and its politics have striking similarities with the elitist flavour of much populism (and, including in this, some brands of anarchism). Populism can be roughly defined as a passionate belief in the spontaneous energies of the ‘People’, and a powerful elitist belief in one’s own necessary role in bringing enlightenment to the ‘People’. [16] But rejecting identification with any particular class is rejecting responsibility to any class. It leaves the leadership free to pursue whatever ends suit its tactics. In Maoism, populism includes a powerful nationalist element, a belief that anything and everything is possible within one’s own national boundaries, that nationalism encompasses socialism. Everything is possible because there is no given objective society – if hearts and minds can be changed. Thus the target becomes souls rather than a definite ruling class, and no objective laws of capitalism or anything else can, it is said, defeat this infinite voluntarism. There are certainly aspects of Marxism which lend themselves, in isolation, to a populist revision [17], even though such a revision also directly contradicts Marxism.
 
9. Backwardness and Socialism
None of this bears directly on the kind of problems which face Marxists in backward countries. Thus: is the thesis of permanent revolution, and in particular, the role of the proletariat, still relevant in backward countries today? if it is not, then what should be the role of Marxists in backward countries? These are major questions which demand separate answers at length, and cannot properly be discussed here. [18] Suffice it to say that, even if the proletariat can no longer be seen as the agency of revolution in backward countries today, this does not change the validity of the points made here. It means only that proletarian socialism cannot be achieved in the backward countries on their own today. But then it never could. Socialism is not possible in one country or one region, particularly when these are the most backward. Certainly, imperialism can be defeated at various points in backward countries – but not destroyed in the world as a whole. Certainly, important and progressive changes can be made in backward countries – but these changes do not constitute socialism. No amount of rhetorical elan can convert poverty into wealth, can give men in a backward society the basic conditions of life already secured in an advanced one. Indeed, the rhetoric alone should make us suspicious. Where objective conditions permit little rapid improvement of material circumstances, Governments have often seen the next best thing to real progress as trying to persuade people that there is really progress anyway, that the things of the spirit are so much more important than the next bowl of rice.
What one must not do is to bend one’s estimate of objective reality to accommodate short-term tactical considerations. Thus, the progressiveness of the revolution in China leads on to arguing that the Chinese ‘model’ is the sole means to achieve socialism, and all things Chinese are, by definition, progressive. The Left intellectuals of the 1930s played the same game with the Soviet Union, and ended being taken for a ride. Moscow came to equal socialism, and all criteria for judging Moscow on a socialist basis thus disappeared. The sympathisers ended as apologists for the Russian State (of course, it is also true that the Chinese revolution has not played nearly so important a role in the political awareness of non-Chinese socialists as did the Russian revolution, nor has Mao achieved anything like the international significance of Stalin).
Progressive steps are important, even if they are not the final step. But in present conditions, whatever happens in China – or anywhere else – is continuously threatened by the continued existence of the imperialist powers. In Vietnam, the American forces may be defeated, but this will not end the existence of Washington. The existence of the advanced capitalist powers, private and State, makes the prospects for any sustained economic development in the backward countries grim. Thus, the future of the backward countries, like the future of the peasantry, depends, not upon one defeat of one element of imperialism, but its global destruction. And it cannot be destroyed globally in Vietnam, nor can it be destroyed by the world’s peasantry. It can only be destroyed in the advanced countries themselves, and only by the proletariat. Thus the issue – peasant or proletarian – is not about who can achieve ‘socialism’ in one country, but about the emancipation of mankind as a whole.
 



Coudert (Rep.): ‘Did I correctly understand you to say that the heart of the present policy towards China and Formosa is that there is to be kept alive a constant hope that at some point there will be an internal threat of military action vis-à-vis Red China in the hope that at some point there will be an internal breakdown?’
Robertson: ‘Yes, sir, that is my conception.’ (Testimony by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, Walter Robertson, to the House Appropriations Committee, US Congress, January 26, 1954.)
From March 2 of this year, both Russia and China have decided to publicise the occurrence of armed border clashes between their respective forces. The clashes are certainly not new, but the fact that they are now publicised indicates a change in the political strategies of the powers involved. In particular, it shows a new phase in the Russian attempt to take over the former role of the United States in Asia.
The British withdrawal from Malaysia and the likelihood of American withdrawal from Vietnam, Thailand, and possibly, at some later date, from Okinawa, is leaving according to the conventional wisdom, a ‘power vacuum’ in Asia. And it is this supposed vacuum Moscow is seeking to fill. It is doing so in ways identical to those used by Washington. On the one hand, Moscow proposes a collective security pact of the anti-Chinese Asian powers – a revived form of SEATO and CENTO, with the proposed addition of what the US failed to achieve, a North Pacific Treaty Organisation. On the other, bilateral military agreements between Moscow and individual Asian powers will provide the teeth to an Asian pact, and incidentally secure Russian hegemony within it. The pact will crown the efforts of Russian foreign policy over the past five years. Moscow has withdrawn from too close an association with particular powers (an association created in opposition to US patronage of other powers) and opened up relations with all of the formerly American client-States.
The two pivots of the new alliance are to be India and Japan. In the Tashkent settlement with India and Pakistan, Russia withdrew from support solely of India against US-supported Pakistan, but simultaneously increased its aid to India and also to Pakistan. India is now firmly locked into Soviet economic policy, without Russia being bound to fight Pakistan in the event of Indo-Pakistan hostilities. Mrs Gandhi has this year duly had talks throughout south-east Asia on possible regional collaboration. For Japan, Russia has reserved the richest bribes – the Siberian contract. Russia has been consistently pressing Japanese capital to invest in a £1,000 million project in Siberia – for natural gas, for timber, for mineral resources (copper, iron, coal), for road, rail and port development. As perks, Japan has been offered more extensive rights for private business trading in the Soviet Union than any other Western power, and also valuable overflying rights from Tokyo via Moscow to Europe (a concession which will give Japanese Air Lines a valuable edge in the airline war on the Far Eastern run). If these are the two whales for which Moscow anglers are fishing, they are not neglecting the minnows. This year alone Kosygin has visited Afghanistan, Pakistan and India, inviting all three to a Kabul meeting with Iran and Nepal; Podgorny has made a quick visit to North Korea; other Russian emissaries have made official trips to Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines; the Russian missions in Indonesia and Burma are already in entrenched positions; and finally, an unofficial visitor has had talks with the Kuomintang regime on Taiwan.
This elaborate noose is designed to encircle China, and it needs, to make it credible to all the powers, a tangible demonstration of undying Chinese hostility. On the Sino-Soviet border the Russian Army has been seeking to provide this demonstration, to trade on the US legacy of anti-Chinese hysteria. Over the past three years, the very thin population of the eastern Soviet Union has been stiffened with possibly up to 30 army divisions, with new major air bases built or expanded at four sites (adding to the existing four major bases). Tactical air units, including 300 combat aircraft are said to have been moved into Outer Mongolia (itself now transformed into a Russian garrison State). Mobile rocket units with tactical nuclear warheads are said to have been sited on the Sinkiang, Manchurian and Outer Mongolian border (in the last case, only 340 miles from Peking). And when the clash was finally achieved on March 2 on Chenpao Island on the Ussuri, the entire propaganda machine of the Soviet Union was ready to swing into action both to ignite an outburst of hysterical chauvinism in Russia and to line up the virtuous Russians with the world’s policemen. Not only was the ‘sacred Motherland’ raped on the Ussuri; with a ‘bandit-like stab in the back’; but Russia must take rapid action to clean out the rats before they attacked again – ‘only by means of a resolute offensive can one defeat the enemy’s forces, break his will to resist and achieve final victory’. [1] It was from Moscow that through until September came the urgent rumours of an immediate Russian pre-emptive strike on Lop Nor and the nuclear installations of north-western China. The scaremongering, the sabre-rattling, were all part of the act to create a Chinese shark with which to frighten the Asian fish into the Russian net.
For the actual basis of the dispute is too trivial to be considered. On the one hand, Tsarist Russia seized enormous areas of formerly Chinese territory, and compelled the ailing Ch’ing dynasty to ratify this theft in a series of treaties (two of the most notable being those of Peking and Aigun, 1858 and 1860). On the other, the Russians have subsequently seized other bits of territory beyond these frontiers. Following Lenin’s declaration in 1917, the Soviet Government in 1920 declared null and void all treaties between China and Russia, and renounced Russian territorial seizures and concessions in China itself. The Kuomintang were never able to cash the promise, and Stalin never positively took the initiative in annulling the borders. Yet now the Russians argue that all the territory they hold is rightfully theirs, and, by implication, the territory they seize is also theirs. What is more, they now positively defend the Tsarist acquisitions, saying that they were territories not historically part of China, inhabited by non-Chinese peoples historically oppressed by Peking, etc., etc. In furtherance of this definition of the problem, the Russians have sought to foster minority movements in Sinkiang, particularly in 1962.
Nor is it the case that Peking has been demanding the return of the Tsarist thefts. At every stage, the policy has been reiterated that the ‘unequal’ treaties should be the basis for the border, and marginal changes made by negotiation. Thus, on October 7 of this year, Peking repeated that ‘The Chinese Government has never demanded the return of the territory Tsarist Russia had annexed by means of the unequal treaties. On the contrary, it is the Soviet Government that has persisted in occupying still more Chinese territory in violation of the stipulations of these treaties and, moreover, peremptorily demanded that the Chinese Government recognise such occupation as legal’. Peking is reduced to plaintive repetition in the face of Soviet aggression and world-wide hostility: The Chinese Government has consistently held that the Sino-Soviet boundary question should be settled peacefully. Even if it cannot be settled for the time being, that the status quo should be maintained ... there is no reason whatsoever for China and the Soviet Union to fight a war over the boundary question’. Meanwhile, Moscow – like President Johnson throughout 1966 – pleads earnestly for a ‘negotiated settlement’, protesting all the time its peaceful intentions and the impossibility of negotiating with the ‘Mao clique’.
Of course, Peking has no more than a nationalistic perception of the border clash. No analysis of Russia emerges other than abuse – ‘Fascist white terror reigns in Soviet Society today’ [2]; Lin Piao compares the Soviet Union’s ‘socialist community’ to Hitler’s ‘New Order in Europe’; capitalism reigns at home through a Fascist dictatorship, and ‘social imperialism’ abroad. But this rhetorical froth demonstrates only that the Chinese government has no bearings whatsoever in Marxism (Moscow itself has similarly virtually no analysis of China at all, and what it has, does not distinguish China from, say, North Vietnam). In Peking, the demands of immediate policy dictate the social analysis, rather than the other way round. It is also true that the Chinese Government responds to the border clash not by arming the people with guns that may be turned upon itself but with all the panoply of chauvinism – ‘China’s sacred territory brooks no violation’.
That two gigantic powers should seek to murder each other over a barren island in a distant river (a barren island which, incidentally, disappears in certain seasons) might be taken as a basis for rejecting both sides. Socialism has been crucified on Chenpao: let both sides do their damnedest. To argue thus would be the worst kind of abstentionism. In the long history of the oppression of the mass of mankind by a minority, socialists can never stand aside when the oppressors and the oppressed nations clash. Unconditional support for China in its clash with the Soviet Union is an absolute obligation on all socialists, whatever their view of the possible evolution of China itself. As Lenin put it – ‘if tomorrow, Morocco were to declare war on France, or India on Britain, or Persia or China on Russia, and so on, these would be “just” and “defensive” wars, irrespective of who would be the first to attack; any socialist would wish the oppressed, dependent and unequal states victory over the oppressor, slave-holding and predatory “great” Powers’. Socialists cannot treat with equality an unequal relationship – we are for the oppressed whoever they are.

Notes
1. Defence Minister Andrei Grechko, May 9.
2. Peking Review 14, April 4, 1969.



THE JANUARY 18 assault of 8,000 Tokyo policemen on Yasuda Hall, administrative centre of Tokyo University (Todai), has brought to a close the first phase of the most militant student revolt at the moment.
This summer, the Lower House of parliament comes up for re-election and in 1970 the US-Japan Mutual Security Pact can be altered or scrapped.
In both cases, the official opposition is not presenting an adequate attack. The student movement, as elsewhere, is filling the vacuum.
Eleven months ago, the Todai Medical Faculty went on strike against the disciplining of some students. In June, Todai’s President – like LSE’s Director this month –  called in the police to clear the campus.
 
Fortresses
The result was a storm of protest. Other faculties went on strike and by the end of October the university had come to a halt.
The campus was converted into a series of fortresses, commanded by different factions. The bitter battle to remove these factions has occupied the police ever since.
But this is only Todai, the nucleus of the opposition and the premier university of Japan.
Elsewhere, in some 50 of Japan’s 370 larger universities, the revolt has also developed.
A year ago, students and workers fought to prevent the US atom-powered aircraft, carrier Enterprise, refueling in Japan.
In May, there were violent demonstrations as militants of Zengakuren (Federation of Student Self-Governing Associations) tried to block railway fuel supplies to the Tachikawa US air base.
 
Prevented
In the summer, a US military plane crashed into a building of Kyushu University and militants prevented US recovery of the aircraft until the US promised to evacuate nearby Itazuke air base.
Further attempts to block fuel and ammunition trains culminated in the enormous demonstration of October 21 against the Vietnam war and US bases in Okinawa and Japan.
Some reports state that 700,000 workers of the largest trade union federation, Sonyo, and a smaller one, Churitsuroren, demonstrated in 363 areas of Japan. Three and a half million held workshop rallies and the students stormed the parliament building.
The demonstration coincided with government attempts to penalise 10,000 railwaymen for a work-to-rule. The railwaymen held a one-hour strike and boycotted fuel trains supplying US bases, and 175,000 other workers held one-hour solidarity strikes.
This year, apart from the battle over Todai itself, students sacked a Tokyo police station as reprisal for the assault on Todai. Chuo and Meiji universities held solidarity demonstrations and occupations and there was a riot at Kyoto University.
 
Forced
Nihon University, the scene of an enormous demonstration on September 30 that forced the chancellor and five other directors to resign (because they had been milking university funds for their own pockets), and Todai were both closed, affecting perhaps 150,000 students.
In total, the police claim, 4,000 police were injured and 5,000 students arrested. Incidentally, the level of violence was more than it might have been because the Japanese Communist Party students (the Yoyogi faction) fought openly against the action of the militants.
The issues behind the revolt are the same as elsewhere, the same combination of local student grievances and major political issues. In particular, because a majority of Japan’s universities are operated for private profit, the continuous raising of fees is a constant threat to all students.
Again, the universities are much more authoritarian in character than elsewhere, and they have been vastly over-expanded in recent years (the staff-student ratio in private universities is 37 to one; in some universities, it is as high as 100 to one).
But in addition, many of the students recognise the key role Japan plays in the US domination of the Far East. Japanese territory, Okinawa in the Ryukyu islands to the south of Japan proper, has been under US occupation for 23 years, and is now a major supply and servicing point for the Vietnam war.
It is the largest US troop garrison in Asia outside Vietnam, a base for the giant B-52 bombers that raided North Vietnam.
 
Agitating
In addition, the US maintains extensive bases in Japan itself, and has long been seeking to push Japan into the role of its major agent in Asia, the lynch pin of an East Asian Treaty Organisation and the major Asian nuclear power.
On Okinawa itself, the local population has been agitating for a long time for US evacuation. US requisitions of land from 1955 now cover 15 per cent of the total land area.
The peasants complain bitterly that the giant Kadena base was built on the best sugar growing soil, and that sugar cane must be cut on demand to a height of one foot so as not to interfere with electronics communications.
They say US troops enjoy extra-territorial rights so that they cannot be tried by Okinawa courts and the waters around the island have abnormal radioactivity because of the transit of nuclear submarines (a frog mutation was discovered by an Okinawa newspaper last July).
There have been peasant demonstrations and sitdowns with the slogan: ‘Yankee land robbers get out? Your dollars are here today, gone tomorrow, but our land bears fruit forever.’
The Japanese government has tried to conceal the fact that it would basically like to be the major nuclear power of Asia, and is not averse to US power in achieving this.
On Okinawa, it has restricted itself to polite criticisms –  requesting that schoolrooms be sound-proofed against the noise of US jets.
Even if the US does return Okinawa to Japan in the 1970s, both Washington and the government of Japan would like to keep the nuclear installations intact there. To do so, they must revise the Japanese Constitution to delete the clause which forbids Japan to hold nuclear weapons.
The particular student issues and the wider politics cannot be separated. Control of the universities, the ‘mass-puro’ (mass-production) of students, is part and parcel of the corrupt businessman’s regime of Prime Minister Sato.
And Sato cannot be separated from his friends in Washington.
 
Survive
Whether it is the row at Keio University, which began when medical students protested against the faculty accepting US military funds for research, or at Kyushy University, US foreign policy and the Vietnam war are intimately bound up with Japanese society.  
The profits flowing back from Vietnam help Sato survive.
Thus all the central issues of Japanese politics – its relationship to the US, the rearmament of Japan (and the revival of Japanese imperialism), the right of Japanese capitalism to rule, the revision of the Constitution and the fate of Okinawa – are being fought on the campus.
In 1970, Japan can revise its pact with the US, or continue the rightward slither.
At the moment, the students are the most militant forces for the first alternative.
 



For the first time in its history, the regime of Ayub Khan looks very close to collapse. The continuous opposition within the country throughout Ayub’s rule has at long last achieved a wider movement. In the past, the opposition has been fragmentary, isolated and often regionalised. In particular, this opposition has been generated in East Pakistan, separated by a thousand miles of Indian territory from the capital in the West. Through its jute industry, the East contributes the largest share of national export earnings while receiving a smaller chunk of domestic investment. The area is very poor, densely populated, ravaged along the coast by typhoon and flood, and of a different culture and language to the West – Bengali. There was also opposition – and demands for greater autonomy – from the Baluchis and Pathans in the West, and sporadic opposition among the dominant Punjabis of the West. But the consistent opposition remained heavily dependent on the grievances of the urban middle classes. Its high point was the candidature of Miss Jinnah for President in 1964.
The last four months have seen the politicians’ opposition overtaken by the revolt of the students, much more radical hostility from religious and professional groups in West Pakistan’s cities (particularly journalists and doctors), and by a clear split in the ruling class. The results are dramatic. Ayub’s governing party, the Muslim League, has all but deserted him, dissociating itself from his rule and grunting restrained approval towards the students. 33 members of the League, led by an ex-Minister of Commerce and supported tacitly by the present Minister of Communications, have openly condemned the East Pakistan provincial administration.
Outside the League, other prominent ex-supporters of Ayub have come out in public opposition to him. Z.A.Bhutto, a rich Sindhi aristocrat and up to August, 1966, Ayub’s Foreign Minister, has been the main focus of student opposition. It was Bhutto’s tour of West Pakistan and his imprisonment which precipitated the first wave of student protest. Bhutto is for disentangling Pakistan more clearly from the West and for a closer alliance with China against India. But, apart from the chauvinistic rhetoric, he has little programme for radical social change. He is for the restoration of universal suffrage, of civil rights (ending the Emergency, declared in 1965 during the clash with India), against corruption and ‘inefficiency’ – as are all virtuous men – but the economic status quo is basically good for him. Bhutto needs just enough hostility towards Ayub to scramble into power. Others with like ambitions have watched Bhutto’s advance on power with apprehension. Perhaps it was fear that Bhutto would not be able to control the forces he unleashed, would turn out to be a Kerensky, that prompted other Establishment figures to throw their hats in the ring. Air Marshall Asghar Khan; S.M. Murshed, ex-Chief Justice of East Pakistan’s High Court; General Azam Khan, ex-Governor of East Pakistan: there are an increasing number trying to position themselves to catch the crown when it falls. Meanwhile, the opposition politicians have also been manoeuvring to be there when the spoils are divided. The eight party Democratic Action Committee, yoking Left and Right together, has drawn up a programme with something for everyone who counts in Pakistan today.
Ayub’s response has been to use all due force on the ground police, troops, teargas (the death toil over the weekend, 24-27th January, was 24, with 1,000 arrested) – but offer concessions to the politicians. He has agreed to end the Emergency legislation, to reform the University statutes; he has transferred Bhutto from goal to house arrest; and has asked to meet all the opposition leaders to discuss constitutional reform. This ‘moderate’ guise could well split the opposition in the crunch. But it might also reflect that Ayub is no longer sure that the army will defend him if there is a sustained rising. If this is the case, it is fortunate. In the past, only one real issue has held Pakistan together – hatred of India (just as hatred of Pakistan has been used to hold the loyalty of north India’s urban middle classes to Delhi). If the army’s loyalty to Ayub were unquestioning, the President would be able to initiate some border incident on Kashmir and flood the opposition with chauvinistic rhetoric. In India, ailing Congress might also find that nationalist militancy against Pakistan would be a useful way of swamping its domestic opposition.
On the other hand, the longer the crisis continues, the greater the danger of national disintegration. On the February 9th 100,000 demonstration in Dacca (East Pakistan), there were cries for a Free Bengal – that is, the unification of East Pakistan’s Muslim Bengalis and India’s West Bengal Hindus against both Delhi and Islamabad. West Bengal’s recent elections have just brought to power the opposition coalition (in which the Left Communists are the biggest element) in a landslide victory against Congress. Neither Delhi nor Islamabad could tolerate a straight link across the border, so that both have a powerful vested interest in growling at each other to mutual advantage.
Meanwhile, each day the battle continues in Pakistan, the danger grows that this struggle within Pakistan’s ruling class, precipitated by the hostility of the urban middle class, will spill over into a real revolutionary movement among workers and peasants. On February 13th, in preparation for the general strike on the 14th, it was 25,000 railway workers and 7,000 factory hands who suddenly appeared to give the battle a quite different complexion. Hitherto, the workers have been a passive element in the crisis, but this could be the beginning of a movement with far wider implications than those of a ‘civil rights’ campaign. The result must be to close the ranks of the ruling class, and for the army to step in to preserve the status quo. The army might then invite into power Bhutto and the others in order to buy off the support of the middle class and the students. Undoubtedly, the new regime would be more liberal than the old, at least until it was firmly in the saddle. But the lot of the ordinary peasant and urban worker would scarcely be affected at all. The 6 per cent growth rate over the past ten years (nearer 9 per cent recently) has benefited the West most; and within the West, the Punjabis; and within the Punjabis, the richest capitalists. The smaller regional groups, as well as the mass of poor Punjabis, will still face the same battle for survival on the land or an urban work day of fourteen hours, six to seven days per week. It will only be otherwise if a real revolutionary movement follows from the demonstration of the 13th, pushing the movement for civil rights into a movement for popular power; a workers’ and peasants’ revolution.
 



THE SPEED of events in Pakistan has transformed the balance of forces. Originally, a middle class revolt in West Pakistan united with a popular movement for greater provincial independence in East Pakistan.
Both movements were, in the midst of the battle, overtaken by a much more dramatic popular revolt.
In the West, the industrial belt ground to a halt. Much of the civil service went on strike, and even the police threatened to do so.
In the East, the industrial workers were even more solid in their action against the regime. In the countryside the peasants began settling a thousand scores with local officialdom, with the array of predatory sharks that feed off the poorest villagers.
 
Violent hostility
In response, Ayub Khan – already clearly deprived of army backing – conceded all the main demands of the united opposition, including finally his own immediate resignation. The more he conceded, the more violent popular hostility became – and the more terrified the opposition leaders became at the Pandora’s Box they had opened.
The counter attack began from the pulpit (the mullahs however have no love for the present secular regime), with denunciations of socialism and the demand that the mouths calling for socialism be silenced.
But to the Islamic Right, seems to have come the original rebels, the West’s middle class. Instead of championing the popular revolt, it is the middle class opposition leaders who have pleaded with the masses to be peaceful and docile, not to dismiss Ayub completely (the coalition Democratic Action Committee wanted to retain Ayub as President in any new regime, with powers to dissolve the Assembly).
It was the opposition leaders who actually accused the government of fostering popular violence for its own purposes.
Thus, the intervention of the army is a relief to everyone except the mass of peasants and workers. Bhutto, erstwhile tribune of the people, described the introduction of martial law, ‘on the whole, it’s a good thing’.
Without a passive population, the opposition leaders also stand no chance of getting a foothold in power. The tiger may growl to get them into power but when it rises to its feet, both regime and critics flee together.
In response to the threat of popular power, there is an amazing realignment of all the old enemies – from the obscurantist religious Right (Jamaat-i-lslami), the provincialist Right (Mujib-ur-Rahman), the government (Muslim League and army), the middle class liberals (Asghar Khan), to the supposedly Left (Bhutto and the Moscow wing of the National Awami Party).
The only leader who seems to have escaped this shameless capitulation is Maulana Bashar of the Peeking-wing of the National Awami Party and he seems to have done so by remaining silent.
With the introduction of martial law, the NAP has not issued any call for the struggle to be continued and, particularly, for West Pakistani strikers to foster mutiny in the army.
To do that is for the NAP to align itself unequivocally with a national class struggle, rather than flirting with East Pakistani separatism.
As it is, for the moment, the villages of the East have returned to quiet. Under cover of this military ‘peace’, the leeches will return to their victims, their savagery now inflamed with a lust for vengeance.
 
Purge opposition
The factories have started again. and there seems virtually no political opposition to sustain the movement further.
Ayyub’s earlier attempts to stimulate a clash with India on the East Pakistan border have not so far succeeded and will not be attempted again until the troops newly despatched to the East have purged the country of the ‘unrespectable’ opposition.
Workers will discover this week that the pay increases for which they have fought over the past month are not going to be paid. It will then become clear whether an authentic working-class opposition is prepared to resume the struggle.
It will have to be on a massive scale to prevent the barbarous provisions of the martial law regulations being used against isolated militants (as they are being used against 21 Karachi mill workers arrested last week for ‘inciting strikes’).
Only an independent workers’ movement could have gone beyond the dithering of the opposition politicians. As in France, so in Pakistan.
 



Industry and Empire, An economic history of Britain since 1750
E.J. Hobsbawm
Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 50s.
The Development of British Industry and Foreign Competition, 1875–1914
Derek H. Aldcroft (ed.)
Allen and Unwin, 60s.
There is great need for a good simple history of British capitalism, relating the economic development of Britain to its class structure and the international economy. Eric Hobsbawm has attempted to meet this need, with mixed results. The first half of his book succeeds well, and his appendix, presenting ambiguous and fragmentary historical material in simple diagramatic form, is a model of what such things should be. But the nearer the narrative approaches the present, the more unsatisfactory it becomes. Leaving aside the nationalism (which emerges explicitly in irritating talk about ‘our’ exports), the book is, from the 1870s, increasingly distorted by the fashionable Establishment myth that there is some peculiar degenerate quality in Britain which leads the economy towards inexorable decline. Hobsbawm dissociates himself from the Right wing myths (the workers are lazy etc.), but in his scheme – as in the classical technocrat Wilsonite period – the managers are somehow tired, and choose the cosy home market rather than the bracing and patriotic rigours of exporting (no attempt is made to discuss relative prices or returns here). Thus, naive nationalism and its inevitable complement, folksy moralising economics, together rob the account of hard analysis and rigorous testing against the known factual information. ‘Efficiency’, which takes for granted the existing structure of society, becomes the centrepiece of the critique, instead of class and power. Nor does the world outside Britain receive much attention – except as threat – so the British response lacks any identification of the target which shaped the response. There is thus no perspective for the future, no point of linkage between ‘external’ economic history and the passions of the participants. Finally, the book is far too expensive; the good first half needs to be read by the rising generation of the Left, but for this, the book should have a paperback sister.
Mr Aldcroft’s book is much less ambitious in scope, more specialized in interest and more faithful to the historical material in the period between 1870 and 1914. Explicitly, the book is designed to examine one of Hobsbawm’s myths – that British business began to be peculiarly uncompetitive in this period. Contributions deal in turn with coal, iron and steel, cotton, woollen and worsted, boots and shoes, engineering, electrical products, chemicals, glass and merchant shipping. The evidence is ambiguous, but the general case suggests no support for folksy economics. British businessmen remained, in aggregate, reasonably rational in behaviour – profits, rather than comfort (or, in New Left Review’s version, an inability to escape the embrace of the landed aristocracy) guided their actions. The book is a most useful piece of work even if limited in scope and intention.
 






NIGEL HARRIS says the struggle to replace Ayub Khan is being fought by opportunist politicians anxious to halt the rising popular revolt



THE EXPLOSION of revolt which has swept Pakistan since early last November is the most important event for socialists in south Asia since the overhrow of foreign political control.
In 1958, Ayub Khan like de Gaulle in France – came to power through a military coup Now, again as in France last May, a completely unexpected revolt has cast doubt on a regime previously noted for its ‘stabiilty’. However, unlike France the revolt is not that of a mass industrial working class.
Pakistan was created out of two territories at the extreme west and east of the Indian subcontinent. The two parts are separated by 1,200 miles of India.
To the west the dominant majority, Punjabis, control the main cities and the mass of fertile land. Minority groups on the edges of Punjabi control – Pathans in the north-west, Baluchis and Sindhis – have sporadicly challenged this control.
 
Very poor
But in East Pakistan, opposition to the West has been continuous. The East has about 20 million more population than the West, but only equal representation in the National Assembly.
The East earns the largest share of foreign exchange, but in proportion to its population gets less than half of central expenditure. The East is very poor, densely populated and backward, separate in culture and identity (the population is Bengali.
Since Ayub came to power, the differences between East and West have sharpened.
Between 1959 and 1967, the difference in income per head between East and West increased from Rupees 88 to 150.
 
Weak roots
It is in the East that the banned Communist Party has what roots it retains (roots constantly weakened by Russian – and, even more – Chinese support for Ayub.
The Leftist National Awami Party (itself divided between pro-Moscow and pro-Peking factions) is also a party of the East.
Finally, the strongest opposition party the Awami League, also comes from the East. Under Shaikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, the League consistently presses for increasing separation of the East from the West. It demands a ban on capital flowing out of the East to the West, a larger share of national funds, restricting the national government (also in the West) solely to defence and foreign affairs, and giving the East representation in the National Assembly according to its population. In the past, the opposition to Ayub has been decisively weakened by its divisions. This includes not just the spectrum of small opposition parties, ranging from Right-wing religious mysticism to Stalinism, but also the rhythm of revolt which has meant East and West have reached the peak of hostility towards Ayub at different times (as was the case in the upsurge of opposition in the East in 1966).
Thus Ayub has been able to play one off against the other, or play off the relatively passive peasant majority against the much more consistently hostile urban middle class. It is the urban middle class – particularly the students and various professional groups (journalists, doctors, teachers) – of the West who precipitated and have since sustained the current revolt.
 
Wide attack
In November, the government de-rationed sugar even though shortages had tripled its price. Separately, students in the West launched a campaign against government controls on the universities.
The two separate starting points merged and launched a more wide-ranging attack on corruption and inefficiency in the state administration.
An answering student echo came from Dacca in the East and this helped to broaden the movement in the West into a generalised attack on Ayub’s authoritarian regime. He was denounced for destroying any semblance of a free press, and for his rigged constitution whereby only 120,000 ‘basic democrats’ in the population are able to elect the President directly.
The champion of this movement was Ayub’s former Foreign Minister (a minister from 1958 to 1966), Z.A. Bhutto, a rich Sindhi landowner-lawyer, outside the old guard of opposition politicians.
His imprisonment sparked the massive student revolt and as this campaign spread outwards, in the New Year, some urban workers also began to participate.
Yet Ayub could possibly have survived all this. What he could not survive was the collapse of his own ruling-class base and, in particular, the withdrawal of the support of the army.
Important establishment figures – Air Marshall Asghar Khan, ex-East Pakistan Chief Justice Murshed, ex-East Pakistan Governor General Azam Khan – began to ‘struggle against tyranny’.
Ayub’s governing party, the Muslim League, disintegrated. Thirty five members formed a ‘critical opposition’ group (including an ex-minister, with tacit support from the current Minister of Communications) to attack the East Pakistan provincial administration. Six others from the assembly joined Bhutto’s People’s Party.
 
Refused to fire
In early January, junior army officers were court-martialed for refusing to fire on demonstrators in Karachi.
On the one hand, the army faced demoralisation and disintegration. On the other, the old rulers were moving over to praise the students and suddenly discover the merits of universal suffrage, so that if Ayub fell, the status quo would not fall with him.
The old politicians – organised, regardless of contradictory politics, in the Democratic Action Committee – have been overtaken by Bhutto’s hurricane. Yet they have continued to try and lead the movement, to accept private talks with Ayub Khan as a settlement.
Ayub’s weakness has grown steadily the more concessions he has been forced to make because he is now robbed of the strength of army backing. He is withdrawing the emergency (imposed in 1965 during the clash with India), releasing some political prisoners (including Bhutto and Mujib-ur-Khan), and finally has promised not to stand in the 1970 Presidential elections.
The politicians have found the concessions a useful pretext for escaping from the popular movement to private negotiations with the President on ‘constitutional reform’. In doing so, they have forced Bhutto into raising more left-wing demands in order both to keep control of the popular movement and prevent the politicians outflanking him.
 
Raise issues
The combination of a regionalist and a middle class revolt can, however – as in Czechoslovakia last year – raise issues which cannot be simply sighed away in private talks.
The movement can supersede the issues of civil rights – shall there be universal suffrage? – and the trivial personal questions of the immediate status quo – must Ayub Khan go?
All these questions protect those who control the land and the industries of Pakistan – the notorious 22 families.
Behind the politicians is the opportunist, Bhutto. But behind Bhutto are the millions for whom Pakistan’s much lauded 6 per cent economic growth rate (nearly 9 per cent recently)over the past decade, has meant only increasing hardship and deprivation.
 
Popular power
For Pakistan’s ruling class, the first priority is to prevent the issue of popular power being raised. To do this, Ayub Khan is an excellent symbolic sacrifice.
In his place must go, at best, one of the establishment opponents like Asghar Khan - swapping an Air Marshall fora Field Marshall – or an opposition politician, or Bhutto.
And the changeover must happen before the virus of revolt infects the masses with a fever that cannot be soothed with such slight remedies.
Bhutto’s aim is to keep the pressure just to the point where he can outflank his opposition rivals. His programme of militant anti-Indian chauvinism and flirting with regionalism contains little about internal social and economic reform.
 
Pot boiling
Nor has the first part of the programme – the secret of his success among West Pakistan’s students – any appeal in the East. It means even higher defence expenditure and military adventures on the Kashmir border (in which the East has no interest).
To keep the pot boiling, he has recently talked vaguely about ‘land to the tillers’ and will probably get away with it since he has no peasant support. He has won some industrial worker support, but he has not raised the issue of nationalisation or workers’ control.
Bhutto is just what the ailing Congress in India needs. Another border squabble permits the ruling groups on either side of the Indo-Pakistan border to flood their domestic opposition in a tide of nationalist fervour.
For the Pakistan Left, the task must be to force Bhutto and the movement further and further left, to push the demand for civil rights into a demand for popular power, to build a movement which Bhutto cannot sell out.
A peasant and worker alliance to begin the permanent revolution in Pakistan can transform the whole perspective for socialism in Asia. Not least, it will raise for the first time on a massive scale an authentic alternative to the Indian Congress.
Nigel Harris has written an important analysis of the upheaval in China in the current issue of International Socialism. 3s post paid from 36 Gilden Road London NW5.
 



THE RE-ENTRY of the army into control of Pakistan could not be long delayed. Having withdrawn support from Ayub Khan, logically the army has become the sole defender of the status quo and it needs to act swiftly.
In the West, waves of strikes have temporarily made Pakistan’s capitalists no more than ailing ghosts. In the East, the peasantry has settled a thousand scores in every village, against the local bully, policeman or landlord.
Martial law is the only alternative for Pakistan’s demoralised rulers.
 
Revenge
Army divisions have already been transferred to the East and a brutal purge is likely to follow unless the opposition forces can recreate their own order.
The army is West Pakistani-dominated and it will have few immediate qualms about revenging the regime’s dishonour.
Meanwhile, it is likely that the middle classes who originally sparked off the revolt against Ayub Khan will now have been terrified by the prospect of popular revolt and will also swing into support of the army.
Finally, the rattle of shots across the India-East Pakistani border last week suggests the final lynch-pin in the status quo’s counterattack.
The only opposition alternative is to pull together the forces of revolt and present a coherent alternative. At the moment, those forces are divided by rampant provincialism and will gladly sell each other out for more autonomy.
This makes the task of the army much simpler and the prospects relatively grim.
 



‘Marxism takes its point of departure from the world economy, not as a sum of national parts but as a mighty and independent reality which has been created by the international division of labour and. the world market, and which in our epoch imperiously dominates the national markets ... In respect of the technique of production, socialist society must represent a stage higher than capitalism. To aim at building a nationally isolated socialist society means, in spite of all passing successes, to pull the productive forces backwards even as compared with capitalism ... means to pursue a reactionary Utopia. If the heralds and supporters of this theory nevertheless participate in the international revolutionary struggle (with what success is a quite different question), it is because, as hopeless eclectics, they mechanically combine abstract internationalism with reactionary Utopian national socialism.’ [1]
Thus Trotsky on Socialism in One Country. But while the comment is correct in relationship to socialists who pursue an isolated revolution, it tells us little concretely about the processes which would transform the Soviet Union from the first Workers’ State to a State capitalist regime. Trotsky certainly identified some of the contradictions which would force Stalin in directions inimical to socialism. To develop the Soviet economy, in isolation from the world market, capital must be accumulated out of the surplus value generated by the mass of the population. More exploitation, not less, was the sole remaining avenue for progress until the European revolution arrived to relieve the beleagured proletarian garrison.
One element in Stalin’s response to the central problem was his treatment of the majority of the population, the peasantry. His response is important, not just for understanding the evolution of the Soviet Union, but also for analysing the powerful pressures on any regime in any backward country today. M. Lewin’s remarkable book, Russian Peasants and Soviet Power [2], begins the account of the factors precipitating collectivisation in the Soviet Union, 1928-30, and lays out in full detail the central contradiction facing Stalin’s regime. To redistribute the land, to break up the great estates of the Russian nobility, was the vital element for the Russian peasantry in its acceptance of the leadership of urban workers in the Russian revolution. But the Bolsheviks were aware that this element was a noose they put round their own necks if they accepted the demand. [3] They had no option if they were to keep the peasantry from joining the bourgeoisie in opposition to Soviet power. Land redistribution simultaneously created a new class of private owners of land – or strengthened the position of the existing class of owners – in Lenin’s terms, a ‘petty-bourgeoisie’, committed to the defence of private property in agriculture. It also deprived urban industry of a significant part of the agricultural surplus. The new regime lost its capacity to export grain (an export important in the growth of the Tsarist economy), and a flow of resources to build industry.
Politically, the regime had to try and retain the neutrality – if not the support – of the peasantry lest it, the majority Russian class, became the seedbed for counter-revolution. Yet to do so was to accept development only at the pace at which the peasantry voluntarily expanded its output – the peasant would control the generation of the agricultural surplus, and thus the pace of urban capital accumulation. Yet to accept this was to accept that the Soviet regime would be inherently weak, continually subject to the possibility of foreign intervention or pressure. And even this slow pace depended upon urban industry producing a flow of goods at prices acceptable to the peasantry so that an urban-rural exchange could operate at all.
Nor would the situation remain stable, given the slow paceof change. The administrative machinery – in this case, the Party in the rural areas – was itself changing. As in China, in the Kiangsi Republic [4], or just after 1948 [5], the richer peasants constantly encroached on the Party, became Party members and manipulated the local Party to their own advantage. In a similar manner, in India’s Panchayeti Raj, the richer peasants constantly overshadowed the ‘representative institutions’ and took the lion’s share of development funds. But it was not a one-way process. For, as Lewin shows, the rural Party cadres in Russia were also able to use their position to become richer peasants. Thus, in the absence of counter-pressures, the Party – an urban beachhead in the countryside – would tend to become an instrument of the richer peasants. If it did, then there would be no way of preserving the class character of the Party and its political aims, let alone having available a means to siphon off resources from agriculture to industry.
During NEP, the balance of economic power tilted away from the cities. Urban industry, shattered by Civil War and the destruction of the Russian working-class, did not produce a sufficient flow of goods to induce the peasants to expand their exports to the towns. The first ‘scissors’ crisis – a ‘goods famine’, a contraction of the rural market – occurred in 1923. In the mid-20’s, agricultural output was still far below its 1913 level. The grain the peasants were prepared to market never resumed its pre-war level, although the population had increased substantially in the interim.
The State procurements for 1928-29 were 630 million poods; before the war, 1,300 million poods had been marketed annually. Before the war, Russia exported 11.4 million tons of grain annually; in 1928, Russia was compelled to import grain to feed both the towns and sections of the poorer peasantry. [6] The population, both urban and rural, had increased; the demands of the cities had increased; the land redistribution, the destruction of the larger estates, had radically cut back the surplus.
Intrinsically, the situation was most alarming. In the last two months of 1927, a sudden fall in State procurements threatened the towns – or, at least, some of the urban population – with starvation. It was this jolt to the unstable system which precipitated a process of State intervention to seize the grain by force, a return to some of the elements of War Communism. Yet to intervene in this way was to prompt the peasants to cut back their output to their own needs: they had no incentive to produce what could be simply looted by force. The peasants’ reaction then further forced the State to increase its efforts to seize the foodgrains that the peasants would otherwise have consumed. The moves developed ‘pragmatically’, but in sum they constituted Stalin’s Final Solution to the Russian agrarian problem: to destroy the peasantry completely as a class, and leave the land as a place to be looted at will for the needs of urban capital accumulation. The periodic bread queues in Russia today, the poor productivity of Russian rural workers, show one of the results.
Lewin’s book is one of the most important works to appear on the agrarian question. At no stage is he content with a shallow explanation of events in terms of the particular personality of Stalin (although this gave some differential emphasis to particular elements in his policies). With a superb wealth of concrete detail, he shows the nature of the problem, of the crisis, and the impossibility of the decisions.
But the Right (whose most articulate spokesman was Bukharin), and the Left (under Preobrazhensky and Trotsky) understood the nature of the dilemma, and accepted that private farming would remain the dominant element in Russian agriculture in the foreseeable future (that is, neither considered collectivisation as a serious possibility). Bukharin chose to accept the situation, to seek by all means available to preserve the goodwill of the peasant producers (which effectively meant the richer peasants). The State should assist the poorer peasants and help them to work in cooperatives. Gradually, the co-operatives would come to dominate the countryside, would move into collective farms, and then the richer peasants would see it was in their interests to join the richer and more powerful collectives. Socialism would have triumphed on the countryside by gradualist means. Yet, this meant that urban industry must produce in the short-term the goods the peasants wanted to buy, even though it could not expand at a rate faster than the peasantry would permit. Had the situation been ‘normal’, industry already satisfied peasant needs such that an expanding flow of grain reached the cities, the strategy might have made more sense. But it did not, and the towns led a precarious existence in terms of grain supply. On the other hand, the poorer peasants were not just weak vis-a-vis the richer, they were also economically a poor risk in terms of production. To divert State funds into this sector was possibly – although not at all inevitably – to improve peasant welfare, but not to create an area capable of supporting the towns, let alone capable of expanding industry to employ the surplus rural population. Long before the co-operatives became even self-supporting, the richer peasants would have achieved an absolute stranglehold on the market.
Was the Left any more realistic? Was there a visible alternative to Stalinism? Preobrazhenzky and Trotsky acknowledged that the terms of the urban-rural exchange operated to the disadvantage of the towns because industry was backward and weak after the long period of economic dislocation in Russia. Industry must be expanded rapidly if the terms of the exchange were to be corrected, and if the Soviet regime was to survive. But where was the surplus for accumulation in expanding industry to come from? In 1926, Preobrazhenzky was arguing that agricultural taxation for industrial development must be increased, but that the main source for capital accumulation must come from the industrial working-class itself. As Trotsky put it, at the 12th Party Congress,
‘there may be times when the State fails to pay you a full wage, or only pays half, and you, the workers, will give your State credit, out of your own pockets’. [7]
But the workers were already very poor; indeed, their poverty was a key factor in the low productivity of Russian industry. To strike at them in this way was to strike at whatever basis the regime had in Russian society.
A temporary sacrifice for a short-term emergency might have been defensible, but to base a long-term policy of capital accumulation on workers’ living standards would negate all the achievements of the revolution. In any case, the workers were few and already poor, so that to raise the rate of their exploitation would not realise a sufficient surplus for rapid accumulation. The peasantry, however, was enormous. Preobrazhenzky moved on. The main source of capital accumulation should be from the petty bourgeoisie, and in particular, the peasantry. Through taxation, through profits on the State monopoly of external trade, through the State use of credits and loans, and, above all, through the manipulation of the exchange between agricultural and manufactured goods, accumulation for urban industry would take place. There was no intention that this would be a ruthless process of looting; a substantial surplus must remain in the hands of the peasants, and the poorer peasants should both be protected by tax exemption and encouraged into State-assisted co-operatives. State collectives should be created to meet an increasing proportion of urban consumption needs.
But where was the process to begin, and how long was it to last? If this was no more than a temporary holding operation until the socialist revolution overtook at least one advanced capitalist country, it might have been possible. But without that revolution, it was likely the policy would diverge either towards Bukharin’s position, or more likely, towards Stalin’s. To start the process in any case demanded some immediate surplus, not automatically generated by the urban-rural exchange. To lay hands on the surplus in the countryside would have begun exactly the process Stalin became trapped in. The situation had its own logic in the absence of the revolution in the West, a logic which perhaps permitted differences of emphasis but not of the basic process.
It is this logic which Lewin superbly demonstrates. Once the process began, Stalin – or, indeed anyone else – had little option but to move towards collectivisation to avoid even greater disasters. The myths Stalin invented to justify his policies, the paranoia about the kulak plot, the insanity of the class classification of the rural population, all these were only tenuously related to the real problem; but the problem remains when the myths are despatched. Although Lewin himself suggests there were alternatives to Stalin’s policies – in the Opposition Platform, in the First Five-Year Plan [8] (the Plan was abandoned by Stalin in practice before it was even ratified), both of which strategies eschewed collectivisation – the weight of his evidence suggests that by 1928, there were no alternatives. Even a run of bumper harvests which would have removed perhaps the immediate crisis, would only have been a temporary relief. In the absence of outside assistance, the peasantry remained the only source of accumulation.
Again, had the Party remained a politically conscious organisation of Bolshevik workers – instead of, in its rural units, a collection of richer peasants and bureaucrats, manipulating the poorer peasants to ratify decisions – the process might have been modified. But the Left Opposition could not have recreated the Party from their offices in Moscow. Stalin purged the Party of richer peasants, and then used his crude ‘apolitical’ rural instruments as a blunderbuss. The cadres were reproved for the excesses which the leadership made inevitable, and thus Stalin exonerated himself in the eyes of the peasants. He recreated the Tsar, the Little Father, who protected his people from his evil satraps. [9] An identical process in China promoted the same ‘cult of personality’ in which the peasants found an illusory saviour in Mao and the cadres were adjudged not on their politics-but on their absolute obedience to the Leader. Pressure from the top within the Party led to the same ‘spontaneous’ zeal by the cadres, the same abandonment of political persuasion among the peasantry for the use of crude force. The same cult of ‘bigness’ led to the creation of vast administratively impossible units in the countryside. In Russia,, the brutality of the process stands out with sharp clarity. Perhaps as many as ten million peasants were deported, and many of them perished on the way. [10] The incredible history of misery and oppression of the Russian muzhik reached its climax in his destruction. Prison socialism, a barbaric despotism filled the gap created by the failure of the socialist revolution in the advanced capitalist countries.
Collectivisation – and Lewin is to publish a volume on the years of collectivisation proper – destroyed the problem of accumulation by force. With profound irrationality, it also radically lowered the potential rate of accumulation itself. One set of problems was overcome, but another was thereby created. Russian development became immediately much more difficult and strangled, and Russian agriculture an almost unrelieved tale of disaster. But the regime survived intact. It did so by making it impossible to contain within itself genuine socialists. For the Bolsheviks, the peasantry might have been a ‘petty bourgeoisie’, but this was not an argument for their destruction as a class by force. Collectivisation gave supreme power to the mindless bureaucrat prepared to savage anyone in the name of the Party, and robbed the political cadres of any organisation. Henceforth, the hectic priorities of Stalinism overruled any scruples at all. Thus the embryonic ruling-class of Russia received its first baptism in peasant blood.
Lewin’s book is a magnificent and sombre account of this process. For obvious reasons, his account lacks the authentic reply of the peasant, a reply still secreted in rural Party archives and in the memory of untold injustices by those still in exile. But given the material available, Lewin has written a superb synthesis and analysis. We are all in his debt.
 



Friday
THE SUN glistens on the mountain snow high above Teheran. From the top you would see the whole sprawling city spread out, the bare brown hills churned up to make way for underground railways, for blocks of flats, luxury hotels and highways.
The city holds its breath. It has vowed to destroy the 25-year-old tyranny of the Shah.
The Shah, sits in his gigantic palace to the north, cold as an icicle, while a dozen telephones ring at his elbow, an endless stream of messengers bring documents to sign and advisors to worry, all to befuddle the moment of crisis.
In the barracks young soldiers polish their automatic guns, worrying. What will happen if they ask me to shoot my brother or my sister tomorrow?
In the bazaar, the fortress of the revolution, they are busy organising, scribbling the illegal wall newspapers, now the only source of news in the city. And in numerous living rooms the argument rages – what will the Shah do?
A girl arrives to say the military have seized the television station. Quick, find a telly to see what fools they make of themselves.
Already the general strike has begun. An engineer, just back from Abadan, the southern oil centre, says no oil is moving – he counted 42 tankers anchored off the Kharg Island terminal.
The telephone workers are out. The one newspaper still operating after the military crackdown – the government’s own – has been silenced by a printer’s strike.
The universities and schools are shut. The university of Teheran is under military occupation to prevent students coming together. Bread shops collect enormous queues, and half a mile or more of cars wait at the petrol stations.
The foreigners flee. The hotels are empty. Every flight from the airport is packed.
Central bank staff have just released an unofficial list of government officials guilty of sending out of the country more than 10 million dollars each.
Three Chieftain tanks belching smoke and swaying dangerously get caught in a traffic jam. Young men on the pavement cheer and lob bricks, and soldiers in a fury fire volleys.
The tanks are impotent, like beached whales. Enraged, a sergeant looses his revolver into the sky.
One hour after 9pm curfew the first greeting for Moharram begins. From every area of the city, from every house – a mighty shout rises, Allah Akbar.
First the deep shriek of men, answered by a shrill chorus of women. Then from all round the roar of crowds breaking the curfew followed by the splatter of automatic fire.
The power workers pull the switches – the whole city is plunged into darkness, lit only by the flash of the rifles. Helicopters, clattering hawks, plunge to launch a volley at those on the ground. And a squadron of the Shah’s Phantoms rip across the night sky.
But shoot as they may – officially five were killed, unofficially 300 – they cannot silence the endless chorus, the macabre chant of a city in darkness.
Only exhaustion does that as the cries grow hoarse around 2 a.m.
They say half a million demonstrated that night. The children were in the front line, facing the troops. Behind them the women, then the men. The soldiers started shooting. The people rushed them and fought with sticks.
A BBC reporter saw bodies cleared from the streets and dragged on to army carts.
 
Saturday
THE STRIKE is now complete, but it does not stop the cars packing the roads, the endless traffic jams.
Soldiers are now everywhere; young men in steel helmets, unshaven and scowling to keep up their courage.
Trucks and armoured cars around the bazaar. Soldiers sit with automatics between their knees. Some grin sheepishly at passers-by. Someone asks one whether he will shoot more people today and he flushes. He shoots no-one he said hotly; it is the others.
We are all conspirators. There are no defenders of the regime. Only the wavering bayonets protect him.
At night the drama begins again. The wails rise from the city just as the lights go out. The flash of rifles make a splatter of sound amid the cries and the roar of rage from a multitude of demonstrators.
Two slogans from every throat. ‘Death to the Shah’ – ‘Tanks and machine guns can no longer stop us’ The Shah in his palace counts the hours, and watches the generals from the corner of his eye.
 



Introduction
This journal has argued in the past that national economic development for the backward countries is now impossible. The importance of this argument can scarcely be overestimated. It jeopardizes the whole perspective of national liberation, a struggle which promised that, if only political independence could be won, a country could transform the condition of the majority of its people. National independence requires an independent material base, an independent economy; without it, the claim is mere empty rhetoric. If that independent economy cannot be created, the claims of the new ruling classes of the backward countries to be the right people to rule become spurious. The Left has remained more snared by this argument than the ruling classes of the backward countries. Communist Party strategies still turn upon an alliance between the proletariat and the “progressive national bourgeoisie” (“democratic and patriotic forces” etc.), the definition of the bourgeoisie’s progressiveness being that it has the capacity and will to develop an independent national capitalism (or, what is becoming hardly distinguishable, an independent national socialism).
A cluster of phrases surround the concept – achieving “self-generating growth” (or, in Rostow’s phrase, “take-off”), the idea that, when developed, a national economy can generate full employment within its own boundaries, regardless of the world system. Indeed, the vindication of Stalinism lay less in the abstractions of a debate about “socialism in one country”, and rather more that Stalin refuted the Trotskyists by delivering the goods – the Russian economy was developed, and on the basis of national isolation.
However, if national economic development was the characteristic only of a past phase of world capitalism, much of the politics of the Left in relationship to the backward countries becomes Utopian and, in the strict sense, ‘reactionary’ (that is, harking back to a past time when national economic development was possible). The view of the Bolsheviks in 1917 – that not only was ‘socialism in one country’ impossible, but also that neither a proletarian nor a bourgeois order in a backward country could achieve national economic development – would then be shown to be only premature, not false.
What then, does the phrase, ‘national economic development mean? Without getting involved in the complexities, it is composed of two interdependent processes – the accumulation of capital and the socialization of the labour force. The accumulation of capital demands the increasingly extensive and intensive exploitation of labour. Extensive exploitation means drawing into work masses of people either unemployed or underemployed, extending the perimeter of work to encompass all potential labourers within the country. Intensive exploitation means continuously raising the productivity of employed labour, which in turn requires the accumulation of equipment and the continuous transformation of the techniques of production. This first process has meant industrialization and urbanization.
However, today levels of labour productivity, determined in technically advanced capitalism, ensure that industrial output can be expanded very rapidly indeed without proportionately increasing the employment of labour. Thus, a backward State can promote high rates of growth of output and accumulation without much “socialization of the labour force”. Instead of the industrial economy spreading to encompass the potential labour force of a whole country, it tends to remain limited to a small enclave of high growth with relatively few effects on the mass of the rural population. The enclave acts as the isolated extension or colony of a world system, rather than as the motor of general growth in the country as a whole.
The Bolsheviks in 1917 believed the role of the national bourgeoisie was exhausted. In this context, that means that the bourgeoisie could no longer fulfil its “historic tasks”, namely the creation of capitalism. Nor was it possible for a proletarian State to substitute itself in that role. It was this impasse which lent so much urgency to the task of spreading the revolution beyond Russia’s borders to the heartlands of the capitalist system – the revolution abroad was a vital material necessity for the survival, let alone the advance, of Soviet power. In fact, the Bolsheviks were wrong – or premature. Japan did develop. Furthermore, in the Soviet Union, it was possible for a new class, some of the heirs of the revolution of 1917, to perform the tasks of development in the Soviet Union itself. In twenty-five years, between 1929 and 1954, the Soviet Union was, in material terms, transformed. Reality refuted the propositions of theory.
 
The record of expansion
Thirty three years have passed since the Second World War, a period characterized by the unprecedented expansion of world capitalism. In that period, most of the backward countries secured political independence, and did so in the most favourable economic circumstances – generalized growth. Many backward countries experienced sustained expansion, at rates much higher than those achieved by the advanced capitalist countries in the nineteenth century. A handful of those countries crossed a number of important thresholds (one of the measures is an income per head of US $1,000 annually) – Brazil, Mexico, Roumania, North Korea, Iran, Spain, and four countries in east and south-east Asia. It is these four – South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore – which are the main concern of this article.
On the figures, the case seems clear-cut: all four are well on the road of economic development. The performance has been as remarkable as any in the history of capitalism. To take the four in turn:
 
South Korea’s 1962 population was 27 million, the labour force 8.3 million, and the income per head, US $87 annually. In 1978, the population was about 37 million, the labour force 13.2 million, and the income per head crossed the US $1,000 benchmark (current prices). In the period 1962–1978, the sectoral source of the gross national product changed as follows:



Year


 


Agriculture,
forestry, fishing


 


Mining and
Manufacture


    


Services




1962


36.6%


16.5%


46.9%




1978


21.3%


36.5%


42.2%



Thus, in terms of the value of output, a decisive structural change had taken place. But what of the “socialization of the labour force”? The change in the distribution of the labour force was as follows:



Year


 


Agriculture etc.


 


Manufacture etc.


    


Services




1963


63.1%


  8.7%


28.2%




1976


44.0%


22.8%


33.2%




1981 target


39.7%


26.1%


34.2%



Thus, on the face of it, although the change is less dramatic, the socialization of the labour force was in the process of being accomplished.
 
Taiwan presents a comparable picture over a longer time period. The 1952 population of 8.1 million (labour force 2.9 million) created an annual income per head of US $45. The 1978 population of 17 million (labour force 6.8 million) produced an income per head of US $1,168 (current prices); in real terms, that represented a change from under 5,000 New Taiwan dollars to 16,890, the fourth highest income per head in Asia.
The sectoral source of the net domestic product was as follows:



Year


 


Agriculture etc.


 


Manufacture etc.


    


Services




1952


35.7%


17.9%


46.4%




1977


13.4%


38.8%


47.8%



The distribution of employment was:



1952


 


61.0%


 


  9.3%


 


29.7%




1977


27.0%


38.0%


35.0%



The proportion employed in manufacturing was roughly the same as in Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Japan and the United States. Furthermore, in both South Korea and Taiwan, the fastest recent expansion is in heavy industry. 50.8% of Taiwan’s industrial output is now in heavy industry and basic chemicals, 43% of South Korea’s.
 
Singapore had a population of 1.9 million (labour force 0.6 million) in 1967. It reached 2.3 million in 1977 (labour force 0.92 million). Average income per head crossed the US $ 1,000 mark in 1971. The change in the source of net domestic products is as follows:



Year


Agriculture etc.


Manufacture etc.


Services




1967


2.8%


17.2%


80.0%




1977


1.8%


25.1%


73.1%



In terms of the distribution of employment:



1967


3.5%


19.5%


79.1%




1977


2.2%


27.3%


70.5%



About 58% of those employed in manufacturing produce heavy industrial output and chemicals.
 
Hong Kong presents a similar picture but with a slightly larger population, 4.5 million (labour force 2 million), but with the difference that its heavy industry and chemicals are almost non-existent. [1]
The two city States are very different. Hong Kong is the nearest approximation to a “free economy”; it is almost completely dependent upon being continually reshaped like plasticine by the world market. Government action is restricted to maintaining high levels of infra-structure for industry, finance and tourism, maintaining low labour costs.
In South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore by contrast, the State plays the main role in seeking to guide accumulation in particular directions. In the case of Taiwan and Korea, this direction is determined in the main by military priorities – to build an independent and self-reliant economic base to support a military posture vis-à-vis China (for Taiwan) and vis-à-vis North Korea (for South Korea). In 1952, Taiwan devoted 60 per cent of the budget to the military and police, and that share was still nearly 40 per cent (on the official figures) in 1976. South Korea maintains 600,000 men under arms, the fourth largest armed forces in the world (but with a population of only 37 million) – as well as 1.2 million in reserves, 2.7 million in paramilitary forces, backed by universal military conscription (and 20,000 in the notorious Korean CIA).
The figures of growth represent a spectacular performance. In some cases, industries have doubled in capacity every two or three years, and sustained that pace for ten years. Furthermore, all four States maintained expansion (even if at lower rates) through the downturn of 1974–75, when the rest of the world was in the main contracting.
 
The Role of the State
The South Korean State maintains tight control over the economy. Planners instruct business on three monthly output targets, markets, type and rate of expansion of capacity, and inspect the quality of the output. All companies depend very heavily on bank loans (and directly on public finance in heavy industry) – and the government has made itself the major shareholder in all lending agencies. The government has nominated a dozen leading business groups as ‘General Trading Companies’, equivalent to Japan’s zaibatsu, each group covering a range of manufacturing, trading and banking companies. Monthly, the President (Park Chung-hee) meets businessmen from these corporations, and in particular, the leading three (Hyundai, Daewoo and Samsung) to plan the monthly export campaign, set the targets, plan how to overcome obstacles etc. The system operates by a mixture of bribery and bullying, backed by lavish government investment in infrastructure that is devoted single-mindedly to the needs of expanding output and exports. The country is now dotted with specialized industrial estates where a very high quality of infrastructure is provided.
Export incentives are said to add ten per cent to the return to exporters, and the proportion is much higher in heavy industry. Some sources suggest that up to 70 per cent of the capital investment in heavy industry and shipbuilding comes from the State. When companies flounder, the State uses its banks to bail them out and keep them afloat. Wages are low and the State makes almost no provision for measures of social welfare; heavy indirect taxation on the mass of the population produces a revenue that is almost completely devoted to defence and sustaining profit margins.
Take some of the key examples:


Shipbuilding. In the 1960s, the industry’s output was of relatively small scale ships and relatively poor quality (20,000 gross tons per year). From 1971, the State forced a vast expansion (to 700,000 gross tons capacity in 1976). South Korea muscled aside the leading work producers in a rapidly contracting market to secure 2–3 per cent of the world market. [2] Most other shipbuilding industries were facing large scale collapse. Korea aims to secure 10 per cent of the market by 1981 (when the industry will have displaced the Swedes as second largest producer after Japan). In fact, the target remains although the government has cut its original 1973 ambition of building nine giant tanker (half a million tons or more) yards; it is now building only three. Yet even so, only a quarter of the shipbuilding capacity has been used since; 1970 (except in the years 1973 and 1974 when it rose as high as 60-per cent): a level of operation that means massive closures and/or massive government subsidies. In fact the government is massively subsidizing, gambling that the shipping slump will end before the public exchequer collapses.
 
Steel. Here the situation is similar. The world industry (except Brazil, Taiwan and Mexico) experiences massive losses and closures, but South Korea has increased output from one million tonnes output in 1971 to 6 million this year and a target of 8.5 million is aimed for in 1981. The government has just announced the building of an additional gigantic 12 million tonne plant, designed and tooled by Japanese and German firms, a plant which will be a technical advance on the existing largest plant in the world, Japan’s Yawata (14 million tonnes). Again, public finance is achieving this miracle.
 
Petrochemicals. The world output is inundated with cheap ethylene (raw material for most petrochemical output), produced by the giant naptha crackers of the world’s leading companies. Efforts are underway to establish a world cartel so that some of the crackers can be shut down to hold the price (and profits) up. Korea began with a 100,000 tonne cracker, has now added a second of 350,000 tonnes, and is planning a third, each the nucleus of a major petro-chemical complex. Only the government can pick up the bill since world demand is so low, and the domestic market is small.
 
Vehicles. The Korean industry began in 1971, and now – thanks to the tooling and technical advice of British Leyland – has a current capacity of 220,000 vehicles, with a target output of 2.1 million (900,000 of them for export). Yet, despite the expansion of output, still only a third to a half of capacity is used. Costs of production in cars are said to be a third higher than equivalent Japanese models, but the export price in foreign markets is lower. Indeed, a Hyundai official claimed that there was a loss of £400 on every car exported. Again, the government waves its magic wand.


The subsidies underpin a drive to establish an independent heavy industrial base of a size where the greatest economies of scale are made. That entails that much of the output must be dumped abroad. The internal market is very small, and deliberately squeezed by high taxes to keep it so. The government’s strategy is now dedicated to a major expansion of the machinery industry, sophisticated electronics and shipbuilding, while running down textiles and cheaper electronics.
In Taiwan, the same direction is pursued. The process of growth has been sustained over a longer period and, given its much smaller size, Taiwan is more advanced than Korea. The Taiwan regime is planning its fourth naptha cracker (the output of petrochemicals expanded 138 per cent between 1975 and 1978) and starting to develop nuclear technology. In steel, capacity is rapidly being expanded. In shipbuilding, the country has just completed two 100,000 ton yards and is planning a 300,000 ton one; Taiwan is one of the very few serious rivals to Japan in the giant tanker field. Finally, vehicle capacity is just rising to 300,000 units per year, with the intention of exporting 100,000. As with South Korea, Taiwan’s exports soared in 1976 when the US restocking “mini-boom” took place – they expanded 53.8 per cent in that year alone. But, again like South Korea, private investment has been declining since then, and foreign investment is stagnating.
Singapore is a much smaller economy, but important in world and south east Asian trade – it is the fourth largest port in the world, the centre of the Asia-dollar market (which is about 6 per cent of the size of the Eurodollar market), and is a large tourist centre (two million tourists annually). It is a very important centre for oil refining, the manufacture of oil drilling equipment, for the repair and servicing of tankers. As in South Korea and Taiwan, the State is pushing the economy towards more capital and skill intensive industries, concentrated in exceptionally well serviced industrial estates. The city government is trying to run down the textile industry (the island failed to fill its quota of the US market), saw mills and cheap electronic plants, and build up aircraft components, fine chemicals (the go-ahead has just been given for a very large Japanese petrochemical complex, the first in Singapore) and advanced electronic equipment. As in the case of the other two countries, the State sees its role as a leading one in all fields. Singapore pushed containerization of its docks well before other ports, building three freight stations (225,000 square feet) between 1968 and 1972, and smashing through all docker opposition. The government provides, again, very high standards of infrastructure, using public spending to keep up activity in the downturn of 1974–75. Even tiny little market stalls are now regularly checked by public health’ inspectors lest foreign tummies turn the tourist trade.
 
Labour
Between 1955 and 1965, the unprecedented scale of the boom in the advanced capitalist core of the world system exhausted the immediate supply of labour within the advanced countries. As a result, a two for-process developed – the attraction of immigrants from the backward areas of the system into the advanced, initially to do “immovable” jobs: in agriculture, mining (in West Germany), construction, social services; secondly, the development of “moveable” jobs by the companies of the advanced sector in backward areas. Along the north Mexican border with the United States there are now a series of “in bond plants” where US firms are permitted by the Mexican government to import freely for production purposes, to employ Mexican workers at Mexican wage rates, provided the firm exports all its output. In effect, in-bond operations are simple extensions of the US economy giving access to labour much cheaper than that available in the States. Of course, American trade unions should have followed the same logic by organizing the Mexican workers concerned in order to strive for parity of pay between Mexican and American workers; in fact, the politics of the trade union leadership produced the opposite reaction – a denunciation of cheap Mexican labour “stealing American jobs”. By now, in-bond plants or, better known as, “export processing zones” are scattered round the globe, and a host of governments compete to get foreign manufacturing companies into them.
South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore were pioneers in this process. But the faster the three grow, the greater is the likelihood of some relative labour scarcity producing a rise in wage levels that deters foreign capital. More likely is a grave scarcity of skilled labour which drives up skilled earnings which then pull up unskilled pay. Dictatorship is thus inevitable in this context. The most vicious regime, the one that destroys militants most ruthlessly, is the one most likely to scoop its rivals abroad. Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand have authoritarian regimes, but in all cases, the regimes lack the political and economic power to concentrate public finance on infrastructure and industrial promotion and to guarantee high rates of return to foreign business.
Of the four countries discussed here, the two smallest – Hong Kong and Singapore – are the most “threatened” by labour scarcity. Hong Kong receives some immigrants from most of east Asia, particularly the People’s Republic of China, and is now negotiating for the import of Filipino immigrant workers. [3]
Singapore’s economy relies heavily on an Untouchable caste of immigrant workers (possibly 120,000 in all, with an unknown number of “illegal” immigrants), most of them from neighbouring Malaysia, but with others from Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines. Immigration is divided between low and high paid labour. The first enters on three year work permits (six month work permits for jobs in construction). Work permit holders have no right of permanent settlement, may not change their jobs for three years (if they lose their job, they are liable to deportation), are not eligible for public housing or welfare and medical services; many, six to a room, housed in makeshift shacks near their worksite, work seven days a week, ten to twelve hours a day, for a pittance. They are forbidden to hold trade union office, and militancy can also evoke deportation. Work permit holders are forbidden to marry without special permission from the labour commissioner; permission may only be granted to those who have worked five years in Singapore with a “clean” record and who sign a bond accepting that both partners to the marriage agree to be sterilized after a second child is born. Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew justified the policy on straight 1930s “eugenics” grounds that “The better educated and more rational” are not replacing themselves because of their low birth rate; whereas “a multiple replacement rate at the bottom [leads to] a gradual lowering of the general quality of the population”.
Malaysian workers in Singapore are contract labour, consisting of young women working in electronics assembly and textiles (possibly 40 per cent of the labour force), and men employed in construction (about 70 per cent of those employed), shipbuilding and repair, and all the dirtiest and hardest jobs. As usual, getting the contract often means that the worker is permanently in debt to the recruitment agent. The jobs immigrants work on have the poorest safety provisions in a city not known for its safety standards in industry – one worker in every 33 employed in manufacturing had an accident in 1973, and one in every 16 in construction. On October 13th this year, for instance, an explosion on a moored Liberian tanker killed 48 of the workers cleaning it, and injured at least 50 more.
The discrimination against immigrants (and women) permits the permanent depression of the lowest wage levels which ensures all unskilled pay rates remain low. Pay is between one tenth and one third of European levels. The system is structured by a permanent incomes policy for unskilled pay, administered by the National Trade Union Congress through a so-called “tripartite” National Wages Council. Strikes are not illegal, but detailed control ensures that most strikes are strangled at birth. Despite the crisis of 1974–75 when there were large scale layoffs, the government held the man-days lost in disputes (running at 388,219 in 1963) down to under 5,000. Relatively low pay rises are awarded, but they continually evaporate under a much higher rate of inflation.
People earning over 750 Singapore dollars per month enter the country, not on work permits, but on ‘employment passes’, a form which means they miss the mass of restrictions. Because skills are in short supply, an almost indefinite rise in skilled and managerial pay is permitted. As a result, differentials are extreme (in Phillips Electrical for example, the range is said to be 1 : 20).
Despite the elaborate machinery of control, rapid growth in the economy constantly tends to turn it over. A Bank of America study estimates that an 11 per cent growth rate would require a 20 per cent growth in immigration. Nonetheless, politically, Singapore’s ruling order needs harsh measures against immigrants to cement the loyalties of Singapore natives, even though it contradicts the economic interests; of Singapore capitalists. Recently, the government gave permission to US companies to import women workers from Thailand, provided the employers made a deposit of 4,000 Singapore dollars per worker with the government and instituted six monthly medical checks of the workers; if any were found to be pregnant, they would be expelled and the 4,000 dollars forfeited.
In South Korea and Taiwan, immigrants do not play the same role. There it is the contract and women workers who are the means to hold down unskilled wages. Women get 43.9 per cent of the average male wage, and work extraordinarily long hours. An International Labour Organisation survey of 60 countries puts South Korea well ahead of any other in the number of working hours per week – an average of 58 hours. At the bottom of the heap are 12–13 year old girls, working up to 18 hours a day, seven days a week, in wet cellars, for between £12 and £16 per month. In textiles which mainly employs young women, some 73 per cent of the workers receive under £30 per month. As a result of inflation, real wages have fallen 20% since 1961.
By contrast, top technician’s pay rates are as high as £680 per month (the Bank of Korea estimates the minimum household subsistence pay at £85 per month). This leaves out of account the numerous perks, bonuses and premia that white collar workers are often entitled to. This is not to speak of the astonishing incomes of the rich. When a recent survey of women workers shows that a quarter of them were paid under £25 per month, the top 1977 income in South Korea went to the chairman of the Hyundai group, Chong Juyong: a cool £8.2 million! The second highest income went to the chairman of another business group, Hanjin: that was only £3.8 million.
Labour is policed, as in Singapore, by the government controlled Korean Federation of Trade Unions. Strikes and collective bargaining are illegal under the 1971 National Defence Act, and the Korean CIA harass any guilty of “indiscipline”. The figures on unskilled wages make no allowance for the ‘social wage’ – welfare, medical benefits, housing etc., of which there is almost none in South Korea. All government expenditure is devoted to defence and industry. There is no unemployment pay, and only a tiny minority are eligible for retirement pensions or medical insurance. As with Singapore, safety standards in industry are appalling (last year, even in the most modern shipyard, that of Hyundai at Ulsan, 11 workers were killed). There is no public using programme. Pollution is severe because of the lack of enforcement of existing regulations – one British expert estimated that the tributaries of the Han river which flows through the capital, Seoul, had double the level of organic pollution of London sewers!
Korea is, paradoxically, also an exporter of labour, workers on Korean construction contracts in the Middle East and elsewhere. The government target revenue for overseas construction in 1978 was 4 billion US dollars, but the target had already been exceeded by June of this year. Some 60 to 70,000 Koreans are currently working in the Middle East. As a result, there is a grave shortage of skilled workers in Korea. In May, the government was obliged to ban temporarily hiring people to work abroad (it also limited the construction contracts it permitted to be signed, and banned the export of cement). Even so, it was obliged to increase the wages of certain key groups of workers in order to try and nail them down in Korea – Pusan bus drivers were given a 70 per cent pay increase. Not long ago, Korean workers in Iran agitated against low wages, and Park was forced to set a minimum wage for overseas work of £240 per month (of which workers are obliged to remit 80 per cent to South Korea). Thus, Middle Eastern wages threaten to overturn the tight control within South Korea itself. Pay increases for a minority intensify the scramble for housing and goods, driving up inflation (now running at around 14 per cent officially, but popular impressions are that it is really 30 per cent). The mass of low paid workers are then driven to rebel just to survive.
Despite the unremitting battering given to all critics and the savagery inflicted upon opponents, opposition remains considerable. In the last open Presidential elections, the opposition candidate polled 46 per cent of the vote. There have been seven counter coups against the regime. This year, there have been a string of student demonstrations, illegal as are all demonstrations, and despite waves of arrests and brutality, it seems impossible for Park to eliminate them. The same is true of the staggering courage of a group of women textile workers in Inchon who have been agitating over factory conditions since 1972.
If Park cannot hold down the mass of wages, Korean capitalism loses out to its Far Eastern rivals. There are already small signs that US electronic companies may be ready to move – many of them have exhausted the generation of capital equipment located in Korea, and are now looking for even lower wages for the new generation of investment. The Philippines and possibly Malaysia have lower wages and authoritarian regimes. China is now signing contracts with Japanese and Hong Kong firms to start export processing plants (in electronic components, radios and television sets, cassette tapes and stereo equipment) in China itself. From the viewpoint of foreign business, China has a virtually infinite supply of very cheap and relatively disciplined labour, no trade unions [4] or collective bargaining, and a politically strong regime. Furthermore, it is offering exceptionally favourable terms – the Chinese government will pay 70 per cent of plant capital costs, guarantee both minimum 20 per cent profit rate and the right to import all components from abroad. H.T. Vong, leader of the Hong Kong group that just signed a set of contracts, commented: “The terms of the deal are very attractive. The land for the new plant will cost almost nothing, and overheads and labour costs will be very low.”
 
Dependence and Imperialism
All four countries depend for their growth overwhelmingly on the world market, and in particular, on Japan and the United States. They also depend heavily on a continuous supply of foreign direct investment and loans. The three “State directed” economies all used foreign loans consciously to keep up growth in the world downturn of 1974–71 (South Korea borrowed a billion US dollars a year), and to direct their respective economies in particular directions – towards heavy industry. When foreign direct investment stagnated – as it did after 1974 – foreign loans, disbursed domestically by the State, were used to compensate.
American aid to its client States in east Asia was important in the 1950s. Taiwan received an average of 1.5 billion US dollars in economic aid (this ceased in 1965) and some 2 billion dollars in military aid. In the early 1970s, about half the investment in the main growth industry, electronics, was American, and another thirty per cent from other countries abroad. About a third of total foreign investment in industry is American (1952–77), 16% Japanese, and 23% other foreigners (and 30% Overseas Chinese, i.e. non Taiwan residents). By industry, this is distributed: in electronics (33%), chemicals (14%), machinery and instruments (8%), services (8%), metal products (7%).
In Korea’s case, the contribution of “foreign savings” to the total savings declined from 84.4% in the early 1960s to 40% in the early seventies; it now oscillates – between a peak of 43% in 1974 to 18% in 1977. Foreign companies control about a third of direct industrial investment, 82% of this American and Japanese, and most of it is concentrated in the key exporting industries, particularly electronics. Profit rates are very high – Korean companies tend to pay a 40% rate return to shareholders, and US banks have just announced the rates of return on their Korean operations, 1974–1977, as around 100% per year.
Possibly 70% of all activities (industry, banks, hotels etc.) in Singapore are foreign-owned – 77% of the metal trades, electronic and chemical industries; 41% of petroleum and petroleum products. The largest investors are American companies (a third of all foreign investment) followed by the Japanese (with the fastest rate of increase; 16% of the current total), Britain (15%), and the Netherlands (14%). Singapore offers the most favourable terms for foreign capital – completely free remittance of profits, a ten year tax holiday for priority projects, no restrictions on the proportion of shares of a company owned by foreign interests.
There is fierce rivalry for foreign capital between South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, as well as the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia. Singapore’s relative labour scarcity could produce higher wage levels that would price it out of this competition. Perhaps that is a factor, along with stagnating world profit rates, in the decline in the inflow of foreign capital since 1974. Foreign investment peaked at one billion US dollars in 1973, was halved by 1975, and down to a third in 1976.
The whole basis of the growth of the four is exporting. They caught the boom of the 1960s and made fortunes from supplying the US military in Vietnam (Korea earned some 200 million dollars per year for the Korean troops fighting with the Americans there, as well as securing many supply contracts; Japanese firms, constrained by the imposition of a US quota on supplying Vietnam, in some cases migrated to South Korea to fill Korea’s quota). So far, the world down-turn has not, apart from the years of 1974 and 1975, reduced the rate of growth of exports of the four, which means in a contracting market, an increasing share of particular sectors of world trade. However, certain sectors have been hit by protectionism in the advanced capitalist group. Thus, the Multi Fibre Agreement and other restrictions on the textile trades has blocked the expansion of textile exports. This, in practice, exaggerates the crisis since the four economies are heavily dependent on imports from the advanced group; what they earn on textiles is spent and more on imported raw materials and machinery from the advanced capitalist bloc.
Indeed, at the moment the backward countries as a whole have become a major support for the survival of advanced capitalism (in sharp contrast to the picture in the 1960s). Trade within the advanced capitalist group is stagnating (the rate of increase dropped from an annual 12% between 1963 and 1973 to 3% between 1973 and 1977), but that between the advanced and backward is expanding faster than ever (the annual rate of growth increased from 7% per annum, 1963–73, to 12%, (1973–77). Exports to the non-oil producing backward countries now takes 28% of Japan’s exports (15% go to the oil producing countries). For Western Europe the equivalent figure is 15% (10% to the oil producers). For North America the figures are 22% and 11% respectively. In all cases, exports to the backward are much larger than imports – Japan’s exports to the backward countries are ten times its imports, Europe’s five times larger, and North America’s double. The gap is filled by the international banks and by foreign aid.
Japan and the United States are crucial for South Korea and Taiwan. To wildly oversimplify, the two import machinery from Japan and raw materials from the United States, work them up and export them to the States. The results are a large Korean surplus on its trade with the States and a giant deficit on its trade with Japan. As the Yen appreciates and the dollar falls in value, the Japanese surplus grows even larger. Japan, through its monopolistically organized domestic marketing structure, effectively prevents imports, no matter how competitive they may be with domestically made goods. And today, many foreign-made goods are very competitive because of the rise in the Yen – in some electronic goods, US export prices are now half that of the Japanese equivalent. A recent Japanese bank study of South Korea admits that Korean products are more competitive in plywood, textiles, shipbuilding and overseas construction, and becoming more competitive in home electronic appliances, industrial machinery and vehicles. To protect Japan’s position, the bank urges even more Japanese investment in Korea’s industry and negotiating a “division of labour” (which means market sharing). The latest proposal from Tokyo goes much further towards, some might say, a revival of the old “Co-Prosperity Sphere”: a common market, modelled on the EEC, to include the Japanese mammoth, and the tiddlers of Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong.
In sum, then, the three East Asian economies are “offshore” extensions of Japan (and, to a lesser extent, the United States). Indeed, in terms of trade, perhaps the surpluses on their American trade of Taiwan and South Korea should properly be seen as part of Japan’s enormous surplus with the United States. There are, however, other forces at work. If only trade were at stake, we could see South Korea and Taiwan as simply Japanese offshore conglomerates, completely subject to changes in Japanese capitalism. But in both cases, the governments are struggling to establish independent heavy industrial bases. But this gamble takes place in the least promising circumstances – a stagnating world economy. The gamble requires much more than simply cheap labour and authoritarian regimes to keep labour cheap and obedient.
 
Conclusions
So far as the mass of the population of the four countries is concerned, there have been tangible benefits. “Socialization” has taken place. Wages are very low, life styles austere at best, but in both cases they are an important advance on what was possible in agriculture in the period preceding industrialization. Furthermore, for Korea, since that period included the savage saga of Japanese colonialism, the Second World War and the barbarities of the Korean War, the era of Park can only be seen as a relief. However, industrialization has brought not only a contrast with what existed before, but also with what could exist. No doubt, the economies are a remarkable testimony to the dynamism of the world system in certain limited circumstances, but the generation now entering the labour force no longer has any memory of the bad old days of the Korean War, does have some perception of conditions abroad, and can hardly escape noticing the level of profits and the consistent resistance of the regimes to elementary reforms.
Does the transformation of Korea and Taiwan represent “national economic development”? Is it a recipe for the transformation of the backward countries, for the expansion and flourishing of world capitalism? The second question points up the peculiar circumstances of Taiwan and Korea, in essence in origin US military fortresses in the East Pacific, and in industrialization, basically offshore operations of Japan and the United States. The four countries are testimony to the growth of world development, but not national development. In no respect has “self-reliance” or “self-sustaining growth” been achieved. The local ruling classes have an appearance of independent power that is entirely subscribed by their two giant trading partners.
Nor will heavy industrialization change that, for it is already planned to be on a scale that will make it overwhelmingly dependent upon external markets for survival. Autonomy can only come with political dominance, so that South Korea, say, attains the same relative power in the world as the ruling classes of Japan and the United States – then its export oriented heavy industry may provide the independent basis for military power, and its military power ultimately backs its onslaught on foreign markets. But that is a fantasy. If world trade grows, other small dictatorships may be able to copy South Korea and Taiwan successfully, but this in no way offers an alternative to the mass of backward countries and the majority of rural populations. Above all, it offers no alternative for achieving national economic development.
However, there are other instructive lessons. In three of the countries, the State has used authoritarian power to achieve advanced capitalist levels of labour productivity (with the capital equipment and infrastructure which makes this possible) but at wage levels of a backward country – a staggering scale of exploitation. Advanced capitalism has been eager to support this endeavour whether through direct investment of companies (while retaining the basic technical staff in the heartlands of the system), international bank loans, the export of equipment and expertise. It is essentially foreign capital that has achieved this, within the framework of government interests. The “success” experienced encourages further efforts by Western capital to tap the pool of cheap labour in backward countries on a much more substantial scale, moving, for example, vehicle assembly operations to low wage areas as Ford has done to Spain and Volkswagen to Brazil. International capital is not sentimental about territory, only about profits. But the industry relocated is only one truncated limb of an international operation. It has no life without its parent, no life which could provide vigour to an independent backward economy. Its relocation proletarianizes the labour force of a small minority of the backward countries, reduces job creation in the advanced capitalist countries, uses low wage labour to batter down the wages of labour in advanced capitalism.
In terms of our original theme, the impossibility of “national economic development” is confirmed in the case of these four economies. Not only is “socialism in one country” impossible, so also is “capitalism in one country”. But that does not mean that economic growth within a world division of labour is impossible. The terms for that participation are also shown – dictatorship, the butchery of all opposition, the subordination of consumption to the maintenance of very high levels of profit, levels of profit far above those prevailing in the world market and sustained only by the scale of exploitation.

Notes
1. By way of contrast, look at the Philippines. The 1960 population of 27 million (labour force 8.5 million) reached in 1975, 42 million (labour force 15.4 million).



i) Gross national product by sector of origin:




Year


Agriculture etc.


Manufacturing etc.


Services




1960


30.9%


17.2%


51.9%




1977


24.6%


17.3%


58.1%




ii) Distribution of the labour force by sector:




1960


61.2%


12.4%


26.4%




1976


52.7%


11.3%


36.0%



The decline in manufacturing employment is concealed by a considerable expansion in mining employment in the past ten years.
2. In 1977, the leading shares in the world shipbuilding market were:
Japan 40%; Spain 6.4; UK 4.6; Denmark 2.6; West Germany 2.2; Sweden 8.7; France 4.7; Italy 2.8; S. Korea 2.4; Norway 2.2.
3. The Philippines is becoming an important exporter of labour. 87,000 Filipinos were reported to be working abroad in 1977, 16,000 of them in Saudi Arabia, and many more as maids and hospital workers in the US and Europe, and working as sailors on foreign ships (remember Ravi Tikoo at Le Havre?). It is government policy to lease workers for work abroad, provided the major part of their pay is remitted to Manila.
4. That is, disregarding the institutions in China called “trade unions”, since they are not trade unions but merely the welfare arm of management.
 



SINCE 1973 the structure of international capitalism has been disrupted as a result of the world economic crisis. The pattern of relationships that developed in the post-war years has undergone a series of changes. The most significant of these changes have reproduced some of the structural features of capitalism as it appeared to Marxists at the time of the first world war. One obvious example is the increased importance of the raw materials produced by the less developed countries (LDCs) since 1973. Another is the reappearance of what Lenin and Hilferding called ‘finance capital’ – the growing centralisation of international economic power in the hands of the Western banks.
In sum, the changes have two aspects. On the one hand, they represent much greater centralisation of the world system and its component national parts, a centralisation which increases the synchronisation of both the economic movement of the components and the social response. On the other hand, the parts of the system are increasingly differentiated, much more unstable in their relative standing. This article analyses both these features – the centralisation and the differentiation – as well as the rhythms of revolt they have produced.
 
Imperialism old and new
IN ORDER to understand these changes we need first to look briefly at the structure of world capitalism. The starting point for Marxist analyses of imperialism was its most obvious feature in the years before 1914 – the colonisation of Africa, Asia and Latin America by the advanced capitalist countries of North America and Western Europe (MDCs, or more developed countries, is the current cliche). The Marxists of the time – Hilferding, Luxemburg, and especially Lenin and Bukharin – argued that colonialism arose out of the basic structure of the imperialist economies. The colonies provided the advanced capitalist countries with markets, the raw materials and the outlets for surplus capital. They thus served both to offset the tendencies towards crisis inherent in the system and to provide the arena for fierce inter-imperialist rivalries leading to world war.
The system that emerged from the second world war differed from this pattern in a number of ways. The permanent arms economy that evolved out of post-war military competition between the Western and Eastern blocs offset the tendency towards crisis while reducing the advanced capitalist countries’ dependence on the colonies as a stabiliser. The drive to self-sufficiency produced both by war economies and inter-war protectionism encouraged massive import substitution so reducing the need for the direct control of the sources of raw materials in the LDCs. As a result, the LDCs’ share of world trade fell from about a third in 1950 to 14 per cent in 1970. The pattern of international investment also shifted, away from the LDCs towards the technologically advanced industries in the MDCs – for example, automobiles, electronics, chemicals. The main flows of capital and commodities took place between the MDCs themselves.
Political independence could, therefore, be conceded to the colonies without severe disruption of the world system. Once independent, the countries of the Third World’ found themselves condemned to compete in a race they could not win. The prices of the raw materials they exported fell relative to those of the imports from the MDCs needed to industrialise. The scale of investment required in order to compete with the MDCs was well beyond the resources of most of the LDCs.
 
New industrial producers
WE HAVE left the stability of the 1950s and 1960s behind us. The decline of the permanent arms economy has been accompanied by a world-wide crisis of profitability, intensified international competition and the worst recession since the 1930s. The problems have been exacerbated by a new development – the spread of industrial capacity across the globe.
This development has disrupted the pecking order among the industrial economies of the world. World trade is still dominated by the MDCs – to be specific, by the giant United States economy and two smaller advanced capitalist countries, Japan and West Germany. The Soviet Union is the fourth giant of world production – in 1971 its gross national product (GNP) was about a third of that of the United States, but still a third larger than Japan’s.
Beneath this four are the rest of the MDCs – the other members of the Western capitalist bloc and the COMECON countries. However, there is a tendency for some of these to be superseded in certain fields by a layer of the richer LDCs – Iran, Brazil, Argentina, Nigeria, Indonesia, South Korea, India and Mexico. The same is true of southern European countries like Spain, Portugal and Greece. Their situation is one of low income, high unemployment and concentrated industrial capacity.
The spread of industrial capacity to certain LDCs has rendered the problems facing the advanced capitalist countries more acute. This year the Hyundai motor corporation of South Korea exported samples of its cheap car, the Pony, at a price competitive with Japanese vehicles. Ironically, Hyundai’s tooling and its top management were provided by British Leyland, although South Korean competition can only drive Leyland even closer to bankruptcy. The growing competitiveness of these new industrial producers is one factor underlying the changes in the world system analysed in this article.
 
1. Finance capital
IN THE last boom (1972-1973), the system experienced grave shortages of almost all types of raw materials, a shortage made extreme by the instability of currencies which obliged traders to move out of unreliable cash into commodities as soon as possible. The greatly increased demand for raw materials is partly shown by the fact that the share of the LDCs (the exports of which are mainly raw materials) in world exports increased from about 14 per cent in 1970 to 27 per cent.
It was a brief moment before slump destroyed the demand for the exports of the LDCs and the Eastern Bloc. But the slump did not end the inflation in the manufactured exports of the MDCs (the imports of the LDCs) nor did it prevent the increase in the price of oil which afflicted the imports of many LDCs which do not produce oil. The majority of the world’s countries moved into massive trade deficits. For example, the Philippines trade balance deteriorated by 45 per cent between 1974 and 1976; its oil import bill increased from $190 million to $800 million. [1] The old pattern of world trade, dominated by the exchanges of manufactured goods between the MDCs, tended to return to an earlier pattern in which primary commodities, raw materials, had a much larger role to play.
The majority of governments were faced with gigantic deficits in their trade. They were supposed to overcome the problem in the orthodox wisdom by cutting back domestic consumption until imports fell and balanced the external trade account, ‘adjusting domestic to international prices’. The process would be less painful if exports expanded simultaneously. Cutting imports is cutting the rest of the world’s exports, and if pursued by enough countries (as happens in a general slump), is itself catastrophic for the system. Of course, few ruling classes could pursue any such policy without being engulfed in a tide of popular fury. As it is, modest efforts were made in this direction, while the government borrowed heavily abroad to cover the current deficit in the hope that the world system would return to boom and so stimulate the expansion of exports before the repayment of loans became due.
Western private banks, faced with a contraction of borrowing in the MDCs, were only to eager by providing short-term loans to the LDCs and Eastern Europe to sustain their profits. The loans were used in part to finance industrial imports from the MDCs, so keeping up the demand. As a result, the MDCs have become more dependent on exports to the LDCs. Currently, 36 per cent of the exports of the European Common Market go to LDCs, 21 per cent to non-oil producing LDCs (cf. the graph). However, important as the shift has been, it has not prevented the continued rundown of some of the core zones of the MDCs – the West Midlands, the Ruhr, Lorraine – and the collapse of important companies.


 



Source: Eurostat and IMF



The volume of LDC indebtedness soared. In 1971, when the cumulative debt of the LDCs was about $60 billion, governments were obliged to use such a large and increasing share of export earnings to pay the interest and annual repayments, that the debt threatened to strangle development efforts. However, now the cumulative debt is over $180 billion, equal to two year’s export earnings for all the LDCs put together. About $75 billion of this is owed to Western private banks, for short term finance and therefore carrying very high interest rates. Much of it becomes due for repayment in the next four to five years. Interest and amortization is adding about $20-25 billion per year to the total debt, and will continue to do so up to 1981.
Some 29 countries account for 70 per cent of the debt, and a much smaller group for the major part of this – particularly Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Peru, Zaire, South Korea, the Philippines, most of them among the fastest growing LDCs. The burden of debt servicing (interest payments etc) on current activities is substantial. For example, Mexico is supposed to repay in loans and interest this year $5.1 billion; on the current budget, the government can raise only 15 per cent of this, so it must borrow the rest abroad just to stand still. Brazil at the end of 1976 had a cumulative debt of $27 billion, compared to the value of its foreign trade of $21 billion and reserves of $3.4 billion. By comparison, Britain’s cumulative debt this year is $22 billion ($17 billion repayable between 1979 and 1984, reaching a peak repayment of $4.7 billion in 1981; the annual interest payments are currently $1.3 billion).
By 1975, servicing costs alone were said to be equivalent to 17 per cent of the export earnings for most LDCs. In international lending, there is a conventional ‘danger point’ when debt servicing takes more than 20 per cent of a country’s annual export earnings. It is at this point that countries are in danger of defaulting on their payments; if they do, the repayment of the cumulative debt is threatened, a country can secure no credit and its imports and exports dry up. On the other hand, sustained default can bankrupt a Western bank, possibly precipitating a financial crisis and slump in the advanced capitalist bloc (in the 1930s, six Latin American countries defaulted when the debt servicing-export ratio rose above 20 per cent).
The smaller a country’s export earnings, the easier it is to reach the ‘danger point’ with quite small borrowings. The servicing of India’s cumulative debt ($13.1 billion, as against reserves of $3 billion) takes nearly a third of the country’s export revenue (and its estimated foreign exchange needs for the coming three years are put at a further $13.1 billion).
Already there have been some temporary defaults or very near risks – in Zaire, Peru, Argentina, North Korea, and Indonesia; Egypt was ninety days late on its payments in 1976. A political crisis such as occurred recently in Zaire or is currently occurring in Pakistan exaggerates the risk of default and exposes the vastly increased vulnerability of the financial system to a collapse of confidence.
At first, the oil producing countries (OPEC) were protected from the crisis by their increased revenue as a result of the oil price increase in 1973-74. But the ‘surplus’ they received has rapidly declined – from $66 billion in 1974 to possibly $32 billion this year (and a predicted $20 billion by 1980). The larger OPEC countries tried to expand out of the world boom by accelerating their spending abroad (for industrial imports, for arms, and by purchasing assets in the MDCs). Currently, half the 13 OPEC countries are now in deficit, so some of them are now also obliged to borrow to keep up their domestic growth (Iran $1.4 billion, Venezuela $1.2 billion, from the Eurocurrency market alone). As a result, the ‘surplus’ is now concentrated in the hands of three tiny Middle Eastern oil producers (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, which means mainly Abu Dhabi).
The growing role of the rulers of Saudi Arabia summarises some of the new trends in the world economy. Saudi Arabia’s control of a large portion of oil production makes it indispensable to the economies of the MDCs. At the same time, its share of the OPEC oil surplus makes an essential part of the new system of international finance capital, since billions of Saudi petrodollars have been lent to Western bankers. The new economic power of the Saudi regime is accompanied by its growing political role as a defender of Western, and in particular American, interests in the LDCs. Examples are Sheikh Yamani’s role in opposing last December’s OPEC oil price increase and in pressing the Western governments’ proposals on the representatives of the LDCs at the North/South talks in Paris, as well as growing Saudi intervention to defend the status quo in countries as diverse as Lebanon, Zaire and Pakistan.
At the other end of the debt relationship are Western banks. They have, through the crisis, greatly expanded their international dealings. In Britain, Lloyds and Barclays have become important in this lending, launching themselves as multinational banks. US banks have expanded their loans to foreigners by 20 per cent year for the past three years. One of the largest operators. Citibank, has 63 per cent of its current loans abroad at the moment, earning 72 per cent of its current profits. Cumulative US bank loans abroad at the moment are some $45 billion. West German banks have also expanded external operations rapidly, particularly in Eastern Europe and the Middle East. Japanese banks are still mainly involved in operations at home; the largest, Dai Ichi Kangyo, gets about 11-12 per cent of its annual profit abroad.
Some of the US and European banks have become very exposed to the risk of default and so the possible precipitation of their own bankruptcy. It is for this reason that Arthur Burns, head of the US Federal Reserve Board, has been issuing warnings to US banks not to extend themselves further and intervening to forbid certain loans.
It is also the reason why the International Monetary Fund (the MDC’s central bank, set up to offset sudden payments crises) is being vastly expanded to supervise borrowing countries, using its lending power to force governments to cut imports and raise exports. Argentina and Zaire have both had their debts ‘reorganized’ by the IMF to protect the Western banks’ loans, and the IMF is currently supervising Mexico, Brazil, Britain, Italy and many more. The IMF’s current assets (usable currencies to the tune of $4 billion) are quite inadequate to the task, compared to a total world deficit of $45 billion (with a $4 billion contribution extracted from Saudi Arabia). IMF intervention exaggerates the scale of the crisis in the world system (by cutting imports and increasing exports) as well as inflicting the maximum damage on domestic consumption. The results can be seen in Egypt in January when the government endeavoured to ‘cut domestic consumption’ by raising food prices to the international level.
Even without IMF supervision, the lending relationship imposes a two way discipline. It obliges the borrower to slash the living standards of the country concerned (and reduce the public sector, supposedly ‘part of consumption’), but it also obliges the lender to keep up the loans lest stopping them drives the borrower into default, so bankrupting the banks concerned. Brazil has consciously tried to push up its debts so that the lending banks become desperate to protect Brazil from default. In the spring of 1975, North Korea (in the Eastern Bloc) defaulted on its interest payments. The cumulative debt was about half a billion dollars, and the share of British, French and other banks sufficiently small for them to insist on no further loans until interest payments were resumed. Japanese banks, the main lenders, were however too frightened and resumed lending just to try and ensure ultimate repayment. The banks are competing for custom in a declining market, so that a borrower can shop around if one lot refuses; the US intervened to limit South Korea’s borrowings (a cumulative debt of $6.7 billion in 1976), so Seoul promptly turned to West German banks to raise the cash.
 
Eastern Bloc
THE SEQUENCE of events which afflicted the LDCs and advanced capitalist countries also affected the Eastern Bloc. Like the leading LDCs, the COMECON group is heavily dependent on imports from the Western bloc for technically advanced inputs. In 1974, the group imported from the West six times as much technically advanced equipment and materials as it exported to the West (machinery, vehicles, plant, chemicals, electrical and electronic goods). Much of the computer technology in the East is dependent upon or derived from the West, and Russian fertiliser output, so decisive for its ailing agricultural production, is manufactured in plants imported from the West. To keep up current output, let alone expand future capacity, the COMECON group, like most of the LDCs and all the MDCs, need to keep up imports. Furthermore, two spectacular harvest failures (1973 and 1975) obliged the Soviet Union to make massive imports of grain from the United States.
However, revenue from COMECON’s exports, already insufficient to cover import costs, suffered just as did that of the LDCs in 1974-75. The COMECON response was the same as that of the LDCs: increased borrowing from Western banks. Between 1970 and 1975, COMECON’s debts
increased tenfold, reaching a cumulative total of possibly $40 billion. With cumulative interest, this figure may double by 1980. At present, the largest borrower is the Soviet Union with a debt of $14.4 billion, but with a relatively strong economy backing it. Poland, with a much weaker economy, owes $10.4 billion. Bulgaria with a smaller economy again is possibly in most danger (it has persistently imported twice as much as it exports to the West).
The debt relationship imposes the same external discipline described earlier, a discipline recognized in the stress on the need to expand exports in most of the current five year plans of the Eastern Bloc and the substantial efforts made to cut imports in 1976. Nonetheless, the world law of value obliges, to a greater or lesser extent, conformity with the imperatives of world slump, the use of world prices in inter-COMECON trade, and to some extent, in domestic transactions. As in Egypt in January, so in Poland in June 1976, the results of this ‘discipline’ have been vividly illustrated. [2]
The two way relationship also operates. In this case. West Germany is most closely involved. Half the West’s exports to the Eastern Bloc come from West Germany, and a major part of West German banks’ external lending is with the East.
 
Domestic debts
THE TIDE of debt does not simply engulf the LDCs, some of the MDCs and the Eastern Bloc. The centralizing discipline of finance – and the homogeneity it imposes on a diversity of borrowers – operates not simply between countries. There is an identical situation within countries. The cumulative debts of New York City are not fundamentally distinguished from those of another country. Indeed, the two way discipline was most clearly illustrated in the case of New York; President Ford refused federal aid to the city up until it was discovered that 546 national American banks had holdings of New York city bonds equal to 20 per cent of their capital; Washington intervened to give short term aid to the city in order to protect the US – and indeed, world – banking system. The same obligation has been incurred by the British Government now it is a major lender to British Leyland, Rolls Royce and sundry others.
Shipbuilding is now heavily subsidized to protect it from the logic of debt and competition. The Europeans complain that Japanese new ship prices are 30 to 40 per cent below the products of Common Market shipyards, and, as a result, Japanese yards won 90 per cent of all new ship orders from the OECD countries in the last quarter of 1976. In steel, only the Italian industry is said to have a higher level of debt (in relationship to the value of its output) than France, and the French steel industry’s debts are put at 104 per cent of its turnover (61 per cent for Japan; 34 per cent for Britain; 18 per cent for the US, and 16 per cent for West Germany).
Governments have moved into keeping alive loss making units because they are unwilling to risk the financial and political instability that results from allowing them to collapse, just as they have borrowed abroad to protect against contraction in the world market. More and more of these pockets of unprofitable capital emerge, the longer the crisis continues; living standards are cut and profitable business taxed to subsidise unprofitable businesses. The more the State does this, the more it prevents the general profit rate rising again and so restoring growth.
The financing of unprofitable activities is only part of the increasing centralization of each national unit in order to offset the external crisis. The degree of State intervention is becoming massive, particularly in some of the LDCs. Thus, Jamaica has nationalized or purchased the three main activities of the island (banks, bauxite, hotels). In India, the State has steadily taken over ‘sick industrial units’, particularly in the two leading industries, jute and cotton textiles, to prevent closures. In Mexico, as the external debt soared, so also there was a major domestic extension of public finance to hold up profits. In South Africa, the budget deficit tripled (a 44 per cent increase in government spending in 1976) for the same purpose, not to assist the two million unemployed.
The IMF strives to prevent this and force a cut back in public expenditure so that the economy concerned will be reduced to just what is still profitable. Any government which followed the IMF in this task would be committing political suicide. It was the issue of cuts in public expenditure which set off the general strike of the public sector in Sri Lanka (Ceylon) last December and January.
Reorganisation also is accelerated – mergers, amalgamations, the establishment of cartels, the concentration of production. The State and the banks use their lending power to force such changes as the condition of further loans. Indeed, there seems to be a much closer relationship developing between banks and industry, a relationship more characteristic of the situation before 1914 in Germany as the Financial Times recently noted (in commenting on the relationship between the bankers, Morgan Grenfell, and Davy Ashmore International, in winning a major contract with the Brazilian steel industry).
Crisis, then, forces dependence upon borrowing, whether this is an ailing company or city within a country or an ailing country, and this in turn, forces the centralization of the entire system, its common subordination to a handful of core zones in what Lenin called, the Bondholder States. The integration occurs even where a ruling class has dedicated itself for many years to autarchy. Thus Burma, after thirty years of rejecting links with the world system, has this year been driven back to the search for capital imports and foreign markets. We have already noted the case of North Korea. China has, since 1970, vastly increased its imports in order to raise the rate of domestic growth (and so increase its national power). Its exports were severely damaged by the 1974 downturn (although it was protected from increased oil prices by its own oil resources at home), and, after a major balance of payments crisis in the autumn, survived by slashing imports, increasing its sale of gold reserves, and borrowing (short and medium term credit from Japanese and British banks). The new State of Vietnam has just published some of the most generous terms going for the import of foreign private capital. [3] Finally, Cuba’s cumulative debts compelled the country at the turn of the year to rejig its five year plan and make substantial cuts in domestic consumption. Apparently, no domestic arrangements offset the impact of the crisis to any substantial degree.
 
2. Differentiation
HOWEVER, a reverse phenomenon to that of centralization is also present as particular national ruling classes endeavour to establish greater control over their local patch of territory. The pecking order of States changes with increasing rapidity, putting formerly comparable countries suddenly at the opposite ends of the spectrum. This is marked among the group of MDCs. Once there was an ‘Italian miracle’, and not very long ago, France was being tipped as the Japan of the 1980s. Perhaps French capitalism would have been able to deliver if world growth had been sustained. As it is now, if North Sea oil gives the British ruling class more room to manoevre, the French ruling class will suffer the final indignity of being overtaken even by the British. Crisis obliged the French to leave the European currency snake (the fixed exchange rates governing trade between Common Market countries) because they were unable to withstand the domestic effects of being chained to the much stronger West Germans. Of course, the weak men of Europe, Britain, Italy and Ireland never even made the attempt to ride the snake.
Even the top three economies (the US, West Germany and Japan) hold no guaranteed position. The United States – as, to a much more limited extent, Britain – holds a strong position in international finance, so its relative (and increasing) weakness in manufacturing is offset in its balance of payments by what are called ‘invisibles’ (that is, of course, no consolation to the unemployed manufacturing worker). The financial weakness of the Japanese ruling class, in the other hand, obliges it to maintain a gigantic surplus on its balance of trade. Last Year, Japan (with West Germany and Switzerland) took $23 billion on trade from the rest of the MDCs). However, despite this appearance of strength, the ruling classes of neither Japan nor West Germany can afford to be complacent about their basic industries.
Crisis has stretched hard some of the key industries of the period since the war. Shipbuilding has already been mentioned. In Europe especially it is in dire straits, with current capacity estimated to be double what is required over the next five years. All the EEC governments now operate schemes which, from the point of view of the long term the West Germans meet 17.5 per cent of the total cost, and offer very extended credit schemes for the rest of the cost), and offer massive financial concessions to foreign buyers, particularly the LDCs; for example, Norway offers 90 per cent of the purchase price to the buyer, a loan repayable over 15 years at five per cent interest, (or half the rate of inflation there). Japanese shipbuilders say these dodges undercut their prices by 20 per cent (but then the Europeans say Japanese prices are 30-40 per cent below theirs). Even with such schemes which, from the point of view of the long term survival of capitalism are insane, it does not at all prevent the infliction of a savage bloodletting on shipbuilding areas, often ones already depressed.
The crisis has similarly afflicted textiles and clothing. In the US, textile manufacturers are pressing the government to ban or limit imports ‘to protect 2.3 million American jobs against cheap sweated foreign labour’. Carter is currently considering quotas (that is, giving exporting countries set shares of current US imports that they may not increase) or tariffs (a heavy tax on imports) for clothing and also shoes. Already, Washington has imposed one stiff duty on shoe imports, as a result of which, there have been lay offs of 10 to 15 per cent of the workforce in, for example, the main Brazilian shoe making area, the Sinos Valley (Rio Grande do Sul). Carter is also considering restrictions on the import of Japanese electronic and television parts.
Some of these problems are at their most extreme in the steel industry. The US steel industry saw exports fall by 48 per cent in 1975 and a further 10 per cent in 1976. Imports of steel increased by nearly a fifth in 1975, and have continued increasing, taking some 14 per cent of the US market in 1976. The American industry, like the British, is old, but the steel companies cannot undertake the required modernization because of their unprofitablility in relationship to current debts. Demanding a ban on imports is their only method of keeping up their profits (and in June last year, Ford was induced to impose quotas on special steel imports for five years). The US industry is most bitter and persistent in its efforts to raise a chauvinistic campaign against imports, claiming that when imports reach 20 per cent of the US market, 96,000 ‘American jobs’ will be lost, most of them in the relatively declining area of the Great Lakes cities (Chicago, Gary, Cincinnati etc.).
The same problems exist in Europe. The EEC has instituted quotas for sales in the Common Market for European steel companies, dividing the market for some products, and proposed fixed prices on the rest to prevent competition between European producers and thus the destruction of the marginal mills (for example, Shotten, mills in Lorraine in France, Walloon in Belgium, and parts of West Germany, all in already depressed areas). It has also encouraged, contrary to EEC regulations, the creation of a steel cartel for Europe, Eurofer, and negotiated with Japan to limit Japanese steel exports to Europe, contrary to GATT regulations. As a result, the US steel companies are now complaining that the agreement diverts 1.5 million tons of Japanese steel to the US market. Yet, with all these measures, the EEC still estimates that the European industry will have to lay off 150,000 steel workers over the next ten years.
In France, the government has just formulated an emergency plan to inject $1.2 billion dollars into the steel industry (which lost Francs 2.3 billion in 1976 and expects to lose Francs 2.6 billion this year). The plan includes a target to drop 10 per cent of the workforce (16,000 jobs) in twelve months, half of them ‘as it happens’, immigrants. Lorraine, heart of the old steel industry, has lost 10,000 jobs since 1970. In Britain, the problems are familiar and the responses are the same. Already, the British have imposed ‘anti-dumping’ duties on some Spanish, Japanese and South African special steel imports.
The Japanese industry is operating at 80 per cent of capacity (13 of the 66 blast furnaces are idle), with a high bankruptcy rate among small steel companies. The external market is decisive here, and although Japanese companies complain bitterly that the revaluation of the Yen has made all steel exports loss making, they increased steel exports 23 per cent last year. This permitted undertaking a major reinvestment plan for the future and tying up the largest raw material contract for iron ore ever ($4.5 billion for 15 years-worth of South Australian ore). Yet there are problems of competition. The Japanese complain the Europeans are dumping steel in a traditional market of theirs, south east Asia, refusing to charge freight from Europe and offering massive discounts.
The instability among the large producers is exaggerated by the output now coming from the new industrial capacity of some of the stronger LDCs. The case of the Hyundai Pony car was mentioned earlier (and South Korea’s car capacity is much inferior to Brazil’s, with Iran coming up behind). Shipbuilding may be contracting in Europe and the US, but the South Korean ruling class is expanding its yards with great speed. Plans are underway to increase capacity from its present 2.7 million gross tons to 4.25 million by 1981 (including the construction of a yard for one million ton tankers, which are so far only on the drawing board): all to break into the Japanese market. Singapore increased its shipbuilding capacity by 65 per cent in 1976. Taiwan launches its first 445,000 ton tanker in June in a yard completed only a year ago (the second largest in the world after Nagasaki).
The same picture emerges in the steel industry. India last year dumped over one million tons of steel abroad at prices below the costs of production. Spain’s small steel exports have received the attention of the British and now the Common Market. Taiwan has just opened a new steel plant (to produce 1.4 million tons by 1978), and has captured nearly 60 per cent of the ship steel scrap industry, all with a view to exporting. Mexico promises a steel output of 10 million tons by the early 1980s. South Korea launched a steel expansion programme in 1971 and has now reached a capacity of 4.5 million tons (with a target output of 8.5 million tons by 1981); in 1976, it expanded steel exports by 40 per cent, and aims to export 1.4 million tons this year. When the expansion of the world steel market is so small, such small volumes of exports can have devastating effects.
Nor is the problem simply in cars, clothing, shoes, shipbuilding, steel and television parts. Brazil and India are becoming modest arms exporters. Brazil is supplying military aircraft to Chile, the Middle East and Africa (as also are Australia and Canada). Brazil is already manufacturing missiles. With a bit of nuclear technology, the 29 or so countries estimated to have nuclear weapons capacity by 1980 will no doubt move into exports to help along their poorer brethren (hence the current squabble between the US and France and Britain over exporting nuclear capacity to Brazil and others). The lean wolves of the ruling classes of the LDCs are already sniffing the chicken pens of the fat wolves of the ruling classes of Japan, Europe and the US. Meanwhile, in the core zones of industry in the MDCs, manufacturing employment continues inexorably to decline.
In sum, then, the impact of the crisis is to produce paradoxical results – increased financial centralization of the whole system with increased differences between the competing States. Some of the leading LDCs are now in a position to compete in certain very important lines of production with the MDCs, and some of the MDCs – like Britain and Italy – are slipping backwards to the position of LDCs in some sorts of output. Each national ruling class meanwhile tries to offset the external depredations by offloading the cost into the local population and by state intervention. This is the background to the startling reappearance of some of the key features of Lenin’s picture of imperialism, and a reversal of some of the dominant world trends in the 1950s and 1960s. [4] The three leading powers, with possibly half the world’s manufacturing capacity and a larger share of world finance, have become synchronized in their economic movements. They thereby impose on the whole world economy a single rhythm. The common reaction of the world’s ruling classes to this rhythm in turn has created a surprisingly and increasingly synchronized rhythm of revolt.
 
3. The rhythm of revolt
The world system in crisis removes from most of the national ruling classes much of their freedom to manoeuvre, to control their national patch on key questions, let alone to direct it towards growth. The effective collapse of national five year planning – the summary of the aims of a national ruling class – is an index of this loss of power. Five year planning requires both stable domestic control by the State of a major part of the national surplus and a stable external environment, particularly in trade and cash transactions. Without these, planning just becomes a once-in-awhile propaganda exercise, with no bearing on real government policy. In practice, government policy in a majority of countries is nowadays subordinate to the imperatives of short-run survival without any aspiration to long term aims.
For ruling classes that have aspired to transform the countries they govern, this situation produces demoralization. Each member of the class is increasingly tempted to subordinate the collective long term interests of the class to short term private gains, through corruption and the ‘flight of capital’ (both of which are votes of no confidence in the local ruling class’ capacity to survive in its home patch). Those responses only exaggerate the objective crisis – corruption rots the State’s capacity to act, and taking cash out of the country wrecks the balance of payments and undermines the value of the currency. Furthermore, such responses strip back the foggy rhetoric of the ‘national interest’ and reveal the purely parasitical function of the ruling class, subordinating the material condition of the majority to private gain. It reveals also the existence of a world order – the capital and capitalists flee to their secure refuges in the MDCs, abandoning their temporary home in the LDCs.
The thin ideological justification of the local ruling class role disappears, and while this is not vital so far as the mass of the population in the LDCs is concerned, it pushes the middle classes into disaffection. Then only physical power – and the elimination of all right to criticise within the ruling class – holds the social order together. This is part of the explanation for the sustained collapse of parliamentary institutions, the ‘rule of law’ and the ‘free press’ in most of the LDCs, whether through military means in Brazil, Chile and Argentina, or through the establishment of civilian dictatorships in the Philippines, South Korea, Pakistan and Mrs Gandhi’s India. On a milder scale, the same trends are apparent in the MDCs also, although there ideological control is more important, and therefore the need to create suitable targets to divert attention from the local ruling class – foreigners, imports, minorities and immigrants.
Physical power requires a sustained expansion in military and police spending (which exaggerates the diversion of investment into unproductive activities and sets further obstacles to resuming growth in output and jobs). In 1975, world defence spending was running at $345 billion per year (by comparison, a ten year plan for the world steel industry, 1976-86, was to cost the ‘gigantic’ sum of $220 billion for the whole decade) or not much short of $40 million per hour (figures which make the debt figures mentioned earlier rather trivial!). It took half the research and development spending of the world (three times world spending on medical research) and employed 40 per cent of all scientific and engineering manpower in the world. But the fastest growing sector of world military spending is in the LDCs. They increased their share of the world arms trade from 6 per cent in 1954 to 22 per cent in 1975. Currently, LDC weapon imports are increasing about twice as fast as their gross national products. In absolute terms, the main spenders are the richer LDCs, especially the oil producers; the Middle East currently spends $135 per head of the population on the means to kill. Nigeria increased its military forces ten times over from 1967. The poorer non-oil producing LDCs are not far behind in the race. India’s defence spending, increasing by 16 per cent per year in the 1960s, currently takes over a third of the national budget. Egypt increased its military spending three and a half times over between 1967 and 1974. The figures for police spending show comparable increases.
The increase in the ruling class capacity to intimidate is not a response to an illusory threat. Not only are the rhythms of revolt becoming synchronized in the world system, so that all ruling orders come under pressure simultaneously (and are unable therefore to help each other out to the same extent), but also they are reaching a scale that wrecks local control. As a point of entry to the question of working class revolt, the graph of Thai strike statistics can be used as an illustration (cf. box). The small – in Thai terms – upswing of 1966 came just after the explosions in Indonesia and Brazil (both terminating in savage military coups). The slightly larger upturn of 1968-69 – which produced the first instability in the Thai military order – coincided with major movements in India and Pakistan [5], culminating in military repression in eastern India in 1971 and the break up of Pakistan (and the creation of Bangladesh). There were also major confrontations in those years in Ceylon (1971), Mexico, Trinidad, Guatemala and others, but staggered in different years.


 


The next upturn, in 1973-74, is the most synchronized yet seen, and on a scale of working class revolt in the world hitherto unprecedented. National strike rates ran at record levels in most of the countries of the world (but particularly in Italy, Australia, India, USA, Ireland, Britain, Japan, West Germany and Norway). There were major worker revolts in Chile (culminating in another barbarous coup), Burma, Malaysia, Jamaica, Southern Africa (particularly South Africa and on the Zambian copper belt), and in India, the gigantic railways strike. In India also, the great hunger campaigns in Bihar and Gujerat developed (they were not specifically worker actions). In Nigeria, public sector workers intimidated the military regime and exacted a 30 per cent pay increase. Three authoritarian regimes collapsed – in Portugal, the end of the Caetano fascist regime promoted a very rapid radicalization of the working class; in Ethiopia and Thailand, general strikes led to the end of old established authoritarian orders. The Thai strike figures were probably exceeded by the figures for Portugal and Ethiopia.
The other side of the coin to this massive scale of working class opposition is famine. For 1974 is also marked by widespread starvation in the Sahel region of Africa, in Bangladesh and eastern India (the famines and the working class revolt had the same causes in world capitalism; the one did not cause the other). The world experienced very high grain prices in 1974 as the result of US stock policies (the US is the major grain exporter) and Russian purchases of grain in response to the failure of the 1973 harvest. [6]
The worker revolt was intimately related to the rebellion of other classes and movements. The events in Portgual and South Africa were directly related both to the world crisis and to the national liberation struggles in Guinea-Bissau, Angola and Mozambique, Portugal’s colonies in Africa that time. Events in south-east Asia were much less influenced by the liberation struggles in Indo-China (Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos). Furthermore, the action of workers stimulated or coincided with movements of the peasantry – in southern Portugal, northern and southern Ethiopia, central and north-eastern Thailand. In Malaysia, the starvation of rubber-tappers on the estates as a result of the collapse of the world rubber price was the main source of the student-led riots of mid-1974.
There was a similar interaction with the struggle of national minorities, whether of a long-standing kind as with the Eritreans in Ethiopia, or of more recent origin, as with the Muslims of south Thailand. Those movements had parallels elsewhere – the Baluchis in Pakistan [7], the Muslims in south Philippines, Tamils in Ceylon, the Kurds in the Middle East etc.
Most ruling classes were able to stabilize their power in the following two years, partly through short term concessions (financed from borrowing abroad), through direct repression (Thailand, Oct. 1976), military intervention (Ethiopia) or a Social Democratic holding operation (as in Portugal, and also Britain), or some combination of all methods. In Nigeria, the military tried and finally succeeded in ‘trade union reorganisation’ and imposing a nine month wage freeze (in June 1976). In Jamaica, Prime Minister Manley’s sudden conversion to the mysteries of ‘Jamaican Socialism’ was a cover for the introduction of the Gun Court, and Industrial Relations Act to break shop floor militancy, and, this year, a wages freeze. Mrs Gandhi carried out an almost identical exercise in India under the cover of the June 1975 Emergency.
The ruling classes gambled on their short term prospects in the hope that the world system would return to expansion before lenders and working classes foreclosed. In late 1975, it seemed they had been vindicated by the revival of the US economy. But it was no more than a brief restocking boom that ended abruptly. By the time it was clear the revival was over, there was already another wave of revolt underway, a wave we are currently in the midst of. The Polish State, endeavouring to offload its external burdens on to the Polish working class, was, a year ago, heavily defeated by worker rebellion. The Sri Lanka general strike followed in December, and almost immediately afterwards, the events in Egypt this January. Since then there have been important collisions in Holland, Belgium, a one day general strike in France, and the threat of a mass stoppage in Sweden. The labour movements have moved back towards confrontation in Britain and Australia. In India, the end of Mrs Gandhi’s rule has already produced a major upsurge in worker battles, and Pakistan is currently wracked by almost three months rioting (that has included ten one day general strikes). Soweto in South Africa and the events that followed are only the most vivid index of the return to battle of the world’s exploited.
 
Politics
THE OBJECTIVE structure of the world is impelling revolt and confounding the supposed differences between the ‘Third World’ and the other two. The inhabitants of each national ghetto fight to escape the logic of a world system, itself dominated by the leading imperialist ruling classes. Each national order is robbed of the basic capacity to guide its national patch, robbed of any political alternative that, at a bare minimum, will stabilize the material conditions of the majority inside the patch. The majority of the world’s States are, despite rhetorical pretensions, reduced closer to the status of South Africa’s Bantustans.
Yet the system remains intact and with considerable resources for survival. Despite the courage of the rebels, the movements of revolt cannot spontaneously formulate a political alternative for the world system which is what is at stake. The people who claim to be revolutionaries, the Communist parties, and the reformists (the sundry varieties of Social Democracy, from Labour to Peronism) are, in the final analysis, devoted to the ‘national independence’ of the local ruling class, not so much against imperialism (the local ruling class needs foreign finance and arms imports to survive), but rather against the people of the country concerned (who are always accused of being the creatures of foreign agitators if they rebel). This is at its most vivid in India where Mrs Gandhi’s sole political ally all through the Emergency was the Communist Party of India. Indeed, for the CPI ‘India’s national independence’ means subordination to the Soviet Union. Yet today, world revolution is the pre-condition of a viable national independence.
In comparable fashion, established trade union leaderships in the MDCs operate in the crisis, not simply to defend the local ruling class, but to take the leadership in defending national power. It is the AFL-CIO in the United States that is the strongest pressure group to ban imports and start a witchhunt against the eight to twelve million ‘illegal’ Mexican immigrants. Such politics are catastrophic not merely for the working class (the unemployment resulting from contracting the US market) and its American section (unemployment results there through reducing imports), but also for world capitalism. The only gainers are the local ruling class in their relative power, and even that is a temporary gain.
In the collisions of 1974, the potential of workers power was clear, but there was no political leadership capable of beginning the task of conquering world power. The lack of a workers’ international to unite both the diverse oppositions to the status quo (peasants, national minorities) and the different national sections of the working class left a political vacuum ultimately filled by the worst barbarities of the ruling class. Yet even without revolt, the system is set upon a course of increasing barbarization. It is that process which promises that 1974 is only a prelude to much more spectacular collisions in the future, and that the task of building the political alternative will become increasingly realized.
In conclusion then, the impact of the crisis has been to force the appearance of a class structure appropriate to the centralized world economic system. On the one hand, a world ruling class, riven by increasing fierce rivalries that can produce war, but no less bound by an increasing degree of collaboration, even for those ruling classes governing the oppressed nations of the world; on the other, a world working class.
In the nineteenth century, the size of firm and the capital intensity of production permitted a drop in the profit rate to be restored through bankruptcies (and mass unemployment). Already by the 1930s, that recipe did not work, despite mass unemployment; only the second World War restored the profit rate. Now, after an unprecedented quarter of a century’s growth, the system is returning to stagnation. The impossibility of permitting the bankruptcy of major sections of national capital (which would disastrously weaken the capacity of the national ruling class to compete with its foreign rivals in the future) as well as the political impossibility of driving unemployment high enough to achieve a decisive shift from consumption to profits, paralyses all tendencies for the profit rate to make a sustained recovery. The result is stagnation with relatively high rates of inflation which increase rapidly with any small increase in activity. But stagnation imposes steady attrition in place of sudden collapse (which does not rule out sudden collapse for particular national units). The attrition compels a continuous reordering of national institutions to unify the power of the ruling class, a reordering that conceals the lack of any political alternative for the ruling class other than cutting living standards and repression.
The changes undermine the possibility of a national reformist strategy, whether as presented by existing ruling classes (embodied in national development plans) or by the conventional opposition (Communist parties, whether pro-Russian or pro-Chinese). The assumption of automatic industrialization, of economic development, which underpinned the confidence of the ruling classes of the LDCs, and was part of the justification of the ruling classes in the MDCs, comes to an end. The idea that, for every national patch, there exists a pattern of domestic production that will guarantee national power, full employment and tolerable incomes, and is achievable within national boundaries without the destruction of imperialism also comes to an end. The national ruling class stands revealed as no more than a parasitic formation, obstructing the development of the world’s productive forces.
Thus, a set of conditions emerge which are mutually reinforcing in the task of world revolution. Ruling classes impose an intolerable degree of suffering upon the mass of the population in defence of their privileged position, when their own morale is low and they are divided. Increasingly, the logic of the system forces the synchronization of the fight back. Objectively, the conditions for breaking the system and creating the old Communist International target, an international workers’ republic, have not been so promising for forty years. But the international ‘vacuum on the Left’ is still a fearful obstacle. Overcoming it is now the most urgent task.
 



Imperialism and Revolution in South Asia
edited by Kathleen Gough and Hari P. Sharma
Monthly Review, £6.45.
The Soviet Union in Asia
Geoffrey Jukes
Angus and Robertson, £2.95.
MONTHLY REVIEW is possibly the best known marxist journal in the world. It has been published regularly since the late forties. All through the dark ages of the Cold War, this American publication, edited by Paul Sweezy and Leo Huberman, tried to keep alive the spark of marxist analysis.
They did it partly by being the most sophisticated exponents of a kind of Stalinism, far more sophisticated than anything coming out of the Eastern Bloc itself. The Cuban revolution made the two editors mild Fidelistas and the break between Russia and China, mild Maoists. But they always tried to retain their independence from organised politics and their isolation from both activity and workers. Because there was no organised movement in the United States, it became possible for them to be both isolated and significant.
Monthly Review attracted over the years a whole galaxy of names, ranging from US New Deal radicals, the ex-Communist intellectuals of the thirties, Labour Party lefts, technocrats, but above all independent intellectuals. The journal, mercifully free of the fads of the New Left, provided a bridge to cross the abyss between the forties and the sixties. But, despite occasional brilliance and virtuosity, the journal remained trapped in that fellow-travelling parasitism which is the enemy alike of theory and practice. The bridge was there, but on the other side they offered no guide, no maps.
Monthly Review is not an organisation and does not have a party line. It is an umbrella to many different views, provided that it remains possible to rationalise the Eastern Bloc, China or Cuba as somewhere – whatever the distortions – socialist. Because, over the years, few of the people involved around the journal were actually engaged in struggles, the differences between them were of no great importance – mere matters of opinion rather than questions of doing something different.
Imperialism and Revolution in South Asia is a good example of the strengths and weaknesses of the Monthly Review intellectuals today. The editors intend the book, they say, ‘for general readers in Western countries and for students in the early stages of South Asian studies’ because of the deficiencies of ‘American social science research on South Asia’. The recipe cuts out most of us. The task is for the ‘general reader’ to understand the world, not to change it.
It is difficult to know what the ‘general reader’ will make of it, since most of it assumes he is already convinced that socialism is the only answer. There are 18 pieces in the book, all previously published elsewhere, and some irritatingly out-of-date. The best contributions are undoubtedly the most academic – Bagchi on foreign capital, Alavi on the state and on peasants, Gough’s introductory essay. But the more the other writers claim to be actually making the revolution, the more windy the rhetoric, the more fancy language is submitted for thought (what about ‘synergetic structural matrix’?) the fewer facts and more mistakes: verbal gestures become all.
Nevertheless, they share a common argument which runs something like this. All would be well in India, Pakistan, Ceylon and Bangladesh if only foreign capital and influence could be expelled, industry nationalised and planning introduced. China has shown it can be done. The peasants, or the people, or the peasants and workers, or ‘the masses’, want to transform the country but somehow their leaders let them down.
The limitations of this argument are ignored. The expulsion of foreign capital may get a temporary breathing space, but it neither conquers poverty nor defeats imperialism. Planning and nationalisation without workers’ power are instruments for increasing exploitation, not ending it. Only one group of people are ‘emancipated’ in these circumstances: those who form the new ruling class. Even then they remain overshadowed by the power of imperialism in the world. Far from China showing it can be done, it shows exactly the intractability of the central problem – ground between the poverty of agriculture at home and the intercontinental missile abroad, what surplus there is must, go to nuclear arms.
It is only with workers’ power that the. revolution at home looks different, for then planning and nationalisation can create a base for the workers’ revolution to spread abroad and subvert imperialism from within. The survival of a workers’ regime depends, not on its nuclear missiles, but on its appeai to an international working class; not on ‘building socialism’ in conditions of the gravest poverty, but in conquering the riches abroad with which to make socialism possible on a world scale.
The book never says who is to make the revolution. The failures of leaders are recognised, but the lessons drawn are so shallow as to be unhelpful. When Kathleen Gough tries to explain why the left leadership has so far failed, she says it lacks ‘elan’ (spirit) that the left has failed to build a serious worker revolutionary leadership, and that it has failed to do so precisely because it remains wedded to just that heady populist Stalinism which infects this book. For Gough, there are still ‘socialist states’ out there somewhere, whatever their warts. For Sharma, India is a watermelon – ‘Whether the watermelon rots and eventually bursts with all the redness (inside) wasted, or whether it is cut at the appropriate time, depends upon effective left leadership, the prospects for which do not seem very promising at the moment’. That is his last sentence. So what do we do, Mr Sharma?
If the writers have no clear view as to who will make the revolution, they are restricted to hoping, wishing, observing. As a result also, they have no view of the world outside South Asia. They attack imperialism.
but do not see it as a world system that clasps both South Asia and the United States simultaneously, and goes through clearly determined phases which make and unmake the possibility of revolution. Their perspective is nationalist, and takes as its standpoint – consciously or not – the view of those who want to inherit the national state, not of those who belong to no state but to an international class.
The mixture produces wild over-optimism about sudden popular explosions and over-pessimism because, at the end of the day, the writer is waiting for someone else to do the job, to build the party that makes a popular movement a threat to existing power. Analysis is all, and is rendered ‘marxist’ by emotionalism.
Without a view of what is to be done here and now, anything goes. Everyone dutifully bashes being involved in parliaments, but at the end of the day that – along with rural guerrilla warfare, provided someone will undertake it – is all that remains. These are the only means open to solitary outsiders to be ‘political’, without displacing themselves with a real class movement from below.
At the end, we remain exactly where we were before. Although the left has failed, this must be a moral failure, an accident The new left will be better but essentially doing the same as before-preserving their separateness from the anonymous ‘masses’ and keeping to the perspective of a national revolution through which they will become the ruling class.
Of course, the writers in this book are not in practice going to rule anywhere. But the policies they put forward – as with Communist Parties throughout Asia – are appropriate to the people who think they can. Except that that phase of history is already past. There may be accidents, but in general the development of imperialism has made capital accumulation on a separate national basis impossible. The economic basis for the class these politics represent has disappeared. The reformist perspective has exhausted itself.
Mr Jukes’ book is altogether different. He has amassed a heap of information – most of it readily available elsewhere – on Soviet foreign policy aims and involvement in Asia so that the Australian government will understand it. There is no argument nor original view he wishes to demonstrate. If you are the Australian government, perhaps you should read it, but it won’t tell you what to do, and anyway, you ought to know most of it already.
 



HALF THE world’s population lives in south, east and south-east Asia, and lives in the main in extreme poverty. It was thought in the 1940s that the pillage of western imperialism could be ended by removing colonialism, enabling the countries of Asia to lay hands on their own resources and begin to build industry and develop agriculture. The conquest of poverty would then be in sight. An identical optimism infected both those who believed this transformation could be effected by private capitalism and those who saw only state capitalism as the means. In general some combination of the two was envisaged, with state industries and planning providing the driving force for the whole society.
In the 1950s, the Korean War boom in commodities, the sustained arms expenditure of the Cold War and the competition between East and West in aid buoyed along these hopes. Large public sectors, five-year plans, the rapid development of heavy industry, land reforms, even a modicum of welfare measures, provided a coherent reformist programme for development independent of imperialism.
The hopes were illusory. The increased instability of world capitalism in the 1960s has, stage by stage, revealed that very little has changed in the relationship of the metropolitan and backward countries, despite the achievements in the period since independence. Bit by bit, the reformist strategy has been knocked away.
Neither private nor state capitalism is able to prevent an increasing gap in income between backward and advanced, to prevent unemployment rising, to assure a secure and rising food supply, to guarantee the complete security of national frontiers against foreign aggression or the regimes against overthrow.
Asia is the most victimised segment of the world economy. When there are general difficulties in the world system, they are seen here in their most savage form-in terms of the dead. The present world ‘recession’ is a disastrous slump here. Its political effects are already apparent in the increasing instability of most Asian countries – student riots against the authoritarian regime in South Korea, permanent martial law in the Philippines, the collapse of the Thai regime, riots against Japanese imperialism in Indonesia.
South Asia (the Indian subcontinent and Ceylon) is possibly the largest concentration of poor people in the world, and is even more victimised than its Asian neighbours. None of the countries concerned has attained a real momentum of economic growth. The people are too poor to support the scale of capital accumulation required, the imperialist powers will neither meet the cost nor even provide the markets for the goods of these countries, and each ruling class is now more obsessed with the leeching of its own people than development.


 



South Asia



Without economic growth, agriculture is unable to meet the food needs of a rising population, nor industry the need for jobs. Defence against its own people becomes the sole means for a ruling class to preserve its privileges.
But this makes the economic problems even worse. The technology of modern armaments demands a massive consumption of scarce resources and heavy imports of sophisticated weapons – which have to be paid for out of exporting commodities in poor demand on the world market or by taking on more foreign debts and conditions. Present arms expenditure in backward countries is roughly equal each year to all the aid transfers from advanced to backward countries in the second United Nations Development Decade. Arms imports are increasing in backward countries by 9 per cent per year, 90 per cent of them from the US, Russia, Britain and France.
The real crisis, however, comes in food. The vulnerability of Asia to famine has steadily grown. New agricultural techniques – the so-called ‘Green Revolution’ – increased output where capital was abundant, but it hardly changed the basic situation. Now its effects are limited by the central lack, capital. 90 per cent of the world’s rice is produced in Asia, and monsoon failures tend to affect all Asian rice growers together, so there is little offsetting of harvest failures in one country by bumper crops in another. When scarcity is worst, prices of the little rice that is traded soar – Thai rice export prices, on average about 130 dollars per ton, rose to 200 dollars in February 1973 and later to 500 dollars. Crop failures in 1972 were not made up in 1973, nor did prices come down.
The failure of the Russian wheat harvest and a poor Indian crop in 1972 set off an escalation of wheat prices that has continued ever since, and been made even worse by world inflation in other commodities. The Russians succeeded in getting a large part of US stocks at a relatively low price, but this led to a change in US government support policy – and the US supplies 60 per cent of the world’s traded wheat and most of the animal fodder – which drained US stocks dramatically. The resulting world scarcity further pushed up prices – the Chicago world price increased from 80 dollars per ton to 600 dollars per ton in 1972-3.
Any Asian need for wheat to feed people has to compete with British and Japanese need to buy animal fodder, and only the wheat growers benefit. Stocks round the world at an all-time low – they are a third now of what they were four years ago, meanwhile the world’s population has increased by 300 million – and very high prices makes it impossible for Asian countries to ward off famine if the weather fails.
The capacity of agriculture to feed people is rendered more difficult still by other elements in the present inflation. Fertiliser prices have soared – for example, urea, priced at 40 dollars per ton in 1971, is now 260 dollars. Because of high wheat prices, European and US farmers are buying up world traded fertilisers, even though their land is already overfertilised and returns are small from any additional application, leaving Asia with a fertiliser shortage even though a ton applied there produces an increase of eight tons of grain. Again, the fattening of European and American cattle is in competition with the starvation of the people of Asia.
The increase in oil prices only makes for less fertiliser and higher prices. It also directly affects agriculture production by restricting the transport of crops, irrigation, tube well and drainage pumps, heat and light. It makes the continued development of industry at an acceptable pace impossible. The balance of payments difficulties of the advanced countries prompts them to cut aid flows, making it even more difficult for the backward to purchase oil, foodstuffs or industrial equipment.
The least regrettable casualty of this crisis is reformism; But the collapse of optimism does not mean an end to nationalisation. Indeed, every government in south Asia nationalises now as a tactic of despair rather than as a means to direct and plan development. Without a political change, nationalisation is merely another tactic of ruling-class survival, abandoning a segment of the private capitalist class to preserve the state. The rich peasants are alone in profiting. The local and world market laws of value grind all the rest between them.
Nationalisation goes with increasing press censorship, attempts to curb or destroy the unions, a ban on strikes, the increasing use of the police and military to destroy all opposition. The populist rhetoric of the regimes is no more than whistling in the gale. Alongside the talk of socialism, the members of the ruling class take the easy way of grabbing what they can and salting it away abroad.
The collapse of reformism affects even more the so-called revolutionary parties. Most of the Communist Parties were not revolutionary at all. They were ginger groups in the ruling class, funnelling middle-class demands for more jobs in the government service, and using worker grievances as a basis for parliamentary power. They were all essentially nationalist. Such politics were possible when the ruling class knew where it was going. But now its own survival depends upon squeezing both middle and working classes. The Communist Parties have to choose, and in general they have instinctively chosen to side with the ruling class. In the process, fragments have broken away from the parties, but usually without any politics other than a rejection of parliament and embrace of individual violence. Nationalism – and a state capitalist reformism – remain the same.
As a result, the amazing militancy and anger of organised workers remains unconnected to the demand for workers’ power, the struggle to conquer the state. Yet it is impossible to see any nationalist solutions to the current crisis. The crisis is an international one, and there is no force capable of solving it other than the working class. Yet still most young revolutionaries remain trapped in the perspectives of the middle-class rebel, and are thereby pushed to the margins of the struggle. The ruling class is thus safeguarded from serious assault. Nevertheless, the present upheaval is going a long way towards breaking the stalemate Stalinism has imposed on the left, making for new opportunities for revolutionaries to break out to a workers’ revolutionary party.

INDIA
Riots and Martial Law
SINCE CHRISTMAS, more than 130 people have been shot dead by the police in India, many of them in the continuous food riots in the states of Gujerat and Bihar. Gujerat has been the home of the traditionally prosperous middle and rich peasantry that supplied an important base of support to the Congress right wing. The agitation began with a student protest against higher canteen prices, spread rapidly to the cotton-mill workers of the capital, Ahmedabad, and from there to the rest of the state. Rioting continued until the army was ordered to take over the cities.
The revolt was not simply a matter of a food scarcity and high prices. The state chief minister and his associates were accused of manipulating the food distribution system to make massive profits. In the end, the chief minister resigned and the state assembly was dissolved; Delhi took over direct administration. Meanwhile, the revolt had spread to the student movement of Bihar.
These two states have made the headlines. But this is only the most dramatic sign of the disintegration of the country. There have been a rash of communal and religious riots in other states-in Maharashtra (especially in Bombay), in Mysore, in the largest state, Uttar Pradesh, and now in Delhi, where there was a clash between Hindus and Muslims. Members of the Untouchable caste have formed a new political party, the Dalit Panthers, which has demonstrated and clashed violently with the police several times in Bombay. The tribal peoples of Maharashtra are also beginning to demand equal rights with the rest of the population.
Simultaneously, many of the best organised groups of workers have been agitating or on strike – after a lull in 1973 – for some means to safeguard themselves and their families against a terrifying level of inflation – 50 per cent in the past three years; 27 per cent in 1973. Jute and cotton mill workers, railwaymen, insurance and government employees, numerous professional groups, all have struck in the past few , months.
Beyond the employed workers Ii6s the great sea of unemployed and underemployed, now perhaps numbering 40 million or more in the country as a whole. A recent advertisement for 17 social education officers in West Bengal (salary £15 per month) attracted 100,000 applications. The short list for 90 posts as canal inspectors in Marathwada (Maharashtra) last month had 1,810 candidates. The candidates protested when they presented themselves for interview because the interviewer had not bothered to turn up. The police opened fire and two were killed.
These are the symptoms of possibly the most profound crisis that has ever affected India. For years the economy has decayed, but only over the past few years have the real results of this decomposition become apparent.
The economy has been in decline since the end of the third five-year plan (1955-6). A plan holiday symbolised the government’s inability to restore economic growth, let alone accelerate the rate of creation of jobs. Defence became the most dynamic sector of the economy, supporting great power exploits abroad as the circus that would console people for the lack of bread. More expenditure on defence meant less to create jobs or assist agriculture, so that ultimately poor employment and the danger of famine become the two symptoms of the failure of India’s ruling class. The world downturn came upon an already sickly Indian economy. In 1973, inflation increased while industrial output stagnated, producing a decline in average real income per head to about £44 per year.
On top of this had been added the increase in oil prices. Oil imports could take up to 80 per cent of the country’s export earnings, making impossible significant imports of foodstuffs, fertilisers, industrial machinery or raw materials. The balance of payments difficulties of the Western capitalist countries makes it impossible for aid to bail out the Indian economy. In any case, aid has been falling for a long time for political reasons – from two dollars per head of the Indian population in the mid-1960s to just over 50 cents now – and mere hunger will not reverse the trend. Foreign investment in India is also falling. Russian assistance has increased sharply but it is small beside the overall gap if the economy is even just to keep going, let alone grow – the World Bank estimates aid must increase two and a half times over if the country is to cope.
Oil imports are vital for transport, fertilisers, kerosene – the main source of heat and light in rural areas, power for irrigation and tube well pumps, for power in major industries, for herbicides, even for drying tea, an important export. They affect directly the ability to export – so that, for example, food can be imported – and the capacity of agriculture to grow foodstuffs. Stocks of food are very low. They were reduced through 1973 in making up for the poor harvests of 1972.
The scarcity encourages hoarding and speculation by rich peasants and traders. Last year, the government tried to overcome this – and make a gesture to the left – by nationalising the wholesale trade in grain. The effect was paralysing since the traders refused to sell to the government. One of the results were the food riots in Gujerat. Now the government has scrapped its monopoly and increased its purchasing price by 40 per cent – giving a massive profit to the hoarders Wheat stocks in the world are low and prices very high, so to make up the deficit with imports only reproduces the central difficulty. A small variation in the rainfall this year could produce a very serious famine.
A society reduced to a crisis of sheer survival has little time for much else. The government has effectively abandoned any pretence of planning or trying to increase economic development. This has steadily reduced the role of the public sector and opened the way for private capital in all the profitable sectors. This is in tune with American pressure to ‘liberalise’ the economy – that is, open it to US capital and exports. Indeed, public capital is now used extensively to finance private profit. The industry which is profitable is that which meets the consumption demand of upper income groups – so while much of India goes hungry, the island of upper-class life flourishes.
The government itself assists this process. Its current budget deficit has been converted by the inflation from 850 million Rupees to 8500 million Rupees, yet still it has made a major cut in income taxes for the richest.
It has also increased defence expenditure – now taking a fifth of the national budget. The role of the military has been vastly expanded; indeed, defence is the only continuously booming sector of the economy. There are no serious external threats to India now that Pakistan has been cut in half. Internally, however, the calls for military assistance have grown steadily and will grow even more in the future. The generals cannot have failed to notice their increasingly important role, particularly when – as happened last year in the largest state in India, Uttar Pradesh – the police mutinied. This year, when martial law was declared in Ahmedabad, the army was greeted on its arrival with enthusiastic crowds, despite a curfew, with garlands and cries of ‘You are our brethren’. Again the generals cannot fail to notice that, amid the corruption, squalor and instability of the civil authority, the army appears as the only honest, orderly and disciplined force.
The government is eager to find scapegoats for its difficulties – Pakistan, Bangladesh refugees, the weather, oil sheikhs. It has also begun to accuse the workers of sabotaging the economy. Mrs Gandhi has proposed a ban on strikes for a few years. There have been two lock-outs in government undertakings, Indian Airlines and the enormous Life Insurance Corporation. K.D. Malaviya, Minister of Steel and famous as an old-time left-wing Congressman, has accused steelworkers of being responsible for the disastrous results in public sector steel, even though man-days lost in disputes declined last year. The two major employers’ organisations have taken up the cry, ‘notwithstanding what the statisticians say’.
The same approach is apparent in the current railways dispute. The Minister of Railways deliberately blocked the long-drawn-out negotiations and then, when the call for a strike went out, moved the police in to arrest 15,000 railway trade unionists.
The non-Congress left – assorted Communist and Socialist parties – have played virtually no role in the massive wave of agitation, other than trying to ride it to advantage, along with every other political outfit. Old discredited politicians have re-emerged to try and make a new career out of disaster. As always, the Hindu fascists and extreme communalists have tried to turn events in their direction, which is why so many of the riots that seem to be about religion in fact have their real source in food and jobs.
The present crisis in India shows the world crisis in its starkest form. Neither private nor state capitalism can grapple with it in any other way than by reducing India to the status of beggar. At present, there is no coherent alternative that fuses the fury of workers and their capacity to seize the state. As a result, Congress is able to totter from one catastrophe to another, and even then it requires more and more massive bribery and violence to achieve this result. The army will not prove indefinitely tolerant. Yet some on the left could still make a difference. For the upheaval now underway is shaking loose of traditional loyalties masses of workers – the grip of the Communist trade unions (AITUC) is weakening. But there is very little time to use that opportunity.

PAKISTAN
The Weak Link?
PAKISTAN’S economic problems are less severe than India’s – although this makes very little difference to the mass of people – but its political stability is weaker. There would perhaps be a greater opportunity if a revolutionary alternative existed.
The country made a surprising recovery from the 1971 war with India in which the military rulers lost over half the old Pakistan’s population to the new state of Bangladesh. The new government of Z.A. Bhutto introduced a major devaluation of the Pakistan Rupee (131 per cent) which cheapened exports at just the moment when a world commodity boom increased the demand for Pakistan’s exports.
Bhutto pushed up food prices without a major revolt, and this prompted a strong increase in grain output. Yet his success here was overtaken by world inflation, by the widespread floods of last August and by the escalation in oil prices at the turn of the year. In fact, investment has been falling since 1965, and in 1973-4, the terror of private businessmen at the instability of the regime produced a flight of capital and a massive increase in exports as business tried to get its cash out of the country to safe havens.
As a result, home demand was starved, and scarcity of foodstuffs pushed up prices even more. Bhutto was compelled by the possibility of a popular backlash to ban certain exports – foodstuffs and textiles, particularly – and subsidise key food imports. The private traders resisted so the Prime Minister nationalised the trade in vegetable oil and rice. As in the case of Indian nationalisation of the wholesale grain trade, Bhutto’s measures caused a strike by traders, a scarcity of grain and thus a rapid increase in prices.
The attack on the private trade only intensified the terror of businessmen and their unwillingness to invest, despite Bhutto’s introduction of massive investment incentives – up to 75 per cent of new investment can be claimed from the government. So Bhutto intervened again, this time to nationalise 31 key companies, the textile trades and all banks, except those in foreign ownership.
The increase in oil prices was the last straw. At current prices, Pakistan’s oil bill increased from 37 million dollars in 1970 to 85 million in 1973, and an estimated 260 million this year. As in India, increased oil costs reduce food imports and cut home food production through its effects on fertilisers, kerosene, fuel and transport oil.
The effect of all this on popular living standards is grim. Yet the reaction so far, in comparison to the revolt of 1969-70, has been muted, partly because of the threat of Indian intervention, partly because of the weariness of a people faced yet again with a major struggle.
Where there is a major revolt is in the border provinces of Baluchistan and North-West Frontier, but this is a tangled conflict between tribal aristocrats and the central government rather than a popular movement. In Baluchistan, the rebellion is sufficiently large to constitute a civil war, and the Pakistan military behaves as an occupying colonial force. In the third of Pakistan’s four provinces, Sind, there is also a barely concealed hostility to the largest province, Punjab, which broke out not long ago in riots in the city of Karachi. All three provinces sport movements demanding greater local autonomy with a hint of the right of national self-determination.
But the conflicts are still very much within the ruling class of Pakistan. They are expressed in political assassinations, political arrests – more than 200 in Frontier provinces, the tight censorship of newspapers, and the dismissal of some of Bhutto’s key gangsters in the provinces that used to support him most strongly – his cousin, the Chief Minister of Bhutto’s own province, Sind, and his declared political heir, the Chief Minister of Punjab. The rash of strikes and demonstrations has yet to assume the drive of the 1969 movement.
Pakistan is now also the victim of international politicking in a way it could not be before 1971. Russia is both trying directly to oust Chinese influence from Pakistan by bribing Bhutto with aid, and supplying heavy assistance to India and Afghanistan, Pakistan’s neighbours. In turn, India is supporting Afghanistan, which lays claim to the Pathan people of Pakistan’s Frontier provinces.
Iraq has a long running battle with Iran, and as a result, supports the movement for a Greater Baluchistan covering Baluchis on both sides of the Iran-Pakistan border (Iraq tried to smuggle arms to the Baluchis through its embassy in Pakistan). Iran has always been opposed to the Arabs, and so was able to ally with Pakistan, but now Bhutto’s attempt to win Arab support has pushed the Shah into association with Mrs Gandhi.
However, the game of perpetual manoeuvre is not ended, for Bhutto has now counterattacked by reaching an agreement with Bangladesh and so frightening those in New Delhi who regard Bangladesh as legitimate Indian property.
In the end, the permutations indicate no more than Bhutto’s desperate struggle to survive amid predatory neighbours, each of which would gladly take its share in an eventual carve up of Pakistan. But that is only a dim threat. The real challenge comes, not from abroad, but from a people made desperate by the unrelenting pressure on their living standards from an intractable world market. The size and privileges of the military establishment – justified by Bhutto on the grounds of the foreign threats – is only an obscene reminder to most people of how unequal is the sacrifice asked of them.
In 1971, the military rulers stifled the Pakistan revolution by turning it into a savage attack on the Bengalis in what was then East Pakistan, and into a war with India. The two arms of the revolution had been the national revolt of the Bengalis and the class struggle in West Pakistan. But the first was used by the military to defeat the second, instead of both contributing to the same aim – the overthrow of the military.
The military, by their assault on Bengal, produced what they always claimed they were seeking to avoid: a war with India and their own massive military defeat. Nevertheless, Indian intervention allowed the military in the West to consolidate their rule, now with a civilian disguise in the shape of Bhutto. By causing Indian military intervention, they bequeathed to the new Bangladesh the weakest and most corrupt new government under Indian patronage, they permitted Mrs Gandhi, by achieving a temporary popularity, to root out the strongest section of the Indian left, in West Bengal. All round, the Pakistan military is owed a debt of gratitude by the ruling classes of Pakistan, India and Bangladesh.
Now the scene is being partly played through again but with a weaker national revolt (on a border not with India but a much weaker power, Afghanistan) but under much more severe economic conditions. The military will again try to use the threat of foreign intervention when the revolt in the outlying provinces threatens to unite with the class struggle in the Punjab. The unification of those two movements could end the paralysis not simply of Pakistan but of the whole subcontinent.

BANGLADESH
‘Living’ on £25 a Year
THE SITUATION in Bangladesh is undoubtedly the worst in South Asia, one of the worst in the world, and probably the worst in the history of East Bengal, which made up the new state. A population of 75 millions, increasing by more than two millions each year, lives in an area half the size of Britain at an annual income of roughly £25 per year per head. The country, exploited over the years since the British left by the old state of Pakistan, when Bangladesh was East Pakistan, ransacked during the 1971 repression of the Pakistan military and the Indian invasion, scarcely exists as a coherent entity.
The weak corrupt government which India and Pakistan bequeathed to Bangladesh is little more than a holding company for the local gangsters who run the districts of the country, have a hand in land, trade and public office. The government party, the Awami League, is now notorious for its corruption, for maintaining a speculative economy, and above all, for smuggling out of the country into India both grain and jute, the country’s main export.
Because the government has never properly established its writ over the whole country, each gangster maintains his own private army with which to ward off rivals. The result is not unlike the Wild West: street warfare, regular murders, the ransacking of villages, the disappearance of people, hoodlums seem supreme. Mujibur Rahman, the Prime Minister, also has a paramilitary force, the Rakki Bahini, which has now been empowered to stamp out violence, to search and arrest without restriction provided it ‘acts in good faith’.
In good faith, no doubt, more than 10 MPs have been murdered, hundreds of Awami League officials slaughtered, one of the opposition headquarters sacked. There have been four murderous attacks on Dacca University hostels – in the last one in April, seven students were seized at night and murdered. This is an attempt by the youth wing of the Awami League to destroy its student wing. The students arranged a protest march; two hand grenades were thrown at it, and two student leaders arrested for ‘attempted murders’. This is the rule of law offered by Bengali democrats.
While the gangsters slog it out, Mujibur Rahman presides benignly above, and the mass of the population struggle against sporadic famine below. In the past fortnight, Dacca newspapers have reported 32 cases of death from starvation, peasants offering their children for sale because they cannot afford to feed them, families committing suicide to escape. With large scale smuggling of grain out of the country by the Awami League – perhaps more than one million tons in the past year, food depends on what can be grown and upon imports. Food imports took 40 per cent of the total import bill last year.
Increasing food output and paying for imports requires exports, particularly, jute and tea. Yet those peasants able to do so are growing food instead of jute since even with a good jute price, it is not possible to buy much food nor is it easy to ship jute to the ports with such a chaotic transport system.
The increase in oil prices only increases the difficulties of restoring the economy. The distance that would have to be travelled to get back to the conditions of 1969-70 is immense. Industrial output is 30 per cent below what it was then, jute production 28 per cent, cotton yarn 23 per cent, sugar 80 per cent, exports 30 per cent, and tea exports – despite a 30 per cent subsidy to the tea growers – 60 per cent down. The scarcities generate an uncontrollable inflation. Basic prices have increased between one and four times over since 1970. Coarse rice prices have more than doubled. Unemployment is very substantial in a population now larger than in 1970,
The government does little more than hang on, hoping the storm will blow itself out. Mujibur Rahman started as a client of the Indian government, and India inevitably dominates the economy, whatever the protestations of Delhi.
But Mujib is too astute a politician not to use India as a useful explanation of the disasters, and even re-establish relations with Pakistan. ‘The people have short memories’, as he put it recently. Despite all the pillage and savagery of the Pakistani army, despite the central role of Bhutto in the politics of the destruction of East Bengal, Mujib now prattles:
‘I am impressed by Mr Bhutto’s sincerity. I am overwhelmed by the love and affection shown me by the people of Pakistan.’
Pakistan is a counterweight to India, and is the road to reconciliation with China, an even bigger counterweight to both India and Russia.
The left has never recovered from the disasters of 1971. To a greater or lesser degree, it supported the unity of Pakistan against the Awami League – partly because the military were in alliance with China. As a result of its confusion at China’s role, many socialists failed to appraise either the role of Mujib or the role of India. To this day, much of the left still pins its hopes on Mujib imposing his will on the warring factions of the Awami League. The only alternative seems to be to retreat to the villages and form a guerrilla band.
In practice, without a secure class basis and in a disintegrating country, the left is reduced to sniping from the wings. Yet an army cannot be built in the midst of hand-to-hand fighting, nor can those on the sidelines influence the outcome. Critical support for Mujib or playing soldiers in the villages are both part of the old illusory politics that led to the last catastrophe. But no force seems spontaneously capable of breaking these illusions, and when China recognises Bangla-desh-and perhaps nominates it for entry to the United Nations – the confusion will be compounded. Meanwhile, the real victims face an almost endless prospect of deterioration, punctuated only by disaster.

SRI LANKA
State of Corruption
AS IN THE other countries of South Asia, the world crisis of capitalism has hit Sri Lanka (formerly Ceylon) very hard, particularly since it comes at the end of a long period of economic stagnation. The domestic food supply depends in part on imports – food imports were 44 per cent of total imports in 1972, and increased last year. For 20 years, exports (tea, rubber, coconuts) have stagnated while imports have increased. The gap between the two has been covered by borrowing abroad. Now about a third of the country’s export earnings go to pay interest on past loans, and the terms of any new loans grow harsher each year.
Last autumn the International Monetary Fund refused yet another request for a loan unless the Rupee was devalued, which would have increased the price of imported food and so imposed a real wage cut. The government proclaimed that it would never bow to the imperialist agencies, and promptly raised food prices and cut food subsidies itself. This was part of a continuing struggle by the government to cut food consumption. Last October, Mrs Bandaranaike’s government cut the rice ration by three quarters – now it is down to one pound per week per head, doubled the price of bread, cut the sugar ration and increased the price. It is now illegal to transport, possess or sell rice in quantities larger than the individual ration.
All this was to safeguard the government’s procurement of rice for distribution as rations, but in effect it robbed the sellers of any market. As the gap between the government and the black market prices widened, procurements dropped – to 75 per cent of normal in late 1973, 20 per cent in January of this year. At that point, the government went into reverse, as in India, increasing the price paid for rice and searching foreign countries for rice imports – from Pakistan, India, China and Russia.
Paying for oil imports cut into food supplies. The Middle Eastern suppliers have been as unrelenting as Western imperialists in this respect. Iraq refused to supply oil at the price contracted originally (£1.70 per barrel), and insisted on the Sri Lanka government depositing £5.80 per barrel in a foreign bank before reconsidering supplies. The price of oil along with the cost of debt servicing could wipe out the possibility of paying for food imports.
All this comes upon a population already poor. There are possibly three quarters of a million unemployed, 17 per cent of the labour force. While food remains a crisis question, the resources necessary to expand the creation of jobs ate not. available. Scarcity adds further fuel to inflation: in four years, the cost of living has increased by 50 per cent. With the government’s cuts in the rice ration and welfare provisions this becomes an intolerable stranglehold on the mass of people. The conditions for most people have deteriorated since 1971 when thousands of young people were provoked into revolt. About 5,000 were killed and 16,000 arrested.
Where is the left in this situation? The main part of the Sri Lanka left constitutes the government of Mrs Bandaranaike This is full of left-wing talk – and gestures of nationalisation – but in the end, agrees to act as agent for the world crisis. This means essentially defending the privileges of the ruling class by imposing on the people of the country the cost of rising world prices. Beneath the facade of ‘democracy’, corruption permits a few to escape from the public crisis. They say that there are 200 relatives of the Prime Minister now employed in the key offices of state.
The three main newspaper groups have been shut down or curbed in order to prevent any public challenge. When the right-wing opposition party, the UNP, tried last month to organise popular protests against rising prices, the government first introduced regulations to ban public rallies, and then imposed a national 28-hour curfew.
There are rumours of plots and preparations just as there was before the explosion of 1971. But now, after the experience of 1971, the state is much more heavily armed. The defence budget was doubled in 1971, and rearmament was much speeded with the generous help of ruling classes abroad (including China). Conditions have deteriorated since then, but the defeat of 1971 cannot have left potential rebels unaffected.
As Sri Lanka slides slowly into being an inefficient and corrupt police state, the only organised group likely to provide some obstacle to the government’s intentions is the trade union movement. But even here, although the strength is available, the political orientation of the militants is still towards guerrilla warfare rather than the dictatorship of the proletariat. That makes a mass movement impossible, and means that as the country lurches downwards, it will be the army that inherits.
 



The Autumn of Central Paris, The Defeat of Town Planning, 1850-1970
Edward Arnold, £6.
CENTRAL CITIES are being torn apart all around us. The faster capitalism grows, the more rapidly do familiar landscapes dissolve. If it were not for a streak of sentimentality – and the tourist trade – the cathedrals would already have been cleared for car parks. Only the slums would survive intact until commercially profitable for conversion to office blocks.
What are the forces which produce this transformation? Property speculation is only the result, rather than the cause, of the drive. At base is the constant attempt by the capitalists to master the development of the productive forces. People are shunted about to fit the process.
In the early nineteenth century, people were stuffed into gigantic ant heaps, within walking distance of the mills. The railways allowed them to seep outwards along the suburban routes. Cars and trucks spilled both people and jobs out of the city centres to vast regions. The city centre was recolonised by the new vast bureaucracies of state and monopoly capitalism, sucking the daily commuters back into the offices from the suburbs.
On top of this process – the fashioning and refashioning of the city as an instrument of capitalist production – there are numerous others. The city rich build monuments to flaunt their power: cathedrals in the Middle Ages, town halls and railway stations in the nineteenth century, flyovers and giant office blocks today. Each city has its herd of Poulsons, scrabbling to get their snouts in the trough of ‘development schemes’, whether those schemes are useful or not.
In an earlier day, the attempt to defend against street insurrection was another factor in replanning city centres – thus the great squares and wide streets in front of palaces and government buildings. The attempt to prevent epidemics, lest the ignorant plague carry off rich as well as poor, provided the motive for much sewage and water schemes that reshaped the surface, but did not rehouse the poor.
This book has a wealth of detail to illustrate some of these points as they affected the planning of Paris from the days of the most famous Parisian planner, Haussmann. It shows well the powerlessness of the planners themselves, for they are frequently under the illusion that they are shaping the environment so that revolution is unnecessary, whereas insofar as they are able to plan, they do so in accord with the interests of those who control the power.
But the book lacks any sense of the development of French capitalism and the role of Paris within it. Nor does it indicate the politics at stake, the struggle of the petty interests to make a fast buck from contracts and building.
As a result we are left without a clear view of the main drives, and so little perception of the future of the city. Certainly, there is reference to the struggle to make Paris the capital of Europe, a battle in which London’s transformation is also involved. But it is only in passing. For an account of Paris as the heart of French capitalism, we must await another work.
 



Asian Revolutionary – the life of Sen Katayama
Hyman Kublin
Princeton/OUP, 72s.
Sen Katayama, the younger son of a peasant family in an obscure village of Southern Honshu, was born eight years before the Meiji Restoration and Japan’s plunge into the world and modernisation. He died in 1933 in Moscow, a personal member of the Comintern Executive and the only non-European member of the Praesidium; at his state funeral in Red Square, some one hundred and fifty thousand mourners gathered, and Stalin was the chief pall-bearer. The transition between the two points is remarkable, and it is important for understanding the political evolution of many radicals in underdeveloped countries. Nearly as remarkable is the obscurity into which Katayama has fallen since his death – unlike his less distinguished contemporary, M.N. Roy. The present study traces the evolution of Katayama from a poor country boy, through Confucianism as a poor scholar in Tokyo to Christianity in the United States; back in Japan again, through Christian Socialism and welfare activity to trade union work and political agitation. The account here is at its most useful in Katayama’s most creative period. Beset with terrible hazards from the State, Katayama showed great tenacity, optimism and steady work in the minuscule, vulnerable faction-ridden sects of the Japanese left (dominantly intellectual), and, more important, among the first generation of ruthlessly oppressed but bewildered Japanese workers. He was never an intellectual, but in general remained loyal to broad Second International policy – against the temptations of lukewarm liberalism or anarcho-syndicalism or the intellectual’s contention that the proletariat was not the agent of socialist change; in particular, against the immense tide of Japanese nationalism, he clung to the conception of proletarian internationalism – at the Amsterdam Sixth Congress of the International during the Russo-Japanese War, he publicly ‘shook hands’ with Plekhanov to the thunderous cheers of the delegates.
However, in 1914 he fled to the United States, and would there probably have died in indigent obscurity had he not been the only known Japanese socialist abroad and had not the Comintern given a qualitative change to the notion of internationalism. Alone and isolated in America, but still distinguished by ignorant foreign socialists as the voice of Japanese labour, he was useful to the Comintern – he became an agent in the US and Mexico before going to Moscow where he became Japanese labour. Being no theoretician, he never played much role in defining Comintern policy (which kept him safe); he plodded along, preparing reports on ‘the East’, representing ‘Asia’, being an almost non-political high dignitary in the fictitious grandeur of Stalin’s Comintern. He visited China, made efforts from safe Shanghai to refloat the leaky boat of the JCP, attended functions and helped where the hatchet was needed. He died, unlike so many others, praised by the Comintern as one of the old Bolsheviks, a grand old man and revolutionary. Yet if the beginning of his life is an astonishing account of courage and tenacity in the face of overwhelming odds and tragically meagre results, the end on which his glory turns, is hollow; he died a poor old man, lonely and isolated, far from his homeland, and with nothing but his pathetic epaulettes to comfort him.
The present biography is partly soured by the eulogies of postwar JCP stalwarts, partly diffused by the wordiness of the style, partly obscured by the author’s failure to go more deeply into the political detail and into Katayama’s voluminous writings. However, it is a very scholarly account and solid within its personal terms of reference – the author’s political sympathies remain for the most part outside his account. It is a useful contribution to the relatively little-known history of the labour movement in Japan before the first World War.
 



1. The Nature of Underdevelopment [1]
A significant number of underdeveloped countries have in recent years made a shift from their post-Independence regimes to a new sort of politics. That new politics seems marked by an irresistible compulsion towards centralised State autocracy, embodied in a national dictator and based upon one group monopolising all political initiative – whether that group be military, a nationalist party or a Communist Party; with it goes national planning, a steady expansion of the public sector in State intervention into the economy, and an ideology, expressed in different sorts of terminology, of ultra-nationalism – a sort of “étatiste nationalism.” Whether it is Mao’s China, Castro’s Cuba, Nasser’s Egypt, Nkrumah’s Ghana, whether the process is sudden or spread over a number of years, the end product is in important respects similar. Even those countries which do not undergo a radical social change imitate important aspects of the process and on occasions even execute it under the auspices of traditional rulers – Nepal, Bhutan, Afghanistan, Cambodia are all monarchies, and all have national plans which involve expanding State initiative and the public sector.
Historically, some aspects of the same process have been visible during development in the European countries, and in earlier attempts at development in the underdeveloped. A mild autarchic nationalism was seen in Britain, a slightly more extreme version involving more extensive positive State initiative occurred in the France of Louis XIII and XIV; Bismarck’s State “Socialism” is well-known. Or take the interesting case of Mehmet Ali (1805-42) who, with the same pre-eminently military motives, tried to shift Egypt from a subsistence to a modern economy – he revolutionised land tenure, expanded communications, established State monopolies to handle crops and begin industrial projects, all behind a wall of protection and operated by an expanded bureaucracy. The process was checked by outside intervention in 1841, and Egypt did not gain sufficient political autonomy to make another attempt at étatiste nationalism until after the Second World War. Military purposes provided a major drive to modern Egypt’s second attempt, but now the purely industrial aspect alone exercises a powerful impulsion towards State direction – the concentration of resources and skills now required is much greater than ever before.
Unlike the earlier attempts (leaving aside Bismarck), the word “socialism” is applied to the modern cases, with peculiar and luxuriant varieties – Egyptian or Arab Socialism, Burmese, Indonesian, Ugandan and even Cambodia’s “Buddhist Socialism.” This “socialism” involves a key redefinition of the purposes of all “socialistic” measures – nationalisation is not to realise worker freedom, but to focus State economic mobilisation for a development blitz-krieg. Given the dominating position of the developed countries, the low level of development elsewhere and the enormous concentration of resources now required to build modern industry, it is perhaps impossible to develop quickly today while retaining the norms of bourgeois democracy. In any case, modern underdeveloped countries have no Liberal interlude which introduced the key stress on freedom, democracy and the individual – they seek to press straight through from tribalism to modern corporatism.
Only a few of the factors involved can be mentioned here, but it is important to note how very much more difficult it is to-day to develop than earlier. The position from which the underdeveloped begin is much lower, the distance they have to go (even allowing for telescopic development) and the concentrated cost involved is much greater. Per capita income levels are much lower and thus the margin for saving and investment much narrower – the demand for food and necessities is much greater, and yet, since the land is burdened with a much greater population, the slack available for expanding food production or realising a surplus for development is much smaller. Improvements in health have helped to raise population increases to record heights – so a correspondingly higher rate of investment is needed to keep pace with the population – if there is no slack in the economy, if production is relatively static, per capita income just goes down. Again, in the early phases of Western development, the gap between traditional craft techniques and new industrial ones was not great – now it is enormous, and a correspondingly greater effort is needed to train the skilled labour force. To produce goods by modern techniques demands a much greater volume of resources, and capital is very scarce – only the State can really contemplate building a modern integrated steel plant, unlike the nineteenth century ironworks. Illiteracy is much higher in poor countries today than developing Europe. Again, the world is already occupied by the rich – there are no unlimited markets to stimulate indigenous capitalists, no demand for silk as there was for Japan, for timber as for Sweden, for wheat as for Russia and Canada, no Eastern Europe as there was for Western. The development of the West, also, is shifting towards an expansion of services, so the relative demand for primary products falls – in any case, modern techniques economise to the maximum on raw materials (in 1920, three pounds of coal produced 1 kilowatt of electricity in the US, in 1955, 0.95 pounds) and generate an increasing supply of domestically produced raw materials or synthetic substitutes. The process is reflected in the steady deterioration in the terms of trade for primary products since 1870, plus the fluctuations in their pricing (more than twice as much as for manufactured goods). Finally, whereas there were substantial resources of foreign capital to develop the West (after British development), now that capital is concentrated in the rich countries and stays there.
Under imperialism, the nationalist party operates as a ‘counter-State,’ and the form it inherits on independence is the State – thus, the role of the bourgeoisie and the State are merged, and the functions and initiatives formerly divided between groups are united. The State becomes both business and the regulator of business; sometimes, it is both employer and trade union – and even arbitrates between its two selves. Along with the demands to develop, the needs of defence, and the techniques of modern industrialism, the whole adds up to a powerful compulsion towards étatisme. The native capitalists are usually too weak to resist the process, and in any case, where foreign capital continues to operate in the independent economy, they need the State to protect them. That need is purchased at a high price – the line between ‘Indianisation’ (or Ceylonisation, Egyptianisation, etc.) of business and its nationalisation becomes very fine.
The independence struggle is mainly an urban phenomena, and since the urban masses have succeeded in overthrowing the old regime, the new State needs to make concessions to retain their loyalty: a higher proportion of national production must be devoted to urban working-class consumption, limiting the investible surplus available under Western capitalism. The new State may also identify the key enemy as the rural landlord in an attempt to shift its base to the peasant majority. The overall image projected thus incorporates both nationalist and apparently socialist elements, but integrated solely by the omnipotent State. Initially, the checks on the State are limited by the absence of organised classes and institutions apart from the dominant political party – accordingly, the impulsion to autocracy is that much greater. The articulate political arena is almost wholly dominated by the educated middle class, which, since the role of the State as employers is so great, is clustered round the State. [2] Thus the middle class represents a primary vested interest in the State and its expansion – they are all ‘ socialists.’ Since they occupy the political stage – they are ‘ the people’ to whom the politicians appeal – on purely self-interest grounds, politics is likely to be very much concerned with the role of the State.
The schismatic trend in new societies, conglomerate amalgams of different tribes and peoples, is very great – even in those countries which have a high degree of homogeneity and a history of some unity. The complexity of ethnic origins is added to straight economic competition, in conditions of great scarcity, to produce substantial tensions only ‘reduced’ by State coercion. Opposition parties perpetually walk out of Assemblies, and fight with the utmost personal ferocity – such that it seems only just removed from the prelude to civil war (which also happens). Since the trends to disintegration are so great, an accordingly greater burden of compelling ‘nationality’ falls on the State and the middle class. Nationalism must provide the ideological commitment to replace sectional loyalties. So great is the need, so widespread and low the cultural poverty, that elements of ‘modernism’ towards which the middle class is striving, tend to attain magical forms, become fetishised, whether this be straightforward education, the elements of nationalism or Marxism.
 
2. The Village as Nation
The retention of this theological element is only one aspect of the continuation of an urbanised “ruralism” – the peasantry, still the majority class and the source of the new urban sector, pervade the atmosphere. Traditional peasant society involves very strong kinship groups which provide the immediate context for all activities of the constituent family unit, the basic social element (unlike the “individual” in the city). By contrast, in cities a multiplicity of alternative associations exist, and loyalties can be very mild and clearly limited. There are many people to depend upon lightly, and relationships are much more strictly functional – the new rural immigrant, used to intense and intimate personal relationships, feels lonely and alienated without his former absolutist commitment.
The sort of characteristics involved in shifting to the city retain or translate the village into urban terms. Workers identify less with their work-mates in the same occupational stratum, more with their kinship group [3] or caste or district. The rural origin is reflected in the formation of cities, a cluster of villages rather than an integrated urban whole. Workers come to live in districts inhabited by others from their village, take jobs in shops employing their group, form friends and marry within the same group. The class alignment is muted – loyalties go to the group or, since the wider group spans the class divide, merely to authority. This along with middle class dependence on public authority, inhibits the appearance of a clear and popular liberal critique of authority, just as it inhibits continuous and consistent opposition – those who oppose are parasitic on what is opposed, and are frequently silenced by relatively trivial concessions, bribery, promotion or just vague promises. When the inevitable hard conflict comes, fragmentation, the lack of solid organisation, makes it sporadic, disorganised and violent – a sudden outburst of fury and frustration rather than part of a sustained campaign. Even in the act of opposing the basic dependence can be reaffirmed – strikers demand not their rights, but beg the satisfaction of their needs. Implicitly, the plea assumes powerful friends, the kindness of authority, the deus ex machina who will take responsibility and permit the workers to evade achieving their demands through their own efforts. Accordingly, particular individuals assume wildly inflated importance, mystifying to outsiders. Whether it be Stalin, Gandhi, Nasser, in a religious peasant-dominated society, they come to play the role of Gods, intervening charitably from their omnipotence on behalf of the oppressed: to give them independence or economic development or war potential.
For the middle class, this type of incipient authoritarianism is a part of a wider romantic reconstruction of rural society that both serves to compensate for the loss of the presumed security and integration of the village group, and provides a rationale to buttress their own position: with the State as the pivot, society must be integrated like a village. Identification with the blood group (or the leaders upon whom one is dependent) becomes translated into an absolute commitment to the Party, or fanatical loyalty to the new fetish, (the nation). Again, as the village faction depends upon a shared hostility which enforces common sacrifices by all members, the new nationalism depends on its enemies – the imperialists in the first instance, but later more closely identifiable enemies: thus the constant friction between Arabs and Israelis, Indians and Pakistanis, Ethiopians and Somalis, Indian and Chinese Indonesians and Malaysians, etc. As group honour is the primary expression of group existence in the village, so the “honour of the nation” becomes a practical political term, and men react with violent sensitivity to imagined slights on their national integrity – personalised international relations portray the United States as an evil old man scheming with almost motiveless malignancy the disaster of the pure white virgin, “the nation.” Of course, alongside the hostility goes an unnatural deference towards the foreign bearers of modern technology.
The presumed nature of armies conforms to some of the aspired ethics: order, security, hierarchy (where all accept their place naturally), each place carrying incumbent duties and rights that demand neither debate nor change, the whole directed in one direction. Actual armies, of course, are as likely to be riven with the same divisions as the embryonic bourgeoisie at large. In addition, the rural myth implies that unanimity and harmony are autonomously generated – armies are straightforwardly commanded by generals at the top. lust as corporatism, itself a response to class disintegration in a developed society (and borrowing heavily on myths of medieval ruralism), could only achieve “harmony” through the ruthless dictatorship of fascism, so reliance on the army achieves “harmony” by destroying precisely the sorts of virtues demanded by the middle class.
Étatiste nationalism stresses popular welfare probably more strongly than its predecessors, find since it is spearheaded by the middle class State under the experience of Stalinism and Fabianism, it stresses planning and State ownership, it is called “socialism.” Insofar as working-class welfare is improved above the relative standards prevalent in early capitalism, the State attempt to force development is limited – both India and Egypt have sustained levels of living in their tiny proletariats which are probably proportionately better (given general living standards) than in nineteenth century Europe, but their rate of expansion is well below the theoretically possible. Achieving the possible involves a much more ruthless exploitation of the working-class, along with the serious risks of revolution. However, all this has little to do with socialism, and insofar as socialism is the realisation of freedom, étatiste nationalism can only be a degeneration. In. any case, the crucial test of the socialism of the new ruling classes is not how much they pay out (along with extensive police repression) to secure a docile working class, but how they treat embryonic working-class organisation. Here the picture is clear – the trade unions are either smashed or, more often, infiltrated until they become merely agents for the ruling party.
It is incidental to the main aim of étatiste nationalism, a tactic to force development in the face of enormous problems, that in common with socialism and classical liberalism, it is anti-imperialist; and, in common with socialism and corporatism, it is anti-capitalist. Both socialism and corporatism are the product of developed capitalism; both socialism and classical liberalism express the strength of a particular class against the existing State – they are creeds of revolt, not lectures on political economy. Accordingly, a different sort of description is required for a society which is both underdeveloped and also so weak that the State can encompass its totality, can monopolise all morality, ideology, all social and economic initiative and power, can be, in fact, that society for the outsider.
All this however only suggests the context of the development of a strong State – it gives no reasons why the lurch into autocracy takes place in some places and not others, why Egypt slowly developed towards it, why Ghana is only just completing the process, why India still retains some of the forms of parliamentary government and judicial independence. These answers come only from concrete studies of particular countries, but it is hoped the foregoing has suggested some of the climate involved.
 
3. India
India, an area roughly the size of Western Europe, without British rule would have been at best a group of countries – one of its constituent states has a population of 74 millions, and six others have populations between 30 and 40 million. It covers at least four geographical regions of considerable difference, and today has a total population of about 460 million, that is, nearly a quarter of the entire population of the non-Communist world (it receives 3.2 per cent of total non-Communist income). By virtually all the indices of level of development, India stands very low – per capita income is 69 dollars per year (compared to 2,310 dollars in the US); infant mortality rate is 142.3 per 1,000 live births (against 22.5 in Britain). Since the population is now expanding at a very high rate, increasing numbers constantly depress the rate of per capita income and consumption, and add severe urgency to the problem of development.
Ethnically, the population is very diverse, although there is a broad division between the northern Hindi-speaking Aryans and the rest, particularly the Tamil-speaking Dravidians of the south. Constant friction between the different groups forced the Government in the mid-fifties to reorganise state boundaries to correspond roughly to linguistic zones – Gujeratis in the mid-West. Marathi just south of this, and Kannada still further south; Tamil in the south-east, and north of this Telugu; in the middle east, Bengali and Assamese. To the outsider, a common culture seems to prevail, but in fact that culture is probably no more extensive than that covering Europe in the Middle Ages!
Historically, the present Indo-Pakistan subcontinent contained for several thousand years before the arrival of the British a collection of kingdoms, separated by natural geographical features, but periodically unified into three or four large empires. The basic elements in these kingdoms were relatively self-sufficient villages, widely dispersed and maintaining a high-level of relatively static agriculture; the nature of the land and the intensiveness with which single power centres were able to levy taxes produced phenomenally rich rulers. Their patronage stimulated crafts of a very high quality from very ancient times, particularly textiles which were at different times extensively exported. British domination changed this primarily cyclical pattern by unifying the entire peninsula, introducing private ownership of the land, and beginning industrial and communication development. British military autocracy maintained the former rulers where they accepted overall British rule, and gathered round itself the former functionaries of those kingdoms to maintain its rule. These, the Brahmin castes, were traditionally the bearers of culture and religion (although not the rulers proper), and association with the British tended to perpetuate the caste monopoly of knowledge – as formerly they had been differentiated by a knowledge of Sanskrit, now they were distinguished by their use of English, Western education and continuous intimacy with the foreign invader. The predominantly Brahmin bureaucracy, stemming from a relatively unified homogenous tradition, formed again a relatively uniform and united group at the head of society – but crucially their power depended upon the continued power of Britain, and their attitudes were measured and matched, to the demands of British imperialism.
The presence of a foreign power imposed on India its first social unity (in the independence movement) and also maintained public India at a cultural level appropriate to a European industrialised power. With independence, the natural cultural level and the natural power centres in the states have slowly begun to reassert themselves – in the second case, through the formation of new localised ruling groups that increasingly force the national rulers to share power. But all told, these combined groups are still very small. Take for example, the number of newspaper readers – a mere thirteen million in 1958, of which nearly ten million read newspapers in local languages; per thousand of the population, newspapers circulated to nine people in 1959, as compared to 25-30 in Egypt, 180 in Argentina, 398 in Japan. There were at least six million males who could read a local language (but not English), of which only 30 per cent were reached by newspapers. [4] The high proportion of local languages involved suggests some of the shift away from English-speaking Delhi preoccupations to the rich peasant classes of the states. Only about 79 million Indians live in towns at all (of which 35 million live in 107 cities over 100,000 population) – the other 380 million odd inhabit some 840,000 rural settlements, 81 per cent, of which have a population of 500 or fewer. Sixty one per cent, of the population between the age of 6 and 11 actually attended school in 1960-61 (state averages vary from 42 to 100 per cent), eleven per cent of the villages have access to a post office.
What this adds up to is in the first instance three layers – a highly sophisticated but minute national ruling group; very small ruling groups rooted in the states; and beneath both, the vast rural base of the iceberg, hardly seen or heard. As the local ruling groups extend their power, they increasingly infringe the freedom of action of the centre, and shift the whole climate and nature of Indian society. Gaps constantly loom up between the groups, and much energy is spent on attempts to reunify the whole – through the Congress Party, through community development to integrate urban and rural leadership and so on. Yet still the sort of economic advance that might be possible by the Westernised elite is restricted by the necessity of carrying the state’s elites.
Just as these horizontal gaps are wide, the vertical ones are even more so – ordinary standards of living appropriate in the West exist beside a sea of intense poverty; it is announced on the same day that five thousand died of cholera last year in West Bengal and that the Congress Party is spending about £75,000 on entertaining delegates to its annual conference. Advertisements for luxury flats jostle a small note that there are an estimated 60,000 beggars in India’s eight main cities, and that pavement dwellers in New Delhi are roughly 3,484 (the Opposition claimed 12,000). A minister in January claimed that some bank workers received about £3 7s. 6d. while top bank managers were given £2,250 per month. Two thirds of urban families live in single rooms or less, and eat on average 4 pounds of meat and 6 pounds of fat per annum (America: 190 and 16 respectively). Actual income distribution figures are not very reliable, but a recent estimate suggests that the top 5 per cent of the population received 26 per cent of income, and the bottom five per cent. 1.25 per cent, of income; 32.5 per cent, get 11s. or less per head per month. [5] What increases there have been in national income since independence have been absorbed by the population expansion.
But if the cities are bad, the villages are often worse, although standards differ very widely from the bustle of the Punjab or modern farming of irrigated refugee-settled areas of Rajasthan to the strange inertia of other states. Similarly, the degree to which the villages participate in national India is very varied. In some areas, scarcely any structural change has been recorded within living memory, and people are hardly aware that the British have gone. Others have seized on the beginnings of change to increase their own position, or have extended their caste group to become a political weapon. In the past, caste was less a stratum of society within which people could feel a common identity over a geographical area – rather were all areas dominated by one caste which had isolated groups of dependents of lower caste; the natural identification of the lower caste was upwards to his patron, not outwards to his caste fellows. In the past, territorial cleavages between dominant groups were the key source of rural tension but over the past fifty years, consciousness of a common caste identity has begun to produce tensions between different castes in the same area. Commensurately, new political organisations founded on a particular caste have spread out over wide areas to the limits of the linguistic zone. Even Government attempts to protect lower castes has helped to identify groups not formerly aware of their identity – just as the attempt to give special privileges to backward castes has prompted some groups to plead for inclusion in the new category. [6] The effect of the new organisation is felt all the way down the line – in the past thirty years, the dominant peasant caste has ousted the Brahmins from political control in Madras, but beneath them the lower castes also now jockey for the same privileges. The caste dimension gives a quite different underlying pattern to some Indian politics which may be expressed in orthodox Western terms but merely represent traditional conflict between two dominant castes. In Andhra, the Reddy and Kamma peasant castes have been in conflict for nearly five hundred years, but for a time their mutual hostility was expressed through the battle of the Congress and Communist Parties.
Caste has provided one of the primary flash-points for India’s politics, the clash between newly aware strata of the pyramid. Given the inevitable level of bitter hostility embedded in the social structure, given the ferocious competition for pathetically small resources and the blind loyalties involved, the conflict is marked by sporadic but extreme violence over relatively trivial matters. In particular, India has experienced enormous agitation through the fifties (periodically breaking out in the sixties as well) over the organisation of states on linguistic lines. The agitation forced the Government to revise existing boundaries in the mid-fifties, but this did not settle the question – border disputes continue today. The fact of the conflict demonstrates the growing power of the new localised rulers:
“It is the middle-class job hunter and place hunter and the mostly middle-class politician who are benefited by the establishment of a linguistic state, which creates for them an exclusive preserve of jobs, offices and places by shutting out, in the name of the promotion of culture, all outside competitors.” [7]
Counterposed to the local rulers is that section of the population educated and nationally concerned, the relatively small middle class clustered round the Government bureaucracy either as members or aspirants. The national bureaucracy offers 40,000 new jobs per year (and totals nearly one million) and is constantly expanding. The need to obtain a job with the largest single employer, the holding of such a job in the chief institutional bearer of India’s nationality, dovetails with the natural tendency to nationalism in the rising middle class. The State bureaucracy more than anything else is the embodiment of a national ruling class, relatively homogeneous and directed at the same broad ends. Students naturally aspire to a job with the Government. [8] Placed alongside substantial educated unemployment, the tensions and attractions towards a counter-nationality nationalism can be seen. In 1963, it is estimated, there were 779,000 unemployed with matriculation and above – 69,959 of them graduates. In as status-ridden a country as India, the tradition associating education rigidly with desk work prevents many of these educated unemployed taking the jobs that exist – the demand for an expansion of bureaucracy is accordingly greater. The violence of expression by students, culminating periodically in riots, denotes the same level of insecurity. Where the possibilities for mobility in the existing bureaucracy are so severely limited then the likelihood of the formation of an alternative bureaucracy aspiring through revolutionary action to overturn the existing one is accordingly higher. General middle-class frustration is very high, and provides a powerful backing for a particular sort of politics, limited under universal suffrage by being only a minority. National crises ignite the longing to belong – and the national Emergency put its finger on just this feeling. The dependence of all Indian opposition parties on just this articulate middle class makes the separation of opposition and nationalism most difficult, with particularly hazardous problems for the left parties.
 
4. Government
The administration reflects the changes already cited – the strengthening of the States vis-à-vis the centre, and the extensive bureaucracy. Since society at large is relatively so weak, it has very little check over the organs of the State – opposition tends to be parasitic upon what it opposes. The tight employment opportunities mean that even as desk jobs proliferate, they can only be obtained through special advantages – nepotism and corruption play a major role in compensating for the deficiencies. The new Minister of Education recently revealed that he discovered 120 committees attached to his Ministry when he attained office, committees employing 2,000 people (and education is the concern of the states, not the Central Government) he was able to abolish fifty of these committees immediately as redundant or useless.
The response of most Governments to decreased effectiveness is an extension of powers and increased demand for extraordinary rights – for the indefinite extension, for example, of the Emergency of October 1962. Despite Opposition attempts to remove this Act, which virtually suspends the Constitution and duplicates the already extensive powers of the State to imprison people without trial, despite the lack of any cogent case by the Government for its retention and the self-evident fact that it is used merely to gaol or demoralise those who oppose the State, the Emergency looks like becoming a permanent feature of the Indian scene: so much for “democracy.” Through initiating projects or taking over existing ones, the public sector has been steadily expanded. In 1950-51, the private sector expended 91.7 per cent, of national expenditure, and produced 92.5 per cent of net domestic product; in 1961-62, the same items were 85.3 and 88.9 respectively. In particular fields, the Government holding is much higher than these figures suggest, particularly in heavy industry. At present, the Government operates about one third of all the capital invested in corporations. The pressure for further extensions from the rank-and-file of the Congress Party is substantial, both to defeat national capital (in favour of local capital) and to expand the job potential. The demand for bank nationalisation, which attained substantial proportions at the turn of the year, was diverted by the wily Finance Minister who offered instead nationalisation of rice mills – a much less exciting prospect since the mills are very widely dispersed, relatively small, in the hands of local capital and without great job potential.
 
5. Industry
The actual industrial sector is extremely small, and even smaller within this is modern manufacturing industry, which employs not much over four million at most. Almost 70 per cent of India’s workers are agricultural (52.8 per cent peasants, 16.7 per cent agricultural labourers). Factory employment is also heavily concentrated in particular areas, two fifths of it in the two States, Maharashtha (with Bombay) and West Bengal (with Calcutta) with more than double any other state; the first five states (these two plus Gujerat, Uttar Pradesh, Madras) account for two thirds of factory employment, while the dozen or so other states take the rest. These top five states have about 202 million population, and a total of 2,657,000 in factories.
Historically, indigenous capital developed alongside the British from the 1860s of the last century, and in particular communities entered industry from trade or money-lending. Activities initially were restricted to fields pioneered by the British (particularly textiles and jute), except for India’s first steel plant set up after the turn of the century. The British pattern of company holding involved great concentration of resources in relatively few hands, through the instrument of the Managing Agency, a sort of trust covering a wide range of activities, and the Indians followed the same pattern. The first two communities, the Parsis (an immigrant Persian community from mid-west India) and the Gujeratis (particularly the members of a minority splinter from orthodox Hinduism, the Jains), were followed after the first World War by a third, the Marwaris, also from mid-west India and long active in rural money-lending. The communal aspect is important since nepotism and monopoly have produced a pattern of national industry in India today particularly restricted to identifiable communal groups – these three communities (which include the largest industrial empires, of for example the Parsi Tatas or the Marwari Birlas) comprise India’s national bourgeoisie. For obvious reasons anti-capitalism is closely muddled up with opposition to a particular community, providing a parallel with the development of anti-Semitism. Local capitalists have a vested interest in ousting “North Indan capitalism,” and can tap embryonic class consciousness in the fight. In parts of Bombay, Marathi workers face Gujerati employers, and in the villages, Marathi peasants face Marwari moneylenders; in Kerala, both local peasants and Christian merchants, along with the educated unemployed who want an expansion of the State sector, have theoretically a basis for opposing North Indian finance. The situation is as likely to produce a sort of fascism as anything else, as the development of a radical left nationalist movement, the DMK, demonstrates in Madras.
Since Independence, Indian capital has expanded quickly, but always tending at the national level to retain its very high level of relative concentration. It is said at the moment that fourteen business houses control two thirds of the total share capital in the private sector, and more than half the total private investment in the country belongs to half a per cent of the shareholders in the country. Protectionism and Government planning, the almost unlimited demand generated by the immense volume of investment involved in the Plans, plus the sheer technical characteristics of capital-intensive investment at modern standards, has tended to aid the retention of the level of concentration, if not to positively increase it.
Alongside native capital, foreign investment has continued to expand at a slower pace, attracted by the relatively high profit rates – 20.6 per cent, the average rate of return after taxation, on American investment in India, as compared to 9.1 per cent in Japan, and 18 per cent in the Philippines. [9] This new capital however is much more variegated, dispersed, and less tied closely to its foreign parent than previously. Britain still leads as major foreign investor, but since 1957, the pace of its expansion has dropped – proportionate to indigenous capital, the decline began much earlier. American investment has proportionately expanded much faster. In the past three years, about half the investment in new companies has been from foreign sources, but still foreign participation covers on average only 19.5 per cent of issued capital. Staffwise, the Government has consciously pursued a policy of Indianisation which has had substantial effects in all but the topmost category of managers in the oldest industries – in plantations, still 55 per cent of managers. getting more than £75 per month are non-Indians (the 1961 figure was 62.5 per cent), and in banking the figure is 42.8 per cent (1961 53.1 per cent). By contrast, chemicals employ 10.6 per cent, oil 8.7 per cent, and public utilities 8 per cent. The overall figure in this category of managers is 22.3 per cent. Both these factors, capital and staff, do not cover the much more substantial Government-to-Government aid, and India’s increasing dependence on American aid and food supplies.
As mentioned, the Government in the same period has expanded fastest of all, building the outlines of a heavy industry base which proportionately absorbs very large quantities of capital and skilled labour. In addition to these three sectors, small business, actively encouraged by the Government as a short-cut solution to the unemployment problem, has progressed much more slowly – employing four times as many, workers as the large firms, the rate of increase in employment by small firms has not been as fast proportionately as the increase in population.
 
6. Planning
Not that the pattern of growth has been smooth. The First Five Year Plan (1951-6) was mainly concerned to restore the economy after War and Independence, and to take up or complete projects already begun or designed. The Second Plan (1956-61) which really began development proper, came face to face with some of the deeper problems – it saw a substantial recession, a crisis of foreign exchange, and demonstrated the ultimate dependence of the economy on agriculture, the vagaries of the weather and the susceptibility of the peasant to change, and the world market rather than decisions made in Delhi. Finally, the Third and current Plan is facing the same succession of problems – the strain, clearly visible in mid-1962, has had an emergency and rearmament added to it, to produce, with further agricultural failures, both a recession and sharp inflation. The agricultural target of a six per cent increase per year, has been replaced by a realisation of not much over two per cent per year – which is not sufficient to keep pace even with the population growth, producing an overall decline in per capita food production and consumption. [10] Particular industrial sectors are hit by agricultural failures – cotton textiles, for example, suffer from reduced supplies of raw cotton. Decreased income has reacted back on general industry, producing a recession.
So far the Government has not sought to pay for expansion by reducing the surplus accruing to the peasant – even if the administrative problems involved permitted such a scheme. Politically, the power of the Congress party rests on the peasantry, given universal suffrage, and this has preserved them from direct taxation, although not from the redistributive effects of inflation. The gap has been met by foreign aid and a slower, more vulnerable and fluctuating rate of development. American aid in food-terms, paid for by India in rupees, has led to Washington accumulating rupee funds equal to half India’s currency (Rs. 15,000 million or roughly 3.100 million dollars) now being paid back to India in soft-currency aid or through visits of missions, tourists, etc. [11] With the Emergency, the Government did try to increase its domestic revenue, to raise domestic savings from 8 to 15 per cent of national income (the “acceptable” level for a developing country is put at 20 per cent) but almost entirely failed on the resistance of the State Governments and the tax-payers. Militarisation itself did not pull the economy out of its recession – the relative scale is still very small, and in any case tends to rely more on foreign purchases than buying from domestic industry (it is said that, at the height of the Emergency, private sector capacity was only 60 per cent utilised).
Criticisms of the planning process are legion, from mere attacks on the level of bureaucracy or inefficiency or low overall rate of return on invested capital [12], on the controls which allegedly restrict expansion or favour only the rich, to more specific ones which criticise the attempt to build a modern heavy industry base rather than merely seeking to raise employment by any means – only the Soviet Union, it is argued, with abundant coal and iron, could afford to begin with heavy industry, and then only with immense human cost.
The hints of failure in the current Plan have gathered since its second year, culminating last autumn in a formal reappraisal of the performance. The Government’s response has been limited to urging further intensification of what is already happening, plus numerous committees of inquiry, trips to secure more foreign aid, and, most recently, the liberalisation of some parts of the economy which includes an almost studied failure to combat inflation. The political implications of the failure to meet even the targets should not be missed – the national crisis, complicated by a struggle for power amongst the leaders of the Congress Party, alongside the personal problems of unemployment and inflation in the middle class, the impression of incompetence and inefficiency alongside the performance of other countries which conceal their economic failures in the euphoria of Stalinism or wild chauvinistic cults of great men, could be yet another factor in breaking the camel’s back.
 
7. Agriculture
The main domestic obstacle to raising the national income is then agricultural production which has stagnated around eighty million tons since the end of the Second Plan. [13] Given the smallness of the industrial and urban sectors, the problem is in fact India. Again, numerous causes are given for the failure of the peasant to expand output – from the inhibiting structure of the traditional village in some areas, to administrative failures in others. However, as suggested earlier, the overall rural picture is very varied, and the specific factors involved in some expanding and others not is obscure. Certainly, some failures belong to the administration – scarce resources, absorbed within the existing structure, have been misdirected or expended on expensive status symbols, and the Government personnel in rural areas is very sparse and overworked. It is with difficulty that the educated are inveigled into venturing into the rural areas to work – the professionals bunch together in the cities; last year, less than one per cent of India’s 25,000 agricultural graduates took up jobs in farming or allied activities. What development has taken place is restricted to particular areas. What its impact has been is unclear – estimates suggest that the proportion of income taken by the cultivator has declined somewhat from nearly 70 per cent in 1951-2 to just over 60 per cent, while the proportion of income taken by the agricultural sector as a whole has remained roughly stable. [14] Some evidence also suggests that rural indebtedness has also increased to the point where total indebtedness now covers roughly 7½ per cent of all assets held by rural households, but the figures are not very reliable. [15] Questions of changing rural conditions bear directly on the rural social structure, and particularly the structure of ownership, tenancy and landless labour. It is in this dimension that the “traditional structure” finds its roots, and, as a consequence, the incentives and willingness of the peasant to raise productivity.
Productivity at the moment is not much more than it was thirty years ago under British rule – increased production largely derives from increased acreage. But what can be drawn in economic lessons is, given the dependence of Congress on the power of those who dominate the villages, far removed from the politically practical. Eleven years ago, the rural development programme was begun to help minor irrigation works, education and other services. The low level of peasant participation prompted the introduction of Panchayat Raj, placing more power in the hands of village councils to develop themselves. Intensive efforts, propaganda campaigns, free advice and demonstrations have followed upon each other – all of which serve the incidental function of increasing the degree of integration between the ruling village clique and the urban leadership. Panchayat Raj only served to increase the error – more resources are given to the dominant group in the village to fortify its position and hold down the rest. Economic progress in developing countries has usually been the result of conflict and competition in groups, but in India, the small ruling group has consistently been afraid of the possible results of permitting more conflict than it already has – the stress lies on the pursuit of harmony, change while preserving the status quo. Accordingly no appeal to the poor peasants or landless labourers is possible. As it is, Panchayat duties are neglected and its resources monopolised by the same few; in some cases, the Panchayat is merely by-passed for important business, or packed with the powerless. All new forces entering the village are bent to fit the existing distribution of power and accordingly only serve to strengthen the inhibiting effect of a static social structure. As one commentator notes:
“One of the inner contradictions of the Community Development Programme (is) that the people directing the programme represent the interests and classes which stand to lose their status, privilege and power if the programme succeeds.” [16]
The land reform programme designed to curb the worst excesses has achieved no dramatic results. Numerous ways of escaping the provisions have been invented and are likely to be tolerated where the State government needs the support of the rich peasants, landowners and ex-Zamindars. Landowners threatened by formal legislation to give the land they hold to the tenants farming it have evicted tenants and compelled them to say that they are voluntarily surrendering their holding, and then split holdings between different members of the family. Absentee landlords have resumed direct administration of their land. Even where the Zamindari proper has been abolished, the ex-Zamindar frequently remains the richest person in the village and retains his power. Where his lands have been distributed, the unemployed have been swelled by the number of landless labourers who used to work his estates, and village services, formerly the responsibility of the Zamindar, fall into neglect. The reform was merely a legal one and has been reshaped to fit the existing distribution of power, leaving the important matters untouched. [17]
 
8. The Labour Movement
Certain things about the Indian labour movement will be clear from the foregoing account – its extreme smallness, its rural origin, its poverty and yet its exceedingly privileged position in a society where continuous employment is relatively rare, its cultural level, its relative isolation from what is thought of as politics in India, its enormous vulnerability and relative lack of strength.
The concentration of modern industry, both in capital and geographic terms, has already been cited. Industry in general is still dominated by the early development of the cotton textile and jute industries – cotton textiles still rate roughly three quarters of a million out of a total registered manufacturing employment of 2.5 million. But the older industries, like the new, are not protected from advances in technology in the world at large – at a given level of output, the volume of labour used is falling. In the jute industry, for example, in 1922-3, 321,000 workers produced 4 million bales of jute; by 1939, 298,967 workers produced six million bales. In 1951, 302 thousand workers were employed in the industry, and in 1960, 232 thousand – in the same period, jute manufactures rose from 849 thousand tons to over one million tons. [18]
In jute, the sharpest fall in employment takes place in the most efficient (that is, modernising and profitable firms, and since the labour force is mixed (i.e. male and female, and drawn from four or five communities), redundancies fall with maximum severity on the most vulnerable sections – female employment has fallen with maximum speed, and also employment of Biharis relative to local people, Bengalis. In cotton textiles, the same trend is visible, and the stringent controls upon firing have been evaded either by allowing the labour force just to decline “naturally” (through old age, sickness, etc.), without replacing it, or reaching secret agreements with workers to operate more than the statutory two looms (with the same labour force), or introducing two and three shifts with the same labour force. To evade the regulations governing workers, a category of “permanent worker” which receives all legal benefits has been strengthened, alongside “temporary workers” who do not, and who bear the cost of industrial fluctuations and the “flexibility” of the firm.
The key factor about the Indian labour scene is the enormous volume of unemployment which simultaneously depresses both earnings and consistent militancy. Nobody has any clear idea of the scale of unemployment – it could be over twenty million, without accounting for the even more serious problem of underemployment. Since labour is very very cheap, it is used with great carelessness, meaning that labour costs are still high – in jute, four men are employed in Calcutta for every one in Dundee.
The wage structure, if such it can be called, is a vast scarcely explored jungle of different rates and non-uniform job specifications. Since Independence, Government efforts have clarified the structure in the largest units, but this is only a relatively tiny segment. However, broadly, workers in manufacturing receive a basic wage which is quite inadequate for even bare subsistence. To this is added in different industries a cost of living allowance (Dearness Allowance), sometimes related to the quite unreliable cost of living index, sometimes only changed by periodic negotiation. This element, “in some companies at least ... (is) more important to the total wage of a worker than piece rate performance or an increase in basic wages as a new skill level is reached.” [19] In any case, it is always maintained that Dearness Allowance shall not fully neutralise changes in the cost of living index – the workers must “share” inflation. Finally, in some firms a bonus is offered on the year’s performance and this fluctuates with the type of firm and the level of worker militancy – the largest number of disputes surround this question. To try and avoid such disputes, the Government appointed an inquiry which has just reported, recommending that 60 per cent of the available surplus within a firm, that is gross profit less depreciation, tax, a return on capital of 7 per cent and contribution to reserves of 4 per cent, shall be given in bonus, subject to a minimum of 4 per cent of annual basic wages plus dearness allowance or Rs.40, whichever is higher. The size of the recommended level, a sort of poll tax on investment, suggests the balance of forces between State and business.
Within the categories of payment, there is an elaborate hierarchy of rates, correlating rather with conventions than either worker contribution or the scarcity of skills. The complexity of the subject makes for mystification, and heavy worker reliance on outside “experts,” and, in particular, lawyers. The bonus system is particularly iniquitous, being just a form of forced saving imposed on workers to give the firm financial margins for manoeuvre, the price of which is poverty and debts for workers most of the year.
The trade union movement began, unlike in the West, not as a defensive organisation of craft workers to prevent their conditions being swamped, but as a by-product of the essentially middle-class political movement to oust the British. Accordingly, the traditions of craft solidarity as well as a supply of skilled workers capable of leading mass unions were denied Indian trade unions, and the leadership was monopolised by middle-class people whose primary drive was either to use the unions as an adjunct to the independence movement, or charity or personal ambition. Similarly, Communist intellectuals organised extensively for relatively short-term political demonstrations. Necessarily, the accent of the infant movement was pre-eminently upon sporadic displays of opposition to the Government, rather than organisation and defending worker conditions. Low dues and poor organisation meant that the unions could not organise sustained strikes, nor establish a full coverage of an industry – non-solidarity failed to close a given industry, which, in any case, employers could keep open by moving in rural unemployed. The faults are obviously not just with middle-class leadership – their vested interest is only possible given the low cultural level of the workers and their continued retention of rural attitudes. Since no strong class disciplines the leadership, its sputniking is only to be expected.
The lack of worker commitment reflects the lack of a working class in the proper sense, and the conditions cited – a job in India is a great gift that stands between living and literal starvation. The rural drag prompts the maintenance within factories of the same caste and community demarcation lines, the same hereditary or familial relationship to a given job, the same dependence on authority. Union organisation succeeds best when grounded in one community. Not that the workers are not militant from time to time – but this is more a sudden surge of ungovernable rage, the final outburst of frustration, than a consistent opposition; activity, intense and violent, is followed by exhaustion and apathy. The union thus only springs to life momentarily as a strike committee, thereafter being little more than a letterhead in a lawyer’s office. However, while this is the general picture, three of the four largest and oldest Indian industries are organised – textiles, railways, iron and steel.
The general level of unionisation and the high turnover of unions means that continuity is much more closely related to outside political affiliations than worker participation. But this is far from the factory floor – Indian trade unions span the vast class divide, at one end, the federations which are entirely politicised, worrying about Cuba or fascism and very small, and only distantly reflecting anything current at the other end, Indian factories, where people are only just dimly aware of India let alone the question of playing an independent role in the national political community. Since the unions are dominated by aspirant politicians, the appearance of a fully conscious radicalism is misleading. The real level of commitment is shown in the high wastage rate of unions, their dependence on outside enthusiasm, the low level of membership and even lower level of contributions. Within the factory, there is almost sure to be some form of rudimentary organisation, particularly where the national federations have not secured a foothold, but this may be restricted to a particular community (a “caste organisation”) or a particular shop.
For the union that has managed to establish stable beachheads in the factory, these are probably in the hands of the clerks who decide most issues themselves. So far as can be seen, there is nothing as yet remotely corresponding to the shop steward organisation. At the district level, the most widespread stable unionisation is in the oldest industries located in one place, and frequently co-ordination in an area for a particular strike can be close – for a general strike in Bombay, say, or Calcutta (but there is little operative contact between the cities). Bombay textiles, Ahmedabad and Madras textiles, the iron and steel men at Jamshedpur and the railwaymen, the seamen, the dockers, have all managed to attain some stability, even if precariously maintained. In textiles and iron and steel, the “representative” union (recognised for negotiations by the State Government) is a Congress one that operates uneasily as a cross between a straight State union (on the Soviet or Spanish style) and a trade union proper. Periodically, it must become militant to keep its membership, particularly since in both cases, a Communist union is waiting to take over – and in Jamshedpur, is said to have a majority. Ahmedabad is a pre-eminent example of a Congress union, a large wealthy organisation and a regular spring-board for ambitious Congress politicians [20], the union structure is entirely monopolised by middle class professionals who have never worked in textiles ; it is more enthusiastic about ‘uplifting’ the worker through charitable welfare activities (for which the worker pays through his dues), and has had no strike since the War; all disputes are carefully extinquished in a cosy tie-up between union and management. More than this, the ideology of the union, Gandhism, consistently stresses the role of the union leader not as defender of worker interests but as impartial mediator between labour and capital. [21] Trade union leaders defend themselves against the charge that they are just another clique of outs on the make by stressing that the workers are too ignorant, too uneducated to fight their own battles – they must rely on outsiders to wage class war by proxy. [22]
As will be clear, this form of dependence of workers on leaders again repeats both the rural and the caste pattern, and receives its chief rationalisation in the ideology of Gandhi. Gandhi was more concerned to shame employers into being the sort of generous powerful people they really were at heart. He lectured workers on their need to be loyal to the employers, and loyal to him – the honour of Gandhi was at stake. In the new industrial form, all the wrong things are carefully repeated – and the continued maintenance of India’s peculiarly vicious social structure and the position of its traditional rulers is maintained.
The State is in a position to call the union leaders’ bluff, and since State and union leadership are members of the same class, the preconditions for State-wide company unionism exist. Since 1937,
‘every arrangements for keeping step with the rising cost of living, every significant wage increase, every annual bonus, every major standardisation of work relations, has been granted through the agency of the State and as a result of the intervention of the State.’ [23]
Dependence of workers on union leaders, is matched by dependence of union leaders on the State. Since Independence, the Government has sought, first through its own unions (which it split away from the main federation in 1947), and then more broadly, to centralise and control labour. It has tried to shore up the position of its own unions, taken the power to force through one union, to offer that union (‘recognised’) substantial privileges, to break unofficial strikes and prevent any disputes being settled except through the union it has nominated as ‘representative.’ In most cases, no union can expect recognition unless it agrees not to strike and accepts Government jurisdiction on all major questions. Since the Government becomes responsible for every disturbance, since it is committed to intervening, relatively weak unions have nothing to lose by raising issues and further burdening the painfully slow process of litigation: it is not surprising that it is private industry that is keen to have open collective bargaining.
The elaborate structure of regulations which govern registered manufacturing industry means that all disputes, no matter how small and simple, have to be filtered through the Government machinery – lawyers are necessary at every stage, and only those who can afford to wait during the legal process can undertake it. Again, the position of the professional ‘expert’ leadership is fortified, and the resolution of disputes further mystified. Not that the unions can provide an effective control of labour. Not only can unions not extend their organisation to effective grass roots, but also union organisation is still a free market, with different political bodies competing for support; workers can and do opt for more than one union, for the Congress union for whatever bread and butter issues can be settled through the State, and for a Communist union for questions requiring militancy and fervour (the case is from Bombay textiles). Union leaders may, as they did on the outbreak of the Emergency, make bold promises not to strike, to increase production to fight the Chinese, not to ask for wage increases – but all this is moonshine when it comes to holding the breach in the face of inflation. In fact, after the Emergency, it was the Congress that struck first, trying to retain control on the slippery ground of competition. Despite the ‘enemy at the gate’ rubbish, the course of industrial disputes got back firmly into stride.
All Unions depend ultimately on the State for their triumphs, and the main aim of their activity is to influence the State to intervene on their behalf. On its side, the Government has increasingly moved towards more direct controls and intervention. Despite vigorous tail-wagging, the Government unions have tended to be ignored or consulted only after the event. The Congress unions are rife with the same faction fights as the Congress Party, so that where Party and unions belong to different factions, consultation falls to zero and the Congress unions cannot offer even their proximity to authority as a reason for loyalty. In Madras, the State Congress even set up new unions along side the old in pursuit of faction warfare. If the Government really needed the unions at all, the energy and devotion of the Communist unions would be much more promising – at least, they can deliver some of the promised goods.
Dependence, then, is the key element – a dependence that keeps worker participation very low, and so far has prevented their arising alongside the middle-class leadership a genuine worker leadership as happened in the development of Japanese unions. The union leaders have developed a vested interest which distorts the whole pattern of Indian unions, and renders them weaker than they might otherwise have been. This has provided the opportunity and pretext for State intervention to the extent where both industrial managers and trade union leaders occasionally seem no more than functionaries of the State.
Since the War, evidence on wage movements is too thin to say definitely what the pattern has been, but some estimates suggest that real wages have hardly advanced much on pre-war levels, although this does not take account of the extensive fringe benefits conceded to avoid wage increases. Most recently, the defence effort, a stiff budget and a bad harvest have precipitated an inflation which threatens to be serious and severely erode working-class living standards. What taxation cannot achieve in redistribution, inflation is doing – real wages are being lowered to pay for defence without disturbing the current pace of development investment, producing, one newspaper says, ‘something highly explosive; its intensity is without parallel since the inception of planning.’ As, at the same time, something of a political crisis is approaching, the results could be decisive for a long period ahead, particularly for the fifty-year development upheaval that lies ahead and has, to date, hardly begun. That crisis will concern the next article.

Footnotes
1. The debt to T. Cliff and his works will be clear from what follows, and in particular, to suggestions contained in Permanent Revolution, International Socialism 12, Spring 1963, p.15.
2. As the State offers welfare to the workers, it offers education to the middle classes, and since the rate of expansion of the educated is greater than the increase in jobs for the educated, the problem of educated underemployment appears – as a direct threat to the State, a Bolshevik nightmare. In the early fifties, an Egyptian survey showed that 38.4 per cent of those with school certificate and above were employed by the State ; if the doctors and lawyers are excluded, the overwhelming maiority were State-employed. Cf. Egypt in Revolution, Charles Issawi, Oxford-RIIA, 1963, p.90. In 1953, roughly 46 per cent of total Government expenditure went on public wages and salaries. Cf. Bureaucracy and Society in Modern Egypt, Morris Berger, Princeton, 1957, p.83.
3. City Life in Japan, R.P. Dore, Routledge 1958, pp.218-9.
4. Annual Report of the Registrar of Newspapers for India, 1958, Minirtry of Information and Broadcasting, New Delhi 1959, and UN Statistical Yearbook, 1960.
5. The Economic Times, Bombay, 11 December 1963.
6. Tribe, Caste and Nation, F.G. Bailey, Manchester University Press, 1960, pp.187-191 and Caste and Territory in Malabar, E.J. Miller, American Anthropologist 56/3, June 1954, pp.418-19. The Backward Classes Commission lists 2,399 backward communities for 1953 (excluding Untouchables) – 913 of these account for 116 million people.
7. Reorganisation of Indian States, K. Mukherji, Popular, Bombay 1955, p.31.
8. Cf. the 1954 survey of Lucknow student opinion, cited in Party Politics in India, M. Weiner, Princeton, 1957, p.10. On the association between nationalism and the middle class, cf. The Growth of Nations, K. Deutch, World Politics, January 1953, and Paradoxes of Asian Nationalism, R. Emerson, Far Eastern Quarterly, February 1954.
9. Report of the US Dept of Commerce, cited The Economic Times, Bombay, 28 January 1964.
10. The highs and lows of net per capita availability of food-grains per day in ounces runs: 1950-51, 13.9 ; 1951-52, 13.6 ; 1953-54, 16.1 ; 1957-58, 14.4; 1958-59, 16.5; 1960-1, 16.2; 1962-63, 14.9; The Economic Times, Bombay, 11 December 1963. Since 1960, the whole ECAFE region has seen roughly a two per cent per annum decline in real per capita income, excluding Japan: Economic Survey of Asia and the Far East, UN, Bangkok 1963.
11. New York Times, Paris, 10 December 1963.
12. With investment averaging about Rs. 20,000 million per year, production increases by barely three per cent.
13. The index, given 1949-50 as 100, reached 139.7 in 1960-61; 141.4, 1961-2; 136.8, 1962-3 – the overall decline in agricultural production in the last year is estimated at 7-8 per cent. Economic Survey, February 1964, Government of India, New Delhi.
14. The actual figures in the first place are 68.09 in 1951-52, and 63.03 in 1960-61. Distribution of Agricultural Income in India, S.A. Shah and M. Rajagopal, The Economic Weekly, XV/41, Bombay, 12 October 1963.
15. Partly because of complex re-lending by borrowers: cf. Rural Debt and Investment Surey, 1961-62, Reserve Bank, 1963.
16. Hugh Tinker in Politics and Society in India, ed. C.H. Phillips, Allen and Unwin, 1963.
17. For discussions of land reform, cf. Rural Change in Bengal, V. D’Souza, The Economic Weekly, XVI/9, 29 February 1964, and successive articles in this journal. On community development of Democratic Decentralisation, W.H. Morris-Jones, The Economic Weekly, XIV/28-30, July 1960.
18. The first case is from The Indian Working Class, R.K. Mukerjee, 1945, p 136 ; the second from Report of the Central Wage Board for Jute Industry, IJMA, Calcutta 1963.
19. Workers, Factories and Social Chance in India, R.D. Lambert, Princeton, 1963, p.218.
20. The present Indian Home Minister, an ex-economics professor, is an ex-official of the Ahmedabad Textile Labour Association, and another ex-official of the union has been since 1962 Chairman of the nationalised India Oil Co Ltd. Michael John, leader of the Jamshedpur Congress union is also a director of another public steel plant, Ourgapur.
21. Cf., for example, a southern Congress trade unionist: ‘The labour leader has to maintain the balance between the two (capital and labour) in order to achieve the objective – the trade union leader represents “the nation” in the irrationality of class conflict, or, in British terms, “the consumer”.’ Cf. Problems of Labour Leadership, K. Gurumurthi, Mainstream, 7 September 1963, p.33.
22. The forms of battle reflect the need of union leadership to retain a monopoly of initiative – thus leaders make symbolic sacrifices for the workers, like going on a fast ‘until death.’ A Communist leader recently did this, and called off the strike after nine days since the Minister had assured him ‘he would personally look into the demands of the workers.’ And all this, to avoid a break in production and the leader getting into the bad books of the State or management. The present Communist campaign against the cost of living relies almost entirely on workers going without food: why is clear only to the nuttiest Gandhian.
23. Morris D. Morris in Leadership and Political Institutions in India, ed. R.L. Park and L. Tinker, Princeton 1959, p.268.
 



Hindu Culture, Economic Development and Economic Planning in India
K. William Kapp
Asia Publishing House, 45s.
Professor Kapp’s book is a collection of essays (or lectures) written in recent years and very loosely grouped round the theme of development. The approach is primarily towards non-technical theoretical analysis, and the political bias is roughly the dead centre of American economic thought, best exemplified by Galbraith and, in more extreme fashion, the modern corporatists (or – the non-American – Myrdal). The book is divided into three sections, covering first the relationship between traditional Hinduism and modern Indian development efforts, and the need for a good civil service in development; second, problems of evaluating criteria for development investment; and third, an essay in the history of economic thought, one on social costs (following the author’s earlier book), and a defence of planning. The list of contents will exhibit the degree of interest likely to a general reader, or even one intersted in Indian development.
Professor Kapp has taken as his title the concern of the first three essays, so presumably he considers these to be his main contribution. Here, he starts with the sensible (but dull) observation that social institutions inhibit development. But then, instead of analysing in concrete terms how this is so, how, say, one particular social institution (like land ownership, village organisation, caste structure as the organisisation of people rather than what he deals with, a religious conception) prevents the sort of activity that seems from the outside to be in the interests of the majority of the community concerned, Kapp proceeds to give us a quick sketchy picture of something he calls ‘Hinduism’ – an activity analogous to giving a forty-page sketch of ‘European culture’. His Hinduism, primarily from written sources, adds up to a series of rather vague generalisations, completely abstracted from historical behaviour, from the multitudinous variety exhibited within India, and from any estimate of likely behaviour under a variety of stimuli. The approach is not very illuminating, as well as holding out little hope for self-supporting development. When faced with this sort of analysis, one always wonders what such writers make of the medieval Christian prohibition of usury – why was this not an absolute barrier to development? Hinduism forbids the slaughter of cows, so Mysore peasants sell their cows to Muslims for slaughter. And so on – love will find a way. Short-term cultural resistances certainly exist, but ultimately self-interest (even when expressed in queer ways), even if operated through caste, counts even more. So what holds India back? As Kapp says, partly her social structure, which is a collection of men (rather than ideas or dicta), balanced in a particular power structure which validates the infinite variety called Hinduism. There the directions for research becomes a little clearer than evocations of a transparent and, as with all ‘cultures’, ambivalent Hinduism. For the rest, the essays are competent, careful and cautious.
 



Thought and Behaviour in Modern Japanese Politics
Masao Maruyama
(edited by Ivan Morris)
Oxford University Press, 45s.
This book is a collection of essays on post-war Japanese politics (originally published between 1946 and 1957), essays which seek to probe ‘the psychological atmosphere’ of particular political aspects of Japan rather than present finished analyses. Professor Murayama is a distinguished Tokyo political scientist, intimately concerned with European culture and strongly influenced by Hegel, Marx and the German sociologists – as such, his essays have a depth and interest often denied to the work of his Western colleagues. His thought is a little diffuse and tends to lack clear structure, but his observations on Japanese politics are frequently suggestive, shrewd and illuminating. The present volume consists of five essays (which are good) broadly concerned with the Japanese Right, partly since the Meiji Restoration, but in more detail in the period 1931-45. Here he seeks to draw out specific characteristics of Japanese ‘fascism’ (he does not define the word, so its appropriateness in relationship to wartime and pre-war Japanese Governments is not clear), stressing its pre-eminent elite role (as opposed to mass appeal in Germany and Italy), its lack of domestic revolutionary appeal, and its strong agrarian bias (unlike Nazism’s explicit approach to industrial workers). Also of interest is his discussion of nationalism – in Japan, the weapon of a feudal aristocracy threatened from abroad, and without any domestic progressive content. Factional intrigue and individual terrorism exhibited the interwar passivity of the Japanese masses in the face of encroaching military rule – but political instability continued right through the war.
The remaining four essays are of less interest to the general reader, and seem to lack the perceptiveness of the first ones which are directed specifically at concrete problems. In addition, Maruyama’s failure to incorporate in his analysis a clear commitment or concern with changes in the general social and economic background, vitiate his discussion – his Critique of De-Stalinisation tills ground already covered by many specialists, and suffers from the lack of any coherent picture of the Soviet Union and its relationship to other Eastern bloc countries (a picture, the possibility of which Maruyama would deny, at this ‘early stage’, suggesting the academic bias of his viewpoint here).
The translators seem to have managed excellently in transposing Maruyama’s Hegelian Japanese into English, and the editor has provided a useful glossary to guide the reader through the detail of the period. Altogether, the Right analyses are an original contribution to Japanese political history up to 1945, and discuss very usefully the diverse cultural strands culminating in Japan’s ‘ultra-nationalism’.
 



The Economic Development of China and Japan
Ed. C.D. Gowlan
Allen & Unwin, 35s.
This is a welcome addition to the useful collections published in this series, mainly concerned to date with issues in economic history and politics in South, South-East and East Asia. This volume, an introduction followed by six essays on aspects of Chinese economic development and three on Japan, has appeal mainly for the specialist, but contains useful summaries of some current work in the field. To some extent, it does not hang together as a book since it lacks in the essays on China (which dominate it) any general perspectives or attempts to generalise on Chinese experience or knit the work on China into that on Japan.
Mancall examines the fascinating history of Sino-Russian commercial relations in the eighteenth century, comparing it to Western ones through Canton, and two case studies follow of nineteenth century Chinese entrepreneurship – the China Coast Steam Navigation Company and the Hanyehping Coal and Iron Company. Chesneaux summarises his work on the Chinese labour force before 1949 (a case where comparisons with other underdeveloped countries could have been illuminating), and Eckstein offers a rigorous and cautious evaluation of Sino-Soviet economic relations, a useful corrective to rasher estimates. Finally Walker analyses the writings of the economist. Ma Yin-ch’u, his critique of Chinese planning made during the Hundred Flowers phase, and the subsequent ‘replies’ of the orthodox. It will readily be seen that these contributions presuppose a background of knowledge of the Chinese economy. This is less the case with three essays on the development of Japan which proceed from a wider and deeper tradition of intensive modern research. Allen describes some of the key factors and stresses the relative peculiarity of Japan’s growth; Rosovsky summarises some of his earlier work on the process of capital formation, and Shinchara discusses the role of foreign trade in stimulating (or retarding) domestic growth, a crucial issue in comprehending Japanese development. The brief introduction which is also used to introduce the companion volume on South-East Asia, cannot unfortunately compensate for the diversity which follows. However, for those with a working knowledge of the Chinese economy, there are useful insights; for those familiar with Japan, these essays are important although there are weightier books by the same authors on the topics covered. Each essay is followed by a brief but useful bibliography.
 



1. Middle Class Politics
In the first part of this article it was suggested that public politics in India is almost entirely concerned with the middle class – the dialogue is between the tiny and insecure ruling class at national level and the only comparably articulate and educated group of people, the middle class. When the dialogue is interrupted by wider challenges, the intervention is rarely consistent and sustained so it makes little impact. Since politics is the politics of the middle class, its main concern is étatiste nationalism, tentatively ascribed in the preceding article partly to the psychological concomitants of industrialisation (the shift from rural to urban) and the schismatic strains of the new ‘nation’, and partly to the complete dependence of the educated middle class on the State. Great poverty and deprivation breed intolerant and violent politics, founded upon theologies: there are levels of misery which induce forms of virtual self-destruction, much as medieval society bred the Flagellantes. Marginally, this further generates a belief in ‘spiritual’ pursuits and the power of saints [1] like Gandhi or Vinobe Bhave.
But this use of the term ‘middle-class’ covers up much of the complexity. In fifty years, India’s social structure has shifted decisively, and the localised peasant castes that have risen to power have destroyed the Brahmin monopoly. The Brahmins at least fitted into an all-India scheme of things, Sanskritic Hinduism or British imperial rule, but the new rising castes are pre-eminently local and speak no language comprehensible throughout India. Some inherit crucial political rivalries. For example, in the former greater State of Madras, there was traditional rivalry between the northern Telugu-speaking Brahmins and the southern Tamil-speaking Brahmins, but they held together as a united elite. The rising peasant castes, Tamils in the south and Telugus in the north, inherited this rivalry once they had defeated their local Brahmins, but had no common uniting factors and, as soon as each had achieved dominance, split the State into two new ones, Andhra Pradesh and Tamilnad.
Thus, the term ‘middle class’ described both groups more nationalistic than anyone else and groups more intensely loyal to a local State – both those in favour of a strong centralised India, and those who wish to preserve their own power in a decentralised federal structure of autonomous States. The agitation for the formation of States which would correspond to linguistic areas (a key political issue for all parties in the fifties) represented the assertion of the real power of local rulers that run India proper:
‘It is the middle class job hunter and place hunter and the mostly middle class politician who are benefited by the establishment of a linguistic State, which creates for them an exclusive preserve of jobs, offices and places by shutting out, in the name of the promotion of culture, all outside competitors.’ [2]
This process of ‘localisation’ (and ‘indigenisation’) makes certain apparently irrelevant issues of key significance – the boundary dispute between different States, the issue of what language should be used throughout India (Hindi of the North, of the national capital, and associated with Aryan Brahmin rule, imperialist English or a local language), whether the Civil Service should be made a local responsibility, so destroying one of the key institutions holding the country together, or the issue of Kashmir and whether it should be permitted the right to settle its own future. In addition, all radical politics is shot through by the clash of local and all-India capital, making a united front between Left and local Right against, for example, the Marwari, a permanent temptation: Tridib Kumar Chaud-huri mocked the ‘sudden anxiety displayed by the Bengal provincial committee (of the CPI), criticising the politburo about the ruin of Bengali banks and Bengali trade and industries in the “unequal competition” with the Birlas (the leading Marwaris, NH) ... The stalwarts of the Bengal national chamber of commerce ranged in revolutionary array with the workers and peasants against the Gujerati-Marwari collaborators of imperialism!’ [3] The significance of Maoism with its stress on a popular front against imperialism alone rather than class struggle at home should not be missed.
Indigenisation means that all State politics (the really important level of politics in India) have to be about local issues before wider ones. Thus, although, the terminology may sound familiar, an operative political dispute is almost certain to be about something much more localised than it seems on the surface – the Congress may battle for ‘democracy’ when it means the Syrian Christian merchants of Kerala; the CPI may be for ‘socialism’ when it means the victory of the Kamma peasant caste of Andhra in its battle with the Reddi caste. The gap between explicit ideology and actual practical issues exists in all class societies, but in India it is peculiarly great, especially where political positions are treated as theological ones and few people describe what is really happening – which is a further aspect of mystification and fetishism. Political issues become multi-dimensional; for example, in Orissa in the fifties, a party of former princely rulers (Ganatantra) achieved striking success, but at every level of its operation, its significance was slightly different:
‘the Ganatantra-Congress conflict at State level appears in the guise of rival policies (or, in another form, of regional rivalries – Hill against Coast); in the constituencies of Kalahandi district, it appeared as a dynastic dispute; in Bisipara (a village in Kalahandi – NH), it was translated into caste conflict.’ [4]
Thus there can be no straight reading of the political temperature from election results or what parties say. Parties are only successful at the local level insofar as they mesh with local issues which may run completely contrary to the explicit party programme; in 1952, one of the main CPI leaders (A.K. Gopalan, currently the Maoist leader) alleged that creating linguistic states was ‘India’s most important problem, the Communist number one goal.’ [5] Any party which caught that intensely local linguistic tide, whatever its explicit aims, flowed on to fortune in the urban centres. The rural majority present a different sort of problem. Where politics consists in the struggle between rising economic groups and no more, where there is immense poverty and ignorance and the world of the majority is abruptly curtailed by the edge of the village, then the politics of the States themselves is the concern of only a very small minority. At the village level, politics is ferocious – numbers die regularly during village elections – but the villagers’ main regard for the world beyond the village is fear, sustained by an almost total lack of knowledge [6] which is rooted in the lack of any need to know what happens outside. Fear is the point on which politicians latch, offering protection for all and marginal advantages to a minority. The middle-class man from the town accordingly can become the key link between isolated villages and the dangerous town, he can become what Bailey calls a ‘broker’, commanding vote banks, votes offered for some small service or promise of future protection. With one foot in the urban administration and one in the village, vote banks can be building-blocked into a majority for a politician, that is, provided the broker gets his payoff also. The broker ‘finds jobs, he allocates contracts, relief money and licences, or, to put it more correctly, people believe they are allocated on his advice.’ [7] The considerable finances attached to the rural development programme strengthen the hand of political bosses, and are filtered through the traditional village leaders or faction leaders in order to cement the urban politician’s position. [8] Professional bosses build round themselves machines which are their own property, personal rather than political – accordingly, the psychological roots for individual authoritarianism are that much strengthened. The politician’s task is to find enough perks to keep his bosses happy, for, if he cannot, they will move to a higher bidder, carrying with them their vote banks: which suggests something of the volatile loyalties of Indian politics; men change sides with great speed, carrying loyal ranks of supporters with them, parties are splintered and united with astonishing speed, since the issues concern little more than a small group of leaders falling out and making up.
The organisation at the bottom inevitably spreads upwards, so that State parties become dominated by the toughest bosses. The Independence movement involved a much more orthodox political commitment, a moral ethic, although when it became important among peasants, the ethic was very much tempered by self-interest which on occasions threatened to run away with the movement in a riot of anti-landlordism, illegal crop-cutting and rent boycotts. But since Independence, the moral ethic has all but disappeared in the rural areas, and concomitant with the rise of new rich peasant castes has been the rise of their representatives, the powerful political bosses who command particular States and can thereby defeat opponents at the national level who have no local base – Nehru, for example, along with much of his Cabinet, had little organised local backing, but the new post-Nehru Cabinet is dominated by the local men even if they do not necessarily fill the front row.
Thus, elections cannot be said to validate the aims of any particular party, nor provide material for straight interpretation. The Communist win in Kerala has a very different meaning in the Kerala context to its significance in the Cold War; in any case, with many small splinter parties competing in a simple majority system, the number of seats won may mean little more than electoral quirks (in 1957 Kerala, Congress won 38.2 per cent of the vote, and the CPI which formed the Government, 36.5 per cent). However, the urban areas are less susceptible to the rigging possible in rural areas, although not at all immune from boss politics of a sort. Urban bosses however rely more on leading agitations to build up a somewhat unstable machine, but agitation involves some political commitment by the led if not by the leaders, and means more than simple protection or bribery. In the towns, the CPI has got some sort of proletariat to work on, even if it restricts its attention on communal lines (in Calcutta factories, the CPI aims to secure Bengali support, leaving Congress to build on the ‘foreign’ majority, mainly from neighbouring Bihar State) – not, as in the country, having to focus on the caste divisions of middle and rich peasants which provide a more stable base than poor peasants, labourers or the lowest castes. Thus, the towns remain the most promising arena for future action – here, the opposition can operate on terms of greater equality with the rich Congress. If the ‘ruralisation’ of Congress continues, Congress might well find it necessary to dispense with the democratic forms to hold the rebellious cities down since it is from here alone that the creative trends originate – thus, the Emergency, which is not needed to chain the peasant to the land.
 
2. The State of the Parties
Despite the overwhelming domination of Congress in terms of seats, it has never achieved a majority of votes cast. In 1952, with 45 per cent of the vote for the national parliament (Lok Sabha) it won 357 of the 489 seats. In 1957, this broad percentage of the vote was held (although where it came from shifted), and in 1962, it won about 45 per cent again (anging from 33 per cent in Kerala to 52 per cent in Orissa), a figure which brought it about 70 per cent of the Lok Sabha seats. In the Lok Sabha, some 267 seats go to the largest States (Uttar Pradesh [UP], Bihar, Tamilnad, Andhra Pradesh [AP]) and in 1957, Congress won 201 of these, a base that makes it almost impregnable. The poll in the last election was just over 50 per cent, a three per cent increase on 1957, and ranging from 24.7 per cent in Orissa to 70.6 in Kerala (the one is among the most backward States; the other has the highest educational level). For the opposition, the CPI won about 10 per cent of the vote, Swatantra about 7 per cent, followed by the ranks of smaller parties, both national (like Praja Socialists or Jan Sangh) and local.
State-wise, the breakdown of the vote was as follows in the main States: [9]



State:


Congress


CPI



Praja


Swatantra


Jan
Sangh


Other
Parties


Ind.


Soc. P.




Andhra P.


44.9


20.3


  0.07


14.4  


  1.1    


  2.2


13.3


 




Bihar


42.0


  6.3


12.0  


17.1  


  1.7    


  5.5


  5.4


5.3  




Gujerat


51.4


 


  5.5  


25.0  


  1.2    


  1.4


14.7


0.05




Maharashtra


50.1


  3.4


  4.7  


  0.3  


  4.2    


18.8


12.8


 




Kerala


33.6


34.8


  9.7  


  0.01


  0.7    


  7.9


11.1


 




Madhya P.


37.9


  0.6


11.2  


  0.7  


16.6    


12.1


11.8


3.7  




Tamilnad


44.0


  9.9


  1.6  


10.2  


  0.004


22.8


  7.6


0.5  




Mysore


50.8


  1.5


14.0  


  7.5  


  2.4    


  4.2


16.1


 




Orissa


52.6


  4.9


  1.9  


  1.1  


 


17.9


  1.4


2.2  




Punjab


40.6


  3.2


 


  4.8  


14.7    


20.0


12.3


2.3  




Rajasthan


36.4


  2.9


 


17.8  


  9.0    


  3.9


25.7


2.4  




Uttar P.


36.4


  3.7


10.1  


  4.5  


16.3    


  6.3


  9.5


8.3  




West Bengal


45.8


27.6


  4.4  


  1.0  


  1.1    


  11.1


  5.7


0.04



Over the 1957 election, Congress declined somewhat in its share of the poll. The CPI improved its support in Andhra, Bihar, UP and West Bengal, maintained its position in Madhya Pradesh, Tamilnad, Mysore and Orissa, but lost some support in Bombay, Punjab, Rajasthan and Kerala. The main CPI strength remains in Andhra, Kerala and West Bengal, with lesser pockets in Assam, Bihar and Tamilnad. The Praja Socialist strength is restricted to Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Orissa, with some pockets in UP – all States which are reckoned to be fairly backward. The main rival of the Praja and a breakaway from it, the Socialist Party, is mainly concentrated in UP, with bits in Bihar, Assam and Madhya Pradesh. On the right, the Jan Sangh is solidly North Indian (Hindi-speaking and maximally Hindu), in Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, UP, with some following in Rajasthan. Finally, the new Liberal party, Swatantra, in its first general election, achieved substantial strength in Andhra, Bihar, Gujerat, Tamilnad and Rajasthan, with a pocket in Mysore. Two severely local parties, not included in the table above, the DMK in Tamilnad and the Akali Dal (representing the Sikh religious community) in Punjab made good running.
 
3. Congress
Congress is less an orthodox political party, and more an umbrella for the widely different sections which compose India’s embryonic ruling class: embryonic less by reason of its members, more by the fact that as yet its different elements hardly recognise a common interest that spans all of India and yet is rooted in particular States. The National Congress in Delhi only imperfectly reflects its real power centres in the States, which have been transformed by the changed social structure in the States. Under Nehru, the nature of the national government became increasingly at variance with that of the States, and the changes that should have taken place in Delhi were held up until his death. As a result, Delhi seemed much more ‘westernised’, and therefore much more remote from India proper. However, the impact of the new men from the States was steadily encroaching and forcing Nehru to conform – the sorrow that the westernised urban upper middle class feels at Nehru’s death partly reflects an awareness that one of the last bulwarks of ‘westernism’ in India has gone, and that Indians who looked more to Europe than India must give place everywhere to a ‘nouveau riche’ of political rajahs that care little for Europe and despise those Indians more European than Indian.
The dam that held back the tide of real power at the national level did not exist at the local State level. There the survival of Congress rests upon its capturing every rising caste and permitting the battles of different ruling groups to be waged inside itself rather than between different parties. Wherever it fails to capture the rising caste, it is likely to be defeated or identified with old Brahmin rule or, in the South, with North Indian Hindi imperialism. Alternatively, where the drive to Independence entailed the total alienation of traditional rulers, from Rajas to landowners and old Zemindaris, it has been necessary for Congress to reabsorb these elements if they continue to be powerful (as they usually do) – if it does not, again a powerful political opposition might have been created. Consider again Orissa where the Rajas in the early fifties formed a separate party, Ganatantra, and made severe inroads on Congress strength, coming close to forming the first non-Congress government. In 1952, Bailey found that 17 Assembly candidates were from princely families, and thirteen were elected; in 1957, of 30, 22 were elected, and of the eight defeated, five were by other members of princely families. Which party the Raja chose was in fact more important in determining which party would win the election than the party campaign or programme – and the Raja might choose one party merely because of a traditional rivalry with another Raja who had already chosen a different party. [10] Congress overcame the challenge of Ganatantra by relaxing its old rule that the former pro-British ruling groups of Rajas could not be admitted to Congress – they seeped back in the fifties, with predictable results for Congress radicalism and, in particular, its land reform programme.
The amorphousness of Congress makes it impossible to characterise it in a clear formula applicable in every State and nationally. Generally, since Independence, it has absorbed both rich peasant castes and landowners, as well as some of local capital, but this does not prevent it nationally exhibiting both radical land reform and anti-capitalist tendencies. Sometimes, the State split between two dominant castes may be reflected in a faction fight within the State Congress or between Congress and another party without this having any political significance outside the State or at the all-India level. Again, where one powerful boss has subdued his State Congress the views expressed by that Congress outside the State may only express the boss’s views or the views he finds it tactical to express, given the all-India balance of factions. Some of the best known bosses, Atulya Ghosh of West Bengal, Bijou Patnaik of Orissa, Sanjeeva Reddi of Andhra, Kamraj of Tamilnad, S.K. Paul of Maharashtra, and Shastri of UP (the present Prime Minister), have in recent years organised a strong all-India group, nicknamed the ‘junta’, which can at present effectively control the national party. They represent no very clear political locus except to retain their own position ana Dalance between the urban middle class étatisme (best represented by Krishna Menon and K.D. Malaviya) and the national capitalist sector – neither local capital nor the big landowners are effectively organised in an all-India Congress faction (language is one barrier outside the Hindi areas, the localised loyalties and focus of these groups another, and the sheer size of India a third). The balancing takes for granted the Nehruite legacy of planning and the public sector, but it is fairly certain that over time the right-ward pressure from capital will steadily overcome the étatiste one and make increasing inroads on that legacy.
Last year, the Emergency and Himalayan defeat in conjunction with the Plan failures, and disastrous harvests resulting in inflationary food prices, imposed such pressure on the urban middle class (the only group to feel some of these issues intensely) that Nehru was forced to make some dramatic gesture of reform. This took the form of despatching five prominent Cabinet and six State Chief Ministers back to the Party to ‘work for the movement’ rather than hold high office. This spoof was probably engineered in the background by the junta whose members might benefit from a return to the organisation, but whose nearest rivals for power at the centre would not since they were in the main dependent on Nehru, not a local base, for their power. A little later, the junta with great skill engineered the election for the Congress Presidency (a post previously of little significance) so that one of their number, Kamraj, won it and kept out the former Finance Minister, Morarji Desai, a man now with little local roots but notorious for his authoritarianism. Desai, second in the Cabinet last summer and first in line of succession after the ailing Nehru, was thus destroyed first by being sacked and second by being kept out of the organisation. Since the urban middle class were hit hard by his Budget last year, politically it might favour his destruction, but in fact, in the leadership contest after Nehru’s death, Menon and Maiaviya supported Desai against Shastri, presumably because they reasoned that a strong man with no local base (even if more right-wing) was more susceptible to their pressure than men who represented the peasant States. When the final leadership contest came Desai stood relatively little chance even though he collected a list of distinguished backers – Kamraj was arbiter, and Atulya Ghosh consultant: Shastri was King before the old man was dead.
But this inner knifing did not relieve urban middle class pressure, making the cost of living the key political question of the moment. There was a general strike in Bombay in August, another in Calcutta in September, a CPI petition to Parliament with vast collections of names and so on. When the All India Congress Committee (AICC, the supreme general body of Congress) met in November at Jaipur, that pressure had focus-sed on the demand for the nationalisation of banks, State trading in essential commodities and in exports and imports, and rendering the consumer trade co-operative. The leadership tacked skilfully, promising ever greater heights of radicalism, but recommending that the matter be considered by the Congress Working Committee, a small inner cabal of the leadership. It further recommended that primary party members be denied party voting rights, to prevent election candidates buying them up (it costs about 4½d a year to be a primary member; there are 9½ million, largely paper, belonging to the ambitious). Active members (yearly donation of about 18s, plus enrol 50 primary members), all 138,518 of them, would then alone have the right to vote – a reform that might lower rampant corruption, but would also effectively disenfranchise the poor in the Party.
The Working Committee drew up a compendious resolution, full of much sound, but specifically urging more control over the banks, State operation of the rice mills, a limit on incomes and property; in addition, it offered as the new aim of Congress ‘democratic socialism’. [11] It is administratively impossible to take over the rice mills (they are small and widely scattered and the Indian Civil Service limited), but it was offered as a sop although the middle class did not seem excited. At the Bhubaneshwar annual session of Congress, the resolution was considered. The extent of irritation was visible in the 64 amendments and the comments of some State Congress committees– Malaviya put down a separate counter-resolution with much more radical aims. In addition, the debate was sharp, with much heckling for the solitary speaker opposed to bank nationalisation; Patnaik of Orissa, a left-sounding opportunist, expended much energy in lashing the failings of the banks and all other capitalists, and admitted accepting Rs 4 lakhs (about £31,000) from rice mill-owners as Party donations. However, all efforts were futile since, following similar ‘reassurances from the leadership’, all amendments were withdrawn except one, suggesting innocently a ceiling on the property of Congressmen: such is the hold of the leadership, the amendment received only one vote in favour, that of its sponsor. The junta was in evidence during the elections for seven places to the Working Committee (21 members, 13 nominated by the Congress President), and through intensive canvassing, secured the election of its ‘official panel’ by a wide margin (of 430 votes cast, the lowest elected received 268, and the highest non-elected 109). All told, at very considerable cost, the jamboree was more circus than bread, and much pious talk of everybody having enough to eat in the 1970s.
The junta operations help to show that the small group of committees that effectively control Congress at the national level are themselves tightly controlled by an even smaller group of leaders. But no matter how concentrated the central power, it cannot control the States. Faction fights are endemic in UP, Punjab (where the Chief Minister has at long last resigned after years of hair-raising stories of his corruption), Gujerat and Kerala, and the centre is constantly despatching leaders to the States to try and sort out recalcitrant factions, usually with no success. The scramble for perks and status cannot be straight-jacketed– in February, for 11 Rajya Sabha (Upper House) seats in UP, there were 300 Congress candidates scrambling over each other; Congress renominated the sitting members for fear of upsetting the delicate balance of caste and community. The ‘ideological’ debate continues – at Bombay in May, the AICC was still mulling over the Bhubaneshwar resolution, having received the report of a committee set up at Bhubaneshwar to make recommendations. But all this is just pious acting to try and keep the urban middle class quiet (although the inflation continues with terrible effects) – the rural purveyor of the vote is the ballast that keeps the ship upright. Grocers and rice millers are currently on strike in Calcutta in protest not at the inflation of the supply price of their goods but the control placed on their selling prices – the Government will soon relax price controls, probably, but a strike by the Poujadists is indicative of the state of mind. Nor is the Plan looking much healthier. The result is letters in the English language press promising that ‘the common people’ will not wait till the next election to show their disapproval. Since the urban middle class vote does not matter very much to Congress, the frustration is immense.
Generally, then, national Congress represents an unstable alliance between the bureaucracy (and its staff, the all-India urban middle class) and the, at this level, relatively powerful sector of national capital. At the State level, land and the peasant is married to the much smaller and less significant local capital and local bureaucracy. Since explicit public politics is more concerned with the urban sector (where the press is, where the demonstrations and strikes are, etc), the relative weakness of local capital and the urban middle class is compensated by their command of the towns. But this sort of static description of this basic contradiction in India politics at the moment is not necessarily the whole story, since, within the limits prescribed, Indian politics are very volatile.
 
4. The Communist Party of India
The CPI is the major focus of the left opposition, but like all other parties, it is only successful where it has strong local roots, where it can champion the rights of one side in a local rivalry. Necessarily then, its efforts in the all important rural areas must concentrate on capturing the leadership of some rising rich or middle peasant caste in its struggle with either another rising caste or the existing authorities – the CPI [12] has not rooted itself with any consistency either in the poor peasantry or tenant farmers or agricultural labourers or untouchables, the very lowest stratum of society; all four groups are the most difficult to organise and the least politically aware. Despite the destruction of its theoretical position by Soviet support for Nehru and non-alignment, the CPI has nevertheless been able to establish bases in three States, and obtain, through judicial but wildly opportunistic alliances, footholds elswhere – its alliances with the two purely communal parties, the DMK in Tamilnad and the Akali Dal in Punjab, gave it a foothold in those two States. The three main States, Kerala, Andhra and West Bengal, have little in common except that all three are outside the North Indian Hindi-speaking heartlands, and all three have greater or lesser hostility to Northern (and Brahmin) rule – but so has Maharashtra where the CPI is weak but commanded by Brahmins. West Bengal and Kerala are small densely populated States, with very high literacy rates and the highest rates of educated unemployed – West Bengal, the main centre of British imperial rule and subsequently British capital and Marwari capital, was the base for the bureaucratic administration of all India but has in the past fifty years been so partitioned that it is now only a shadow of its former glory; it had a wealthy and cultured aristocracy and, its companion in certain conditions, a strong terrorist tradition. Kerala has also a well organised local capital base in the Syrian Christian community. Andhra, by contrast, is heavily rural, including the very fertile Krishna-Godivari delta; it is relatively densely populated, but has rich peasant castes; it also has a strong Muslim tradition, being in part the former preserve of the richest Indian potentate, the Nizam of Hyderabad.
In the old State of Madras (which covered part of modern Andhra and modern Tamilnad) and that part of the old Hyderabad State which is in modern Andhra, the CPI had roots in both the tenant farmers (Telengana, Hyderabad) and the rich Kamma caste peasants of the delta. When, in Telengana in 1947, the CPI led a peasant revolt against both landlordism and the rule of the Nizam, it was that section of the Madras CPI dominated by the rich Kamma caste which protested against efforts to spread the revolt outside Hyderabad State – the Kammas argued for a Moaist alliance between rich, middle and poor peasants, for which error, the ultra-left General Secretary of the national party, B.T. Ranadive, reprimanded them. The national government utilised the pretext of the revolt to invade Hyderabad State in order to depose the Nizam – leaving the Hyderabad CPI to ally with ... the Nizam in defence of autonomous State rule (this, of course, broke the back of peasant support). The failure discredited the tactics involved – Ranadive was replaced at national level by the Kammas under Rajeshwar Rao. The new State of Andhra removed many of the checks and balances of the old State structure, and brought the united Kamma caste face to face with its traditional rivals, the Reddi peasant caste (the two live broadly in different but adjacent areas) immediately the Brahmins, the traditional enemies of both castes, were destroyed. It was the Reddis who tackled that destruction, and while the Kammas were still attacking Congress as a Brahmin front, the Reddis were infiltrating it. The CPI, founded by young Kammas in the thirties, thus faced a unique opportunity to represent Kamma opposition – it became, in the early fifties, the political expression of the Kammas and made striking successes against Congress in the 1952 elections. Congress became even more Reddi dominated and ejected its few Kamma leaders, notably N.G. Ranga. For the 1957 election however, the national Congress intervened to prevent disaster– it brought N.G. Ranga back and made him chief of Congress, it matched every CPI Kamma candidate in the Kamma areas with a Congress Kamma candidate, and it carefully angled its campaign to demonstrate to the rich Kamma peasants and landlords the overt dangers of a CPI victory – it also reprinted Soviet statements praising Nehru. The tactic was very successful, and the CPI Legislative Assembly seats were cut from 31 to 11. This was certainly not the end of Andhra CPI, but it demonstrates both the effectiveness of CPI opportunism and the relative ease with which it was checked when the real class alignment of Congress could be demonstrated to what should have been its natural supporters. After the election, the Reddis again ousted N.G. Ranga (putting in one of the earlier mentioned bosses, Sanjeeva Reddi) who wandered, eventually becoming one of the founder members of Swatantra. [13] In Kerala, the CPI rooted itself in the numerically powerful and rising Ezhavas caste which, in 1957, in alliance with one of the wealthiest and most powerfully organised castes in India, the Nayars, succeeded in winning 61 seats in the Assembly (the 61 included 23 Nayars and 21 Ezhavas). The alliance, solidly Hindu, succeeded in isolating the substantial Syrian Christian community, and helped to identify Congress as a Christian front. This could hardly last long since the Nayars had too much to lose, no matter how mildly the CPI Government executed its land reform programme. However, an education bill which ordered private schools (of which the Nayars have some 3,000) to seek teachers only from Civil Service prepared lists was the immediate pretext for dissolution of the alliance. In a State notorious for its educated unemployed, the Nayars and Christians presumed that they would be forced by an Ezhavas-dominated Government to accept Ezhavas teachers in their private communal schools. This incentive, added to the usual scandal, talk of Ministerial corruption and Chief Minister Namboodiripad’s efforts to secure North Indian capital (Birla) for the State, helped to precipitate the alliance of outs which brought the CPI Cabinet down. However, again, as in Andhra, the background of local, communal or caste issues, which is the real reason for the breakthrough of ‘progressive forces’, is clearly evident.
In West Bengal, the CPI is a union between the old aristocratic terrorist tradition, certain rising rural groups (middle peasants, rural traders) and prosperous and very well-educated members of the urban middle class. The urban intellectuals who early organised Calcutta University students, urban workers and middle class groups, tended to dominate the Party and shape its course during its growth period and subsequently. However, in the fifties, as elsewhere in India, West Bengal witnessed substantial peasant castes breaking the surface of State-wide power either directly or through their sons, given higher education but no rooting in an urban context or encompassing occupation. Up until 1959, the Secretary of the CPI State Council was a wealthy and highly educated barrister, Jyoti Basu, and the other key figure, Bhupesh Gupta, was also a barrister and an ex-terrorist. From 1959, the Party has been run and controlled tightly by the son of a peasant, Harekrishna Konar, who reorganised the executive committee so that he had a stable majority and put into the Secretaryship, Promode Das Gupta. The transformation, from a Calcutta-based Party to one based in the rural areas, paralleled a similar shift in Congress when its current strong man, Atulya Ghosh, basing himself on the increasing rural power of the Party, secretly took the Party over behind the back of the urban intellectual and Chief Minister, B.C. Roy. [14]
This background of the three key areas is necessary for what follows on the present state of the CPI. Historically, the party has never been monolithic – the national party is at best a balance of factions; when one faction seizes control it purges the Party apparatus, only later itself to be purged when the line has changed. But the centre is not so important as the States for the operation of the Party – the CPI centre cannot control its units nor discipline them effectively, nor, as often as not, can it secure the consistent loyalty of the State leaders. The overall membership of the Party, officially claimed to be 230,000 in 1958, and currently between 140,000 and 170,000, is heavily dominated by apparatus employees (2,600 in 1958) and, in the past, urban middle class membership, and, even more so, leadership, often linked by close ties with prominent Congressmen (to take only two from many examples: Rajekhara Rao, one time Secretary of Andhra CPI, was the younger brother of the Andhra Congress Chief Minister; Mrs. Renu Chakrovorty, a Bengali Lok Sabha CPI member and now deputy leader of the Right CPI faction, is the niece of West Bengal’s former Chief Minister, B.C. Roy). At an average Party Congress, a majority of delegates might be full-time party workers, and about two-thirds would be from classes other than the peasantry or proletariat, with an even larger proportion having had a college education. [15]
 
5. Sino-Soviets in the CPI
The outbreak of open hostilities with China in October was only the final blow to the most recent bout of schisms in the CPI – precipitating the Right into even closer collaboration with Congress (in obedience to the demands of Soviet foreign policy) and the Left into public opposition. What the Right gained from the chauvinism of its middle class supporters by being ‘patriotic’ and worshipping Nehru, it lost in failing to focus the sharp criticism of Congress and losing its key mass bases in the three States mentioned. The consistent discrimination by the Government against left wing leaders (they were, in the main, gaoled) dissipated what was left of the mirage of unity. Dange was well in advance of Moscow in his censure of China, which only speeded polarisation.
In West Bengal, the opposition rapidly became clearest, helped by the gaoling of a majority of the pre-Emergency State Council. The CPI centre formally dissolved the Council and set up a right-wing organising committee which quite failed to gain the operative loyalty of the 17,000 State members. Actual loyalty went to the unofficial left organisation, the Democratic Convention which was formed round the demand to release the CPI detenues. Last October, against the directives of the central Executive, A.K. Gopalan (Kerala, leader of the Lok Sabha Opposition and Lok Sabha CPI group) attended a Democratic Convention rally in Calcutta, and at the National Council meeting later in the month was publicly reprimanded along with E.M.S. Namboodiripad (Kerala, CPI General Secretary until mid-1962, a distinguished centrist, Leader of the Kerala Assembly Opposition and ex-Chief Minister of the Kerala CPI Government) for deploring any disciplinary action against Gopalan and two other Left leaders, Sundarayya (Andhra, Leader of the Assembly Opposition) and Ramamurthi (Tamilnad, MP). The Right, recognising the vulnerability of their position despite an overwhelming majority in the National Council and most of the organisation, refrained from expelling Gopalan, depriving him of his seat on the CPI central Executive or his Lok Sabha leadership, but a Control Commission was created to examine ‘discipline’.
This was the signal for the first phase of public hostilities to begin – both sides consistently used the national press, whatever its political position, to libel their rivals. In late October, Gopalan was given a hero’s welcome in Kerala and Dange’s offer to come and help a current campaign in the State rudely rejected. On a quick trip to Calcutta, Dange was publicly howled down by Party members.
In December, Namboodiripad leaked to the press a 72-page report he had written for inner party discussion nine months earlier, Revisionism and Dogmatism, in which he stigmatised the CPI stand on the border dispute as indistinguishable from the Rightish parties, concluding:
‘Behind the bourgeois nationalist approach to the question of the border dispute between India and China, behind the whipping up of war hysteria by a large number of our comrades, and particularly after the National Council resolution (of October 1962), lies a fully worked out ideological political line–the line of attuning the working-class and peasant movements to the requirements of the bourgeoisie.’ [16]
However, this apparent shift by a centrist, was matched by a statement from the West Bengal Centrist, Jyoti Basu and 20 CPI intellectuals all in gaol, warning the Left that while the line of the leadership was wrong, Party unity was the first consideration.
The relatively stable Right domination was overturned by the release, through December, of many of the detenus, including the revered Muzaffar Ahmed, a founder member of the CPI, who immediately placed himself at the disposal of the Democratic Convention. The detenus quickly organised as de facto leaders of West Bengal CPI and began pressing for the restoration of the old State Council and the leadership existing in October 1962, and the withdrawal of disciplinary charges against some fifty members since that time. In late December, the first Left faction meeting met in Delhi, being sponsored by Gopalan, Ramamurthi, Basavapunniah (Andhra), Jyoti Basu, Konar, Sundarayya, two Punjab leaders and a CPI peasant organiser; Bhupesh Gupta, a right centrist, leader of the Rajya Sabha CPI and a man worried over the future of his nomination from Left-controlled West Bengal, was kept in communication. The line up seemed to suggest that on the 31 man Executive of the CPI, the Left would command 11 votes. The faction meeting denounced the Tamilnad CPFs decision to ally with Congress in the forthcoming municipal elections (Ramamurthi has resigned from the Tamilnad Executive in protest), and decided that since Nehru had flirted with the idea of permitting Voice of America broadcasts from Indian soil, has initiated four-power air exercises with the West and hardly protested at the entry of the Seventh Fleet into the Indian Ocean, ‘the true character of the Indian bourgeoisie and the Right deviationism of the CPI’s Right wing leadership’ had been revealed – thus continuing the CP policy of defining the nature of the domestic class structure on the basis of its foreign policy alone. For the rest, the tactics for winning the Party and operating in the central Executive meeting occupied attention. At the executive meeting in January, while the Left was being strongly urged by Aidit and the PKI (themselves busily adulating Sukarno much as the Right CPI adored Nehru) to split forthwith, the Right greeted the Congress spoof at Bubanesh-war as a new victory for the ‘Indian progressive forces’. The Executive, however, did agree to restore the West Bengal State Council provided it adhered to Party decisions, and set the date for the Party Congress (originally scheduled for April 1963, but successively postponed by the leadership, no doubt for fear of a Left majority) – for next October. Basu, Ramamurthi and Basavapunniah refused to serve on the Congress drafting committee, despite subsequent Left demands for full preparation rights for the Congress. The voting was fairly consistently 12 to 16.
When the West Bengal State Council did reassemble, the Left, in control of the organisation, immediately began a purge, and 17 Rightists walked out of the Council. Within the Left-Centre alliance, the Left also encroached – Konar began to replace Jyoti Basu as main Assembly speaker for the Party, and almost all Rightists were excluded; however, the Left was too weak to prevent a Right-Centrist alliance renominating Bhupesh Gupta to his Rajya Sabha seat.
Dange made some attempt to demonstrate that he was not wholly unmilitant in the face of the rising cost-of-living in the main cities. Last August, he was pressed by his own trade union militants at the last minute to back the one-day General Strike in Bombay (organised by the Socialist Party trade unions). At the CPI trade unions (AITUC) annual session in December, he went further in breaking his promises to the Government not to lead or provoke industrial unrest during the Emergency, and drew up a programme of (mainly symbolic) agitation against price inflation, for pay increases and more nationalisation. National hunger strikes were planned for February, and, loyally, a small number of trade unionists, mainly in Dange’s stronghold of Bombay, duly starved themselves to achieve bank nationalisation, a striking tactic which caused remarkably little inconvenience to anyone except the participants.
In March, the Left stepped up its vicious campaign to discredit Dange, opening up on two entirely non-political issues (as opposed to ‘personal integrity’ issues) which seemed to excite more devotion than the politics had – the Left circulated and later leaked to a notorious red-baiting paper a series of letters said to have been written by Dange in the twenties offering his services to the British Imperial Government; second, Dange was also accused of lending on his own personal account Rs 30,000 in exchange for shares in an English language non-Communist newspaper group, Patriot-Link. Much self-righteous dust was stirred, and the Left fastened firmly on the demand for Dange’s resignation. Forgeries or not, Dange sued no-one for libel, but the Right resistance stiffened, even though there were right-wingers visibly pleased with an opportunity to bash Dange on purely personal grounds (P.C. Joshi and Bhupesh Gupta both refused to pronounce the letters forgeries without a prior enquiry). Dange replied with much familiar talk about ‘agents of the Chinese’ and ‘foreign spies’, and the Secretariat hastily summoned an emergency National Council meeting to denounce the Left, a move no doubt supported by the publication of Suslov’s 14th February speech to the CPSU Central Committee, announcing the resumption of polemics against Peking.
At the beginning of April, the central Executive decided to ask the National Council tor the heads of the Seven Left leaders (Gopalan, Ramamurthi, Basavapunniah, Sundarayya, Promode Das Gupta, Konar and a Punjab leader), a move calculated to try to split Centrists away, but Namboodiripad and Basu countered by demanding that the issue of Dange’s wild oats be considered before that of discipline – to prevent this being voted upon, the two plus another ten walked out of the Executive meeting. This procedural issue was in fact the main consideration when the Council itself met, neither side wishing to be seen to precipitate a split. In the end, 32 from the Left and Centre walked out of the Council, claiming to be the real CPI, and laying it down as their first aim to fight against Dange and the ‘wreckers’. Of the 66 remaining, some ten centrists stayed on to try and find some cushion between the factions – this took the form of defeating the expulsion move, and instead suspending the 32.
While the Left was obviously all set for a split and chafing at the delay – the West Bengal Secretary alleged that his State CPI no longer owed allegiance to the central CPI, and the semi-official paper, Desh Hitaishi (16 April) called for a new Party and Party Congress in July – the centrists continued to drag their feet. The attack now included the demand for the restoration of the 1960 membership rolls as the basis for selecting delegates for the October Congress, since allegedly Dange had gerrymandered 50,000 members off the rolls since the 1960 Congress and introduced many merely Dange men. The Left also attacked the CPSU letter of 14 July 1963, (which had criticised the leftists in the Party) as ‘unwarranted interference’ by a foreign party: ‘It is for the secretariat (of the CPI) to explain whether it is acting under the orders of some outside party to split the Indian party.’ [17] It made no reference to the Aidit statement of January, nor the denunciations of Dange published in the Peking People’s Daily and Red Flag on 4 February, let alone the notorious ‘Mirror for Revisionists’ of the People’s Daily even earlier (9 March 1963). The Right quickly countered by saying the Left was in favour of a plebiscite in India – unfortunately, a touchstone issue of loyalty in India.
Both sides now set about counting heads in the States. In Dange’s stronghold, Maharashtra, despite the continued internment of the famous old Leftist, Ranadive, and four others, the Left organised a ‘Marxist Study Group’ which circulated Calcutta material, including reprints of Chinese documents and defences of Stalin. [18] After the 32 suspensions, 2 in Bombay were suspended and 12 walked out of the Bombay Council in protest, claiming 25 per cent of the 2,100 Bombay members and some eight of the 42 branches. In Thana district, however, a rural area densely populated by tribal people, the Left claimed 80 per cent of the 1,500 members and control of 16 of the 21 village councils in the area. Andhra Pradesh faced a more difficult situation – the CPI Rajya Sabha nominations were fiercely contested by the two factions, and the CPI front organisation to campaign in the village council elections was virtually paralysed, the Right fearing to press on lest the Left provoke the villagers into starting a rent boycott or open violence on the landlords – what the CPI lost, Congress recouped. When the State Council met, it rushed through Party business with only half the Council present – removing the CPI Legislative Assembly leader (Sundarayya) and deputy from office, expelling 11 of the 25 CPI Executive members (including 4 Assembly members and one MP), suspending 42 Council members and dissolving 4 district and one town CPI councils. Most recently, the two factions have had an open pitched battle which led to extensive fires in Vijayawada.
In West Bengal, the Party refused to meet two emissaries from the centre, who promptly set about trying to create an official organisation, while the central Secretariat ordered the disbandment of the West Bengal unit and a boycott by the membership of that unit. Assam expelled two, and in Bihar nine walked out of the Council, although not before, despite the opposition of the Dangeite strongman of the Party, having put through a motion censuring Dange on the letters issue and asking for a full statement of his finances. In UP, 37 were expelled and five suspended; some 80 set up a new Left organisation. In Rajasthan, the Left claimed a majority on the State Council, trade union and peasant organisation: the Secretary was suspended, and a new one with a new three man Secretariat created. In Gujerat, the Centrist position came out strongly (as it did in Mysore), urging a withdrawal by the leadership of the suspensions and the creation of a collective leadership under Dange, Namboodiripad and Jyoti Basu.
In Kerala, facing a General Election next February, the confusion was at a maximum – with the Left accusing the Kerala Secretary of using his office to make money, but the trade unions falling in solidly behind Dange. Apart from Namboodiripad and three or four others, the Assembly group also backed Dange, but the Left claimed to control a majority of the districts in the State as well as the peasant organisations. As a postscript, the incident of the Party paper, Desabhimani, has its own charm; allegedly, the paper is registered in the name of Namboodiripad as proprietor, but was in fact run by Rightists, who were only removed by the physical assault of Gopalan and a bunch of Left toughs: both sides have now appealed to the local magistrate to establish the rightful ownership of the paper. When two Communists appeal to the bourgeois state to establish their private property rights, things have come to a merry pass.
At the national level, both Rajya and Lok Sabha CPI groups are severely split, with both factions trying to ally with other parties (Right or Left) to defeat the other in the elections for Parliamentary Committees. The biennial elections to the Rajya Sabh reduced the united CPI from 13 to 11 seats, so the Swatantra with 13 became the official opposition. In the Lok Sabha, after much dithering, the Right voted to inform the Speaker that Hiren Mukherjee would lead the Opposition instead of A.K. Gopalan – whereupon both sides appealed to the Speaker to uphold their rival claims. The issue seems to be important to some comrades, but given the split, the Swatantra 29 seats will probably now become the official opposition in the Lok Sabha too.
Rival party centres are now fully operative, and the Centrist hope of a compromise along the Gujerat-Mysore axis, and in conformity with that put forward by Jyoti Basu’s base, Calcutta City, seems doomed. The death of Nehru temporarily stilled the din of knifing, giving both sides time to weep and Dange the chance to say that now Nehru had died, the Left should gather round again: if the rival party organisations were disbanded, the suspensions would be withdrawn. Neither side budged further. At the June National Council meeting, the Right decided to draw up a new party programme for alliance with Congress on the basis of ‘national democracy’ (versus the Left’s ‘People’s Democracy’), wept more for the departed, warmly welcomed Shastri as Prime Minister, and offered full participation to the Left in the preparations for the Party Congress if they dissolved their organisation. To no avail: the horse had left only its smell in the stable. The Left formally rejected the overtures, and pressed on to prepare for its first full conference at Vijayawada in July.
The lack of overt politics in the debate, the personalised clash, suggest something of the theoretical level involved and how closely the CPI split conforms to Indian rather than Marxist conditions. If the perspective of Indian politics was an indefinite prolongation of its present broad pattern, it could see over time a radical realignment – a Right group involving what is most powerful in Congress along with the Swatantra and Jan Sangh; a middle group, merging the Congress Left, the Dangeites, and, possibly, the Socialist rumps (both Left and Right CPI are currently wooing them from different directions), and a peasant revolutionary Left. So far as one can see, industrial workers would be, if anywhere, in the middle group. The split between Right and Left CPI has been strongly governed by the rural/urban split – the militant, crude and entirely untheoretical peasant cadres have opted for the Left and a party of vanguard militants, while the urban middle class City parties and trade unions have generally voted for Dange. In West Bengal, for example, despite the solid Left command of the rural areas, Calcutta City has remained at best centrist; the same pattern can be seen in Maharashtra – heavily rural and backward Thana is Left, while the solid middle class Bombay City party is broadly Right. The Left has risen to its present strength as a result of the shift in emphasis from urban to rural, of indigenisation – the Sino-Soviet split, as it were, was merely the immediate factor in a much longer-term process. Thus, industrial cadres are not significant in this context, since Indian industrial workers cannot hope to defeat the vast peasant majority – the Left is voting for the majority and power, leaving the Right to champion the old ‘out-dated’ Western conception of a proletarian revolution. The logic of Maoism fits India better than many countries.
 
6. The Socialists
The Praja Socialists and its breakaway, the Socialist Party, do not require much treatment since they have been of declining significance both institutionally and politically, with certain sporadic exceptions like the recent Praja-sponsored agitation for an exchange of minorities between Pakistan and India, or the Socialist-sponsored Bombay General Strike of last August. The Praja emerged from the 1952 election as a union of three parties, clustered around the old Congress Socialist group. Its raison d’etre was to provide a left opposition to Congress, but the simultaneous ‘leftward’ drift of Congress and rightward drift of Praja, partly nudged along by CPI successes, rapidly reduced any formal rationale it might have, and it was held together by little more than the association of its leaders. As early as 1953 Narayan, a Praja leader, had talks with Nehru on remerging Praja with Congress, and in 1955 Asoka Mehta, another Praja leader, coined the by now heavily overworked phrase, ‘the political compulsions of a backward economy’ to suggest the growing identity of formal political aims with Congress. All this was angrily rejected by the Praja left and, in particular, Rammohan Lohia, as much on personal as political grounds – he led his followers out to form the Socialist Party, which campaigned with much intensified militancy against Congress. Programmatically, little changed – a sort of vague left opportunism which Praja interpreted in a more fiercely anti-Communist fashion, and the Socialist Party a more anti-Congress style. Last year, the process of Praja disintegration lurched a further stage when Asoka Mehta accepted an offer from Nehru to become both Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission and a member of India’s UN delegation. The Party asked him to resign (7 for, 5 against, 5 abstentions) but he refused, and forced the Party to expel him formally, all with traumatic effects on his wide following. The Mehtaites, about nine hundred strong from 11 States, gathered at Lucknow in mid-June and there, welcome by Nanda (the Home Minister) and Kamraj, poured gratefully back into Congress – not before passing a resolution deploring the failure of Praja to recognise the transformation taking place in Congress.
Meanwhile, Lohia, fresh from his victory over a prominent Congressman in a by-election last year, and bearing the laurels of having stopped Bombay City for one day last August (despite the imprisonment of his most prominent trade union boss, and the opposition of Dange and the Communist unions up until the last minute), flirted with various plans to unite the left opposition – in November, he had talks with the CPI Left, and put feelers out to the Revolutionary Socialist Party, the Forward Block and the Maharashtrian Peasants and Workers Party, the moves acknowledging that the Socialist Party was not expanding as predicted. The removal of Mehta opened up the way for reconciliation with Praja, and the new entity, the Samyukta Socialist Party (inaugurated at the beginning of June) was joined by the Peasants and Workers Party. Again, feelers were put out to the CPI Left. The Mehtaite departure however robs the new union of much of its strength, particularly in terms of Assembly seats – in UP, the SSP claims 62 seats (Jan Sangh: 50) but, of these, the Mehtaites claim 15; in Madhya Pradesh, the SSP has 45 (Jan Sangh: 41), but seven of these were at Lucknow; in Bihar, the opposition is Swatantra (50), but the SSP claims 36, of which the Mehtaites claim 14. Only in Mysore can the SSP claim to be firmly ensconced as the main opposition with 21 seats (Swatantra 9), of which only three were at Lucknow.
However, Assembly strength is only a very imperfect index of strength, and, even here, is restricted to relatively backward States. The SSP’s trade union strength turns as always in India not on the commitment of workers to the SSP, but on the energy and ruthlessness of certain political leaders drafted into the trade union field in order to agitate for support to strengthen the party’s onslaught on the Government – thus, while workers may strike for one thing, the middle class leadership may be concerned with an entirely different strategy. The old Socialist Party was able to stop Bombay last summer, but it has no electoral strength in Maharashtra State that is very serious. Thus, as the saying goes, ought oughts are still ought, and unless the SSP can link up with the other forces on the Indian left and temper its muddled opportunism with some coherence, discipline and responsibility to the people it is supposed to represent, the new merger (if it lasts) augurs little different in the future from the past record.
 
7. The Right – Jan Sangh, Swatantra, DMK
The Jan Sangh is, in practice, a straight communal party, the voice of Hindu nationalism whose raison d’etre subsists in the continued existence of non-Hindu communities in India and on its borders – notably, the Muslims. As such, its appeal is restricted very much to the Hindu North, and, in particular, to areas which are both backward and where Muslims are or have been important. Apart from this, it can make sporadic appeal during communal clashes, and has some thin trade union organisation for action in the urban centres at such times. More active and secretive is the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, a ‘non-political’ para-military organisation. This rarely emerges into public prominence so its significance is difficult to assess, but during the recent wave of communal violence in Orissa and Bihar, Golwalkar, the RSS leader, and followers were said to be active in the villages and towns inciting Hindus to expel the Muslims. The political expression of the RSS used to be the Hindu Mahasabha, but the Jan Sangh was formed to stress nationalist (and non-communal) politics as opposed to the Mahasabha’s pure communalism (in addition, two members of the RSS were involved in the murder of Gandhi which made both the RSS and Mahasabha unpopular}, but, as with the CPI, the Jan Sangh is successful not insofar as it purifies a modern Western ideology like nationalism but rather to the extent which it meshes with the political drives of the existing social structure – communalism. Accordingly, the Jan Sangh’s support fluctuates with such exogenous factors as Indo-Pakistan relations. It attained some popularity in the North for its vociferous advocacy of Hindi as India’s national language, and has also led the wave of chauvinism against the Chinese and those who are even mildly critical of the proposition that Kashmir is ‘part of’ India. Thus, its main strength is in the relatively backward and rural areas of the Hindi-speaking States–Madhya Pradesh, UP, Punjab and Rajasthan. In Punjab, the Jan Sangh probably represents the orthodox Hindu element against the Sikh non-conformist brand of Hinduism expressed through the party of the Sikh community, the Akali Dal. In Maharashtra, it probably represents some northern immigrants to Bombay’s industry. There is no evidence that the wave of the future rests with the Jan Sangh which is as localised as its communal brothers.
The Swatantra Party is a quite different proposition. It was created in 1959 by a group of disgruntled or displaced Congressmen– most notably, Rajagopalachari, former Brahmin leader of a Brahmin Congress in Madras until ousted by Kamraj and the Tamils; Ranga, as explained above, a Kamma and displaced by the Reddis from Andhra Congress; and Minoo Masani, an ex-Congress Socialist and a polished Congress for Cultural Freedom intellectual. Although the immediate pretext was resentment, the formation of the Party reflected the unease of some conservative Congressmen and private businessmen at the increasing étatisme of Congress in the middle and late fifties. Its programme is straight Tory Liberalism, with much stress on the necessary ‘freedom’ of ‘enterprise’ and the need to align India with the United States etc. It is known that while the Birlas primarily finance a wide variety of individuals (including, it is said, 50 Congress MPs and a selection of CPI MPs), Tatas, the Parsi group, stumps up cash for Swatantra as well as Congress.
Practically, Swatantra has aimed to marry the disaffected elements of the old aristocracy, business and the big landlords in defence against Congress land reforms and the encroachments and controls of the State. Since big business profits lavishly, as always and everywhere, from the structure of ‘democratic planning’, the appeal tends to be restricted to the small businessmen who cannot break into the charmed circle of large scale licenced production, importing and contracting. Again, the landowners are not averse to local Congress parties as suggested earlier, even though national Congress tends to bear the distinctive urban middle class stamp of anti-land and anti-capitalism. Thus, in Orissa where Congress has assimilated many of its princely opponents, although Swatantra has merged with Ganatantra it has not succeeded in emulating the performance of Ganatantra in the early fifties. However, overall, Swatantra has succeeded in tapping one form of anti-Congress feeling and has been remarkably successful. Yet, that growth depends crucially on Congress not undercutting Swatantra’s critique of what it likes to call ‘State Capitalism’ by shifting rightwards. Again, ultimately, the alliance of rich peasant and small urban businessmen is uneasy – held together only by their common hostility to national Congress. For some time, Swatantra has aimed to unite the ‘non-Communist’ opposition parties to repair some of these deficiencies but so far big frogs have preferred their little ponds. For the record, Swatantra can cite that now, through judicial if opportunistic mergers and alliances, it has now become the official opposition in Bihar, Rajasthan, Orissa and Gujerat.
It would be incomplete not to mention at least one of the localised communal parties, even if only briefly. The Dravida Munnetra Kazaghab (DMK) of Madras is a radical Tamil party, not unlike – say, the Welsh Nationalists – but vastly more successful. It has been created by the strong anti-Brahmin and anti-North Indian capitalist feeling in Tamilnad, so that it is a classical united front party that links both wealthy landowners, local capital and the broad strata of the poor as well. Its programme (which included until very recently a demand that Tamilnad should separate from India) represents these embryonic elements of a crypto-fascism, and the party has gained steadily on the Tamilnad Congress despite that Party’s efforts to focus even more clearly as a Tamil Party. The existence of DMK rules out the CPI latching on to the sort of communal forces that have made it strong elsewhere – it has both rendered the Tamilnad CPI weak and driven it into continuous and dangerous alliance with Congress. Whatever the future shape of India, it will be a long time before the roots for a DMK party in the South have been removed.
 
8. Perspective
The Indian situation is so full of volatile tensions that it is hazardous to predict – commentators have been predicting the collapse of Indian ‘democracy’ at least since it was created. However, as suggested, the nature of that ‘democracy’ is, even at best, suspect – the natural social forces that have been asserting themselves in the period since British evacuation cannot of their nature have much to do with democracy, even of the straight bourgeois Parliamentary kind. Democracy in India means roughly the right of the urban middle class to oppose the Government and seek both peasant and proletariat support for that opposition. That is, at best – that is, without taking into account the Preventive Detention Act, the 1962 Emergency and the Defence of India Rules, the pervasive corruption and communalism inherent in the very core of Indian society. The continued Emergency has no immediate justification whatsoever – there is no war, and never has been, only a relatively marginal border dispute, and no-one seriously supposes the Chinese intend to try and conquer even part of India proper (it is militarily and economically beyond China’s capacity at the moment and for a very long time to come). Yet despite open criticism and the RSP’s recent Lok Sabha resolution to end the Emergency, it continues and now promises to become part of the normal peacetime administration of India. Its only function is to impress the United States with India’s anti-communist fervour so that economic aid and military supplies keep flowing in, to impress the Russians with India’s anti-Chinese passion and again keep the aid rolling in, and, finally, as a marginal addition to the already overwhelming powers of the police to crush all opposition, repress strikes and demonstrations, and keep militants in gaol for any length of time without trial. That India’s rulers need to crush opposition by violence betokens growing unease, intensified insecurity – which again suggests that the failure of the Plan, the slowness of urban advance, the continued greed and ostentatious wealth of India’s rich, all are in too striking contrast to the claimed aims and nature of Congress. The urban middle class alienation from the status quo is at a maximum – a Public Opinion Poll in Bombay last December showed that whereas the overwhelming majority of the poor and rich thought the Congress the best Government at the moment, only a small proportion of the middle classes did; put in another way, 30 per cent of the educated supported Congress, and over 60 per cent of the uneducated. Given the bigoted presumption of the educated in India that they have a rightful place in the sun before everybody else, given the educated unemployment, the pressure is immense, and a pressure towards the authoritarian dictatorship of the educated but poor. The terrifying advance of the cost of living is eroding living standards and adding the edge of hunger and deprivation to the pursuit of status – whereas industrial workers have the power to paralyse the urban centres, and in any case are somewhat protected from inflation by the nature of their pay structure, the system of price controlled company stores in large factories and the retention by many workers of a rural base and some land, the middle classes are fully exposed to the blast of rising food prices, and feel, rightly or wrongly, that inflation is the result of merchant fiddling or Government corruption or incompetence, rather than genuine scarcity.
The analysis suggested here explains the striking contradiction between the left public image of Congress and its consistent right practice – the national stage of public articulate politics is tilted far to the left by the predominant interests of the urban middle class, while the actual majority class structure of India proper and the actual policies pursued is tilted to the right. The urban middle class, with nothing but their labour to sell and inordinate pretensions to sustain, face the rural middle classes who control the land, the food and the overwhelming majority of the people. India’s revolution was more unfinished than many – it broke the British, but it did not generate enough force to turn Congress against its former allies, the rich peasants – the rural ruling class has now steadily restored itself to its rightful place of command. The failure of the land reform programme is adequate commentary on that restoration. Because of the unique position of Nehru, the expression of the pre-Independence urban middle class, the national expression of what was happening at the real power level, the State, was held up for much longer than might have been expected – the terminology of étatiste nationalism has concealed the drift, and made Krishna Menon the symbol of India, rather than Kamraj or Atulya Ghosh. Now, however, accounts can be settled – and Menon is nowhere, without legions, without voice.
Thus, if three rough prototypes of the pattern of politics in underdeveloped countries can be taken as Nasser, Mao and Ayub Khan (there are of course qualifications to this schematisation, and many ‘mixes’), India at the moment naturally veers towards the Ayub Khan model. For a time, given the rhetoric of the Congress left, it seemed Nasser might be the forward pattern, but Nasser rules one small country, necessarily integrated round the Nile, an area one army can run with relative ease. Ayub Khan does not – he must control two isolated chunks more than 1,000 miles apart (both ethnically if not religiously different), and therefore his rule is conditional on two basic factors: the foreign threat from India which protects Pakistan unity, and the willingness of East Pakistan rulers to accept voluntarily his leadership. That voluntary element is the same requirement in India, and is one of the factors that has helped to sustain parliamentary institutions this far; India is too big to take a radical and ruthless dictatorship founded upon the Army; it could only do so if there were dedicated cadres willing and able to sacrifice themselves in holding the country together. In China, with size factors somewhat similar to the Indian, Mao functions only on the basis of twenty million militants, trained in long years of war, and India would be lucky if, at the moment, it could find half a million. So the ruling classes must hang together voluntarily – they cannot yet be straight-jacketed into obedience to a common interest. Which means the States and the rich peasants must dominate the national stage as well as the local, and the national centre can execute designs only in conformity with the demands of the States. Thus, it can be expected that the pattern of the States will slowly become the pattern of the centre – and for this to be possible, the centre will have successively to deny the counter-aspirations of the urban middle class. To keep the loyalty of local capital, it may even have to go so far as knocking occasional sparks off national capital, but probably some deal can be made here to achieve a modus vivendi of mutual advantage to both: national capital, after all, has to earn most of the export earnings, and India will find it impossible to survive within the present status quo without those, even if American aid is increased indefinitely (which at the moment seems unlikely).
The étatiste element in étatiste nationalism will then probably be successively weakened, and, to ensure State loyalty, the urban middle class ‘disciplined’ – which in turn suggests that what is left of ‘democracy’ will be further amended and qualified until it is hardly meaningful any longer. This final change might permit many of the limitations on the full expansion of private capital (placed to buy urban loyalty) to be removed, and, given that an extensive infra-structure of services to private capital has now been created, might permit some more dramatic progress in industrialisation to be possible – which in its turn might create the jobs and income calculated to reconcile the urban middle class to its political silence. There are many ‘ifs’ here, one of the most important being the nature and outcome of the ultimate confrontation between land and capital that will have to be settled in capital’s favour if India is to develop. Again, it is unclear how far the present concentration of Indian capital will prevent it maximising its growth rate and intensify social tension.
The establishment of some right-wing authoritarianism on Ayub Khan lines that will ratify the existing status quo, would be one of the right conditions for the development of a properly Maoist opposition, generated partly by the central instability of right authoritarianism (producing periodic coups and purges) and rooted in the poor and middle peasants or even landless labour. At the moment, the spongy nature of Indian politics tends to absorb this type of opposition and emasculate it – the Left CPI still attends the Lok Sabha and the State Assemblies, although the ultimate logic of its case suggests that it should take to the land to establish armed enclaves in remote rural areas. The termination of the Lok Sabha might permit just this urban evacuation, although the full establishment of peasant authority in the States would erode the basis which the Left CPI would need to root itself in. In any case, the key conditions in China – namely, a very long period of virtual Civil War that ravaged the land and ripped the peasantry out of its traditional social structure – show no sign of being repeated in India at the moment.
Whether the shift to the right will be sudden or a process of slow erosion (as it has to date) is unclear. The pretext of the border dispute was used with alacrity, which suggests further pretexts might be used in the same manner to truncheon out of the way the Lok Sabha and press criticism which both focuses and intensifies middle class hardships: a sudden harvest failure, the sudden loss of certain aid expectations, the needs of Indian capital to focus further funds to be taxed out of the urban centres, a foreign threat (or something that can be interpreted as a threat) could be the immediate pretext for some sort of martial law.
The aim for socialists is less trying to annihilate their strained and sparse resources in competing for urban middle class support in order to stop this trend by establishing a properly Stalinist regime, but rather seeking to conserve and garner their cadres against the coming storm. Keeping alive socialism at the roots of the scattered and disorganised working-class movement, building disciplined and educated organisations of workers, is the first priority. In the interstices of the political federations of the trade unions, in the work of the smaller parties like the Revolutionary Socialist Party, small but responsible, is the seedbed of future action. The ideological consciousness involved is not and cannot be high, and the formal policy decisions often wrong – the RSP is no more preserved from the prevailing atmosphere of middle class chauvinism than any other Indian party – but it is here that a start can be made in the immense task of building the sort of oganisation that can both protect workers during the violent clash between capital, State and the land, and provide a context in which workers can develop consciousness. For Indian socialist aspirations, these are bleak, Economist words, but for responsible Socialists, the future in India when there is an industrial proletariat which can be a significant national force and assert a decisive role is of more importance than the immediate middle class gains of riding the current factions in the hope that if only power can be seized, socialism can be forced on society by a small clique. At the outside, within a national context, Nasser and Mao might be possible, but socialism is not.

Footnotes
1. ‘Saintliness, with its sophisms, rhetoric and morose delectation repels me. It has only one use at the present time: to enable dishonest men to reason unsoundly.’ Saint Genet, J.-P. Sartre, Allen & Unwin, 1963.
2. Reorganisation of Indian States, K. Mukherji, Popular, Bombay, 1955, p.31.
3. The Swing Back, Revolutionary Socialist Party, Calcutta, 1949, p.125.
4. Politics and Social Change, Orissa in 1959, F.G. Bailey, Oxford 1963, p.232.
5. Times of India, 26 May 1952, Bombay.
6. Q: Who is Nehru? A: The ‘head of some German Rajyam’ (kingdom). For further examples of the extent of peasant knowledge, of Villagers and the News, an exploratory study by the Journalism Dept. of Osmania University, Hyderabad 1964.
7. Op. cit., Bailey, p.146.
8. For more on this, cf. Rural Leaders and the Indian General Election, A.C. Mayer, Asian Survey, 1/8, October 1961.
9. Extracted from a table compiled from 477 of the elections for 494 Lok Sabha seats, Elections to the Lok Sabha, R.M. Ramchandra, Economic Weekly, 31 March 1962, p.546.
10. Op. cit., Bailey, pp.114-6.
11. Congress is particularly given to resolutionary fervour – in 1955 its aim was ‘a socialistic pattern of society’, in 1957 ‘a socialist cooperative commonwealth’. In none of the changes so far have its policies shown much commensurate change.
12. For the formal CPI history, cf Communism in India, G.D. Overstreet & M. Windmiller, California, 1959; Moscow and the CPI, J.H. Kautsky, Wiley, 1956; The CPI, M.R. Masani, Democratic Research Centre (Bombay), 1954. For a CPI critique, cf The Communist Party of India and its Formation Abroad, M. Ahmad, National Book Agency (Calcutta), 1962, and CPI, Years of Formation, M. Ahmad, NBA, 1959; also Splitters’ Arsenal of Falsehoods, S.A. Dange, New Age (Delhi), 17 May 1964.
13. For the full account of the Reddi-Kamma struggle, see the excellent chapter in India, The Most Dangerous Decades, S.S. Harrison, Princeton, 1960.
14. cf. Ashok Mitra, Seminar (Delhi), November 1963.
15. At least, this was true: the drift to ruralism, as much suggested by the focus of Party activities as the rise of Maoism, will have to be checked against the composition of the delegates to the Party Congress this autumn and the delegates to the first Left Conference in early July to see how far the current split corresponds to the clash between urban middle classes and peasant communists. For the 1958 Amritsar Congress, cf. New Age, 27 April 1958, p.6; and op. cit., Overstreet and Windmiller.
16. Amrita Patrika Bazar (Calcutta), 2 December 1963.
17. Times of India (Bombay), 17 April 1964.
18. cf. for example Kruschev’s Role Before and After Stalin’s Death, ‘By a rank and file Marxist’, Current, 1961, or On the Question of Stalin (Chinese documents), International, n.d., but circa October 1963, both Calcutta.
 

