


The sharp counterposition of major issues is not one of the outstanding characteristics of the American “two party system.” As a matter of fact, the two major parties are so organized as to make it virtually impossible for the electorate to choose between clear-cut alternatives in national elections.
In the 1956 presidential election campaign, however, we have a case in which the leaders of both parties seemed to exert themselves to compound the political characterlessness natural to the system. The general form of the “great debate” of this campaign revolved around the question of which candidate had the greater right to claim for himself the exact center of the political spectrum.
The result of the campaign gives a strong boost to the hypothesis that causal relations operate in politics as well as in other natural processes. One of the most issueless campaigns in modern history resulted in one of the most issueless, or rather, stalemated political situations imaginable. Eisenhower, the figurehead of “modern Republicanism” was overwhelmingly re-elected, along with Republican delegations in both houses of Congress who are about as “modern” as Coolidge. At the same time, a Democratic majority was elected in both houses, attesting to the continued status of the Democratic Party as the more popular, plebeian, liberal of the two parties. Yet this party’s Congressional delegation will be dominated by a group of the most reactionary political figures in America – the racists of the South.
The levers of power in Washington have been interlocked thus: the administration will be run by the big-business cabinet, while Eisenhower assures everyone that beauty and light prevail, as he struggles to grasp as much of what is going on as his native capacities and his health will permit. Congress will be run by the Southern Democratic-Republican coalition, thus insuring the defeat of any serious social program that might conceivably be prepared and pushed by any group of liberal Democrats. Added to this will be the pulling and hauling on the narrowest partisan basis over the narrowest partisan issues inevitable when Congress is controlled by one party and the executive by the other.
 
HOW DID THE CAMPAIGN assume the form described above? Is it simply that the prosperity in America is so vast, and that this, together with the recession of the danger of World War III which became apparent with the slackening of the cold war created such an unshakably self-satisfied, bovine mood in the American people that the disaster the Democrats experienced by leaving it alone could only have been exceeded by the disaster they would have brought on themselves had they tried to shake things up a little?
It would be pointless to deify that the continuing prosperity has generated a degree of complacency and conservatism in a broad section of the electorate. Without this it would be impossible to explain the continued solidity of the Republican Party. Yet, the fact remains that a majority of the people continue to support the Democratic Party as a general proposition precisely because they believe it represents a concern with the welfare of the “little man,” and resistance to the tendency of big business to extend its power in the political realm. They support the Democrats because their program and their record on social legislation is superior to that of the Republicans.
Why, then, did they not support Stevenson also? Was he not an eloquent spokesman for the program of his party? Did not the official liberals and labor leaders look on him as an exceptionally high-minded, firm-principled and generally glittering knight championing their cause?
It is not hard to understand why the official liberals were lifted into an euphoric haze by Stevenson’s oratory. It was an excellent expression of the current quality of their own political thought. Stern and forthright in demanding “bold initiative,” “new ideas,” and “creative thinking,” from others (the Republicans), Stevenson’s own program was utterly lacking in these qualities. His speeches may have seemed meaty to a handful of people whose good intentions and comfortable circumstances make it possible for them to live on general ideals alone. But to the mass of people, it was evidently pretty thin fare, at best. That is why one must ascribe the bulk of the votes he did get more to his being on the Democratic ticket than to his campaign.
Two issues which simply could not he tailed out of the public mind in this election were the struggle for Negro equality, and the war which broke out in the Near East in the closing days of the campaign.
On the question of Negro equality, Stevenson and Eisenhower ended up in a verbal draw. Both said they were for brotherhood, equality of opportunity, the Constitution, the Supreme Court, the progress of all humanity, and the like. But since on this question a bitter, historic, implacable struggle is actually going on in the United States, the leaders and ranks on both sides of the fight were interested in concrete consequences for their cause which the election of one or the other candidate would have.
To the Negroes, specially in the South, Stevenson’s real position was revealed not by his words so much as by his active wooing of their bitterest enemies, the Democratic leaders of the South. His failure to fight for a forthright position on the desegregation decision of the Supreme Court at the Democratic Convention spoke louder to them by far than his subsequent platitudes and assurances. In despair, many of them decided to cast what in the deep South is a purely symbolic protest vote ... and voted Republican. In the North, the shift of Negro votes was not so sizable, as the struggle there is not nearly as intense and deep-going as in the South, and industrialized and unionized Negroes have interests and attitudes which more closely parallel those of the organized workers as a whole.
 
WHEN THE WAR BROKE OUT in the Middle East, Stevenson sought to seize on it as the one “big break” which his advisors and crystal-gazers had been telling him he needed to overcome the spell of Eisenhower’s personality. He charged the administration with ineptness, bungling, having brought the country’s policy into an absolute blind alley in that area, etc.
It would be hard for even a fanatical supporter of Dulles to counter these charges. America was at cross-purposes with its allies, at loose-ends for a policy, and uncomfortably voting the same way at the UN as its arch-enemy. What a chance for the opposition to make political hay ... on one condition: that it had a policy of its own to offer which would be more popular at home and more effective abroad.
Throughout his campaign Stevenson had been making vague speeches about how America needs to support rather than oppose the aspirations of the Asian, African and Latin American people for freedom, equality and self-determination. He had talked about aiding them to economic self-development rather than tying them up in military pacts, and the like.
But when the British and French launched a typical 19th Century imperialist attack on Egypt in collusion with the Israeli government’s catastrophic “preventive war," all of these generalities evaporated, and were replaced with an almost equally vague suggestion about a possible policy revolving around the United Nations, with strong overtones of the idea that America cannot stand aside in this situation, but must assume, or resume, its leadership of the Free World, etc., etc.
All this sounded to a great number of Americans very much like an attitude and approach which could get this country involved in a war over whether the British and French or the Egyptians should control the Suez Canal. Call it short-sighted, if you will, but there must have been millions of people who could not see why American blood should be spilled in this struggle, especially on the side of the imperialists. Thus, when Eisenhower simply assured the country that this was one war America would sit out, it is easy to understand why they sighed with relief, and went to the polls to vote for Ike, even if they were otherwise unshaken Democrats.
 
IT IS NOW CLEAR that Stevenson was about as weak a candidate as the Democrats could have nominated for this election. But that is among the least important problems with which the Democrats, including their liberal-labor wing, will have to deal in the coming period.
In city after city, the old-line Democratic machines completed the collapse whose beginning was clearly marked in 1952. Where the labor movement stepped into the vacuum in a powerfully-organized and united manner, the Democratic ticket as a whole was able to hang on to its urban majorities. In Detroit, for instance, even Stevenson increased the percentage of his vote over 1952.
That the modern labor movement is now deeper in “politics” than it ever was before is clear. This did not make it possible for labor to steer a clear decisive course at the Democratic convention, or even to come close to swinging that convention toward the views of its most progressive and powerful sections on such matters as Negro equality. After all, the laborites had come to the convention completely committed to Stevenson, who, in turn, had already shown his determination to hold fast to the Southern wing of the party. They had no alternative, either as to candidate or political organization, with which they could counter-balance the weight of the South.
Thus, their power to influence the Democratic Party, Stevenson himself, and the American people in general, was cut down to a low figure. Despite this, the labor movement expended considerable money and energy for the Democrats. But no matter how well every district and block is organized, the political problem for labor continues, and will continue to be insoluble as long as they remain tied to the Democratic Party.
A million dollars spent on leaflets and radio time will not wipe out the Republican claim, directed at Negroes, that a vote for the Democrats is a vote to put Eastland and Co. at the head of Congressional committees. You cannot really convince the American people that the Democrats are the “peace party” in this country as long as they have no real alternative to Republican foreign policy, and as long as Democratic spokesmen charge every Republican reduction of the military budget with endangering the nation’s military security.
There is no basis for anyone to believe that a majority of the American people were, during this election, prepared to follow a revolutionary program. On the other hand, their mood is not reactionary, but conservative, in the sense that they want what they have, plus some improvements. On the whole, they trust the Democrats more than the Republicans to safeguard their interests, and are not at all scared by the fact, impressed on them by every means of Republican propaganda, that the labor movement is increasingly becoming the backbone of the Democratic Party.
The self-defeating, futile character of labor’s policy in this election was nothing new for the American labor movement. Some of their leaders are, as one might expect, taking the attitude that “next time we’ll try harder,” like the horse in Orwell’s Animal Farm. But even though the experience is not new, its monotonous repetition tends to have a wearing effect on the nerves which may, in due course, communicate itself to the brain-cells of the labor movement. That day will mark the beginning of a new political era in this country.
 




Lobbyist for the People
Benjamin C. Marsh
Public Affairs Press, Washington D.C. 224 pages, $3.00
Ben Marsh’s story of his fifty years as a lobbyist for various causes is a lively handbook of the populist movements of the last half century. Woven into the story is also a clear statement of the naive philosophy of social reformism which animated these movements by one of their most radical spokesmen who actually considered himself an irreconcilable opponent of the capitalist system itself.
Among the movements for which Marsh worked as lobbyist were LaFollette’s Farmer-Labor Party, the Farm Labor Union of the South, the Farmers National Council, the Anti-Monopoly League, the People’s Reconstruction League, the People’s Legislative Service, the Joint Committee on Unemployment (1931), and finally, for many years, the People’s Lobby.
Throughout, he considered himself a revolutionary opponent of capitalism. Thus, he never became a supporter of the New Deal, which he regarded as a slick scheme to save the system. He was quite clear on the role of military expenditures as the only stable prop of capitalism since the Second World War. And as he had been looking at Washington from the “inside” for so many years, there was little room for illusion in his mind about the possibility of major social change via either of the two capitalist parties.
Yet Marsh never joined any of the socialist or Stalinist movements throughout his life. He fought for one reform after another and even as he wrote the book after his active life as a lobbyist was over, he never seemed to find anything contradictory or even incongruous about this type of political activity for a man who rejected the basic premises on which it had to be conducted.
As the years went by, Marsh records fewer and fewer legislative successes for the causes which he represented in the capital. Since the People’s Lobby had a pacifistic slant on disarmament, it had really become out of step with the times. Marsh himself was sufficiently opposed to capitalism not to get sucked into the cold-war justification of anti-Stalinist witch-hunting, and at the same time, so fiercely devoted to human freedom that he could never get sucked into support of Stalinism. Thus he and his organization gradually drew farther and farther away from the mainstreams of American liberalism without being able to establish any social base of its own. During its last years the People’s Lobby was pretty much Ben Marsh with his penchant for grabbing a headline by a striking phrase before a Congressional Committee, and a handful of people who were willing to pay the cash to keep him and his little publication going.
Ben Marsh’s life story pretty well depicts the battles of consistent liberalism during the first half of this century. But the times have become too complicated for liberalism to remain consistent, which is another way of saying that the system has now decayed so far beyond the possibility of reform that the would-be reformers have become infected and their principles have begun to decay with it. Marsh was immune to such infection. But since he could not change his basically reformist viewpoint, he was doomed to become no more than an uncomfortable reminder to them of what their ideals had been in the past.
 




THE QUEMOY-MATSU CRISIS HAS been compared by one American journalist to an international game of Russian roulette. Each side is betting that the other will not dare pull the trigger. But one mistake, one miscalculation, one misinterpreted directive by a local commander, one act of excessive zeal in playing the game, and the results could easily be fatal for thousands and possibly many millions of human beings.
A major danger inherent in the situation is that one of the participants, Chiang Kai-shek, would like the hammer to fall on the loaded cylinder. Nothing else could serve his interests better, and he has done everything in his power to set the stage for a major blow-up in the Taiwan strait. The American newspapers headlined the “scoop” that Chiang was seeking to convince the U.S. government to launch an all-out attack on the Chinese mainland, or at least to permit his bombers to attack the gun emplacements from which Quemoy is being shelled. No reporters are needed on the spot to get a “scoop” like that. It is inherent in the logic of the situation, from Chiang’s point of view.
But that point of view is a limited one, to put it mildly. Chiang and a few dozen people around him may be willing to precipitate a world war as their only hope of regaining their power over China. There may be a few madmen in and out of high government and military positions in the United States who desire a preventive war now on the theory that for a limited time the American Strategic Air Command can deliver nuclear weapons over Russia more effectively than Russia’s ICBMs can deliver them over the United States – and who regard the occasion which triggers off the war of minor importance. There may also be a few madmen in the Chinese and Russian governments who think that, all things considered, the political advantage of a war started over Quemoy would be so great that it would hardly be possible to anticipate a more favorable circumstance in which to start an armed conflict which is probably inevitable in the long run anyway.
But aside from these tiny groups, the whole of humanity is horrified at the game being played out around Quemoy. This horror is dulled only by the feeling that the whole thing is utterly unreal, a ghastly bluff on both sides. It simply seems incredible that the United States would get embroiled in a major war over a handful of tiny islands some eight thousand miles from her coast, or even over Chiang’s sterile little clique on Formosa. Thus, even though a number of prominent politicians in this country have spoken out against the “Dulles doctrine,” and polls indicate that sentiment is running five to one against getting into war over these islands, the political atmosphere is not one of tension or crisis. The American people are taking the crisis like disinterested spectators who go about their business as usual, glancing up once in a while at a TV screen on which some ridiculous actors are putting on an overdone, old-fashioned thriller.
 
ALTHOUGH THE SITUATION ITSELF and Chiang’s direct interests make the danger of war very real, we do not think that either the United States government or the Stalinist government of China have any intention of going to war against each other now. Each is acting in the interest of what it deems to be its political objectives at this time. And in the situation which results, the United States continues to suffer one political defeat after another.
The arguments put forth by Dulles and Eisenhower for their policy in the Taiwan Strait are not only absurd on their face, they are utterly ineffective. Who can take seriously the charge that what is involved here is an attempt at “territorial aggrandizement” by the Stalinist government of China? Who can be convinced by the argument that if the Chinese government is permitted to “get away” with Quemoy and Matsu today, they will take South Vietnam and Burma tomorrow? No one in Asia believes this. Everyone knows that if the Chinese Communists decide to take over the whole of Indochina or Burma, the only context in which they could be expected to do this would be either in the course of a world war in which military considerations could outweigh political ones, or as part of a social revolution in these countries where military aid by China would appear to be, and would be in actuality, an adjunct to the civil war which had been generated by indigenous causes. In any event, there would and could be no analogy to the Quemoy-Matsu situation, and it could set no precedent for any such imperialist action by the Chinese.
For some weeks, fear of a military explosion involving the United States has been dampened by the prospect that some deal might be negotiated between the U.S. and Chinese governments in the ambassadorial “negotiations” in Warsaw. The public positions of the two major parties in this struggle are utterly contradictory and irreconcilable. Hope in a fruitful outcome of the negotiations is thus either hope for a miracle, or is based on the idea that the public positions of the two contestants are not their real positions.
The government of China says that Quemoy, Matsu and Formosa are Chinese territory, and that any means of getting them under the control of the government of China is legitimate, and purely an internal affair of the country. The United States government says that these territories belong to the government of the Republic of China (Chiang Kai-shek), and that the U.S. cannot dispose of all or any of them without the agreement of that government. Chiang says he has nothing to give, and makes only one demand: abdication of the government of China to him.
On what, then, can one base any hope of a negotiated settlement? If one is not given to wishful thinking any such hope must be based on the conclusion that neither side means what it says. Thus the idea arises that the government of China might accept recognition, admission to the United Nations, and evacuation of Quemoy-Matsu in exchange for a pledge not to seek to take Formosa by force. On the other hand, it is assumed that the United States really has no interest in Quemoy-Matsu, and realizes that recognition must be granted to the actual government of China sooner or later. As to Chiang’s heated objections – presumably they could be taken care of by sufficiently powerful behind-the-scenes pressure from an American government which is his sole means of political and military support.
At the moment of writing this, it appears that a deal along the lines indicated above is not in the making. The headlines announce a deadlock at Warsaw and air battles over Quemoy. It is not surprising. The Eisenhower administration’s policy is at least as rigid as was that of Truman- Acheson in their day. And the Chinese, no doubt, feel that they have such a tremendous political victory in the making that there is no reason to do anything at this time but increase the pressure.
 
BUT IF A DEAL CANNOT be made, what will be the end of it all? The Chinese could stop firing their artillery, pocket their political winnings, and wait for another day when things would lie favorably for a repetition of the whole game. In that event, nothing would have been solved. It would simply mean that a bomb which could touch off World War III would be lying there waiting for another day.
Further, any such “solution” of the problem leaves one major factor in the situation completely out of account. That is the wishes, interests and future of the people of Formosa itself. And here we are not talking of Chiang and the few hundred officials plus the hundreds of thousands of soldiers who were shipped to the island when his rule on the mainland collapsed. We are talking of the Formosan people themselves, those who have lived on the island all their lives, and whose fathers and grandfathers lived there before them under the rule of various foreign powers.
And we do not raise the question of the desires of the Formosans only because we are for justice and for freedom everywhere, though that reason should suffice. We raise it also because in this case, in our opinion, the cause of justice and freedom is conjoined with the cause of peace. And we raise, it, further, because only by starting a campaign here in America and throughout the world for a solution which takes the Formosans into account can the initiative be taken out of the hands of the little cliques in Washington and Peiping and Taipei who are juggling with the peace of the world today.
The people of Formosa have the right to decide their future. If they want to be a part of Stalinist China, they have a right to make that decision for themselves, in a free election. If they want to be independent, that too should be their right. The government in Peiping has no more the right to establish its rule over them by force than Chiang has to maintain his rule over them by force. And the United States has no right to impose a solution which seems desirable to its government on the people of Formosa, either.
Thus, the only solution which to us seems to have a reasonable chance of working both to re-establish the democratic rights of the Formosan people, and to minimize the danger of war over the future of Formosa is this: There should be an international campaign for a free and democratic plebiscite to be organized under United Nations auspices and supervision in Formosa. The questions to be decided in such a vote would be, roughly: unity with the rest of China; independence under Chiang Kai-shek; or independence under a democratic form of government.
The United States government should agree in advance to abide by whatever decision the people of Formosa might make. The same demand should be made of the government of China and of Chiang Kai-shek. The refusal of any one of them to yield to such an obviously democratic, fair and peace-oriented solution would put the brand of the imperialist squarely on the guilty party. If the demand for such a program should become widely popular, on the other hand, it is clear that any one of the three governments which would espouse it and seek to put it into effect would by that very act win enormous political capital throughout the world.
What chance is there that any of the governments involved will actually take the initiative in proposing this kind of a solution to the conflict? It would be going too far to say that there is no chance at all, as the Stalinists might conceivably propose it with the firm conviction that their proposal would be rejected by Chiang and the United States. They could further enhance their political capital by doing so. But they are faced with one ticklish difficulty which inhibits them. If a free plebiscite supervised by the UN is good for Formosa today, why not for Hungary or West Germany or Tibet tomorrow? The idea of the common people having the right to determine freely their destiny goes against the grain of the Stalinist mentality at the very least as much as it does against the grain of the ideological woodwork of a man like Dulles.
But we do not count on governments accepting the advice of democratic socialists or of just plain democrats who see the danger and folly of the present course. That would be too radical an innovation in the ways of the world for anyone to take its prospects seriously. What we hope for, and count on, in the long run at least, is a growing awareness among the people, wherever they are free to express themselves and to think, that things are going in too dangerous a direction, and something has to be done about it.
The idea of a solution in the Far East based on a plebiscite in Formosa is not something dreamed up by clever but isolated socialists in the United States. Leaders of the British Labor Party have come out for it. Leading liberal publications in the United States have been gravitating increasingly toward it. Even from within the liberal wing of the Democratic Party mutterings, perhaps dim and quiet ones, have been heard along these lines.
But announcements from Britain or mutterings in the U.S. have not been enough to sway the policy of the State Department. What is needed is, first a campaign to convince decisive sections of the labor and liberal movements that only such a solution can remove the danger of war from that area, even for the time being; and then a campaign to convince the nation. If the present crisis in the Taiwan strait fails to erupt into full-scale war, such a movement will have time to come into existence and to assert itself. In a sense, one could say that given time enough, the rise of such a movement is inevitable. But it will not come without effort – and the time may not be unlimited.
 




The Eisenhower administration has been in power for only a few weeks. Yet these weeks have sufficed to indicate a very definite shift in the tendency of American foreign policy. It will be a long time before the new tendency reveals itself in all its concrete manifestations, before all the preparations, both political and physical, are completed which will make it possible for this policy to be transformed from words into decisive actions. There are so many obstacles and countervailing pressures in the world that the policy may be deflected from its set objectives, and turned into its opposite. Yet none of these considerations should be permitted to obscure the fact that a new policy is here, and that the fate of the world is being shaped by it.
It has become popular to discuss American foreign policy in terms of “liberation or containment.” Actually, both these terms are fundamentally misleading. What is at stake is really this: in the struggle for unrivalled world hegemony, shall the United States take the political and military offensive now. Or shall it retain its defensive posture for a longer period, hoping for more favorable conditions under which to bring its sole remaining rival, Russia, to her knees?
The American government has decided to turn to the offensive.
The so-called policy of “containment” which dominated the thinking of the Truman administrations was a policy of the strategic defensive. Its objective was to stabilize the struggle on the basis of the lines which divide the Stalinist world from the world of capitalism, that is, to firmly secure the division of the world achieved in the Second World War. Implicit in this policy was the acceptance, for the time being at least, of Stalin’s control over Eastern Europe, and even if in more qualified terms, of the strategic relations in Asia. Implicit was also the idea that in a world thus stabilized, the internal problems of the Stalinist world (particularly those created by the national antagonisms within it) would eventually weaken it and make it more inclined to accept a future adjustment on terms less favorable to itself.
 
The Truman government’s policy was a result of two factors of unequal weight. The more important of these was an assessment of the economic, social and military strength of the American bloc in the struggle. The American government had acquired a vast experience during and since the last war in world affairs. It had come to have a healthy respect for the revolutionary temper of the masses of the colonial world, and a no less healthy respect for the ability of Stalin to make capital out of every American misstep in Europe. It recognized the weakness of the governments which it had bolstered and supported everywhere since World War II, and the fatal effect on them of any policy which seemed too contemptuous of their peoples, or too openly directed toward dragging them into another world holocaust. In short, the Truman government did not believe that the American bloc could go over to the offensive now.
The second factor stemmed from the political psychology of the men who, in their aggregate, made up the Truman governments. These men had been intimately connected with the direction of World War II, and of the cold war which followed it. Although they were vastly disillusioned by the failure of the United States to achieve its real objectives in the war, they were emotionally attached to what had been achieved. The division of the world was not as they had foreseen it. Yet they had acquiesced in it in 1944–5 as the best that could be got out of the situation. They were shocked to find out that Stalin was not willing to rest on his achievements, even for a period. But they had expended their energies to salvage whatever they had achieved at the enormous expenditure of treasure and lives in the war. For the time being they were willing to rest if only they could feel that the world would remain carved as they had carved it.
But the bases of strictly American power are not so weak as to imprint on our ruling class a deep and lasting defensive psychology. For France, after World War I, and for the rest of Europe today any thought of the offensive, political or military, is a nightmare. Even to the Truman administration, the defensive posture was thought of as a strategic, but temporary expedient. They know very well that the principle propounded by old Clausewitz for military warfare applies to the politico-military struggle for the world today:
“We must maintain throughout that a defensive without any positive principle is to be regarded as self-contradiction in strategy as well as in tactics, and therefore we always come back to the fact that every defensive, according to its strength, will seek to change to attack as soon as it has exhausted the advantages of the defensive.”
The psychological factor which predisposed the Truman administration to the defensive does not have any force with the Republican government. Although their party participated in the decisions which ended the Second World War, they did not bear the same kind of responsibility for them as did those who ran the show. There were some among them who even at the time protested the agreements reached at Teheran and Yalta, though they did not have the conviction or the power to make an all-out fight to change them. And as the cold war got under way, they remained in consistent opposition, hailing only those measures taken by the Democrats which seemed more in line with their aggressive moods.
 
In seeking the roots of the Republican administration’s political penchant for the offensive, however, one must go beyond the absence of some of the inhibitions which restrained the Democrats. There is a positive element in it also. In a more direct sense than is true of the Democrats, the Republicans represent the basic cadres of American big business. The Eisenhower administration is not made up of capitalist financiers and their attorneys in general, it is composed and dominated by the captains of American industry. They most directly reflect the need for American capitalism to expand its economic control over the world both in terms of investments and markets. In them the dynamic of American industrial expansion is expressed most clearly as a psychological imperative.
And equally important, they have an active contempt for the masses surpassed only by the similar feelings of the old aristocracy when it was at the historic height of its power. Their contempt for the American workers is tempered only by the respect they have been taught by the union movement, but it expresses itself in their open proclamations that “there is nothing wrong with a little unemployment.” Their contempt for the masses of the rest of the world is boundless.
It may be thought that an attempt to emphasize the difference between the rulers of the Republican government and their Fair Deal predecessors in this respect can be only of indifferent value. This realm of the psychology of classes, or of groups within classes, is always the happy hunting ground of “experts” in “mass psychology.” Yet one ignores it at one’s peril.
It is quite true that Truman, and Roosevelt before him, and the men who surrounded them were utterly cynical about the desires and aspirations of the peoples of the world. They proclaimed that they were fighting for the right of self-determination for all nations, and then sat down at Teheran and Yalta and carved up the peoples of the world like so many sides of beef. They said that they were fighting only for democracy and freedom, and then made their dirty deals with Darlan and Badoglio ... and Stalin. They said that colonialism would have no place in the new world they were fashioning, and then armed the British troops who suppressed the national liberation movement of Indo-China until the French could get there to take over.
But they learned that even when deceived and defeated and bartered, the masses are never to be ignored. They learned that disaffected populations were ripe plucking for the social demagoguery of Stalinism. They discovered that they and their allies could dissipate their strength in far corners of the world in keeping down mass movements even when these had no connection with Stalinism. Although they could not bring the masses to their side with a real program of social and economic liberation, they knew that they could not afford to turn them into outright and active enemies by threatening them with naked imperialist domination.
The Republicans, by their very nature are of a different mentality. To them the American workers are not a potential ally to be wooed by concessions. they are an unfortunate power which has to be emasculated. To the mid-Western senators who dominate the Congressional committees, the masses of Europe and Asia are a bunch of ignorant and dirty foreigners who must be shown their place ... which is in armies fighting for the enlightened Americans, or on plantations and in factories doing a fair day’s work which will bring a fair week’s profit by American standards. In this view even the capitalists and governments of foreign countries are at best ineffective moochers who seek to perpetuate a power which they can no longer rightfully command, and at the expense of the American taxpayer at that.
This, it is true, is the lowest mental denominator of the breed, but it is a widespread and dominant one nevertheless. In its more sophisticated form, this contempt for the masses reveals itself in the idea that power, economic and military, and power alone is what decides the fate of the world. As long as the world is organized in class societies in which the rule of man over man is institutionalized everywhere, there is much truth to this idea. But the crudity with which it is felt and translated into policy is what gives the Republican government its peculiar stamp, and which lays the background for the specific aggressive policy in foreign affairs which it is now launching.
 
To a certain degree, the inclination of a sizable section of the Republican Party in recent years toward an “Asiatic” policy as against a “European” one can best be understood in this context. Since the end of the world war there was no real room for an offensive American policy on the Continent. None of the European allies were ready for it, and Stalin was so firmly and directly entrenched in Eastern Europe that nothing short of all-out war could hope to budge him there.
Asia seemed to offer much more appetizing opportunities for a “positive” policy. The Stalinist consolidation in China was far less powerful and developed than its consolidation in Europe. The revolutionary-nationalist temper of the masses of all Asia was a factor to be considered, but the white man had always been able to settle such problems with enough firepower in the past. Further, there were ruling classes in Asia which had already lost everything (Chiang Kai-shek) or were on the verge of losing it (France in Indo-China) and hence were willing to become the pliant tools of the Americans in the hope of regaining something. Such groups, although worthless in themselves, are always necessary to give modem imperialism the mask of legitimacy.
Although the “Asian” wing of the Republican Party may not be dominant, it is powerful and vociferous. Led by Senator Knowland of California (or Formosa?), backed by the Kohlberg “China Lobby” and given ideological support by the Luce publications this group represents the immediate and narrow interests of a gang of promoters who hope to make a real financial killing in the vast economic potential of China. They also represent a conviction that America’s historical destiny lies in the East (Luce) and not in the old and exhausted center of our civilization, Europe.
This conception is not accepted by the whole of the Eisenhower administration. The struggle between the “European” and the “Asian” wings of the party will continue. But given the agreement between both wings that America must move to the political offensive at once, the “Asian” wing has a decided advantage. Asia is obviously the “easier” and less dangerous sphere in which to launch dramatic actions, even if not in which to get quick results.
The “European” wing of the party is more subject to the sobering realization that Europe cannot be ignored. The needs of maintaining the world capitalist alliance must be coordinated with the policy of attack, even if it is mutually agreed that the first offensive is to be launched in Asia. Thus the very important cleavage in the Republican Party does not stem from different conceptions of the nature of American foreign policy. On that they are all united for the offensive. It stems from differences over how far and how fast they can afford to go in the immediate circumstances.
But there, to put it mildly, is the rub. All the objective factors which dictated the policy of the strategic defensive to the Democrats are still in effect. True, American and allied armament has been built up to a strength vastly surpassing what the government had at its disposal when the cold war took definite shape. Russia is girdled by a chain of air bases from which atomic attacks or reprisals can be launched in the event that aggressive policies explode into full-scale war. The Atlantic Pact powers have an army which is no longer only on paper. In that sense, the balance of forces is not what it was from 1946 through 1949.
But Russia still has the interior lines from which to launch concentrated political and military sallies against the vast periphery on which Western imperialism must stand guard. The Stalinist political movements, though waning, are still entrenched powers in France and Italy, essential to any hope of holding the line in Europe while engaging in adventures in Asia. And above all, the governments of Europe and those who are sought as allies in Asia (India, Indonesia, etc.) are absolutely opposed to risking, let alone launching, any offensives now which go beyond mere talk about assuring freedom from Stalinist domination to those governments which are still free of it.
Before the Republican government can go beyond words, a whole new psychological atmosphere must be created in the non-Stalinist world. The allies must be convinced that America can finish anything she starts, and without involving them directly in war on their own soil. If they can’t be convinced, they must be bulldozed and squeezed till the last vestiges of independence, and the last hope of an independent policy has been pressed out of them. They must be cajoled and threatened into acquiescing in partial measures, the consequences of which lead them to agree to further measures, the logical and inevitable and unavoidable conclusions from which are the final measure of taking the open risk of World War III.
There is a long and stony road ahead before all this can be achieved. The administration set forth firmly on this road by the unilateral declaration of its support to Chiang Kai-shek in any future invasion of China. The announcement of this policy resulted in a flare-up of opposition and panic in Europe. But then the European governments took another look at Chiang, and realized that this toothless old tiger was about as likely to rupture his gums on the mainland of China as he is to permit a legal opposition to function in Formosa. They heaved a sigh of relief at the thought that these were only brave words for American domestic consumption, when the plans for a blockade of the China coast sent them into another panic. Dulles was forced to deny any such plans, which would strike such a heavy blow at our gallant ally who is holding the bastion of Hong Kong (and doing a bit of profitable business through it on the side) for White Christian Civilization.
But then there is Indo-China. True, the French have been more than reluctant to have their army supplemented (and supplanted) by Americans in that last rich Asiatic colony. They want arms and money in thick rolls, but no Americans, please. Yet their situation is getting more and more desperate. The French officer corps is rapidly being turned into the corpses of officers in the hopeless struggle. Faced with the imminence of German military resurgence (under American auspices) on the Continent, they simply cannot afford the further reduction of their relative power by a continuation of the expenditure of blood and treasure in the rice paddies around Hanoi. Perhaps the Americans can now convince them that the only way out is to train Asians with American arms ... and the instructors who are so inseparable from them, specially in “backward” countries.
 
In Europe it is only possible to apply pressure to the allies not, for the moment, to Stalin or his satellites. Thus Dulles’ trip to the continent to insist on a speedy ratification of the agreement to form a European army on pain of a “re-evaluation” of what America can do for (read “to”) the shaky ruling classes of Europe if they refuse.
And thus, finally, the proposal of the Eisenhower administration to symbolically destroy the work which was concluded at Teheran and Yalta and Potsdam.
*
“I decline absolutely to embark here upon a discussion about Russian good faith. It is quite evident that these matters touch the whole future of the world. Terrible, indeed, would be the fortunes of mankind if some awful schism arose between the Western democracies and the Russian people, if all future world organizations were rent asunder and a new cataclysm of inconceivable violence destroyed what is left of the treasures and liberties of mankind.”
Winston Churchill, in the debate in the House of Commons on the Yalta agreement, Spring, 1945.
 
As this is written, the Eisenhower administration has just sent up to Congress its heralded resolution on the so-called “repudiation” of the “secret agreements” concluded at Yalta and Potsdam. The more antediluvian Republican legislators are grumbling that it does not go far enough. They had expected a pronouncement which would attack impartially their Democratic colleagues and their Russian enemies. But in its effort to produce a statement which can win unanimous consent, the controlling brains of the Republican government have written one which is of a somewhat different character. There is no telling at the moment, what its fate will be, textually, in the Congress.
But “weak” as the proposed statement may be, it clearly and unambiguously marks the turn of the helm in the direction of the worldwide offensive. For all who can read, it sets as the ultimate objective of American foreign policy a drastic reversal of the division of the world achieved as a result of World War II, a reversal which cannot be realized short of World War III. If there are Republican leaders who cannot read, this is due to a lamentable inadequacy of their political education.
In fact, the statement is not weak, it is very clever. It is designed to trap the Democrats into an acceptance of the reversal of their former administration’s policies. Though ambiguous, it pushes the limits of what may be accomplished with the allies at this stage of the new policy. If they do not balk now, they can be shown, at later stages, that the Republican government never concealed its intentions to take the offensive and push it until the world was re-divided; on the contrary, that they proclaimed their aims for the whole world to see as soon as they had taken power.
Textually, the proposed resolution simply states that the American government will never accept the Stalinist “perversions” of agreements made during the last war which have resulted in the enslavement of peoples. The meaning of this is to clearly repudiate American acquiescence in every territorial grab made by Stalin during or after the war, and to announce the intention of America to “peacefully” get him to let go of them in due course. The profession of purely peaceful intent was indispensable to the resolution. Otherwise the allies would face an almost impossible task in keeping their governments tied to the American chariot in the face of popular opposition.
 
Now that the course has been laid and announced to the world, it may be a long time before anything very material is done in its pursuit. All-out war on American initiative is excluded for a long time to come. As the Stalinists have been quite aware for years (even at the time when they were conferring with Roosevelt and Truman) that eventually America would not abide by the decisions of World War II, this announcement does not compel them to take any drastic action. No one can predict at the moment just how they will react, but the likelihood is that they will see their best chance in breaking up the Western alliance; in using America’s policy of the offensive to convince the less courageous or more vulnerable allies that it will be safer for them to dissociate themselves from America than to be pushed or dragged into the vortex of war by it. In any event, they seem confident that the economic tendencies of capitalism will play their role in disrupting the offensive and that time is more on their side than against them.
All these factors will play their role in thwarting the Republican ambitions. They are already caught up in their own contradictions of promising a balanced budget and tax cuts, objectives which are not only mutually exclusive, but quite incompatible with the military and political requirements of their foreign policy. And although these promises may not weigh too heavily with the heads of the giant corporations who staff the cabinet, they are dear to the hearts of the mass of their small-business retainers.
But vastly more important than this is their utter inability to understand what moves the minds and hearts of the millions upon millions of workers and peasants all over the world. To the extent that they even think in ideological terms, they seem to believe that these people can be won to their struggle against Stalinism by an endless reiteration of catchy slogans, about the same way as one can increase the sale of a particular brand of eyewash. People who are condemned to a life-long diet of onions and dirty bread, while they watch their American-supported masters cavorting in luxury are to be recruited to the struggle for “a better life.” Whole nations which have been and still are deprived of the elementary right to rule themselves are to be won by a barrage of talk about “freedom.” Peoples whose governments have suppressed all oppositions, who have not known what freedom of speech or press is for decades, are to shed their blood under the banners of “democracy.”
The Fair Dealers at least had an inkling of what was involved Their “Point Four” program was a dim and flickering reflection of it. They could not do what was required, because despite their relatively better understanding, they too were committed, at bottom, to the preservation on a world scale of the rotting capitalist system and the decayed capitalist and semi-feudal classes from which the peoples in the non-Stalinist world suffer. But the Republicans lack even the inkling which bothered some and animated others among their predecessors. They will carry on their “ideological” campaign more as a formality than out of any conviction. Like General MacArthur, they really believe that the masses understand only one language: force.
This blindness to the needs of the masses everywhere, this contempt for their ability to understand what their interests are and to act on them, is the prime guarantee of a worldwide defeat for the Republicans and their policy. Stalin is just as cynical as they are. He has, if possible, an even greater contempt for the masses. He is a past master in the use of force as a political weapon. But he knows that the peoples of the world are capable of upsetting all calculations if they are not taken into account. While holding his own masses in the iron grip of a totalitarian rule without equal for brutality in the world’s history, he recognizes that the masses who are oppressed by other, more ancient forms of tyranny, can be moved to revolt against them.
Thus wherever the peoples are struggling for political democracy, against foreign rule, for a higher standard of living, Stalin builds his movement on the basis of supporting their struggles. It is true that he is quite capable of ordering his minions to suppress such struggles if they tend to get out of control. But the struggle for the peoples of the world cannot be won against him by a government which regards their fight for freedom and democracy and a decent life now as a danger almost equal to that of Stalinism itself. Such a government can only aid the world-wide growth of the Stalinist movement. It can only succeed in progressively isolating the American people from the rest of the peoples of the world until the day when we stand alone, the object of universal distrust and hatred.
As the implications for the American people of this policy become translated into hard and harder experiences, their resistance to it can be counted on to grow. But for it to be transformed into meaningful and effective opposition, there must also be understanding both of the nature of American imperialism and of Stalinism. There must be a growth of the understanding of the different interests of the American people in general, and of the workers in particular, from those of the present rulers of our destinies. As long as even the advanced workers continue to think in terms of “America” and “Russia,” or of “Democracy” and “Communism” as the protagonists of the world conflict, opposition to the burdens of war and its preparations will be frittered away at best, and can turn into utterly reactionary channels at worst. We have seen a first step in the latter direction in the reactions to the Korean war as they were expressed in the recent elections.
 
Independent Socialists are for a policy of liberation for the peoples oppressed by Stalinism, but for us the word liberation is not put in quotation marks. We are also for a policy of liberation for the colonial peoples oppressed by the capitalist nations, and for the masses of those nations who are subjects of the oppression of their own ruling classes. We are for the complete destruction of Stalinism as a world force, both in Russia and elsewhere, but not in the name of restoring a hated capitalism to the peoples who have got rid of it, or of keeping it on the backs of the peoples who still groan under it.
But we recognize that the war which is being prepared by the Stalinist bureaucracy and by the American capitalists does not have liberation as its objective. It is aimed toward another division of the world on terms even more favorable to each protagonist than those which were available to them at the end of World War II; in fact, this time it is really a question of the whole world or nothing. Freedom, democracy, peace, liberation ... these are just the shop-worn emblems which they seek to mobilize the exhausted and fearful and rebellious masses.
Our credentials in putting forth our views on the nature of the war which is being prepared is the analysis we made of the struggle which engulfed the world ten years ago. Although we yielded to no one in our hatred of fascism and our determination to resist it and crush it, we proclaimed throughout the war that the aims of the belligerent powers on both sides could not claim the support of people who fought for democracy and freedom for all peoples. We did not have to wait till the cold war broke out in all its fury to recognize the consequences of Teheran, which were confirmed at Yalta and Potsdam ... we stated them clearly at the time:
The seeds of the Third World War are being sown already. World War II is not yet over, decidedly not yet, and the conditions for speeding World War III are being laid ... The military struggle between the two big camps is accompanied by a feverish political struggle inside the Allied camp. The attempts made in it to come to an agreement on the division of the spoils are condemned in advance to the failure which the essentially temporary character of any imperialist agreement bears from the moment it is adopted. They agreed before, once, twice and ten times. Their very agreements contained the germ of conflict. The agreement over Poland simply injects one of the many germs of tomorrow’s conflict. (The New International, January 1944, p. 7)
And the proposal which we make now is the same that we made then. It is not a proposal directed to the Republican government, or to Stalin. It is directed to the workers, the common people of our own country as well as those throughout the world: If you want peace, you must struggle on your own behalf against the war-makers.
For the American workers, blessed with democracy and living in a land of power and plenty this means: break loose from the policies of a government which will drag you through blood and slime to assure its supremacy in the world. Form your own political party to oppose it. Form a political party which will proclaim to the peoples of the world, and act on such a proclamation, that you will support their struggles for freedom and democracy against their rulers everywhere and in every circumstance. Take the political offensive away from Stalinism by championing the cause of the oppressed everywhere, beginning right at home and close to home where you can prove that these are no empty words, but represent a solemn commitment for action.
To follow the Republican administration in its headlong course toward World War III would be a disaster for humanity. To seek merely to replace the Republicans with their Democratic rivals whose policy, in the longer run amounted to the same thing, would be little better. The only chance of avoiding another and ultimately horrible catastrophe for mankind is to start on the road of mobilizing the peoples on both sides of the iron curtain to struggle for themselves against both war camps. It is a difficult policy, which requires the utmost clarity of understanding, and the most inflexible purpose in carrying it through. The forces committed to it are small indeed. But in their growth lies the only hope of humanity.
 




The Republican administration had been in office just sixty days when Stalin left this earth a better place for his departure. The seventy days which followed have wrought a massive change in the plans of the men who make up the “Eisenhower team.” The turn in world affairs, so strikingly illustrative of the swiftness with which history can change its course in our unstable society, has descended on the businessmen and generals who run things in Washington like a bolt out of the blue. In their frantic attempt to reorganize themselves and their “thinking,” it can hardly be expected that they will find the time to reflect on the fact that this new “peace” crisis shows that their previous plans were far from the “the best laid” in the first place.
In the January–February issue of the New International we described the Eisenhower administration as seeking to take the offensive in foreign policy. Those were the far-off days in which Dulles was touring Europe with a view to whipping the allies on that continent into a forced march on remilitarization and political and economic integration; in which the government had just “de-neutralized” Formosa; in which there was widespread talk of a full-scale naval blockade against the coast of China; in which the administration had started on its futile attempt to satisfy the Republican right wing while at the same time entrapping the Democrats in a declaration “repudiating” the agreements at Yalta and Teheran which had formalized the division of the world after the last war.
It is not much over two months since then, but it is already difficult to remember that the Republicans were hell-bent on a “new” foreign policy, or just what were the opening moves in that foreign policy. Stalin died, and the Kremlin began to talk “peace” in well-modulated tones. Within a matter of weeks it became clear once more just who has the political initiative in this world.
The American government’s foreign policy offensive was short-circuited before it could get a good start. The reason for this should be obvious. Its basic strategy, as well as the tactics which flowed from it, were fundamentally military in character. Political results were to be derived from stepping up the military pressure on the Stalinist world. If the Kremlin and/or Peiping showed signs of retreating before this military pressure, it would be proof to all the world that might still has primacy on this globe, and that America has the might on its side. This would stiffen the allies and bring them more firmly behind America in the struggle. If, on the other hand, the Stalinists sought to resist the military measures by counter-measures of their own, the world tension would be increased, and the allies would have no alternative but to band more closely together in the face of imminent military peril.
For any kind of success, the strategy required an enemy who would continue to keep the tension at a high level throughout the world. It was based on the conception that what makes Stalinism a threat is its military potential, that Stalinism’s advances and successes have been basically military in character, and hence that the leaders in the Kremlin would have no choice but to continue to apply military pressure on the periphery of their empire. The conception was one-sided. It was the other side of Stalinism, its political side, which came around and whacked the American policy makers in the left eye, where they have been blind from birth.
 
The policy of “toughness” with allies and Stalinists alike had a basic weakness, even given the most favorable circumstances. That was the attitude of the peoples of Europe and Asia, and of the governments which have to take this attitude into account. Outside of this country, there was almost no serious political force which supported the American “offensive.” It cannot be said that the American government was blind to this fact. But cheered on by the most reactionary elements in Congress and in the country at large, it hoped to overcome the reluctance and resistance of Europe and Asia by a few major successes (combined, of course, with very potent economic threats). Unless it could score a quick victory, however limited, the danger was that the aforementioned reluctance would flare up into a major conflict among the allies, endangering the whole structure so painfully built up since 1946.
If the American government was aware of the chief danger besetting its strategy in the cold war, the Stalinist rulers understood it even better. It has been widely pointed out that the chief conclusion for world policy to be drawn from Stalin’s theses for the 19th Congress of the Communist Party of Russia was that contradictions in the capitalist world were of a continuing and ineradicable character, and that Russia could count on these contradictions to break up the world capitalist alliance sooner or later.
It would be assuming too much to maintain that the Stalinist “peace offensive” is simply the translation of this concept into policy. First of all, the concept has validity in the long run, in the epochal sense. Only rigid sectarians attempt to deduce their tactics solely from the nature of the epoch in which they live. Secondly, the idea that the capitalist world is bound, if left to itself, to fall apart into economically and eventually militarily warring segments has a big “if” in it. ’This is an abstraction from the existence of Stalinist powers in the world, and the forces which prevent them from standing still in the struggle for world power while waiting for the inter-capitalist Armageddon. This theory is akin to the excellent schema according to which, during the ’20s and early ’30s, it was demonstrated that the next great struggle would be between the United States and Great Britain, the two major capitalist economic rivals of that time. Its only fault was that it ignored the specific drives which impelled Germany to make its bid for world power long before the Anglo-American conflict could ripen into belligerency. And finally, Stalin’s theory suffered, as a guide to action, from the fact that it abstracted also from the inner weaknesses and contradictions of the Stalinist empire itself. As it turned out, the first one to show up in effective form was the corruption of the flesh of the “immortal leader,” which threw the whole structure of power inside Russia out of balance at least to the degree that his successors badly need a period of stability and calm in which to get their bureaucratic society back on a steady and even keel.
It appears that the immediate reason for the “peace offensive” lies in the dangerous position in which the Russian ruling class finds itself today, more than in any long-range calculation by the Stalinist gang. Yet the fact remains that there is a large element of truth in Stalin’s analysis of the tendency of the capitalist world to disintegrate, and this makes it possible for the Kremlin to gain time and advantage by its present tactic, regardless of whether this is viewed as a long-range strategy or merely as a temporary expedient.
To official American analysts of world affairs, it appears that the Kremlin has diabolically chosen the “worst” possible time at which to “pull” its peace offensive. The more discerning, or the more honest among them admit that this time is really no worse than any other would have been since the end of World War II. After seven years, during which the United States has supported the economic and political structure of the nations of Western Europe and of much of the rest of the world with over thirty billions of dollars, that structure is as precarious and vulnerable as it has been at any time since the Marshall Plan was inaugurated.
From the beginning of the war in Korea till this is written, the American armament boom, combined with the foreign aid programs, has served to keep the capitalist world from crisis. But now that boom is showing very definite signs of weakening, and the Republican administration with its businessman mentality seems to be doing its best to hasten the process. Britain and Western Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands and Japan all have benefitted from the enormous demands of the American war economy in different ways. But with a slackening of that demand two things are on their way: (1) a contraction of the American market for their goods; (2) an increased competition among themselves and with the United States for the rest of the world market. Not one of them can look to the future with any degree of confidence.
The tendency toward the economic and political integration of Western Europe, induced by the military threat of Russia, and lashed on by American threats and urgings has practically come to a stop. The Benelux customs union, the only actual achievement of note in that particular field, is straining at the seams. And the Schuman Plan steel union still has to undergo the first test which a sag in world demand would place on it. The plan for a European Defense Community is bogged down in the French Parliament, and faces a major test in the coming general elections in Western Germany.
The economic situation in Western Europe shows weakness and vulnerability wherever one looks. In the backward economic areas of the world, the situation is no better. The high demand and resultant high prices for the raw materials which form the chief source of export and of internal economic stability for these countries have already begun to tumble. Representatives of Indonesia, of the rubber interests in Malaya, and their colleagues in other countries look fearfully at the plans of the American government in the hope that its drive to put business über alles will not mean an economic knife drawn across their throats.
All these problems, though difficult, would not necessarily lead to an early catastrophe, given one of two alternatives. Either a continued buildup of American military power on terms which could absorb the production of the capitalist world, or international pump-priming by the United States on an ever-expanding scale. The Russian peace offensive has made both of these alternatives virtually impossible.
The first reaction of the American government to the peace offensive has been to try to pretend that it does not exist. This motif still dominates the utterances of its major spokesmen. Quite justifiably, they demanded that Russia prove with “deeds” that her government is really intent on a truce in the cold war. It soon became evident, however, that the “deeds” demanded were the equivalent of a Stalinist capitulation on all the major issues over which the cold war had been fought.
In President Eisenhower’s only foreign policy speech since the peace offensive started, he gave as “examples” of the things the Stalinists would have to do to prove their peaceful intentions: an end to the war in Korea, Indo-China and Malaya; a peace treaty for Austria, and the unification of Germany on American terms. After this, he said, the United States would be willing to consider disarmament on the terms it had put forth in the United Nations, and it would then also consider the possibility of diverting a portion of the funds now spent on arms to the development of the economies of other countries.
The rest of the world, however, greeted the Stalinist peace propaganda with an almost audible sigh of relief. As far as the countries of Western Europe are concerned, the choice between continuing re armament at the levels demanded by the United States, and of the economic dangers implicit in the slackening of the war drive is a choice between almost indistinguishable evils. On the other hand, to these war-weary peoples and governments even the hope that World War III may be averted has an almost irresistible attraction.
 
While the American government has stood firm on its inspiring assertion that it is willing to “meet halfway” any real evidence of the willingness of the Stalinists to end the cold war, the latter have been performing one “act” after another which gives some substance to their peace offensive. Among these have been the freeing of allied civilians interned by the Stalinists in North Korea; the re-opening of Korean truce negotiations by making proposals which at least appear to yield to the United Nations principle of non-forcible repatriation of prisoners of war; the release of William Oatis who had been convicted on “espionage” charges by the Czechoslovak government. It is quite possible, too, that the abrupt termination of the Vietminh offensive in Laos was another “act” by the Kremlin or Peiping which shows their intention, at the very least, to prevent the spread of that conflict beyond its previous confines.
All of these actions do not necessarily indicate that the Stalinists have decided to end the cold war for good. Such a decision is beyond their capacity. The “cold war” is, after all, a term given to the friction and conflict between the capitalist and Stalinist world which is historically irreconcilable. Although no one gave it that name at the time, a “cold war” between Germany, Britain and France and between Austro-Hungary and Russia preceded World War I, and a “cold war” between Germany and the Western powers raged at least from 1936 through 1939. There was only one power in the world which could have prevented those two wars, and it did not reside in the governments of the great powers which engaged in them. That was the organized socialist working class of Western Europe whose leaders capitulated before their governments in the first war, and before the rise of Nazism which preceded the second.
But this does not exclude a truce in the cold war, an extension of the time before the conflict explodes into world catastrophe. And in these times, when for capitalism nothing is permanent any longer, the governments and peoples of most of the capitalist world are quite willing to settle even for a little time.
Hence, from the moment the peace offensive was announced from the Kremlin, the division between the United States and her major allies has been growing. Much of that growth has been silent, even underground. In a certain sense, the governments of Europe which seem determined to grasp at every straw offered them by the Kremlin are acting just as irrationally as the American government which wishes that the whole annoying problem of the offensive had never come up in the first place. But what really counts for the moment is that those governments are, in their own way, expressing the deepest fears and aspirations of their peoples, while the American government reflects the smug satisfaction and blind provincialism of a nation riding the crest of thirteen years of war and war-induced prosperity.
The first open break in attitudes toward the peace offensive came in the debate on foreign policy in the House of Commons. Prime Minister Churchill called for a top-level conference of the great powers to attempt to negotiate a truce in the cold war. Clement Attlee, leader of the Labor opposition, went farther. He took the occasion to point out that in America there are powerful interests who do not appear to want a truce in Korea, and to demand that Britain take a real share in the truce negotiations in that country to counter-balance those forces. He went on to say that with the separation of powers inherent in the American constitution, it is impossible for any American government to give firm commitment on foreign policy questions. In the present situation, he said, it is difficult to know who really speaks for the American government, President Eisenhower or Senator McCarthy.
From this discussion it became quite clear that in Britain both parties ardently desire a conference of the heads of the most powerful governments in the world (it appears it is indelicate to specify just which these are, in view of the inflated sensibilities of the French and the difference over which is the real government of China). When Attlee stated that Communist China would have to be included in any really stable settlement, Churchill simply interjected: “Not while the actual fighting is going on, though.” He then remained silent, in apparent acquiescence, while Attlee continued to make his point.
The reaction from this side was immediate. Senator McCarthy, of course, came out for sinking every British ship which carries goods to China. He demanded an apology from Attlee for criticizing the American Constitution. The more direct government spokesmen had little to say. Eisenhower handled the question of a meeting with Churchill and Malenkov evasively, and the New York Times and liberals of all stripes rose to the occasion by clucking like nervous hens whose favorite chicks had got into a squabble.
In India, Nehru spoke out in favor of the latest Stalinist truce proposal, and condemned the Americans for turning it down. In Germany, Chancellor Adenauer was so concerned about the effects of the peace offensive on his electoral prospects in the coming contest with the Social Democrats that he had little to say. The French are preoccupied with putting down the colonial stirrings in North Africa, the open war in Indo-China, and the stirrings of their “loyal” governments in the same country. In short, the American government could find virtually no one in the whole wide world outside American borders who was willing to firmly back up the American position that short of capitulation by the Stalinists nothing can be done about the cold war except to arm and stand firm.
 
There are ways in which even the blind can sense that they are blundering into danger. And frustrating as this may appear to Eisenhower’s businessmen in one way, and to his more belligerent “socialistic” would-be advisers in another, America’s allies are forcing a change of pace on the American government. If there is any prospect of a relaxation of cold-war tensions even for a few months or a few years, they are going to embrace them. This is not a policy or an attitude which can avert World War III, or which can give it a progressive content if that disaster finally deluges us. But if the Stalinists are in sufficient difficulty to have to slow up their drive toward war, it is an attitude which can give the world a breathing-spell.
The question is simply: what will the world do with such a reprieve from destruction? If the masses sink down in apathy, and simply wait till the conjuncture of economic and political forces once more permits a resumption of the struggle, they will have gained little. Surely this is the opportunity for the conscious socialists to come forth with policies for the labor and socialist movements which can once more give them the initiative in the struggle for the world.
For us in the United States, the isolation from world support into which the Democratic and Republican governments have taken us should be the beginning of wisdom. The American labor movement must be shown that this isolation is not a product of foreign stupidity or perversity, but rather of the character and policies of their own government. As the continued burden of armament on the one hand, or of depression on the other falls on the backs of the workers, they must be shown that these evils are direct consequences of the kind of social system and the kind of government which they have supported heretofore. Only after this lesson has been absorbed can we hope that the American labor movement will become a positive force for social change and for peace in the world.
May 20, 1953
 




Recently Labor Action carried a brief note reporting that during April a special convention of the Los Angeles CIO Council resulted in a smashing two-to-one victory for the forces representing national CIO policy over the Stalinists in that body.
In the course of winning this victory, the anti-CP wing of the CIO passed a number of by-laws and amendments to the constitution of the Los Angeles CIO Council which have a grave bearing on the future of democracy in the CIO.
Though all of these deserve discussion, we will confine ourselves to the one which has the greatest bearing on democracy. On the face of it, this amendment looks quite harmless. It reads simply: “The autonomy of local unions affiliated to the council shall be preserved.”
In voting against this clause, delegates from the International Longshoremen & Warehousemen’s Union (ILWU) entered the following statement in the minutes:
“The proposed provisions of the constitution interpreted by the constitutional committee chairman and the convention chairman denies the CIO Council delegates the right to speak and vote according to their own convictions and the instructions of their local unions. For these reasons and these reasons only, the ILWU voted unanimously no, because we are for full and complete autonomy and not autonomy that is left up to any chairman’s discretion or interpretation.”
The ILWU asked for inclusion of an amendment giving delegates the right to discuss and vote upon any matter coming before the council. This was defeated.
 
Majority Rule?
In discussing this amendment, the West Coast edition of the CIO News (a Murray paper) states: “Supporters of the accepted amendment protecting local autonomy claimed that adoption of the ILWU-backed language would have given council delegates the power to smash CIO Council rules by voting against national CIO policy. Such an action would actually interfere with the autonomous right of the national CIO to establish rules for the councils, which are an organizational part of national CIO, and not of locals or internationals.”
This statement explains the real purpose of the amendment on “local autonomy” about as clearly as could be desired. Further, it falls in line with the whole strategy of the Murray leadership in smashing the Stalinist control of CIO councils all over the country by demanding that all councils must go down the line in advocacy of national CIO political policies (support of Truman and the Marshall Plan), regardless of the opinions of the delegates and the local unions which they are supposed to represent.
Those who, in the name of democracy, defend this idea of what CIO councils are supposed to do, reason something like this: Policies of the CIO are laid down in conventions and meetings of the National Executive Board. These are the highest bodies of the CIO and the majorities of these bodies represent the majority of the rank and file of the CIO. They have the right to insist that their subordinate bodies, the city CIO councils, carry out these policies. Surely it isn’t undemocratic to demand that the policies established democratically by the majority of the CIO membership as represented at national conventions and on the National Executive Board be carried out locally, even if a local body happens to have a majority which disagrees with these policies. Majority rule in the CIO will have no meaning if anyone who disagrees has the right to act contrary to the will of the national majority.
 
Loaded Against Minority
Looked at from this formal point of view, the policy seems to have merit. Yet it seems very likely that it will serve to take away from local CIO councils much of their reason for existence. Further, it will go a long way toward making it impossible for any point of view which starts as a minority from ever being able to win a majority in the CIO.
Let’s say that some local union, after full discussion, comes to the conclusion that national CIO policy on political action is wrong. The local passes a resolution to that effect, with copies sent to its international and to the national CIO. Yet the delegates of this local cannot present this resolution for adoption in their city council. There they are compelled to vote for resolutions which are exactly the opposite of the one adopted by their local. They are not even permitted to abstain on such resolutions, nor to move to table them.
Congressional elections are rolling around in 1950. One of the life-and- death questions of the labor movement is going to be the policy adopted on these elections. If a local has passed a resolution demanding the formation of an Independent Labor Party, or at least that locally the labor movement cease playing around with the Democratic Party, select labor candidates and run them as such – what are the delegates of this local going to do in the council? Will they vote to support some wardheeler whose record in the last Congress was 51 per cent “pro-labor” as against some candidate whose record was only 30 per cent “pro-labor”? Are they going back to their local and whoop it up for the membership to get out the vote for him?
Most likely they just won’t go to council meetings. Why should they? Why have a council which is bound, even against the will of possibly 95 per cent of the local unions which are represented there, to carry out “national CIO policies”? Isn’t it enough to have an office of the regional director of CIO who is paid to carry them out?
 
Packing a Convention
Some more questions: Local councils send delegates to national conventions of the CIO. If the councils and their officers haven’t the right to discuss or pass resolutions contrary to present national CIO policy, that will mean that all delegates from the councils to the national CIO conventions will be a solid bloc for the present administration. And that is no small matter. At the last convention of the CIO there were 150 delegates representing local councils. These delegates had the same number of votes as delegates representing the internationals in the following industries: auto, electric, steel, rubber, textile, clothing, longshore, seamen (NMU), packinghouse, transport and oil.
If local delegates to the councils can’t even put the views of their membership before the delegates from other unions (if these views happen to be contrary to national CIO policy), what chance will they ever have to get the support of other locals for their views? Democracy means majority rule, but there’s more to it than that. It also means the right of a minority to fight for its views and its right to become a majority if it can get enough support.
We are very well aware of the fact that the Stalinists, who are how howling for democracy in the CIO, were the chief ones to abuse it when they were in a majority in locals and in the councils. But in the process of ousting them in the name of “American trade-union principles,” isn’t the Murray majority setting up procedures which look much more like those of a bureaucratic political machine than those of political and trade-union democracy?
 




Four hundred employers from all over the world were told exactly what they had come to hear last week in Vatican City: namely, that “free initiative of individuals” and not socialism is the key to economic progress.
The speaker who addressed these employers was Eugenio Pacelli, who is better known as Pope Pius XII in his capacity as head of the Roman Catholic Church.
According to the Associated Press, Pacelli told the employers that there is in the world today an “opinion, unhappily too widely spread, that between them [workers and employers] there is an irreducible opposition of divergent interest” and that this opinion is “erroneous and bad in its consequences.”
 
“Usurping Authority”
Pleading for elimination of mutual suspicion by workers and employers, Pacelli said the answer to the world’s economic ills must be found in employer-worker relationships which preserve the authority of the employer while providing for “the prosperity of all the members of the people.”
It is assumed that the employers were highly pleased by this speech. We might wonder whether or not the workers tramping the Ford picket line at the time the speech was delivered could agree that the important thing for prosperity is to ensure the “authority of the employer.” If the organized auto workers had not “usurped” some of that authority or at least “infringed” upon it in their contract, they would have no defense against the speedup today and wage cuts tomorrow.
The same is true for the idea put forth by Pacelli that workers and employers really have the same fundamental interests. To be sure, many workers and even labor leaders of high position share in this opinion. Unfortunately, very few employers are of the same mind, although they are always glad to spread the idea among their help.
 
There’s a Single Kitty
But when it gets right down to cases, the employer is absolutely convinced that it is his job to produce dividends, and that any means to that
end is justified. Thus when profits fall, he throws workers out on the street (and their families on relief rolls), speeds up the work, and cuts wages. The only thing which limits his production of profits at the expense of his workers is the power of their organization.
For the employers know very well (their bookkeepers can show it to them in the book balances at any time) that both wages and profits have to come from the same place. There is no way around that fact under the “free enterprise” system, and no economist has found a way around it, and no religious leader has been able to exorcize it.
If profits and wages have to be drawn from the same kitty, at any given time more profits mean less wages, and more wages mean less profits. If the kitty is big, both may be able to get along. But when things begin to contract a. little, there suddenly appears an “irreducible opposition of divergent interest.” The worker wants a living wage and employment, and the employer wants a profit, regardless.
Pacelli had quite a bit more to say, according to the papers, but we don’t have space to comment on all of it. He spoke against “statism,” and we’re against that too. He said that “the economy is not by nature an institution of the state; it is, to the contrary, the living product of the free initiative of individuals and groups freely constituted.”
 
Try Some Initiative!
Well, we don’t rightly know what the economy is “by nature.” We hope, indeed, that some day it may become “the living product of the free initiative of individuals and groups freely constituted,” and that’s why we are for socialism.
One of the chief reasons for our determination to put an end to the system of capitalism is precisely that under this form of economy the vast majority of individuals cannot exercise any “free initiative” at all. (Just try a little “free initiative” on any assembly line in the country.)
“Free initiative” under this system is reserved solely to the biggest banks, corporations and bureaucratic governments. Those who can exercise it are a tiny minority of the population and they exercise it without any consultation with the majority, and, in fact, at their expense.
We note that the big employer- controlled press gives Pacelli’s economic opinions front-page space. For workers, the result of accepting these economic opinions is simply to disarm them in the face of the employers. This is just as true for those workers who accept the religious leadership of Pope Pius XII as it is for those workers who do not.
 




“It is sincerely hoped that every member of the AFL will get out and vote for the candidates that have been endorsed by the great majority of your fellow brother and sister trade-unionists ... By exercising your privilege of voting, you can play your full part in the democratic processes that make up this great country of ours ...” – (East Bay Labor Journal, April 15, 1949)
The above two sentences appeared in one of the most progressive AFL papers we have seen on the eve of the recent nominating election for city officers in Oakland, Calif. As previously reported in Labor Action, in a very light vote, almost every candidate endorsed by the AFL’s Labor League for Political Education was defeated. (They were also endorsed by the right-wing CIO- PAC.)
There were no doubt many reasons for the failure of the endorsed candidates. But among the most important was the policy of the AFL and CIO leadership so well summed up in the above quotation.
First, it is not correct to say that the LLPE candidates had “been endorsed by the great majority of your brother and sister trade-unionists.” This majority was never consulted. The result was that the vast majority of the trade-unionists simply stayed home.
 
Full Part?
But the second sentence quoted above is at the very core of labor’s political weakness in America today. “By exercising your privilege of voting, you can play your full part in the democratic processes that make up this great country of purs.” That sentence is an indictment not only of the AFL leadership’s political attitude but of the “democratic processes” of the country as a whole.
Just casting a Vote is NOT the full part which the representatives of capital, the businessmen, big and not so big, play in the political setup. They are very careful to see to it that men who represent THEIR interests are nominated and run for office. They see to it that these men get plenty of publicity in press and radio, either because business owns the press and radio or because they give their candidates the money to get this publicity.
After their candidates are elected, the representatives of capital, the industrialists, real-estate interests, bankers, big merchants, keep a constant vigil over THEIR officeholders and see to it that they vote right in council, legislature and Congress, and that they administer right in every executive department of government – “RIGHT” for them.
The workingmen and women, on the other hand, the vast majority of the citizens of the country, cannot use the SAME method of nominating THEIR representatives and seeing to it that they faithfully represent THEIR interests once elected. For the workers don’t represent millions of dollars and vast industrial empires.
They only represent themselves – millions upon millions of people. THEIR political power can only be made effective by organization. And they can become ACTIVE participants in the “democratic processes” only if they are organized politically in a democratic manner.
 
Here’s a Way
That is not the way the LLPE and the PAC are organized at the present time.
True, their officials are often the elected officers of some union or central labor body. But they were not originally elected by the rank and file to make political decisions for them, and hence the rank and file have no control over and very little interest in the political decisions (or endorsements) they make.
But how could the rank and file of labor actually participate in the democratic processes except by just casting a vote? We offer below a sketch of how the whole trade-union movement could be organized for ACTIVE participation in the democratic processes.
Let’s start three months before any local election. (This plan could be applied on a national scale with slight changes.) Every local union is asked to elect a special delegate to a political nominating committee. These delegates meet, draw up a draft program for the elections, and propose a slate of men with a real record as members of or active supporters of the labor movement who are willing to run on that program and no other.
The program and slate are returned to the locals for discussion. AFTER thorough discussion, the locals vote on the program, plus any amendments and elect delegates to a political convention. This convention then draws up the final program, endorses the final slate of nominees to be put before the voters and sets up a campaign committee to direct the campaign.
How has the individual unionist’s participation in the democratic processes thus far been increased?
He has had a chance to help make the decisions on the program on which his candidates are going to run. He has helped make the decision on who the candidates will be. And the candidates, who know that they owe their nomination to the will of the majority of the workers in the area, will feel a thousand times more responsible to that majority than they can possibly feel under present practices.
A man in office is subject to many pressures. When any matter of importance is before the city council or other body in which he serves, every interest group in the area puts on the pressure. If labor is concerned, the labor leaders will pay him a call. But so will the bankers and big industrialists and merchants and real-estate owners or their representatives. And the pressure that can be worked up with a few million dollars behind it is positively astounding.
The experience of every political body in the world shows that in the clinches there is only one kind of pressure that can hold even “honest” politicians in line when the big money starts putting on the heat. That is the absolute knowledge that the politician owes his position to the political power of the working people, and that if he doesn’t perform in their interests he will lose that position as sure as he is alive.
 
Not in the Chorus
But there is only one way that labor can have politicians in office who owe their position to labor and who will lose it if they stop representing the working people and yield to the pressure of capital. That is if the ranks of labor – not just a few leaders, but the real “majority of brother and sister trade-unionists” – have ACTIVELY participated in nominating THEIR candidates on the basis of THEIR program and elected them by virtue of the power of THEIR political organization.
As long as the labor leaders really believe that casting a vote on election day is the “full part” Which the ranks can or should play in the “democratic processes” they arc going to continue to lose elections. For the ranks are becoming increasingly convinced that this role is so small and insignificant and ineffective that they won’t even bother to show up on the stage to play it.
They are tired of playing in the chorus while their employers manage the show, direct it from the wings and have their favorites in the stellar roles. Organized democratically, the workers can run the whole show, and more and more of them know it.
 




The two candidates for City Councilmen endorsed by Labor’s League for Political Education (political arm of the AFL in Alameda County) suffered a crushing defeat in the nominating election for city officers in Oakland, held April 19.
Just two years ago the nominees of the Oakland labor movement, united in the Oakland Voters League, swept the field in the nominating elections and went on to win hands down in the runoffs against the hysterical red-baiting, labor-baiting opposition of the Oakland Tribune and the business interests it represents.
From that victory to this defeat, there lies a tale which should be of interest to everyone concerned with the role of organized labor in the political life of America.
Two years ago the labor movement of Oakland had just gone through a general strike provoked by some highhanded scab-herding by the city cops. The ranks and even the labor leadership had just experienced a fresh lesson in “politics” learned the hard way. United and determined, they taught the business community here a lesson in what labor can do in politics when it decides to stop fooling around with making deals with its economic and political enemies, and strikes out on its own. The labor leaders picked their candidates, decided on their program, ran them in the teeth of the fiercest kind of opposition, and won.
 
They Voted Labor
True, even then the “brains” of the labor movement here were afraid to march openly under their own colors. They created the “Oakland Voters League” and tried to camouflage it as a “broad citizens’ group” by getting endorsements from a number of doctors, lawyers, businessmen and others. But no one was fooled by this – except, perhaps, the labor leaders themselves.
The Tribune saw to it that every citizen who could read a headline knew that this was labor’s slate. The labor movement put up the money and did the work. The Tribune was so successful in convincing everyone that this was a clear-cut fight between organized labor and business, despite the repeated denials by the labor leaders, that the workers and their families and all the “little people” turned out and voted ... for labor.
That should have taught the leaders of the AFL and CIO something about politics, but it didn’t. Instead of transforming the Oakland Voters League into a permanent political body, based on the active participation of the locals, they let it die.
Such a political organization could have exerted a continuing pressure on the councilmen it had elected. It also would have given the whole labor movement, down to the ranks, a feeling of real power in city affairs.
The trouble is, however, that a political body based on the active participation of an informed rank and file would also have made it necessary for the labor leaders to subject themselves to the will of the ranks in political matters. But that kind of democracy is dangerous. It’s much more pleasant for a union chief to be in a position where he can “speak for labor” in political matters without having to bother about any democratically elected political representatives of his membership.
 
Retreat in ‘49
So the Oakland Voters League was not transformed into some kind of local labor party. A contributing factor to this was and is the split in the CIO between CP and Murray wings of that body. The AFL leaders had formerly worked mainly with the CP wing, as two years ago they represented the bulk of the CIO membership. No similar working arrangement has been made with the Murray leaders who now claim to represent such a majority. But this was a minor factor in the defeat.
The defeat in this election for the candidates endorsed both by the AFL and the Murray CIO group was due mainly to the fact that the same workers, who two years ago felt they were voting for a slate of their own candidates in a fight against the concerted forces of big business, this time could have no such feeling. This time labor did not select its own candidates and did not run them on a clear-cut program.
This time the union movement went back to the old Gompers policy of simply endorsing some of the candidates who had decided to run on their own or had been induced to run by others. These candidates ran their own campaigns on “programs” which they decided on themselves (such as the program of Al Braga, AFL endorsed councilman for the 6th District: “New Blood – Business Judgment – Common-Sense Efficiency”).
Even the Tribune couldn’t work up a good sweat about the danger of labor’s winning in this election. For how could labor possibly win when it confined itself to endorsing a couple of real-estate agents who have never had any connection with the labor movement? Win or lose, the Tribune and the business interests it represents would have been on top.
Without a real political organization involving the ranks of the labor movement the leaders haven’t been able to keep in line all of the councilmen elected last time. What chance would they have of exerting any real influence on these two businessmen, had they been able to convince their membership to vote for them?
 
Something to Learn
Looked at from any angle, the “policy” of the labor leaders in this election has proved the complete bankruptcy of that kind of labor politics. They will now no doubt set up a big wail about the indifference of the membership to the endorsements made by their leaders. They had better save their tears and take a good look at the kind of leadership they have given.
It is too much to expect that the lesson of their victory two years ago and their defeat now will really teach them too much. For it proves to the them too much. For is proves to the saying for years.
There is one way labor can really win in politics. That is to apply the same principles to politics which they have applied to their economic organization. To win economic concessions from the employer, you organize the workers into a union. You have to start with a membership which knows what it wants and is willing to fight for it. To win in politics you have to organize the workers into a party of their own which can select its candidates and decide on their program in the same way that a union chooses its officers and votes on the contract demands to be made.
That kind of a movement the workers will support, because it is theirs. If the leaders of labor in Oakland didn’t understand this before the election, and if they won’t understand it now, there is only one thing for intelligent workers in Oakland to do. Start electing leaders who are not only good union men, but who are capable of understanding the ABC of labor politics.
Footnote: In this election the Socialist Workers Party ran Philomena Goelman for Councilman at large. She ran eighth in a field of nine, polling 2,054 votes. The AFL-endorsed candidate ran third with 5,618 votes. Total votes cast: 60,013.
 




“The first function of a political leader is advocacy. It is he who must articulate the wants, the frustrations, and the aspirations, of the masses.” – Aneurin Bevan.
Aneurin Bevan is a tribune of the people. That is the role which he is playing so ably today, and with such a powerful and salutary effect on the development of the British Labor Party and hence on that of the whole international socialist movement. In an attempt to understand the full content of his political thought, and to come to a clearer conception of what its long-range development and consequences may be, it is not without significance to note that in describing the functions of political leadership he lists only that of advocacy, and that to him the most important quality of a representative of the people is that he remain close to their thoughts and feelings at all times.
This is a truism which can well stand repetition in these days when so many of the leaders of labor in Britain, and certainly in the United States, live in circumstances much closer to those of business executives than of workingmen, and all too often seem to be more concerned with the “public opinion” of government and employer circles than with the feelings of their own hard-pressed constituents. Yet an ability to reflect the sentiments of the masses and to articulate them is not a sufficient qualification for real socialist political leadership. What is needed in addition is a grasp of the fundamental political realities of our times and the will and ability to lead the masses in a social struggle along lines which are capable of dealing with these realities. The demagogue may share sensitivity to the current feelings of the masses with the socialist leader. The thing which distinguishes them from each other is not only their subjective motives, but also their socio-political analysis and their program.  
The most recent, full statement of Bevan’s general political views is contained in his book In Place of Fear
[1] published in the United States toward the end of April of this year. The book is somewhat discursive, and we will not attempt to follow Bevan along all the side-paths into which he wanders. He makes incidental comments on dozens of topics which, though they may have little bearing on his central themes, give the reader a pretty good insight into the way in which his mind works. It does not seem to be constrained by an excessive amount of systematization. But it is always lively, incisive and passionate. His social and political interests cover a wide range of subjects; his hatred for capitalism, its representatives, and all their works is virile and healthy; and his devotion to the cause of the little people of his country breathes naturally and not self-consciously from every page of his book.
We will try to present, and discuss Bevan’s thinking under three main headings: the road to socialism in Britain; the nature and role of Stalinism; a socialist foreign policy. Not that In Place of Fear itself follows any such division. But it discusses all of them at some length, and in any event, these are the crucial issues to which a British socialist must address himself in our times.
*
“Whenever the Labour party has made a mistake, it has not been in consequence of pursuing its principles too roughly or too far, but by making too many concessions to conventional opinion.” (In Place of Fear, p. 103)
To Aneurin Bevan the basic evil in capitalist society lies in the private ownership of the means of production. This is the root cause for the wasteful planlessness of capitalism, for its extremes of unnecessary poverty on the one hand and anti-social wealth on the other, for its instability. But capitalism has also succeeded, in its own bloody, oppressive and planless way in increasing the means of production and along with this, of the skilled, urbanized and educated working class which is its nemesis. And in Britain, at least, this working class has achieved a degree of democratic political power which is a weapon adequate to the job of changing the basic premises of the system.
Bevan believes that private property, poverty and democracy are the chief moving forces in capitalist society. The first is the basic cause of the second. But poverty, when it appears to the masses to be senseless, sets up a drive against its own cause. And democracy is the means by which this drive can and does become politically effective.
“The social reforms of the twentieth century are a consequence of the democratic power of the masses and not of increased enlightenment,” he writes. This power is embedded primarily in the universal franchise which was not fully won in Britain till 1929. The masses have only had it for an extremely brief historical period. And it is wielded primarily by the representation of the masses in the British parliament.
To be sure, Bevan recognizes that the democratic power of the masses can rest in institutions other than the franchise and the parliament ... institutions such as the trade unions. In the pages of his book there are vivid descriptions of the application of extra-parliamentary democratic powers by the unemployed miners in Wales after the First World War, and of the crisis to which the British government was brought by the threatened strike of the Triple Alliance (miners, transport workers, and railway men) in 1919. But it is quite clear that Bevan regards these democratic powers as at best auxiliary to the franchise, and as dangerous if employed too fully.  
His description of an episode in the struggle of the Triple Alliance speaks eloquently for Bevan’s attitude on this matter. He reports that one of the leaders of the Triple Alliance told him about a conference he and his colleagues had with Prime Minister Lloyd George just before their planned strike. “Gentlemen,” Lloyd George is reported to have said to them, “you have fashioned in the Triple Alliance of the unions represented by you, a most powerful instrument. I feel bound to tell you that in our opinion we are at your mercy. The Army is dissaffected and cannot be relied upon ... We have just emerged from a great war and the people are eager for the reward of their sacrifices, and we are in no position to satisfy them. In these circumstances, if you carry out your threat and strike, then you will defeat us.
“But if you do so,” went on Mr. Lloyd George, “have you weighed the consequences? The strike will be in defiance of the government of the country and by its very success will precipitate a constitutional crisis of the first importance. For, if a force arises in the State which is stronger than the State itself, then it must be ready to take on the functions of the State, or withdraw and accept the authority of the State. Gentlemen,” asked the prime minister quietly, “have you considered, and if you have, are you ready?”
Bevan reports that the union leader told him that “from that moment on we were beaten and we knew we were.” To him this was not an admission of cowardice or irresolution on the part of the leader of the workers, nor did the results really constitute a historic defeat for the British working class to which the depression of the thirties, and even the Second World War can be traced in the negative sense that the failure of the British workers to come to power permitted capitalism to drag the peoples of the world through these two great catastrophes.
Actually, the matter is not brought up for the purpose of assessing its historic impact. It is introduced in an aside on “Marxism.” Bevan is intent, at this point, on demonstrating that what gives the capitalist state power is not so much its coercion of the workers, as their subjective allegiance to parliamentary institutions. “The opportunity for power is not enough,” he writes, “if the will to seize it is absent,” and a little later: “the trade union leaders were theoretically unprepared for the implications involved. They had forged a revolutionary weapon without having a revolutionary intention.”
Bevan believes that these statements illustrate some error of what he calls the “undeveloped Marxist school,” and he also believes that “classic Marxism consistently understated the role of political democracy with a fully developed franchise.” The important point is that he has no criticism to offer of these leaders, and that he fully shares their parliamentary inclinations.
Bevan says that socialists “assert the wisdom of collective action through parliament as the core of their creed.” In their hands, parliament cannot remain a passive factor which seeks to intervene in economic life as little as possible. It is a weapon in the social struggle. It should not stand by and only try to redress the imbalances of the capitalist system ... the limit to its functions assigned it even by the “interventionalist” Keynesians. Its power “must be used progressively until the main streams of economic activity are brought under public direction.”  
Since parliament is an instrument which is adequate to the task of transforming the economic structure of a society, socialists assume an extremely grave responsibility when they gain a parliamentary majority. In such circumstances they must act vigorously, and use the parliamentary instrument to its utmost capacity. For their failure will not only discredit them, it will place the whole of democracy in jeopardy. Bevan is fully aware that “people have no use for a freedom which cheats them of redress,” and that “if confidence in political democracy is to be sustained, political freedom must arm itself with power.” But if, once thus armed, it fails, the people are quite likely to turn to some form of dictatorship which promises vigorous and effective action.
Bevan is here making a plea for a continuation of the drive for nationalization and, for the democratic planning which is made possible by it. Although he is of the opinion that the socialist state need not nationalize all sectors of the economy, and in that sense is an advocate of a “mixed economy,” he is also convinced that in this matter the Labor Government had not gone far enough. Too much of the economy was left in private hands, and this rendered effective planning difficult if not impossible in far too many fields. “At the moment,” he writes, “we are between two worlds. We have lost the propulsion of one and we have not yet gained the forward thrust of the other. This is no place in which to halt.” And later: “It is a requisite of social stability that one type of property ownership should dominate. In the society of the future it should be public property.”  
Throughout the book he argues against those in the Labor Party who regard taxation as the chief means for bringing greater equality and stability into British society. Although some further adjustment of unjustified inequality can be brought about through tax policies, the vital thing is to get public control over the allocation of the social surplus of the British economy, and this can only be done effectively by establishing public control at the source.
Bevan does not have the attitude attributed to “doctrinaire socialists” by their conservative (and in this country by their liberal and even labor) traducers that nationalization gives the full answer to the problems of British society. As a man who has had practical administrative experience in the Labor Government without losing his touch with the workers, he knows that this is far from true, and that the road from nationalization to socialism is neither clear nor easy. But nationalization is the first step which must be taken (a) to shift the power in society so that the conflict between public and private claims can be resolved, and (b) to make direct planning of the economy possible.
But the question still remains: who shall plan, and who shall control the planners? It is significant that here again Bevan sees the problem primarily, though not solely, in parliamentary terms. He attacks the principle of the independent boards which run the nationalized industries ... on the ground that they are not subject to parliamentary supervision. Actually, what has happened is that the ministers cannot be questioned in parliament on the actions of the boards, and the chairmen of the latter have peerages conferred on them so that they sit in the House of Lords. Thus the only public supervision and control is vested in the unrepresentative section of the British governmental machine. Bevan warns against any “reform” of the House of Lords which would actually give it more power in the economic field. But he ends the discussion on this topic by the following ominous sentence: “We have still to ensure that they [the industry boards] are taking us toward democratic socialism not toward the managerial society.”  
But how about the whole complex of problems and issues summed up in the shorthand phrase “workers control”? Bevan is not unaware of their existence, or of the fact that they cannot be resolved solely by placing the nationalized industries under a greater degree of parliamentary supervision. “The advance from state ownership to full socialism,” he writes, “is in direct proportion to the extent the workers in the nationalized sector are made aware of a changed relationship between themselves and the management.”
Yet despite his stated aversion to the “managerial” approach, Bevan’s suggestions as to what should be done to bring about this awareness of the changed relationship are directed solely to management – public management, that is. What he has to say on this is not so very different from the advice given to corporation executives by the most progressive school of personnel management experts. The worker must be given an understanding of the part he plays in the whole picture. “A new class of manager must be trained and he must be taught that we are not building a new species of pyramid.” The question is: who is to teach him?
True, he ends this discussion by a winged and perfectly correct general phrase: “Liberty and responsibility march together. They must be joined together in the workshop as in the legislative assembly. Only when this is accomplished shall we have the foundations of a buoyant and stable civilization.” But in another connection he has already pointed out that social reforms come not as a consequence of enlightenment, but rather of the democratic power of the masses. The point is that until the workers have greater democratic power in nationalized industry, their relationship to management is not changed sufficiently for them to be made aware of it. It is they who will have to “educate” the new managers in the new relationship, just as they have “educated” private management on the limitations of its powers through their trade unions, and the Tories on the limitations of theirs through the ballot box. But it is not likely that they will be given this opportunity from above ... not even from their own parliament. At least, they have not been given it yet. And Bevan does not suggest that the road to greater democracy in industry lies through the application of democratic pressures by the workers to win it.  
The road to socialism in Britain, for Bevan, is primarily the application of parliamentary democracy in a thorough, bold and militant program of nationalization. Political democracy is its guarantee, parliament its instrument, nationalization its primary method. “Audacity is the mood that should prevail among Socialists.” There is little doubt that in these views he gives expression to the sentiments of the most advanced sections of the British working class.
Whether or not the guarantee, the instrument and the method are adequate to their historic tasks will only be demonstrated in practice. It would be the height of pedantry to substitute speculations as to their adequacy for the real job of British socialists, which is to push them to their limits. Whatever theoretical reservations Marxist theoreticians may have about the matter, the British workers appear determined to follow this road. They will recognize its limits only when they have exhausted the possibilities in practice. And Bevan is today breaking ground for them through the marshland of vacillation, doubt and accommodation to “conventional opinion” of the right wing leadership of the party.
*
In their struggle for the achievement of democratic socialism in Britain, the workers of that country are faced with a whole realm of problems, the locus of which lies outside the area of their own direct political control. In fact, whether or not they will be permitted to test their chosen path to its limits may depend much more on the development of the world struggle than on their own domestic politics.
And in this field, in which the problems and issues are often beyond the scope of the immediate experience of the British masses (or those of any other single nation), the qualifications for leadership are more difficult and complex than those described by Bevan at the beginning of his book. Here it is not so much a matter of the leader articulating the wants and needs of his own people, but rather of getting a grasp of the situation which he can use to educate and guide his followers.
Of all the problems which beset socialists today, perhaps the most difficult is that of the nature of Stalinism. One socialist movement after another has been absorbed, wrecked, or debilitated by a failure to grasp the nature of this new social system and the movements which represent it all over the world. And it is little consolation indeed to meditate that if socialists have misunderstood it, the leading politicians of the capitalist world have been even less able to understand this social phenomenon.
Aneurin Bevan has been slandered in Britain, and even more in the United States as some kind of a pro-Stalinist. The motives of the British Tories have been clear enough: any argument which might win a vote. The motives of the Americans, though less direct, are equally clear: anyone who criticizes the way we fight Stalinism must be some kind of a Stalinist.
In Place of Fear should re-emphasize, for those who are really interested in Bevan’s views, that he is no Stalinist. He is perfectly forthright in his description of the totalitarian, ruthless nature of Russian Stalinism. His views on foreign policy are in no way motivated by a desire to increase the power of Stalinism, and do not constitute an apologia for its actions in international politics. He recognizes the Stalinist “peace campaign” as an attempt to make political capital completely unrelated to any real desire for peace. He does not regard the present Russian regime as the natural outgrowth of the aspirations and achievements of the Russian Revolution, but rather as the consequence of its isolation in a backward country which has led to the perversion and defeat of those aspirations.
And yet ... his understanding of Stalinism is vitiated by a supra-historical approach to its origin, nature and development. Though the error may be found in the method, the result has a very real and practical political consequence. It makes possible the evasion of the development of a policy to meet the problem.  
Viewed from the height of historical abstraction, Russian Stalinism is an attempt of a backward agricultural society to industrialize itself rapidly. Either because it has started this effort at a time when world capitalism is in decline, or as a result of an historical accident, this society is undergoing a process of primitive accumulation similar to that through which every industrial country has gone in its time, but without the private ownership of the means of production. When British capitalism was going through the same process, “the rate of capital accumulation was an expression of the denial of consumption goods to the masses of the people.” In the case of Russia: “the economic function of the police state is to hold down the consumption of the people, especially of the peasant population, while their surplus production is drained off for the purpose of fixed capital investment ... Herein lies the whole tragedy of the Soviet Union ... In the furtherance of this policy she has developed an extreme centralist policy. More local responsibility would reduce the rate of accumulation because the nearer responsibility is to the people the more it is amenable to the people’s sufferings. From this centralist policy to the creation of a vast bureaucracy to serve the needs of the central direction, is a short and logical step. Everything is sacrificed to the requirements of the ‘Plan.’”
In Britain, and throughout the capitalist world, Bevan sees clearly that what is going on is a struggle between antagonistic social classes over who shall be master in the house. But as soon as we get to Russia ... we have the grand, impersonal and classless deployment of historical forces. Here there is no class which holds its power and derives an exalted economic status through its control of industry via its control of the totalitarian state. He even denies that there is a “caste” formation in Russia. Repressions exists on a vast and inhuman scale, “but I should say that only an insignificant minority of the Russian people are aware of them.”
In fact Bevan believes that the mass of people are not held in subjection by the police terror of the state. They feel that they are better off than their fathers, that they have much wider opportunities. True, they are indoctrinated by a propaganda which tells them that they are much better off than their brothers in the West, and they are prevented by police measures from finding out the truth by establishing any external contacts. But the workers’ support of the Russian regime “rests on his own knowledge that all around him the framework of a modern industrial community is being built, that he is helping to build it, and that in the meantime his life is substantially, if slowly, improving.”  
And finally, says Bevan, we must realize that not all people move at equal speed to achieve their political emancipation. Political liberty is, in any event, not a product of the human spirit, but of historical development. And just as capitalism has produced its own gravedigger in the industrial working class, so the Russian system of totalitarianism is doomed, in the long run, by the industrialization of the country. Workers and technicians must be educated to operate effectively in a society of complex industries. Sooner or later those who have the economic function of running industry will demand the political liberty which goes with economic power. Just when and how this will happen, no one can tell. Modern totalitarianism has great power to atomize society and hold it in subjection. Every dissident or questioning person is purged. So it is going to be difficult to get political democracy.
But “so far man has invented only three methods of transmitting political power from one generation to another; dynastic, caste and property.” And Bevan doubts that a caste can be formed in an industrial society. Anyhow, “power is ultimately shared with those whose economic co-operation must be ensured. These eventually comprise all the workers, for creation, maintenance and expansion of modern industrial techniques depend upon a literate and trained population.”
The Russian government has not yet faced the problem of transferring its power to another generation. Purges take the place of elections.
“The principle of authority has replaced the authority of principle which inspired the revolution in the first instance. Government by authority dominated the history of man until the universal franchise and representative institutions established themselves in the Western world in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.”
In brief, if this analysis is accepted, it is clear that all the peoples of the Stalinist empire must be left to stew in their own historical juice until such time as the historical process brings their economy to a level at which they will reach out for democracy. The fact that they had reached this level thirty-five years ago is alluded to, but no conclusions follow from it. For them, as for the other peoples in industrially undeveloped countries who are groaning under repressive regimes, Bevan has one answer: the industrialized West must help in their economic development. Democracy will follow, as the night the day.  
Certainly there is no direct way in which the peoples of the West can liberate the peoples of Russia or of her vassal nations. For one thing, they have yet to get control over their own countries before they can think of conferring political power and the freedom which goes with it on the masses of Stalinland. In fact, until they have done the trick in their own countries the most they can hope to do is to restrain the capitalist governments which rule them from strengthening Stalinism through their policies of desperation.
Can socialists devise a program which is capable of undermining Stalinism in Russia to the point at which its masses will rise in revolt against the ruling class which today expropriates the surplus of their labor? It is quite true that internal Russian developments can only be hastened or retarded by what the workers in other countries do or leave undone. The problem, to be sure, can only be approached indirectly.
But that does not mean that the problem cannot be approached, or that an approach to it is aided by making a supra-historical, classless analysis of Russian society. The further industrialization of Russia, and the expansion of Stalinist state rule to other countries no doubt increases the strains on the monolithic bureaucratic rule of the empire. But this is neither an argument for augmenting the economic and industrial resources at the disposal of the bureaucracy, nor for the expansion of its control over peoples who are still free from its grasp.  
Quite the contrary. Whatever the historic consequences may be, every increase in the power and area of Stalinist control strengthens the bureaucracy, it does not weaken it. The independent victory of Stalinism in countries like China and Yugoslavia may decrease the specific weight of Russian Stalinism, it does not weaken Stalinism as a world force. Bevan understands very well that democratic socialism and Russian Stalinism have nothing in common, but when he approaches Yugoslavia he does not seem to be aware of the fact that he is dealing with a society of the same order as that which prevails in the Soviet Union.
The task of socialists, then, is not simply to regard Stalinism as something which will “work itself out,” but to recognize that the duration of this historical monstrosity will be directly related to the speed with which they can offer an alternative in significant sections of the world which has an appeal for the peoples in Stalinland. That capitalism, even rich American capitalism, does not appear to these people as such an alternative, goes without saying. There are powerful Stalinist movements in countries where the workers are still free to make a political choice precisely to the degree that no vital, militant socialist alternative is offered them. The creation of such an alternative force can only proceed in terms of a vital response to the challenge of decaying capitalist institutions. Where its creation is thought of chiefly in terms of “anti-Stalinism” it is bound to fail. And yet it must be clearly understood that the development of such forces is not only the most effective counter to the growth of the Stalinist movement internationally, but constitutes the greatest possible external threat to the stability of the existing Stalinist regimes.
*
This brings us to the general problem of a socialist foreign policy for the British Labor Party. And here it must be said bluntly that although Aneurin Bevan has a good deal to say about foreign policy, and much of it is to the point, it does not add up to anything which is nearly as penetrating or instructive as the ideas which have been summed up under the general heading of the road to socialism in Britain.
From the economic point of view, Bevan has not, it seems to us, quite grasped the vital relationship of a positive foreign policy to the prospects of socialism for his own country. He exhibits a quite justified impatience with those who would council the British workers against taking power in their own country and pushing their nationalization and social programs to their sensible limits on the grounds that nothing can (and therefore nothing should) be done in Britain because her economy cannot be self-contained and it is therefore impossible to start building socialism until there is a socialist world of which Britain is a part. He is quite right in denying that Britain “is exposed to world trade movements to an extent that limits the application of socialist policies to her own economy.”
Socialist policies can and should be applied wherever the workers get the political power to apply them. But this does not mean that in every country where the workers achieve such power they can actually succeed in establishing socialism. Bevan understands clearly enough, though abstractly, the historic-economic reasons which prevented the Russian workers from marching forward to the socialist goal. There are equally strong reasons, though of a different nature, which doom British socialism ... if it remains confined to the economic area of the British Isles.  
There has been ample, documented discussion of the economic problems which confront a Britain shorn of its former foreign investments and of much of its former empire. Bevan’s answer to these problems ... is to attack British businessmen for not competing vigorously enough in the American market, and to denounce the United States for economic policies which bear down heavily on the British economy. With the adoption of Bevan’s domestic policies, the British workers would be able to take care of the obstacles their businessmen have placed in their way. But the American government is run by capitalists who are not likely to adapt their policies to the interests of British socialism. Unfortunately, the American labor movement is led by men who are not much more pro-socialist than is the government, and in any event, they have little political power ... as they have no political party through which to wield power.
In brief, the disruptive effect which the uncontrolled American economy had on the economic planning of the British Labor Government can be counted on to continue for some time to come. As a matter of fact, if the effect of the American armament program has been disruptive, a full-scale American depression could have a really destructive impact on the economic structure of Britain. In such circumstances British exports to the United States and to all areas where America dominates the market could be all but eliminated.
To be sure, a high-pressure American dumping campaign on a world scale to relieve her economy of surplus products would force the rest of the capitalist world to protect itself. It might even drive Britain and other countries to close ranks economically in the hope of immunizing themselves to the threat of American competition. At the very least they would be compelled to trade via the type of barter arrangements brought to such a high level of development by the Nazi economists during the late ’30s.
The British government can cushion the shocks of the -fluctuations of world trade on the economy of the country, as Bevan says. But to change the secular trends is much more difficult, and it is these which threaten the economic existence of the country. From the point of view of long-range socialist economic policy, there is no escaping the conclusion that Britain must widen her economic base in order to survive and develop to socialism.
This is primarily a political problem. It cannot be solved by adopting Schuman plans and the like, as the Labor Party has correctly pointed out. For a planned economy on an international scale, parties must be in power on both sides of the border which have a basically similar approach to economic questions and which represent the same class in the society of their respective countries.  
Under the threat of Russian expansion on the one hand, and the whiplash of American economic pressure on the other, the bourgeoisie of Western Europe has been preoccupied to the highest degree with developing some form of economic and even political integration. To be sure, none of the plans has actually gone into execution yet, and perhaps never will. But the tendency is certainly there. The question is: do the socialists have the capacity to make an equally strong drive for the unity of Western Europe ... one which would have a truly progressive historical content?
The British Labor Party has an almost unique opportunity to lead such a movement. Yet they showed no awareness of this when in power, and Bevan shows no awareness of it now. In fact, in his discussions of international affairs the socialist movements of Western Europe and of Asia hardly come in for mention as possible foci toward which a policy could be directed. In Britain it is the masses, the workers who with their democratic power are the force for social progress. When world problems are considered, the chief concern is not at all what the BLP can do to encourage, stimulate, unite and assist the socialist movements to struggle for democracy in their own countries, or where possible to struggle for power so that they can unite the economies of their countries in free, planned association with the economy of Britain and thus form a powerful world counter-weight to the systems of capitalism and Stalinism. In international affairs Bevan sees the existing governments as the only real forces which control policies, and therefore toward which policy should be directed.
In this respect it must be said that he has not even risen to the level of theoretical understanding which has been displayed by Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas in this country. Bevan sees the political prospects of political democracy in Russia as a simple function of the industrial development of the country. He has the same view of the backward areas of Asia and the Middle East. To him a vast Point Four program is the answer to the threat of the spread of Stalinism or some other form of totalitarianism in those countries. Douglas, on the other hand, has clearly recognized that the export of industrial and agricultural equipment to these lands will be of little avail unless a social revolution precedes or at least accompanies it. Alas, to hope that the American government will stimulate and encourage such revolutions is to whistle for a wind. But the British Labor Party is not congenitally incapable of effectively aiding such movements, and this will be doubly true when it is returned to power.
As long as Bevan deals with the role of the United States in world affairs, In Place of Fear is penetrating in its understanding and devastating in its effect. It has already stung liberal and “socialist” standard bearers for the State Department in this country to bitter and anguished cries of rage. His attack on the speed of rearmament to which America has driven Britain and Western Europe is well known. He charges American foreign policy with unpredictability and with a tendency to believe that an effective social policy can be dispensed with in favor of an overwhelming military one. He points out that once America has built up its military power to the point at which it is thought that “negotiation from strength” is possible, the tendency will be to demand a rapid and simple solution to all international troubles ... or else!  
He is equally clear on another aspect of the American armament program. The vast industrial expansion to which it has given birth tends to increase the economic imbalance in the capitalist world. Any prospect of a serious slackening of the pace of rearmament brings the American economy face to face with the danger of surplus production and hence surplus men. This becomes a reason in itself for keeping the arms race going.
But when he comes to the role of Russia in the world struggle his argumentation becomes once again either highly abstract, or at times even trivial. The main burden of his theme is to discount the expansionist drive of Russian Stalinism.
Russia, he insists, lacks the steel to fight a global war. In any event, she is incapable of a Blitzkrieg, because it would not be “consistent with the nature of her economy, which is sluggish and resistive, not mobile and offensive.” Here we have, once again, Bevan the simple economic determinist.
He believes, further, that the Russian government is deterred from starting World War III by another consideration: “such an action on her part [an attack on Western Europe] would lose her the support of those millions in Western Europe who still cherish the delusion that Russia yearns only for peace. No matter how the onslaught might be dressed up, and presented as defense, the presence of Russian soldiers would bring about sharp disillusionment, and consolidate the populations of the invaded countries against her.”
And it is this theoretical approach which also completely dominates his thought on the implications of the rise of Stalinism to power in China. He actually sees this as a blow to Stalin’s aspirations. Why? First, because Stalinist Russia has hoped to achieve her greatest successes not among the peasant populations of the Orient, but among the urban workers of the advanced industrial countries. And second, because the economies of Russia and China do not complement each other. “If you amalgamate a Russian peasant with a Chinese peasant you don’t make a steelworks.” China, you see, needs industrial equipment, and therefore must look to the Western world where it is available. If America would just understand this ...
Bevan has not grasped the fact that once a Stalinist party is in power, political considerations can and are made to prevail over the formal economic needs. China is not just a backward country which needs industrialization. She is also a backward country which is now ruled by an all-powerful bureaucratic class. It is not at all to be excluded that the national interests of this class will lead it one day to break with Stalinist Russia, as happened in the case of Tito. Such a break would be welcomed by every thinking socialist in the world. But this would not change the basic nature of the regime and its relationship to its own peasants and workers.
Bevan urges on the United States a policy toward Stalinist China which would make easier a break from her ties with Russia. Such a policy is not outside the realm of possibilities, though nothing in the present American political scene makes it appear likely. But its effectiveness would not be a simple function of America’s theoretical capacity to industrialize China. Under the circumstances which one can conceive of as bringing about such a break, it is quite to be expected that America would be much more inclined to arm China than to industrialize her. Bevan correctly points out that this has been the tendency of Russian policy also.
After commenting at length about the failures, inadequacies and outright stupidities of American foreign policy in the Cold War, Bevan admits that he cannot put forth any “novel proposal” to solve the problems presented by the struggle for world hegemony between Stalinism and American capitalism. Basically, in his view, it is a matter of a big and world-wide Point Four program, and whatever is decided upon “must command the resources of idealism.” This is rhetoric. But after saying it, he nevertheless does come up with a “novel proposal” which is about as close as he comes to a statement of policy for socialists in the struggle for the world. He suggests that “we fix a date – toward which we should at once begin to work – when a definite percentage of what we are now spending on arms shall be set aside for the peaceful development of backward parts of the world. There are three essentials for success. The date should be far enough away for preparations to be made. It should be near enough to excite hope and encourage restraint. And the percentage of the arms program proposed to be diverted to peaceful purposes should be definite, substantial, and capable of being expressed in terms of men and machinery.” Russia, of course, should be invited to participate in this program.  
Aneurin Bevan is a militant British socialist. But this book does not demonstrate him to be an international socialist. He understands very well that in Britain the masses win that for which they struggle, and that the only hope for the future of British society rests in the success of this struggle. He feels at home in the democratic institutional framework of British society, and recognizes that the value of this framework for the masses is a function of their willingness and ability to use it for the purpose of transforming the social structure.
But the moment he steps outside of these familiar political and social surroundings (and the relatively similar ones which prevail in the United States) he loses his touch. In the vast areas of the world where the masses have no democratic rights, and where they are therefore constrained to struggle for them by methods less orderly and more violent than those employed by the British workers on election day, he tends to lift his eyes from the battle and fix them on the far reaches of historical development.
In practice, this means that he does not see the masses in Asia, and even in Western Europe, as the real source of social progress in our time, and more concretely, as the only force capable of preventing World War III. “Revolution,” he writes, “is almost always reform postponed too long. A civilized society is one that can assimilate radical reforms while retaining its essential stability.” And although this is just one of his many asides made in a quite different connection, it is clear that it expresses his real attitude toward the struggles of the peoples against both Stalinism and the repressive neo-feudalism of the East. His arguments for Point Four are frequently set forth in terms which imply that its purpose should be to secure orderly and stable change and to prevent mass upheavals.  
A socialist foreign policy for Britain cannot be constructed on the basis of such a conception. The fullest exploitation of parliamentary democracy may be an adequate political strategy for the workers of Britain today, but it will prove itself as such only to the extent that by it they gain the power to reorganize their own society. To secure this power, they will have to broaden its base. The most immediately available political forces for this lie in the socialist movements of Western Europe. But they need to be helped and encouraged, not to be ignored. The fate of socialism in Britain, and even of the world itself, may well depend on the speed and thoroughness with which the British labor movement becomes aware of this fact.
And beyond Europe lie the vast reaches of the Middle East, Africa and Asia. The political and social struggles in those areas will not await the long-range working out of economic forces. Quite the contrary, it is these struggles that will in large measure determine how these economic forces will work out. A socialist foreign policy cannot get started until this is understood. And its object must be to assist and encourage in every way possible the actual, present struggle for democracy of the turbulent and aroused masses.
Audacity is indeed the mood which should prevail among socialists. It is needed at least as much in their approach to foreign policy as to their struggle for democratic power at home.
* * *
Footnote
1.
In Place of Fear, by Aneurin Bevan, Simon & Schuster, New York, 1952, 213 pp. $3.00.
 




Major electoral campaigns perform two vital functions. The first, and by far the most important, is that they bring to political realization the silent and often imperceptible shifts in political sentiment which have been taking place within the various sections of society during the whole period preceding them. Elections not only register the nature and magnitude of these shifts; through them the major political parties are able to polarize the social forces which have been in motion, and to organize them into new configurations of real political power.
The second function is derivative from the first. It is the aspect of elections which Marxists have referred to when they have described them as “barometers” of social change, or more precisely, as yardsticks of changes in social and political consciousness. Although they are by no means the sole instrumentality through which the social scientist may judge and weigh the development of consciousness, in periods of relative political stability they offer them by far the most exact and extensive data on which to base an analysis.
In the recent presidential election in the United States the independent socialists were, unfortunately, in no position to participate effectively in the re-distribution of political power.
At the moment, they do not pretend to play that kind of role. But the speed with which they may hope to reach a position of influence in political affairs depends to no small degree on their ability to perform their analytical function, on the accuracy and fruitfulness with which they can discern the meaning of the election as it affects the political development of the working class in general and the labor movement in particular, and on the skillfulness with which they can translate this meaning into the tools of political effectiveness: political program, political education, and political action.
It is far too soon after the event for anyone to lay claim to a full and complete understanding of all the factors which led to the tremendous electoral victory of Dwight Eisenhower in the election. Compared to what will be available in a few months, the data are far from complete, yet enough is known to serve as a basis for a preliminary estimate. It is, of course, extremely important to understand why a majority of the electors who cast their ballots on November 4 voted for Eisenhower. But it is equally important to understand who these electors were—that is, from which social classes they were drawn. For it is in the answer or answers to this question that a good deal of the social dynamic and the longer-range consequences of the election may be discerned.
The crudest general data are these: Out of a total of almost sixty million votes cast, General Eisenhower got a few more than 33 million, while Governor Stevenson got almost 26.6 million. Eisenhower won majorities in 39 states, while Stevenson carried nine ... all of them in the “solid South” and the “border” region. Eisenhower received 55 per cent of the popular vote to Stevenson’s 45 per cent.
In this election ten and a half million more Americans voted than had ever cast their ballots before, sharply reversing the tendency of a declining vote for both parties which had evinced itself in the presidential elections of 1944 and 1948. The increase in the vote for 1952 over 1948 for the two major parties was a staggering 13.5 million votes. Although Eisenhower got about 9.9 million more votes than were received by Dewey in 1948, Stevenson still received almost 2.5 million more votes than were cast for Truman in the same year. The votes cast for the Democratic candidate would have insured him a smashing victory in any previous election in the nation’s history. He received only 892,000 fewer votes than were cast for Roosevelt in his top year, 1936.
 
Who voted for Eisenhower, and who for Stevenson? It is on this question that much more extensive data will become available only in the future. Yet enough is known now to indicate the following conclusion, and that decisively: In their overwhelming majority the basic forces of the labor-Fair Deal coalition remained faithful to the Democratic Party. The organized workers, the Negroes, both North and South, the mass of the Jews, the vast majority of the Catholic workers, voted for Stevenson. The Democratic Party also retained the support of a considerable section of the poor farmers in the South, and of the white-collar “intellectuals” in the North.
Who voted for Eisenhower? And in answering this question it must be made clear that we are not talking about those who voted for the Republican Party, for there is an important distinction which will be gone into later. The answer is: everyone else. And although this answer may appear facetious, it is not. For the major significance of the Eisenhower vote is precisely that it represented a vast outpouring of the “unorganized” voters, which is another way of describing the sociologically amorphous mass of the citizenry which is usually politically passive and only enters the political arena when it is activated by the strong pull of one of the major classes, or when a state of social stalemate and frustration between these classes prods them into a temporary though sometimes frenzied activity.
Perhaps we can better understand who voted for Eisenhower if we first demonstrate the reasons for our contention that the basic social forces of the Fair Deal coalition remained intact for Stevenson. And we can most readily approach the problem by asking: from where other than this coalition could Stevenson have got two and a half million more votes than Truman polled in 1948?
Eisenhower received a relatively tremendous vote in the South. He won majorities in six Southern and border states, and great increases in the votes of all the rest. He gained powerfully in most rural areas, cutting into the Democratic vote not only relatively, but over large sections of the country in absolute numbers. For Stevenson to get a vote larger than Truman got in 1948 he must have not only held on to his basic Northern and urban vote, but to have increased it to compensate for the loss of so much in the countryside.
Could this increase have come significantly from the new vote, that is, from the ten to thirteen million voters who had been passive for the past four, eight or twelve years? That is just about excluded as a major factor, except to the extent to which it applies to new strata of the working class who were activated in this campaign by the trade-union leadership. Everyone agrees that the “new” vote, the usually passive vote, was overwhelmingly for Eisenhower.
But from what other source could Stevenson’s increased vote have come? From the prosperous farmers? From the old middle class of small businessmen, or the new white-collar middle class? Did the housewives leave their homes in masses to register and vote for him? Just to ask the question is to answer it.
But we need not, fortunately, rely chiefly on this kind of negative and deductive reasoning to arrive at the facts, even though it would be adequate to indicate what they are if no other data were at hand. To the extent that detailed information is now available it points inexorably to an increase of the vote of the organized working class for Stevenson in this election.
In a specialized study of seven industrial counties in Ohio and six in Michigan published in the New York Times for November 9 we get the following popular vote (in thousands):



OHIO


      


  Stevenson
1952


      


  Truman
1948




Cuyahoga (Cleveland)


323


258




Mahoning (Youngstown)


  68


  62




Stark (Canton)


  55


  48




Sumitt (Akron)


  98


  78




Hamilton (Cinc.)


  141


  135




Lucas (Toledo)


  85


  74




Franklin (Columbus)


  87


  85




MICHIGAN


   




Wayne (Detroit)


   


616


   


490




Genesee (Flint)


  56


  45




Gent (Grd Rapids)


  47


  43




Muskegon


  25


  21




Saginaw


  21


  17




Hacomb (Mt. Cl.)


  25


  25



For the moment, we are not concerned with the implications of the fact that in eleven of these thirteen counties Eisenhower ran ahead of Stevenson, or even of the fact that in 1948 Dewey ran ahead of Truman only five of them. The fact we are trying to bring out at the moment is that in these thirteen counties Stevenson picked up some 266,000 more votes than Truman got last time. Did these come from a shifting across class lines, or from an intensification and consolidation of the conscious working-class vote?
Although the evidence is far from complete, it appears that even in cities where the Democrats as a whole lost heavily proportionately, the total vote for them increased, or at least, the defections were least evident in the strictly working-class districts. It was in the vast suburban areas, the habitat of the minor business executives and the white-collar aspirants to their jobs that Eisenhower made a real killing.
It has been said that the Democrats lost heavily among the Catholics, and particularly in those areas populated by people descended from nations now behind the Iron Curtain. Eisenhower probably did make a dent in the traditionally Democratic “Catholic vote.” But the Catholics in general must be differentiated from the Catholic workers, and particularly the organized Catholic workers. The Czech 20th Ward near Cicero, Ill., voted 64.67 per cent Democratic, and the most heavily concentrated Polish population in the United States in Hamtramck, Mich., was carried by Stevenson well over four to one.
Who, then, voted for Eisenhower? First we have the small though solid phalanxes of substantial businessmen all over the country. Then there are the traditional Republicans of all classes who have never forgotten or learned anything since Roosevelt infuriated them by keeping the unemployed from starving to death in the streets. These are the solid foundation of the Republican party, but by themselves they never have won an election and never will. This time, however, they were joined in their mass by the white collar workers, the small and minute businessmen of town, and country who have been spawned by the industrial boom, the wealthier farmers, millions of housewives who usually leave pursuits like politics to their husbands, unorganized workers and young workers to whom the depression is a legend, and who take their union-won economic status for granted, and a great mass of people in the South to whom labor organizations still look like an imported Northern menace only slightly less dangerous than the “menace” of equal civil rights for Negroes.
These groups in the population are usually politically passive. They are the most backward elements in society. They are the ones who would be last to join any great surge in political consciousness, who tend to sit on the sidelines when history is being forged by the active classes. But this time they marched to the polls in their millions, and from 70 to 80 per cent of them cast their votes for Eisenhower. Why?
The most general way in which the question can be answered is that the Democrats had landed themselves and the country in a blind alley. For them, there was no way out. Even during a political campaign, a period in which candidates of the major parties and their publicity agents are traditionally exempted from the usual social prejudice against people who make promises which they cannot and do not intend to fulfill, they could think of nothing to promise.
That is, perhaps, a slight exaggeration. It would be more exact to say that they could think of nothing good to promise which could be taken seriously by anyone. The only attempt they made in this direction was their promise to the Negroes to pass a Fair Employment Practices Act ... but then there was the South, and there was Sparkman, and there was a record of eighteen years of power for the Democratic Party without such an Act ... and there was the District of Columbia, controlled for eighteen years by a Democratic Congress with segregation and discrimination the daily scourge of its great Negro population.
But except for this feeble effort, what could they say? Did they promise lower taxes, which hit the workers hard and make the small businessman froth at the mouth? Not quite. They insisted, with dignity, that taxes will have to stay high for the duration of the cold war.
Did they promise to lower the cost of living? No, not as long as the armament program compels an unbalanced budget.
Could they hope to balance the budget in the foreseeable future? Hardly.
But then, perhaps it would remain unbalanced in order to pay for increased social services, like national health insurance? No, this was approached with discreet silence. The money is needed for less healthful projects.
Could it be that a vast program for building public low-rent housing is in the making? Nothing like that, said the Democrats by their silence.
Well, it appears that all our troubles in the economic field are caused by the cold war and even more directly by the hot war in Korea. How about ending that war?
Not on your life, said the Democrats. We are going to fight it as long as necessary to prove that we can outlast the Communists, and anyone who raises the hopes of the people for peace there is a demagogue or worse. The war in Korea is only a part of the world-wide struggle between our way of life and the Russian way of life and its solution will depend on the solution of the world struggle.
But how are we going to solve the world struggle? We have poured billions of dollars into the economies of Europe and Asia, and more billions into our own arms program. But we hear that in Europe the economies are still shaky to the point of collapse, and that they have not raised their own armament programs enough to make any relaxation on our part possible. Where is the end to this?
The Democrats replied with commendable honesty: we don’t know where the end is, or if there is one. It will be a long, hard, thankless struggle. Even though you may not believe it, we have made progress, and things may start to break our way any year now. But the watchwords must be vigilance, sacrifice, and honor. In the meantime, count the blessings you now have and consider yourselves fortunate. We can’t promise you more, and there may very well be less before the whole thing somehow blows over. But never forget that what you have you owe to the Democratic Party, and that when the Republicans were last in power you had much, much less.
Winston Churchill was once able to arouse the British people to a heroic national effort, and to increase his own political prestige immeasurably by promising them nothing but blood, sweat and tears. It is no reflection on the courage or the political awareness of the American people that a similar appeal has left them cold. They do not live on a small island under the direct military attack of a powerful foe. Their sons and husbands and sweethearts are not dying almost literally in the defense of their own homes. Their food is not being sunk by submarines, nor are their cities being obliterated by bombers.
The young men of America are dying in a little peninsula thousands of miles from home. To millions upon millions of Americans the war in Korea seems some kind of a ghastly nightmare, the product of an inexcusable diplomatic blunder. And less sharply felt, but almost equally burdensome appears the slow, deadly, inexorable emotional and economic drain of the world-wide struggle with Stalinism.
True, they have food and clothing and shelter and many of the conveniences and luxuries of life which are almost beyond the imagination of the workers of Europe, and quite beyond that of the impoverished masses of Asia and Africa. These things are valued by everyone, and by large numbers of the middle class and the organized workers they are almost taken for granted. But they can be retained and improved upon only by the greatest exertion in the face of high taxes and a rising cost of living. The people are in a gigantic rat-race, even if the course is comfortably furnished and the contestants are well fed. And there is the pervasive feeling that the whole thing rests on unstable foundations, that their instability is somehow connected with the war in Korea, the endless expenditures and confusions abroad, and the “mess in Washington.”
In the circumstances, what, after all, could the Democrats promise the American people, or even those sections of them needed for an electoral victory? Any promise of a drastic change with regard to taxes, the high cost of living, the level of federal expenditures, a thorough shake-up in Washington, the war in Korea or the cold war in general—any such promises would be a repudiation of their own administration. Any promises about new social gains in medicine, housing, or other social programs would also, in the nature of things, have to be promises for ever higher taxes in a country in which the budget is already unbalanced, unless it were connected with a brand new, large- scale assault on the holdings of the capitalist class itself. But neither the structure of the Democratic Party nor the necessities of retaining the support of the capitalists in the financing and execution of the armaments program permit such an assualt. And in any event, would not that smack just a little bit of “Godless Communism,” the arch-enemy which we are being mobilized to resist and eventually crush all over the world?
So, for the future, the Democrats promised virtually nothing, or at least nothing better. But the Republicans were neither inhibited by the burden of their record, nor by the prospect of having to carry out whatever promises they might make. Their campaign was vague in specific proposals, almost ridiculously devoid of concrete program, but devastating in its impact.
From beginning to end, they were on the offensive. And in a period of uneasy social stalemate they chose the perfect candidate and the perfect slogan. Their candidate: a national hero who had never become identified with any particular social or political grouping in the country and who bore no direct responsibility for any of the major policies over which the parties had fought over the years; a man who was known for three major qualities: an architect of victory in war, a unifier of diverse interests in peace, and a stern but always friendly father of his countrymen in both.
Their slogan was as effective as their candidate: It is time for a change!
Your taxes are too high?
Ike will lower them.
But aren’t high taxes caused by the armament expenditures?
No, they are caused by inefficiency and waste and corruption in Washington. Ike will change all that.
But even if all that is eliminated, won’t the budget have to remain high to build arms?
Yes, it will, but Ike knows how to cut arms expenditures to the bone while increasing the armed might of the nation.
But how about the high cost of living—isn’t that a result of the armament program?
No, it is the result of the inflationary policy in Washington. Ike is for a sound dollar, and you remember how much that used to buy before the Democrats squandered away our national wealth.
How about the war in Korea.
Ike will fix that. He will go over there and take a fresh look at it, and see what can be done. The Democrats got us into it, you know, and they say themselves they don’t know either how to win it or how to stop it. Ike will find a way to do one or the other, or at least to get the Asians to do their own fighting and dying.
But the war in Korea, isn’t that part of the cold war, and didn’t the Reds start it in the first place? Will we really be able to end it unless they want to?
Well, Roosevelt gave Stalin Eastern Europe at Yalta and Teheran, and Truman finished the job at Potsdam. The Communists in the State Department and other key spots gave China to Mao Tse Tung and his Russian masters. Whom would you rather trust, the people who were responsible for all our defeats in foreign policy, or a man who showed that he knows how to win a war like Eisenhower did in Europe?
Well, how about the labor bosses and strikes which tie up the country?
Ike will fix that. He knows how to get people around the table and show them where their best interests lie. He’ll be firm, but just; he won’t let anyone mess around.
What about the Communists over here?
Ike will fix them. He doesn’t go for that McCarthy stuff of smearing people, and he is firmly for civil liberties. But he will clean every Communist or Creeping Socialist out of power in Washington. You can rely on that.
While the Republicans were on the offensive throughout the campaign against the stalemate of 1952, while the Democrats were reduced to a pitiful “me tooism” and “you’re another” response on these while attempting to shift the battle-ground to the burning issues of 1932–1936.
The Republicans attacked the open sores of corruption in Washington.
“You’re another,” shouted the Democrats as they gleefully pounced on Nixon’s private pork barrel, or dusted off the history books to remind people of something known as Teapot Dome.
“Ike will clean out the mess in Washington with a new broom.”
“Stevenson can do some cleaning, too.”
“The Democrats let Hiss and the other Communists sneak in and practically run the government. We’ll clean them out root and branch.”
“But we have been cleaning them out ourselves. Just look at our Smith Act and all the people we have sent to jail, and our loyalty program and our subversive list.”
“The Democrats have passed no legislation for civil rights in twenty years. They never intend to pass any. Most of the States which have civil rights programs also have Republican governors.”
“But the Republicans in Congress voted against the civil rights bills too.”
“The Democrats who controlled both houses of Congress increased your taxes, inflated your dollar and raised the cost of living.”
“But the Republicans voted against price controls.”
“Who had the majority in both houses of Congress?”
Did the Eisenhower campaign meet the issues squarely? Did it offer the people a progressive issue from the stalemate in which the United States finds itself both domestically and on the world arena. Not at all. It was not designed to influence the progressive class in society which was given up as a hopeless job before the campaign even started. It was not really designed to win the Negroes who are overwhelmingly working class in status and instinct. It sought only to neutralize the Negroes’ adherence to the Democrats, as much as possible, while really playing for the support of the ruling class and the rascists in the South. It went heavily for the Catholics not as workers, but as anti-Communists, as anti-Atheists. It was not pitched to attract the urban intellectuals who have little influence except when allied with the workers, and fewer votes.
The Eisenhower campaign was directed to the frustrated middle class above all. They are the ones who chafe most under the high taxes and the rising cost of living. They are the ones for whom the rat-race to keep up their standard of living and to improve their social status is most galling. It was designed to appeal to the mothers and fathers with boys in Korea or who are of draft age; to the type of housewife whose social consciousness is limited to her struggle with the family budget; to masses of little people who have no organizations through which they can protect themselves even partially against organized business on the one hand and organized labor on the other, and who seek a strong, fatherly leader to protect them instead.
 
Here we witnessed one of those classic situations which arise every now and then in the period of capitalism’s decline. For one reason or another, the major social classes have stalemated each other. A social movement which had been able to make progress in one way or another, and through which the society had been solving its problems more or less adequately had come to a complete stop. While it was in motion, it had succeeded in neutralizing the most backward sections of the population, and in dragging wide layers of the rest along with it. But new social conditions, new problems had robbed it of its dynamic, and it had found no new source of energy with which to replace it. The old social classes which it had fought are too discredited to be able to return to power under their old symbols and with their old leadership. But they are able enough and powerful enough to find new symbols and new leaders which promise an issue from the frustration of the backward masses.
Where have we seen this most clearly in recent history? In the closing years of the Weimar Republic, of course. There the causes of frustration were far more acute and compelling than they are in America today. The capitalist class had far less room in which to maneuver, and therefore was compelled to select a leader and a movement which was almost as dangerous to itself as to the workers. And the Nazis were able to attract to themselves not only the desperate declassed elements of their brown and black shirted legions, but the vast middle class, and the reactionary peasantry, and the housewives who were convinced that whatever you might say about the Nazis, it was time for a change.
The working class did not go over to Hitler during his rise to power despite unemployment and under-employment. They were split between Stalinists and Social-Democrats, an aspect of the situation which bears no similarity to what is going on in America. But the great mass of them stuck to their Social-Democratic Party and their trade unions and their democratic allies until all of them were thrown into concentration camps together. They did not go over to the class enemy, but they did not offer leadership to the broad masses of the people either. They just stood pat on their gains, while their leaders explained that there were all kinds of difficulties in the way of resuming the road to full employment and socialism.
Here the situation is not so desperate, and there is no effective fascist movement which could thrive only on real desperation. The working class and its natural allies stuck to “their” party in overwhelming numbers because to them the Republicans smelled at a distance of a thousand feet of big business, the Taft-Hartley symbol of union-busting, and depression. The Negroes stuck not because they have any real illusions about the Democrats as a party, but because in the North it was the party of labor and the liberals, and in the South there was no road to political influence outside of it. Above all they stuck because despite the fact that no laws had been passed to protect them they had improved their condition measurably during the war and since, and because they too, like the rest of the workers could smell the open class enemy at a distance. The Jews and the foreign-born workers stuck because they recognized that despite all its deficiencies in this respect, the labor movement and the fair-deal leadership has been their main champion in America, and because they could not fail to discern that the organized rabble of the lunatic fascist fringe feels much closer to the Republicans than it does to the Democrats.
These groups stuck to Stevenson. In fact, they did more than stick. They were more firmly devoted to his candidacy than they had ever been to that of Truman. They wore Stevenson buttons, and they talked Stevenson to each other and their friends, and they campaigned for him. Yet their mood was not one of hope for a better day. It was permeated by the fear of a worse one.
But the white-collar workers, and the little business men, and many of the unorganized workers who regard the unions more as a barrier to good jobs than as a friend, the mothers with boys in Korea, the backward masses who had not bothered to vote before ... they came out and voted. They voted for the General with the big smile who can bring people together and fix things. They voted for an end to the mess in Washington, for a hope of an end to the war in Korea, and in any event, come what may, they lashed out for a change.
The role played by the “Communist” issue in the campaign has tremendous symptomatic importance. In retrospect it appears that it may not have had quite the weight which it appeared to have while the campaign was in progress (see below on McCarthy’s vote in Wisconsin). Yet there is no doubt that it played a significant role.
The Republicans used the Hiss case and the revelations about various Stalinists who had worked their way into some prominent positions in American society to create the impression that Stalinism is a serious internal menace to the country, and that the Democrats have been “soft” toward the Stalinists at best, and in secret collaboration with them at worst.
They sought to whip up a real hysteria over the “Communist menace,” and not without success. The Democrats had prepared the ground for them over the years with their “loyalty” program, their subversive lists, their Smith Act, and the legal and extra-legal hounding of the Stalinists and anti-Stalinist dissidents by their ubiquitous FBI. On this issue the Democrats, often led by their most “liberal” spokesmen, were forced into a most cowardly and even despicable “me too” role.
Although we would be the last to deny the fact that just before and during the last war the Stalinists had succeeded in acquiring positions of considerable influence in many sectors of American society, it is evident that today their strength and influence are at an all-time low in the United States. The function of the anti-“Red” hysteria in America is today chiefly that of singling out a vulnerable scape-goat on which to vent the fury of frustration for the inability of American foreign policy to deal successfully with the real Stalinist menace in the rest of the world.
This frustration is felt not only by the officials responsible for this policy, but by the people as a whole. It is a specific reflex to the pressures of the cold war. Even though Eisenhower’s victory may well tend to relieve the fear which has been created that “Communists” are directing American foreign policy in a manner favorable to Stalin, it is probable that the anti-Stalinist frenzy will be turned from government as its object to other sections of our society.
It is indeed heartening that McCarthyism has shown itself weaker than many had feared. Yet this does not mean that the anti-“Red” hysteria has passed its peak, or that there is any reason to expect its abatement in the future. The basic cause for this menace to the civil liberties of our whole society is the success of Stalinism on a world scale, and the inability of a policy of military containment to defeat it. As a Republican administration can be expected to be even less successful in combatting Stalinism internationally than were the Democrats, both it, and particularly its reactionary wing, can be counted on to utilize the emotional safety-valve of the “anti-Red” drive at home.
 
The backward masses expressed their frustration, and took their revenge on the Fair Deal. But they did not do it altogether wildly or blindly. Their prosperity makes them cautious even in revenge. They like Ike, but they are dubious, or at least they lack enthusiasm for the Republicans. This was expressed in the fact that almost everywhere the General ran ahead of his ticket, that the Republicans were only able to pick up a net gain of one seat in the Senate, and that they gained control of the House by the slenderest margin enjoyed by any party since 1930. It was expressed even more strikingly in the virtual repudiation of the extreme right wing of the Republican Party.
Senators Jenner of Indiana and Malone of Nevada just barely squeezed through on Eisenhower’s landslide. And the Wisconsin Wretch, McCarthy, ran far behind both the presidential and gubernatorial tickets in his state. Three other reactionaries of the “class of ’46,” Kem of Missouri, Cain of Washington and Ecton of Montana went down to defeat. Ten states voted for Eisenhower but chose Democratic Senators, and only one split its ticket the other way.
The same pattern was repeated in the House of Representatives, where all seats were up for re-election. The Republicans made a net gain of twenty-one seats over 1950 out of a total of 435. In twelve Northeastern and Western states which voted for Eisenhower, the Democrats retained all of their seats in the House.
The middle class and the usually passive unorganized mass came out and expressed their frustration by voting for a change. As they were given no leadership by the labor-Fair-Deal coalition, they had no alternative but to express their desires by voting for a conservative symbol of change. But Eisenhower was not a symbol of black reaction, and those who were got their come-uppance.
It is of the utmost importance that this be grasped in its full significance. It has been obscured chiefly by the tendency of the labor bureaucracy and the Fair Dealers to paint Eisenhower and the real core of his leading cadres in the blackest hues. As their own “movement” had been retreating, socially speaking, steadily since 1940, they sought to create the illusion that it had been forging ahead by holding up before the electorate a picture of the Republicans in headlong flight to reaction. Just as the troglodytes of Republicanism tried to convince the people that the real choice in this election was between “socialism and democracy,” so the Fair Dealers tried to scare them by proclaiming in effect that their alternatives were between “democracy and fascism.” The truth was in neither of them.
The shift was to the conservatism of the permanent war economy, not to the conservatism of Herbert Hoover. It was a shift to a conservatism which recognizes and accepts the major social reforms of the early days of the New Deal as built-in features of American society which may be chipped at a little but which must not be touched in their essence. The shift was to a conservatism which recognizes that the labor movement is here to stay, and that the problem is not to destroy it, but rather to integrate it into the structure of the permanent war economy.
The first impact of Eisenhower’s election has been, quite naturally, to stun the labor and Fair Deal leadership, and the working class and other groups which have accepted their ideology and their picture of the social dynamic as the only ones possible. By the same token, it has greatly encouraged not only the conservative elements, but also the extreme reactionaries. It is only necessary to keep ones ears open in any place where the undifferentiated public assembles to know that the racists, the anti-Semites, the union haters, the 100 per cent Americans are in a state of high euphoria. They feel that their day has come at last. But actually, it is still a long way off.
The depth of the stupefaction of the labor leadership and the liberals is a function of their misunderstanding of the era in which we live. This misunderstanding was most clearly revealed in the kind of campaign they conducted, in the symbols, both positive and negative, with which they sought to rally the masses to the Democratic Party.
Quite understandably, they sought to win with the same kind of campaign which had won for them in every election since 1936. Essentially, Stevenson ran against Herbert Hoover and the great depression which started in his regime. He ran for the reforms of the New Deal, and for the prosperity of the war economy.
The working class and its natural allies recognize the Republicans for what they are, the chief spokesmen of big business, and hence voted against them. But it is questionable whether even for them the old symbols retain their potency. The major reforms of the New Deal are now accepted as an integral part of the American Way of Life, and Eisenhower could promise, more or less in good faith, to leave them intact. After twelve years of prosperity, the traumatic effect of the depression on all layers of American society is beginning to wear off. Truman could still invoke its memory with success in 1948, when the country had once again experienced a slight post-war recession with unemployment (even though mostly temporary) reaching four to six millions at its worst.
But in 1952 the attempt of the Fair Dealers to claim credit for the current prosperity, either for themselves or for their New Deal ancestors, was too fanciful to convince anyone except those who were determined to be convinced in advance. Even the Fair Deal professors of economics know, and admit privately, that our prosperity is based on the armament economy in general, and the war in Korea in particular. And the masses who have not been initiated into the “new methods” devised by the Fair Deal to prevent depression even without armaments take this as a matter of course. (The “new methods” are frequently referred to by Fair Deal publicists, but never described. They are, no doubt, being kept a dark secret to be sprung on an unsuspecting public at the proper psychological moment.)
The domestic issues which gave meaning to the Fair Deal-Republican dichotomy for the past twenty years have not been solved. Bet they have been submerged by, or rather, subsumed into the problems of the cold war, of the struggle between the imperialisms of Stalinism and American capitalism. However slowly and dimly, and with whatever gross distortions of understanding, the American people have grasped this fact. They know that their own prosperity is linked to the armament economy, and that this in turn is a function of the struggle for the world. Although they have, by and large, accepted the necessity of this struggle, they have not accepted the consequences which follow from it.
This is particularly true as they do not feel that the struggle is being waged successfully. The bloody stalemate in Korea is only the most dramatic symbol of the stalemate in the rest of the world. At the moment, the people are not worrying about a depression, though they know that its recyrrance is always a possibility. At the moment they are more concerned with high taxes and high prices and the mess in Washington and the world.
The Fair Dealers have misunderstood this era because they cannot accept the permanent war economy as the only basis for continued prosperity. To do so would be to shatter the illusion that they have discovered the magic formula whereby capitalism can be maintained without depressions and without wars on an ever-ascending scale of welfare and progress. But that is the image of American society by which they live. By this image all that is necessary is to keep re-electing Fair Dealers to office, and to keep on subsidizing capitalism all over the world. Finally Stalinism will evaporate as a world menace, and the Europeans and Asians, educated in the mysteries of American know-how will combine in a happy family of nations under the divinely ordained leadership of no one but the Fair Dealers themselves.
Just how long this illusion could have been maintained if Eisenhower had not won the election, it is hard to say. It is not excluded that if the Republicans had chosen Taft, and if they had conducted their campaign along strictly Taftist lines, they might have backed out of victory.
The fact is that Eisenhower dragged the Republican Party to victory with him, and that in doing so he dealt the Democratic Party as we have known it a blow from which it may never recover. This brings us to an assessment of the trends which the General’s victory are likely to set off for the future.
 
It is a commonplace to refer to the sobering effect of office on even the most irresponsible opposition. We have stated above that the Republicans were not inhibited in their campaign by the prospect of having to carry out whatever promises they might make. This was true even though it did not induce them to make very many concrete promises. They did not have to.
But now they are saddled with the cold war and the permanent war economy as the basic framework of capitalist existence. To operate successfully within it, they must maintain a considerable degree of national unity. They cannot do this and at the same time mount a major assault on the working class or its organizations. They cannot even hope to hang on to the electorate which they coaxed to the polls unless they at least make a gesture on taxes and the high cost of living. And most serious of all, for them, they cannot hope to stay in office for more than one term in the event either of major reverses in foreign policy or of a serious recession in this country.
Even while wallowing in their slough of despondency, the Fair Deal publicists can hardly suppress a morbid chuckle of anticipation in their columns. It has been a matter of common knowledge before the elections that the critical period for the American economy would come sometime toward the middle or end of 1953. With a levelling off of the armament economy projected for next year, the surpluses of the productivity of American industry will tend to begin choking the pores of the economy. In Europe the signs of contraction are beginning to show up already. This means that any prospect of dumping the American surpluses abroad is reduced.
With the economic difficulties of the decayed capitalist regimes in Europe piling up, any successes in the cold war appear highly unlikely. Further reverses, and possibly major ones are much more to be expected. And the Stalinists are not being at all helpful with the turn projected by the recent congress of their internationally ruling party in Moscow. They are preparing to exploit every economic difficulty to the maximum.
The Republicans are not Fair Dealers, even though they are confronted with an intensification of the problems which had kept the Fair Deal at dead center or in a slow retreat for the past eight years. Taft and Taber will drive to cut expenditures at the expense of the people, and Eisenhower will not resist them. The right wing of the Republican party will seek to harry the labor movement both from the halls of Congress and from behind their corporation desks. Although it is quite likely that Eisenhower and the moderates will seek to restrain them in the interest of the war economy, the crises in class relations which are bound to arise will force decisions on them which are made in the heat of battle ... and these decisions are even less likely to be favorable to labor than were those of their Democratic “friends.” (Remember Truman’s proposal to draft the railroad workers into the army to break the rail strike of 1946?)
Yet it must be emphasized, once again, that we have witnessed a conservative turn in the country, not a swing to reaction, let alone to fascism. The Republicans will always have to remember a few hard facts: (1) Stevenson got enough votes in the last election to win any normal (numerically) contest. (2) The labor movement is intact, and showed increased political organization and strength in the elections. (3) Any major and direct assault on the standard of living of the people in this country, or on the labor movement, would no doubt generate sharp class conflict and the most vigorous working-class resistance and such an assault would play right into the hands of Stalin and the Stalinists all over the world.
In the meantime, however, there is another problem and it is a pressing one. What will four years out of the White House, and a minimum of two years out of the Federal patronage troughs do to the Democratic Party?
 
The recent electoral campaign and its results in the balloting on November 4, have already shown a remarkable disintegration of the old relations of power inside the Democratic Party coalition.
In the South, the party has fallen apart at the seams. And although the evidence is yet far from complete these seams appear to run, strangely enough, pretty close to the class cleavages whose very existence is denied by our Fair Deal deep-thinkers. It is true that in the South all social relations are distorted by the incubus of racialism even more than they are in other parts of the country. And it is also true that racialism is still strong in the white sections of the new industrial working class of the South, which has only come out of the hills yesterday, so to speak. But it is quite clear that the bolt to Eisenhower in the South was led by the capitalists, both old and new, of the area. The oil millionaires of Texas probably gave as much money to the Eisenhower campaign as the masters of Wall Street.
To whom can the Democratic Party leadership in the South turn in an attempt to rebuild the shattered structure of the party there? Of course they will seek to compromise, to make deals, to appease many of the leaders who turned against them. They have certainly had no principled objection to working with the big landowners, the cotton merchants, the arrant racists and reactionaries who have dominated the Southern Democracy for so long, and they can be expected to have none in the future.
But the leading cadres of reaction in the South have turned against them in this election as they did in 1948. They cannot be trusted to maintain elementary party loyalty in the future. There can be little doubt that their Congressional representatives will continue to cooperate with the Republicans as they have done in the past. They have shown their basic affinity to the Republican Party in legislative matters for years, and they have now twice demonstrated that this affinity is so strong that they are willing to cooperate with them even in an election where power was directly at stake.
From a primitive urge of self-preservation, the Democratic Party would have to seek new bases of strength in the South. And if the ruling class lines up solidly with the Republicans, where could they look? Primarily to the same elements there who form their electoral base in the rest of the country: to the organized workers, the poor farmers and tenant farmers, the enlightened section of the middle class, and yes, to the Negroes.
Such a course could be dictated by political logic, but whether it will actually be pursued is a different matter. The Democratic leaders do not have any intention of transforming their organization into what would clearly be a class political party in the South. Their interests are those of liberal capitalism, not of the working class and the Negroes, and their own desire and ability to cooperate with the Southern Democracy is one of the most conclusive demonstrations of that fact.
But for the labor movement, either as part of the Democratic Party or as an independent force, this course is the only one possible. Their intentions in the matter were demonstrated at the last Democratic Party convention in Chicago, where they attempted to purge a section of the Southern leadership from the party. Even though the party leadership itself has much in common with the Southern bourgeoisie, to the labor movement it is an implacable enemy in both the economic and political fields.
Even if nothing else had happened, a deep and probably unbridgeable breach in the Democratic Party of the South would bring about a new configuration of forces in the party nationally. But much else happened, and it will continue to happen.
We have already pointed to the fact that in the North, the tendency of the organized industrial workers to stick with Stevenson was much more pronounced than was that of the rest of the urban masses who had been, more or less, in the Democratic camp up till now. Not only did they stick, but for the first time the union leadership found, that by and large, where they conducted an aggressive campaign independently of the old Democratic machines they were able to get out the vote, and an even bigger vote than ever before. It is a remarkable fact that in this campaign in which the old-fashioned Democratic machines in city after city revealed their weakness, the Liberal Party in New York and the new labor-Americans for Democratic Action machine in Philadelphia were able to gain votes against the stream.
The success of the labor political organizations and the failure of the old machines dealt a further blow to the relation of forces within the Democratic Party. If the party had won despite this development, the labor leadership might have continued to tag along behind their friends in office for some time to come.
But now they have no friends in office, or at least almost none who are in a position to do anything for them. Throughout the country the Democratic Party organization is bound to weaken and to begin a process of disintegration now that it is deprived of its life-blood of patronage. But the labor movement and its political arm have never depended on patronage for their existence. They have a different base, and it remains intact. Their chief reason for clinging to the Democratic Party was the conviction that this was the only way in which the more direct and open representatives of their major enemy, the employers, could be kept out of office. They will now discover that their movement can survive even under the new conditions—survive and grow.
So far we have sought to demonstrate that the relation of forces inside the Democratic Party coalition has been drastically changed in this election and that it will be changed even more fundamentally as a consequence of the Republican victory. Labor has emerged not as the petitioner who had to content itself with the best compromise it could make on program and candidates in a coalition in which the cards were stacked against it before the game started. The labor movement now emerges as potentially the power inside the Democratic Party.
But between potentiality and realization there is that well known gap. Only a foolhardy person would seek to predict at this time what the future relations of the labor movement will be to the Democratic Party. The most that one can hazard is to indicate possible lines of future development. Which ones will actually be realized will depend on factors which cannot be known now.
The city machines have proven themselves weaker than before, and the party is deeply torn in the South. But the Democratic Party still has a lot of life and kick in it. Its leaders will bend every effort to re-constitute it and re-organize it more or less on the old model, but with “more energetic” personnel. They certainly have no intention of abdicating to the labor leaders, just as the latter have no intention of taking over their functions.
But the changed relationship of forces cannot help but increase the friction among them. This does not necessarily mean that the friction will raise the temperature to a point at which continued collaboration becomes impossible. There will be all kinds of countervailing pressures which will tend to lubricate the rubbing surfaces. The actual development will be determined primarily by the course of the economy itself and the manner in which the working class and its leadership reacts to it.
Even before the Eisenhower victory there was considerable evidence pointing to a new type of participation of the labor leadership in politics and in the Democratic Party. In this campaign over large sections of the country the American Federation of Labor’s Labor League for Political Education, and the Congress of Industrial Organizations’ Political Action Committee conducted a far more vigorous campaign for Stevenson than they had ever conducted for Roosevelt or Truman, and they proceeded generally outside but parallel to the regular Democratic Party machines. It appears that they were frequently far more successful than the Democratic regulars in getting out the vote for Stevenson. Even now, right after the common defeat, it is evident that there is a great deal of contempt and bitterness among the active union politicos for their Democratic colleagues.
If, in the period ahead, the labor movement finds itself under strong pressure from the capitalists backed up by the Republican administration, it will naturally look to its Democratic allies for help. It is quite possible that they will get much less sympathy from them now that they are out of office, than they got when Truman was in the White House, and that was never too much. Such an eventuality could easily force them to seek to form a new organizational base for their political activity; that is, to form a new party of their own.
Although such a development is to be ardently hoped for and advocated by independent socialists, a different course is not at all excluded. As the labor leadership still thinks of politics almost solely in terms of immediate electoral victories, they may be driven into an even more conservative course by this defeat than that which they had been following in the immediate past. They may be convinced that their only hope is to cling even more tightly to the skirts of the Democratic Party, and to play an even less prominent role inside it. It is certainly too early to predict. It is not too early to seek to drive home to the advanced workers by every means available the strength which labor’s semi-independent instrumentalities displayed in this campaign, to seek to convince them that only a further and broader organizational development of them, and a bolder and politically more independent course can serve their true political interests.
In this connection it is pertinent to draw attention to the remarkable achievement of the Liberal Party in New York. Their own candidate for the United States Senate, George Counts, got 461,229 votes. In 1950 the Democratic candidate for the Senate, Lehman, got 312,594 votes on the Liberal line. Even though Stevenson also polled a heavier vote on the Liberal line than did Truman in 1948, the Counts vote was greater than that for Stevenson.
It may very well be that the Liberal Party picked up a good portion of the 1948 Wallace vote in this election. Furthermore, the Democratic candidate for the Senate, Cashmore, was a little-known party hack whose nomination had been opposed by many Fair Dealers as well as by the Liberals. Nevertheless, the ability of the Liberal party to make headway in New York City against the Eisenhower tide showed that even in this election, with its conservative swing, an independent labor-based party has attractive power.
It will be some time before the vote received by the Socialist Party and other minor organizations is known. It is impossible to state in advance whether or not this vote will prove to have shown a significant increase or decline. In an election the outstanding aspect of which was the feeling of frustration of a large mass of the people with the cold war and specially with the war in Korea, one could normally expect a heavier protest socialist anti-war vote.
Yet the campaign was also characterized by greater heat and emotion than any in recent years, and by a greater organized effort on the part of the leadership of the labor movement. The Democratic candidate had a particular personal appeal for intellectuals in the labor movement, on its fringes and on the campuses, and it is on these groups that socialists in America have in recent times counted for a goodly portion of any vote they get.
The campaign itself clarified two things about the socialist organizations in this country. It underlined the organizational weakness of the Socialist Party as nothing else could have done. Their failure to get on the ballot in some of the key states (California, Illinois) was chiefly a result of the vicious electoral laws passed by the major parties which make it virtually impossible for organizations without enormous resources to place their candidates before the electorate. But even where the SP was on the ballot, its campaign was virtually nonexistent. The Third Camp adherents in the SP are going to have to take a long and hard look at the situation in their organization and come up with some serious answers. A “party” which cannot conduct an electoral campaign even within its accepted limitations must find another reason for organizational and ideological survival.
The other fact demonstrated about the socialistic groups was the almost simon-pure Stalinist-type campaign conducted by the Socialist Workers Party. Anyone listening to their radio and television speeches would have sworn that he was being addressed by one of the Stalinist-front groups. Their campaign was “anti-war” in the typical “peace campaign” manner. If there had not already been enough evidence of the distance the SWP had travelled in a pro-Stalinist direction to justify the Independent Socialist League in withholding its endorsement, the campaign itself would have furnished it.
In this campaign the Independent Socialist League urged a vote for the candidates of the Socialist Party (or in states where they were not on the ballot, of the Socialist Labor Party) as a socialist vote of protest against the policies of both major parties, and particularly against their pro-war orientation. The justification of this policy did not lie in expectations of a large increase in the socialist vote, but in offering the most conscious political people in the country a method of expressing their opposition above all to the cold-war foreign policy of both parties and specifically to its most futile expression in the war in Korea.
The over-all results of the campaign show that among broad masses of the American people the war in Korea is highly unpopular, and that the cold war itself is beginning to have a strong impact on mass consciousness. The Democratic Party went down to defeat primarily because it bears responsibility for the policies which led up to the war and the war itself, and because it could give the people no satisfactory answers in the direction of a new and more fruitful foreign policy.
The most dangerous aspect of labor’s continued allegiance to the Democratic Party is its blind adherence to its foreign policy. Its determination to prevent Stalinism from spreading over the globe is commendable; but its inability to see that this can be accomplished successfully only by a truly democratic foreign policy, by a foreign policy which supports the struggle of the backward nations to free themselves from imperialism and from their own reactionary social institutions; and its failure to recognize that in Western Europe Stalinism can be defeated as a political force only by lining up with the socialist movements in a struggle to replace dying capital ism with a new social order—this blindness leaves only the conservatives in a position to make capital out of the pre-war and war weariness of the American masses.
The political task of the independent socialists remains the same after the elections as it was before: to educate and urge on the advanced militants in the labor movement a course toward the political independence of their organizations and the working class from the deadening alliance with a section of the capitalist class in the Democratic Party, and to urge upon them a foreign policy which will make the American labor movement a staunch adherent of the Third Camp of the peoples against the imperialisms of both Washington and Moscow. This task they will continue to perform with ideological firmness while taking into account the difficulties and the opportunities created for them by the new dynamics of political power which have been set in motion by the elections.
* * *
Footnote by ETOL
1. Despite the date of the magazine (September–October 1952) it is obvious that this article was written after the presidential election, which took place on November 4, 1952.
 




AS TIME PASSES, the meaning of the détènte in the cold war, of the Geneva Spirit as a tactic in the Kremlin’s foreign policy becomes ever clearer. It is the obvious answer to the current phase of stabilization and solidification of the capitalist world, especially in Europe and, though to a lesser degree, in Southeast Asia. It is also a reaction to the military stalemate which has been brought about by the availability of extremely powerful nuclear weapons on both sides, while the means of delivering them and defending against them remain essentially refinements on buzz bomb and long-range bombers of the last war.
The military aspect of the stalemate is adequate to explain the Kremlin’s détènte policy only in a very restricted sense. Except to those simple-minded propagandists (who sometimes seek to cloak their propaganda in the sombre disguise of analysis) to whom the threat of Stalinism’s expansionism is primarily if not almost solely a matter of its propensity to send its armies marching across its borders, it has been fairly obvious that the Stalinist chiefs, not being madmen, use their military power only as the ultimate resources of political warfare. The nuclear stalemate has restricted political warfare to the extent that the Stalinists, like all other realistic politicians, realize that for the foreseeable future it is the better part of valor to refrain from driving issues and situations, even when they have the clear advantage, to such a degree of sharpness and acuteness at which there is a danger that the other side may feel itself driven to its ultimate resource.
In other words, at the moment they feel, unlike Dulles, that this is no time to be walking to the brink of war. That is not to say that there is no prize big enough or threat dangerous enough to drive them to the arbitrament of arms. But this is a poor time for it. Perhaps, if the Russians definitely win the race in the design and production of an effective inter-continental guided missile, the scales might again be tipped ...
But this is the less important aspect of the détènte. The real point is that the Stalinist leaders have apparently decided that they have about reached the limits of territorial expansion possible at the present time. The economic stabilization, and even boom, in America and Western Europe have solidified those areas against Stalinist encroachment. Korea stands devastated and divided, as a symbol of the world stalemate, and the folly of any attempt to change the balance of forces by a direct military attack. In Southeast Asia, Indochina dangles like a ripe fruit on the vine. But unless new political forces appear which show signs of the capacity of regenerating the political life of Southern Indochina and hence of threatening the Stalinist regime in the North, the big brothers in Peiping and Moscow can afford to wait, however onerous this may be to their “comrades” in Hanoi.
There appears to be a real soft spot in Indonesia, and Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Malaya retain in themselves all the conditions which make Stalinist penetration possible. But Burma, India and Pakistan have consolidated their regimes to such a point that even a Stalinist victory in one of the “soft spots” of the area would not necessarily or even probably mean their fall. And as long as this is so, a heavy, sustained and victorious push in the “soft” countries would risk far more than could be gained from it. So, it is likely that the Stalinists are willing to wait in these countries ... and if their local agents become impatient, they have ways of bringing them in line.
It is quite possible that in this respect there may be a considerable difference in outlook between the Russian Stalinists and their Chinese colleagues. After all, as a consequence of World War II, the Russian empire was extended deep into Europe. The Chinese, on the other hand, still have the galling problem of Chiang Kai-shek sitting in “their” Formosa, raiding their maritime commerce by ship and plane, and presenting an eager political auxiliary and invasion staging-platform to the American bloc in the event of World War III. In addition, the American economic and political blockades are far more humiliating and damaging to China than they are to Russia.
All this means that although Russian and Chinese Stalinists may well share a general estimate of the world political situation and how it should be handled, the Chinese have special problems which make it impossible for them to adopt exactly the same attitude as their Russian colleagues. For the Russian policy may be summarized as one of seeking to consolidate and legitimize the status quo in Europe. The Chinese feel that there is at least one aspect of the status quo which they do not want solidified and legitimized: Chiang’s regime in Formosa.
As to the Russians, that what they are after is a recognition by the capitalist bloc of the status quo in Europe is clear. At Geneva (the first Geneva, where the spirit was present) what they said in effect was:
“We are not going to argue with you about the Atlantic Pact. It is a fact, and we recognize it. In return, there is no point to your trying to argue with us about the division of Germany. That, too, is a fact, and you might as well recognize it. As to the satellites, there is no point in even discussing the matter. So, actually, there is nothing to discuss and negotiate in the big sense. What is needed is an end to threats and the atmosphere of crisis. Let us all recognize that World War II is over, and its gains and losses are no longer subject to revision. On the other hand, World War III is a long way off, and neither of us benefits by pretending that it is around the corner. If we can shake hands over the division of Europe and agree not to try to upset it, then all we have to ‘negotiate’ or ‘settle’ is the recognition of the fact that World War II is over in Asia also, and our China came out on top.”
Does the Khrushchev-Bulganin junket in Southeast Asia, or the Stalinist economic and diplomatic “penetration” of the middle east contradict this theory of what the Stalinists are up to? Not at all. Although they have apparently recognized the capitalist stabilization as the dominant fact with regard to which their tactics must be oriented, this does not mean that Stalinist policy must stand still and inactive until such time as some major political or economic upset in the capitalist world once again sets things in motion.
First, it is to their advantage to woo Nehru, Nu and all the other neutralists in the world just as strongly as possible for their policy. Any means by which they can convince these gentlemen, and the political public which they represent, that they are a decent, law-abiding, respectable, jolly and well-meaning sort is to their advantage.
“After all,” the leaders for whom Nehru stands as a symbol seem to be saying, “is it not better to be at peace with such fine fellows? What if they have gobbled up the whole of Eastern Europe, maintain a totalitarian political regime at home, keep the masses in their own country in the direst poverty so that a small ruling class may live in luxury?
“And behold, even the local Communists, whom we know to be vicious to the core, are being tamed by these reasonable people. In India they have set their face against the faction in the Stalinist party which refuses to support Nehru in his foreign (and even most of his domestic) policy. In France, Italy, the United States, and everywhere else, they are willing to give up any program of overthrowing capitalism, or even struggle against it, in exchange for an alliance with those political elements which are willing also to recognize and legitimize the international status quo. They do not set onerous conditions on their alliance, or seek to exact favorable terms. All they want is to be given the opportunity to add their modest bit to the general clamor for peace and good will.”
Secondly, a desire to legitimize the status quo in Europe and to end the crisis atmosphere in which the world has been living since the Berlin blockade does not mean that international politics can be put into mothballs. Stability, equilibrium, consolidation, co-existence ... these are all relative terms. In the midst of a situation in which neither imperialist war bloc seems to be in a position to deal a serious, let alone a decisive blow to the other, the Arab-Israel struggle, the fight for national independence in North Africa, the rising movement for equality and self-determination in the rest of Africa and other situations too numerous to list, all present opportunities for influencing people and winning friends and adherents to the Stalinist bloc.
 
IF THERE IS ANY SINGLE FACT about the foreign policy of the United States which is more damning than the rest it is the inability both this administration and its Democratic opposition have shown to meet the Russian peace offensive, let alone to mount an effective political attack on Stalinism of their own.
Lest there be any misunderstanding, let us repeat again that the current Stalinist tactic has been launched as a reaction to the consolidation and stabilization of capitalism in Europe, America and a good deal of what capitalism has left of Asia. The senility of capitalism is proving to be a protracted one, and its decay and disintegration is marked at times by all the appearances of flourishing health.
But despite this apparent vigor of what is left of the capitalist world, it is a striking fact that it feels everywhere on the defensive with regard to Stalinism.
Thus, when the Stalinists make their overtures to the rulers of the Arab countries of the Middle East, the American and British governments shout “foul,” and try to convince the world that the opening of commercial, financial and political ties between the Stalinist and Arab countries is an “invasion” of “traditionally British” (or French, or American) territory, and hence in the same category as a military breach of the peace.
They howl that this is incompatible with the Stalinist peace offensive and the Geneva Spirit, and that it demonstrates that peaceful co-existence is impossible with such a perfidious bunch.
But who is to believe these cries or to pay them much heed? To be sure, only the most naive of the neutralists believe that the Khruschev-Bulganin tour of Southeast Asia, or the Stalinist moves in the middle east were or are expressions of a pure and selfless pursuit of peace and good will. They know that what the Stalinists are doing in these areas is to win support for their own position, to seek firm or firmer ties with political groupings there, to fish in troubled waters with the hope of catching something which may, in the long run, be of substantial value to them.
But what of it? Don’t the Americans and the British and the rest have the same opportunities? They have been in these areas longer, have deeply established economic and political roots there, have bound these countries to their own with all kinds of economic and cultural ties. It would appear that they have every advantage, and should welcome the Stalinists onto a familiar field on which they can be defeated and shamed for all the world to see. After all, if there be anything to the term “competitive coexistence” would it not be that we all have a chance at each other, and each other’s territory ... and let the best man win?
But the actuality is that what “should” be, from the point of view of capitalism, isn’t. It is precisely in the colonial and semi-colonial areas, where the British and French (and now the Americans) have been for the longest that they are hated the most. The close relations they have established are with reactionary, hated, and often unstable and corrupt ruling classes, and not with any of the progressive, popular and democratic elements who are trying to lead these countries out of their ancient slumbers into the modern world. The economic ties with which they have bound these countries to their own have been the bonds of imperialist exploitation or special privilege. When the Stalinists enter these areas, they look to the populations and even a section of the rising ruling classes much as the economic, commercial and even military envoys of the Nazis looked to them before: as enemies of their enemies, and thus, at least as probable friends.
It is, of course, true, that the Stalinists offer no equal or even unequal access of the capitalist governments to “their” satellites, let alone to their homelands. After all, they represent a totalitarian social system, and one of their advantages is not only that this erects an iron curtain between their slaves and the outside world, but that it gives them a degree of tactical independence and freedom which cannot be achieved by governments still burdened with bourgeois democracy.
Thus, the Stalinist masters can shriek for peace one day, and order troops into Korea the next. Or they can denounce their enemies as incorrigible imperialist beasts and warmongers on Monday, and on Tuesday announce that nothing stands in the way of a peaceful settlement with them but a few misunderstandings. They can shout for collective security on Wednesday, and sign a pact with Hitler on Thursday.
But this has always been an advantage of any autocracy, tyranny or totalitarian regime over democracy. That has not meant that those who have confidence in the innate superiority of democracy are wrong, What it does mean, in the present instance, is that the weakest opponent of Stalinist totalitarianism is not consistent, thoroughgoing democracy ... but rather the half-hearted, half-baked, half-mockery of democracy which is really the capitalist world.
The reality with which capitalism seeks to oppose the demagogy of Stalinism is the dictatorship of the ally Franco; the democracy-for-whites-only of South Africa; French rule in North Africa, and white rule throughout most of that continent; Rhee’s dictatorship in South Korea; Chiang’s corrupt dictatorship in Formosa and Songgram’s in Thailand; the oil dynasties of the middle east; the military dictatorships of Latin America, etc. etc. This is what the world at large, and the oppressed masses in particular, see as the real political face of capitalism. It is this, and neither freedom nor the American standard of living, which is actually competing with Stalinism. And the role of the United States in the struggle is to subsidize, support and back up all these corrupt and outmoded ruling classes, or the imperialist allies who in turn support them. And thus the ground is prepared and made fertile for the Stalinists to sow and reap a harvest of support in the struggle of competitive co-existence.
It is not that no alternative is available. The labor movement in America, for instance, has everything to gain and nothing to lose by pursuing a consistent and principled democratic foreign policy. It could throw its support, moral and material, to precisely those democratic and socialist movements abroad which are seeking to end both foreign and domestic oppression, to modernize and liberate their countries. They could throw their political weight at home against the support for discredited autocracies and imperialisms abroad. Armed with such a foreign policy, they could meet the Stalinist challenge head-on both in Europe and throughout the rest of the world.
“You want peace?” the labor movement could say. “Good, we are for it too. We are for democracy also, and to prove it, we are broadening it at home and are exercizing every effort to help it and defeat its enemies where ever they may be, first on our side of the iron curtain, where we can actually do it. As to the partition of Germany, we are pulling our troops out of that country to show that we really stand for peace ... and we expect that ... you will not dare to do the same. We are not for peace with you because we think you are democrats, or are good fellows, or are for peace. You are totalitarian tyrants, as always, and we will continue to tell the world exactly that. But we are for peace because we do not propose to expose the world to nuclear devastation, and because, above all, we are confident that it is your regime and not ours which is sick and which, if left to stew in its own juice, will eventually disintegrate as a result of the struggle for freedom by your slaves. In the meantime, what we have to offer the rest of the world is help to establish liberty and democracy and a rising standard of living in their own countries. If you think you can compete with us to win the support of their peoples, go right ahead.”
The American labor movement (and those in France and Britain are, in their own ways, in a similar state) is in no position to meet the Stalinist challenge in this way ... the only way in which it can be met successfully. This is so because our labor movement is still bound to capitalist politics, both ideologically and organizationally. Until it liberates itself from this bondage, it cannot even begin to meet Stalinism on an equal, let alone a superior footing.
It is still the most important mission of socialists, especially in the United States, to seek by every means at their disposal to assist the labor movement at home to break with its capitalist ideas and allies and seek the leadership of the nation.
Unless this happens in the United States and some of the other leading countries, the Stalinists will ultimately succeed in their immediate aim of stabilizing and sanctifying the status quo in Europe, and bending events to their advantage in Asia and the rest of the world.
 




WHEN THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR and the Congress of Industrial Organizations opened their convention on December 7, 1955, just about two decades had elapsed since the Committee for Industrial Organization was expelled from the AF of L. For twenty years the American labor movement has been divided into two mutually hostile and warring factions. But far more important in the long run than the history of fratricidal struggle is the fact that during these two decades the trade union movement in this country has transformed itself from a relatively narrow organization of the building trades and a few other skilled workers into a mighty, broad, national organization of the American working class as a whole.
Looking back at it now, one can say that it is hard to see how this result could have been achieved without the split in the labor movement which has now come to an end. The old AFL was just too strongly dominated by the narrowest of craft outlooks to respond to the opportunity to organize the mass-production workers in the basic industries. Given the pioneering work and the competitive threat of the CIO unions, the AFL leaders were able to bestir themselves sufficiently to take in the hordes of workers who were practically breaking down their doors. The mass influx transformed many of these unions. It was only this transformation which made it possible for a George Meany to replace a William Green, and to lead the hard core conservatives of his own organization reluctantly to the unification ceremonies.
Even at that, the unity might not have been achieved, or at least not at this particular time, were it not for two essentially conservative pressures which have been bearing down on the labor movement with increasing weight for the past few years. By far the most important of these is the pressure the capitalist class has been able to put on the workers as a result of the former’s increasing political strength over the past decade.
The most dramatic expression of this pressure was the passage of the Taft-Hartley law, and the utter inability of the labor movement to muster any but token strength for its repeal or fundamental revision in all the years it has been on the law books. In this respect, victory with Truman meant no more to them than defeat with Stevenson. And the law bears down with greater and greater weight as its interpretation and administration continues in the hands of increasingly conservative officials and as capitalists learn to use all the booby-traps and time-bombs concealed in it. Having experienced what can be done to unions under the protection of this law even in good times, thoughtful workers and labor leaders shudder at the thought of what they will face if the country is once again subjected to a serious siege of depression and unemployment.
But Taft-Hartley is just the most dramatic symbol. In the South it has been combined with all the traditional union-busting measures of the pre-CIO era with devastating effect on the big post-war drive of both federations to organize that area. Significant sections of industry have seen the promised land of low-wages and unorganized workers below the Mason-Dixon line and in the smaller rural communities of the middle and south west, and have moved their operations to these areas leaving the organized workers at their old sites high and dry.
And in general, despite the long post war prosperity, despite the bulging treasuries and the imposing new headquarters, health and welfare funds and the like, the labor leaders feel that hostile elements have the upper hand politically and that sooner or later they are going to use their power for an all-out drive against the unions. This, more than anything else, helped the most politically sophisticated and sensitive of them to push over all the many and difficult barriers to unity at this time.
The other factor which made unity possible was the fact that both the AFL and CIO had been growing toward each other in many ways ever since the split, and particularly during the post-war era. On the one hand, this growth was healthy and progressive, as in the tendency of more and more AFL unions to take in unskilled workers on an industrial basis, to reduce the old racial barriers which had disgraced them for so long, etc. On the other hand, there has obviously been a thickening and hardening of the bureaucratic crust in the CIO unions over the seething rank and file democracy which won the great battles of the ’30s. Many of the top CIO leaders, now in high office for ten, fifteen or twenty years, began to think and feel much more like their opposite numbers in the AFL. Despite the understandable uneasiness of some of the latter at the prospect of sitting down at the same table as colleagues with the parvenue CIO leaders, even the first tentative contacts made it clear to them that these gentlemen were not really the wild-eyed agitators with whom the AFL moguls had sought to scare their members and prospective members for so many years.
The defensive motives which compelled this unity as outlined above in no way change the fact that the united labor movement is a far more formidable and powerful force in the national life of the country than the old divided movement could possibly have been. Speaker after speaker arose at the unity convention, both from among the labor leaders and from among the “Friends of labor” and other dignitaries who had been invited to address the body, and counseled the new labor movement to use its strength sparingly, cautiously, soberly and with humility. Speaker after speaker got up to proclaim that the class struggle, thank God, has no place in this great country of ours. It was just a product of the hallucinations of a lonely refugee in a dark recess of the British Museum, and has no relevance to the American scene. Speaker after speaker proclaimed that no responsible labor leader is for a labor party, that it would be a disaster if such a party were to be formed, and the like.
This was all in the realm of historical, social and mythological theory. When Meany and others got down to talking about the practical problems which face the labor movement, they spoke about the need for labor to become “more political” than in the past; to participate more actively in national politics; to meet their adversaries on whatever ground the latter may choose, including that of politics. When Meany left the convention hall and went over to extend the hand of friendship to the 60th annual convention of the National Association of Manufacturers, he was met with a snarling attack from the top leader of that organization and the proposal of a “code of conduct” to be signed by industry and labor the terms of which read like instructions handed an enemy who has agreed to surrender, unconditionally.
Meany, who had just come from presiding over a convention whose delegates represent about 15,000,000 American workers from every state, city and town in the country replied to the NAM’s leader in the presence of reporters:
“If the NAM philosophy to disfranchise unions is to prevail, then the answer is clear. If we can’t act as unions to defend our rights, then there is no answer but to start a labor party.”
Meany repeated this again at much greater length over a national TV network when prodded by reporters. He is a deliberate and thoughtful man. He made it clear that he hopes the labor movement in this country will never be forced to form a labor party; that he does not believe that its enemies will get their way to the point where this will be the only alternative left to the workers; that he certainly does not think any such situation is imminent. But the fact remains that the most solid, most representative leader of the American labor bureaucrats turns again and again to this among all the possible solutions to labor’s political dilemma in this country.
The united labor movement faces all kinds of internal problems, and it is quite likely that much will happen before this unity settles down into its permanent mold. Racism, racketeering and raiding will all give rise to struggles of varying scopes and intensities in the months and years ahead. There may be split-offs from the united organization, and even big ones, before some of the most cancerous growths which have afflicted the organized workers in this country have been eliminated. There may also be considerable periods of apparent calm when far too little seems to be happening.
But the handwriting is on the wall for the racketeers and racists who have dominated such sizeable sections of the movement for so long. And the neanderthal type employer, who decides he is going to spearhead the return of class relations to what they were before the CIO was formed is also going to find it much harder going. After all, even those of the CIO’s leaders who have been getting to think and act more and more like AFL bureaucrats come from the tradition of a labor movement which is neither a racket nor a labor-management mutual admiration society, and they are bound to join forces with their similars who have existed in the AFL throughout its history against the section of the leadership whose whole outlook is essentially alien to trade unionism.
 
THE FIRST REAL TEST of the united labor movement on the industrial front came in the bitterly-fought Westinghouse strike of the International Union of Electrical Workers-CIO. The second was and is, as we go to press, the Miami hotel strike. In both cases the united labor movement appears to have shown the increased strength and self-confidence of its unity.
The next test will come in the national elections of 1956. It would hardly be reasonable to expect the new giant to feel his strength so clearly in so short a time as to enter the political arena on his own behalf and under his own banner. Only the rapid development of some extreme attack on the movement, or of an irreconcilable struggle in the Democratic Party could lead to that.
But American politics being what they are, there is much short of forming its own party that the labor movement can and will do which can at least have the effect of increasing its political experience and self-confidence, which can test the mettle of itself, its friends and its enemies. Most generally it will probably test the increased effectiveness it has gained by unity in the very limited field of getting out the votes for the Democratic Party. Here and there it may be emboldened to run its own candidates against those of the party machine, or to engage in other forms of independent or quasi-independent political activity under the transparent camouflage of the Democratic Party label.
Despite itself, or anything its leaders may do, there can be no doubt that in this election all other class forces and groupings will feel the effect of the labor unity and will seek one or another method of adapting themselves to or dealing with the fact that a new political force is now in the field. Nothing could more clearly bring home to the American working class and the whole American people that the unification of the labor movement is an event of almost incalculable significance in their history.
 




Crisis in Britain
by Robert A. Brady
Berkeley, Calif., University of California Press, 714 pp. $5.00.
A good deal is being written these days about the “meaning” of the British Labor government. From the conservative right we are told that there is a direct and inevitable road leading straight from British “socialism” to the “new serfdom” of Stalinism. At the devitalized center stands Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. to bewail the loss of élan by the British labor leadership, and to tell us that if only labor would abandon its rigid faith in nationalization of industry, and grasp instead the creative gospel of Keynesian economics as propounded by the liberals, all would be well. Standing at Schlesinger’s left shoulder is the American Socialist Party which sees in the program of the Labor government the realization of the socialist dream in practical terms. This school of analysis includes the official view of the British Labor Party itself as propounded in its election platforms. It includes also almost the whole of that vague and unorganized “socialistic” thought in America which ranges from the legion of ex-socialists who make a small though respectable living in the research departments of our more enlightened unions, to the fair-dealish writers and politicians who temper their firm determination to bring about a better world with the even firmer desire to keep the Democratic Party in power regardless of the cost.
The thing which all these analyses of the British Labor government have in common is the sweep with which they jump from their premises to their conclusions. In between there is only the most bald-faced impressionism, which is another way of saying that there is a substitution of premises and impressions for analysis.
Robert A. Brady’s Crisis in Britain is a welcome relief from all the above-mentioned schools of writing about Britain. A professor of economics at the University of California at Berkeley, Brady [1] was able to spend eight months in Britain. The result of his work as presented in this book is the first rounded study of the problems which confront Britain today and of the theory and practice with which the British Labor Party has tried to meet these problems. It is hardly a serious criticism to say that even as extensive a work as this has left a lot of loose ends for others to tie up.
Brady has a thesis which runs through his whole analysis of the British Labor government. Whether he started his work with a “preconceived idea,” or whether his thesis developed from his materials is a question which can concern only people who are ignorant of scientific method as employed in the social sciences or who identify this method with the blind grabbings of academic moles. Brady gathers and analyzes an impressive mass of data to demonstrate his thesis: the present operational theories (as distinguished from holiday statements) of the British Labor government, and the practice which flows from them are inadequate to bring about a socialist solution to the problems of British society. Or, to put it in a way which may avoid terminological dispute over the word “socialist,” the crisis in which Britain finds itself cannot and will not be solved if the British Labor Party continues along the tack it has been following since 1945, and which it seems even more determined to follow since the narrow electoral victory in 1950.
“From the moment of its coming to power,” writes Brady in the first paragraph of Crisis in Britain, “the British Labour government has had to contend not only with issues that were legacies of two world wars, but with many of the still unsolved problems that had led to those wars. It has been compelled to divide its forces in order to battle for national economic survival in the international sphere and, at the same time, struggle for wide-ranging social and economic revolution at home. The first task involves a web of interdependent issues which is coextensive with virtually the entire range of economic policy-making decisions by all parties and interests through the nation, and is further complicated by the fact that very nearly everywhere, and with almost every facet of such policy, success at home depends upon a world economic situation over which Britain can exercise at best only a very limited and highly tentative influence. The second is no less complex or vital; it reaches to the central ideological conflicts and their attendant cultural values, which lie at the heart of not only British but all Western civilization.”
The rest of the book puts substance into these generalizations. First it discusses the historical and ideological factors which have shaped the British Labor Party and its thinking. It then discusses each major field in which the BLP government has intervened in a decisive manner: the Bank of England; Coal; Electricity and Gas; Iron and Steel; National Transport; Telecommunications; Social Insurance; Health; Town and Country Planning; Agriculture and Marketing. The book ends with four chapters entitled Industry: National Planning; Industry: Co-partnership and Monopoly; Empire: Commonwealth and Colonies; and finally, Achievements and Prospects.
* * *
It must be borne in mind that the leadership of the BLP are not, and never have been Marxists. They recognize the existence of the class struggle and the contradictions inherent in capitalism, but not in the Marxian sense. To them the arrogance and propensity to exploit of the ruling class is a moral failing of the old rulers of Britain. In their economics they are, despite Arthur Schlesinger Jr., much closer to Keynes than to Marx. That is, here again they believe that the contradictions of capitalism are a product mainly of the short-sightedness of private investors. The necessary changes can be brought about, therefore, by moral suasion and education on the one hand, and by direction of investment on a long-term basis by a far-sighted Labor government.
With such a social theory, nationalization of industry can take place only within certain fairly well-defined limits. It is difficult to persuade people whom you have expropriated to cooperate with you, nor is it easy to re-educate people who are smarting under the sense of a great social wrong done them by their teachers. Thus the nationalization program can extend only to those sectors of British industry which the capitalists will relinquish without too bitter a struggle, and it must be accomplished in such a way as to minimize the opposition of the former owners.
Brady’s chief index to the reaction of the British ruling class to the nationalization schemes is the debates in Parliament over them. By extensive quotation he demonstrates that in every case but that of steel, the opposition of the Tories was not one of principle, but rather to the specific proposals on the national organization and the method and extent of compensation. The same applies to almost all the social security measures carried out by the BLP. In the last election the Conservatives made the case clear by claiming that what the Labor government had done in this field was merely an acceptable though poorly administered extension of measures initiated and proposed originally by Conservative statesmen. This does not mean, of course, that had the Tories been in power they would have done in these spheres what Labor has accomplished. It means simply that they were not in principle opposed to these measures, that they do not feel them incompatible with continued social dominance of the class which they represent in British society.
Thus the policies pursued by the Labor government have clearly accomplished one of their goals: to introduce broad- scale social and economic reforms and changes without throwing British society into turmoil. But have they accomplished enough to solve even in a preliminary way, the most pressing problems which afflict British society?
These problems are so many and so diverse that one hesitates to select the “central” one among them. Yet if we abstract for the moment from the international field, it is certainly clear that a good deal of the crisis in Britain can be lumped together under the heading of a crisis in the productivity of labor.
As everyone knows, Britain has the oldest industrial plant in the world. It has a tremendous density of population with a staggering food production deficit. It has to import the overwhelming bulk of almost every raw material its industries transform into finished goods (except coal). Thus foreign trade for Britain is not, so to speak, a safety valve for the economy, it is in the most immediate, daily and direct sense its bloodstream.
This means that the relative productivity of British labor is a datum crucial to the survival of the nation, again, in an immediate and daily sense. Any plan for the reorganization of British industry which does not involve the rapid and extensive upward movement of productivity is bound to fail to solve the central problem.
The factors which have kept back the productivity of British labor compared to that of the United States are many in number. Even before the First World War it was pointed out that the tendency of the British world position was to make of the British capitalists an essentially rentier class. Instead of striding ahead technologically, British industry tended to rest on its laurels and seek to secure its markets through world-wide cartel agreements, and through an Empire and Commonwealth-wide protective system.
There are a dozen other factors. British industry, though highly monopolized in a financial sense, has never been integrated technologically, even on a corporation-wide level. Tremendous wastage in cross-haulage within a single technological process is the result (e.g. from iron-ore smelting through to the final product). The financial monopolization of industry has led to a whole web of commercial relations which make no sense from the point of view of producer-to-consumer efficiency.
Thus the basic problem from the purely technological point of view is the complete reorganization of British industry on the basis of a ground-plan which would relocate industry in relation to raw materials, manpower and markets. This would have to be accompanied side by side with the vertical integration of production processes which would permit modern mass-production techniques to be applied, and which would eliminate unnecessary cross-haulage of materials and products.
Brady contends that none of the nationalized industries have been reorganized from this point of view, and that there are no plans to reorganize them. Though nationalization has brought certain efficiencies, they are essentially of the kind that one would expect if each of the nationalized industries had been given over to a private corporation to run without regard to anything that was being done by other corporations within the country.
As a matter of fact, that is just about what the administrative structure of nationalized industry amounts to in Britain. Each is run by an autonomous public corporation. The corporation has a struc- turne not unlike the structures of private corporations, except that the officers of the boards are appointed by public bodies. There are, to be sure, a variety of interindustry liaison committees and planning boards. But these either function on a day-to-day “practical” basis, or hardly function at all. The result is that technologically British industry has been creeping ahead instead of making the rapid strides which the situation requires.
The other major factor affecting productivity is the attitude of the workers and the degree to which they control production.
In Britain this is of exceptional importance. The British working class, though non-Marxist in its political ideology, is imbued with a deep-going sense of hostility to the ruling class. In production this translates itself into a hostility to change and a very effective resistance to any and all forms of speed-up. Unless these attitudes are transformed, the workers themselves become an obstacle to the introduction of new machinery and new methods of organizing the work, and cannot be driven faster with the old methods.
This comes to the heart of the failure of the British Labor government to solve the crisis in Britain, as Brady sees it. It is also, of course, the central problem of socialism, that is, of the possibility of reorganizing society on a socialist basis.
The workers of Britain won a great victory at the polls in 1945. They carried their party into power with a decisive majority. Yet on the day after, and the month and the year after their victory, they still had to go to the same jobs and work under the same foremen and superintendents. They still lived in the slums, while the class which had been beaten at the elections still lived in fine houses and apartments surrounded by servants. And what is even more important, as far as the workers could see ahead, even if they kept the Labor Party in power, no basic change would be wrought in all this.
The public corporations which run nationalized British industry are staffed by the old technicians and owners and managers. They are in no way subject to the control of the workers in the plants and mines. Even if a labor leader gets appointed to one of these boards, he does not sit as a representative of the workers. He is then an “expert,” and must relinquish his union office as a condition of his employment. It is quite in line with official BLP philosophy that labor men on the boards shall serve the “general public” and not the workers. But it also means that the workers have no greater voice in the administration of industry than they had before.
The liberals in this country have been bemoaning the fact that the British workers are so irresponsible that most of the strikes in the past few months have been against nationalized industries. Yet why should this be surprising? They were never given any responsibility in the management of these industries. That would be “class” legislation. Why then should they feel a responsibility to them? In fact, it may be inherent in the situation that the workers feel more resentful toward industrial managements which have been set up by “their” government than toward private employers who never seriously pretended to have any responsibility toward the workers.
Ever since the days of Marx socialists have disputed over the methods of social revolution. In this dispute the advocates of “gradualism” have based their arguments to no small degree on the “social overhead” of a rapid and drastic seizure of power by the working class. The tearing of the social fabric which results when the basic social relations are transformed over a brief period of time have been described as the evil which is to be avoided at all costs.
In Britain today we see the “social overhead’ of the gradualist approach. The working class has not broken with its traditions of servitude. It has not been emancipated by an act of social revolution in the course of which it gains a new vision of the possibilities of a society organized by itself on completely new lines. It has not been imbued with the willingness to take large-scale risks which is the negative way of saying that it has no large creative ideas for the transformation of British society.
The result is that although vast energies are put forth by the government, the increase in productivity is negligible, and certainly does not come close to solving the crisis of Britain in the most immediate sense. The workers are reluctant to accept even those minor proposals which are made by the government authorities unless they can see direct benefits to themselves in the personal, short- range sense. The government’s agencies have a purely bureaucratic, administrative approach to the workers, and tend increasingly to blame them for not being willing to work harder and to accept every decision from above without question. As there is nothing creative, transforming in the procedures and plans of the government (except in the sense of improving things here and there within the old framework) there is no reason for the workers to change their attitude.
This is the central thesis of Brady’s book, demonstrated in detail and at length. He makes certain specific criticisms of the fundamental planlessness of British economic planning (it really differs little from the approach of the Fair Deal except in so far as Keynesian “full employment” policies are more consciously used) and of the administrative set-up in the various industries.
But the problem is obviously not one which can be solved by anything the government can do, as long as it clings to the idea that the capitalist system can be reformed or transformed without seriously inconveniencing the capitalists. In fact, it cannot be solved by the government at all. A new movement must grow inside the working class of Britain which consciously rejects the present ideology of the Labor Party. It must be a movement which not only recognizes the capitalist class as an enemy, but proposes to deal with it as such. This is, again, a negative way of saying that the British working class must recognize that it and it alone has the power to transform British society and thus save it.
In this discussion of Crisis in Britain there has been an obvious abstraction from the relations of Britain to the rest of the world. Brady does not fail to discuss this question in the book, though his discussion is of necessity more sketchy on this point than on the internal problems of British society.
The abstraction is, of course, purely artificial. Yet it seems useful to discuss whether or not the present Labor government is, in any sense, on the road to socialism purely on the basis of its domestic program because there has been a certain tendency in the socialist movement to accept this while insisting that the crucial weakness of BLP policy lies in its failure to adopt a foreign program of socialist internationalism.
On the evidence adduced by Brady, the British Labor government is not moving toward socialism, in any sense in which that word has been understood by Marxists in the past. And failing to do so, it is also failing to solve the most immediate and pressing economic and social problems which constitute the crisis in Britain.
* * *
The Cautious Revolution
by Ernest Watkins
New York. Farrar, Straus. 451 pp. $5.00.
The sub-title of this book is Britain Today and Tomorrow. After the sub-title, Ernest Watkins, who is on the staff of the Economist and is a news commentator for the overseas program of the BBC, succeeds in continuing for four and a half hundred pages a “description” and “analysis” of the type which could be expected in a Sunday supplement of a liberal paper.
The book is crammed full of facts and figures. But the approach of the author is such that no clear or coherent picture ever develops from them. He writes as a determined anti-theoretician, in fact as one who reserves his most cutting jibes for those who seek to generalize experience in a consistent theory and then to formulate policies based on such a theory. When this is coupled with the desire to “interpret” the five years of the British Labor Party government to Americans with confirmed capitalist views in such a way as to flatter their prejudices without making them antagonistic to further cooperation with the British government, the result is a book which sheds no real light on the future of Britain.
Of course, it is true that the “revolution” in Britain which Watkins is describing is a social movement piloted by people who are almost as anti-theoretical, as empiric and hence as lacking in a concrete program adequate to the problems of Britain as he is. If the future of Britain is to remain in their hands indefinitely, undisturbed by any eruption from the workers of that country, it will be a dark future indeed. Yet, the revolutionary socialists of Britain need not abandon their firm conviction that sooner or later the workers will assert themselves for a bold and positive program in the affairs of their island as well as in those of the world at large. For, as Watkins writes in an entirely different connection: “If the human race has any merits at all, one must accept its capacity to fight until the last second of the last hour.”
* * *
Footnote
1. Other books by Robert A. Brady: Spirit and Structure of German Fascism; Business as a System of Power; Rationalisation Movement in German Industry.
 




The mechanization and concentration of production in America has brought with itself a vast increase of the sociological phenomenon which is usually described as the “new middle class.” And with its expansion in numbers has come the inevitable proliferation of theories about the political, economic and social role which this group is likely to play.
C. Wright Mills’ new book [1] is an exceptionally valuable contribution to this discussion. Written in the brisk, readable style to which we have become accustomed in Mills’ work, it is a serious attempt to analyze the historical pattern of the rise of this group in American society, its social, economic and psychological characteristics, and its probable political role.
The difficulty which one encounters in defining “the new middle class” gives a clue to the ambiguous position it holds in the social structure. As Mills points out, it can best be defined not by a description of its own characteristics, but by contrasting it to other, easily definable economic classes. The bourgeoisie is the class whose social role is defined by its ownership of capital. The new middle class, like the proletariat, does not own means of production, although at its apex it may exercise vast administrative powers over masses of private capital, and often supplements its income and bolsters its position through actual ownership.
In their vast majority the office workers, salespeople, teachers, technicians and foremen who make up the rank and file of the new middle class are propertyless. As time goes on they can be distinguished from the industrial proletariat less and less on the basis of income, education, leisure time, security of status, etc. The best criterion which sociologists and statisticians have been able to develop to distinguish them from the classical proletariat is that they perform their work in their street clothes, in “white collars” rather than in blue denims.
The growth of this group in American society over the past seventy years has been tremendous. According to Mills, the old property-owning middle class declined from 33 per cent to 20 per cent of the gainfully employed population between 1870 and 1940. During the same period, wage workers declined from 61 per cent to 55 per cent, while the new middle class increased from 6 per cent to 25 per cent.
Despite their growth, however, they do not represent a “stratum” in capitalist society. Rather, they form a pyramid of income, social power and prestige inside the larger social pyramid. At the top are the big executives and administrators of corporations and government departments. The middle ranges form a broader group of secondary executives, managers, and successful professionals. The broad and deep base is made up of the people who, along with the manual workers, are administered, directed, and manipulated by the higher echelons.
 
The first section of White Collar is devoted to an analysis of the decline of the classical middle class of small property-owners. The evidence on this is now so overwhelming that only writers of advertising copy have the courage to deny it. There are now four times as many wage and salaried workers as independent entrepreneurs. The farmers, once the backbone of the small property-owning class, have declined to a tenth of the occupied population, and even among them, 2 per cent of the farms had 40 per cent of the land in 1945.
The capitalist class has itself been polarized into the great industrial and commercial corporations on the one hand, and what Mills calls the “lumpen bourgeoisie” on the other. In 1939 1 per cent of the business firms in the United States employed 50 per cent of all people working in business. In the realm of retail trade, the last stronghold of small property, during the same year the bottom 75 per cent of stores accounted for only 25 per cent of retail sales.
Despite its decline in economic and social importance, Mills points out that the remnants of the old middle class still play an important ideological and political role in America. The power of the farm bloc is proverbial. In the name of free enterprise they, and their colleagues of the various business trade associations, seek and are able to obtain government protection and legislation which guarantees their profits. They are often the vanguard in the attack against labor unions. And their continued existence gives substance to the myth of a free enterprise, free market, competitive society, without which the great corporate monopolies would be hard put to find ideological justification for continued existence in private hands.
The old middle class, the petty bourgeoisie, are disintegrating, but their decline has not led to the political consequences which might have been expected on the basis of the old Marxist predictions on this aspect of capitalist development. The reason for this is evident. Only during the years of the great depression was the destruction of the small capitalists so rapid and painful as to produce a conscious feeling of despair and revolt. Except during those years, the expansion of employment opportunities, and the general rise in the standard of living has succeeded in integrating them into the job hierarchy of the new middle class without an acute feeling of loss. The sons and daughters of the little businessman of yesteryear are much more obsessed by the idea of getting ahead in the bureaucratic structure of some corporation than with dreams of reestablishing their old independence, let alone of changing society.
But within the new hierarchy, their dreams of advancement have decreasing chances of realization. For within the white-collar pyramid the same forces have been at work which have shaped our society as a whole: mechanization and concentration.
 
The industrial revolution has come late to the office, the store and the salesroom, but it is now proceeding at a pace which is made possible only by its previous development in industry.
By World War II the overhead involved in tabulating, coordinating, and directing the vast network of industry, communication, transportation, trade and finance had become a real drag on profits. This is just another way of saying that an increasing portion of the surplus value created at the point of production was being absorbed by the administrative and coordinating functions which are inevitable in any industrial society, but which become monstrous in a society of private industrial monopolies. It was this drag on profits which gave major impetus to the mechanization and rationalization of white collar jobs.
Mills gives a fascinating description of the development and application of office machinery on an unprecedented scale. Along with this came the inevitable reduction in the skill, and responsibility required of the office worker. Assembly-line techniques, once confined to industry, are now transferred to the office. Experts analyze each job, break it down into its simplest elements, reorganize the office physically to ensure a steady flow of production, and the office hierarchy structurally, so as to reduce costs.
The result, as in industry, is the fragmentation and alienation of the worker. Office people are, in any case, removed from the reality of production. By and large they handle the shadows of products. Even the production line worker adds an actual piece to the whole product, and can see it growing into something under his hands. The office worker handles the invoice, the bill, the memorandum, the cost schedule ... the paper reflections of the industrial process. His satisfaction on the job, his feeling of being part of and contributing something of value can be derived chiefly through his knowledge and understanding of the directive or coordinating, or even marketing role performed by his office or firm. And in the smaller, more intimate and personalized office, even the lowly clerk often had a significant range of knowledge about these matters. But as his job is fragmented, his range of knowledge is narrowed. Increasingly his function is on the order of the punch-card operator who transfers coded symbols from schedules to cards without even knowing what the code stands for.
Although the old office is still statistically predominant, the new, rationalized office will soon take its place. And its impact is not confined to the workers with the very lowest skills, although they are the chief ones to be displaced by the new machines. The fragmentation of responsibility and of knowledge tends to go to the very top of the new business bureaucracies.
 
The modern type of the big businessman is the corporation executive. Only at the very top does he approximate the old captain of industry. Even there, his major decisions are made not as a “free” individual, but as a chairman of a board which works in conjunction with other boards and committees directing the enterprise.
Below him, is the cadre of executives and administrators. They are even less free entrepreneurs looking for the main chance. They are links in a chain of command, taking orders from above, and interpreting, elaborating and transmitting them downward. And in the larger enterprises, there is not a single chain of command, but several, connected at the top. Even the executive’s information is limited. His power is derived from his office, and for his position in the hierarchy he depends more on his relations to those above him in the chain than to any special abilities which he may possess.
The bureaucratization of the new middle class is not confined to the realm of big business. It affects the so- called “free” professions almost as much. The young man who becomes a doctor today knows that the road to success leads through his relationship to and status in a major hospital or clinic. The young lawyer finds his place in a legal factory, in which he is likely to spend his life drawing up briefs in a narrowly specialized field, while the senior partners spend most of their time moving in the circles from which business in large volume may be expected to flow into their factory. Other avenues of success lie through joining the legal staff of some corporation, or some government department. Only the failures hang out a shingle over the shabby office from which they issue forth in pursuit of ambulances ... or as a last resort, there are always the swelling ranks of the FBI ...
This whole process of bureaucratization, institutional rigidity, personal fragmentation and alienation is described by Mills in absorbing detail. As the hope of the white collar worker lies in a successful climb within one of the myriad bureaucracies, his whole personality must be aligned accordingly. Success comes not from superior energy, intelligence, or a capacity for making bold decisions. It comes from his ability to “sell” himself to those above him, to impress them with his cheerfulness, adaptability, “willingness,” and above all, loyalty. This involves the final degree of alienation ... the alienation from self.
Mills is deeply preoccupied with the socio-psychological effects of this whole process on the new middle class. At one time, the white collar workers’ feeling of security was buttressed by his knowledge that he had a formal education, an income and skills which set him above the industrial worker. But all of these factors are losing their former importance. The growth of unions in America has raised the status of the workers to a position at which vast numbers of them have more job security, higher incomes, more assured pensions, sickness benefits, vacations, etc., than a large percentage of the unorganized white collar workers. The spread of high-school education removes the “educational escalator” as a distinctive property of the new middle class.
But people still feel that they must have some status, even if there is no objective basis for it. Mills describes the “status panic” as one of the characteristics of the white collar world.
 
Mills appears to feel most strongly the dilemma of the “intellectuals” in our society. In his previous book, New Men of Power he showed this same preoccupation. There he set forth the view that if the labor movement is to make its way against the “main drift” it must be informed by “a brace of labor intellectuals,” and tended to ascribe to them a role which seems to us somewhat exaggerated.
In White Collar, when he considers their actual role and position, he is at the point of despair. Instead of critically thinking men, he finds that they are the hired “experts” and “technicians” of the business and political power which dominates the scene. Their talents find a buyers’ market which their integrity cannot resist. The professors become the “non-political” experts who advise government agencies, or the “objective” and “disinterested” handmaidens of business in market research, industrial management, and a personnel psychology. The writers are seduced by the status and income which can be theirs only as hirelings of Luce, of the great advertising firms, or of Hollywood. And often those who do resist the powerful attraction of these mass media of communication find themselves doomed to the relative atrophy of their talents which attends their inability to communicate beyond the narrowest of circles.
But what political significance does the rise of the new middle class have for American society? Are the white collar workers, or some special stratum of them, destined to move along some unique political road of their own?
Mills rejects out of hand the notion that the “managers” may strike out in their own interests, and displace the capitalists as the ruling class.
In the political sphere [he writes] no American manager has taken a stand that is against the interests of private property as an institution. As its chief defender, rhetorically and practically, the manager has a political mind similar to that of any large owner, from whom he derives his power; and in his present form he will last no longer than property as an institution. Thus, although the bureaucratization of property involves a distribution of power among large subordinate staffs, the executives of the modern corporation in America form an utterly reliable committee for managing the affairs and pushing for the common interests of the entire big-property class.
Ever since the decline of the petty bourgeoisie could no longer be disputed as a historical fact, bourgeois sociologists and economists have contended that their traditional role is being taken over by the new middle class. As against the Marxian thesis of the polarization of society, they have maintained that this new group would act as a “balance wheel” in society, as a cushion between capitalists and proletariat, as a stabilizing and moderating influence on the class struggle. Mills finds no evidence, historical or theoretical, for this contention.
In so far as political strength rests upon organized economic power, the white-collar workers can only derive their strength from “business” or from “labor.” Within the whole structure of power, they are dependent variables. Estimates of their political tendencies, therefore, must rest upon larger predictions of the manner and outcome of the struggles of business and labor.
And he continues:
The political question of the new middle classes is, of what bloc or movement will they be most likely to stay at the tail? And the answer is, the bloc or movement that most obviously seems to be winning.
They will not go politically “proletarian,” if for no other reason than the absence of any political proletariat in America. They will not go politically “middle class,” if for no other reason than the absence of middle-class policy or formation, and because they will not be economically able to maintain such a status. They will not go political as an independent bloc or party, if for no other reason than their lack of either the unity or the opportunity. They will not become a political balance-wheel, if for no other reason than their lack of will to choose one bloc or another before it has already shown itself in the ascendant; they will “choose” only after their “choice” has won.
 
It is at this point that Mills’method, and hence his conclusions, show their major fault. And the fault is not uniquely his: it is endemic to the whole school of sociology of which he is such an outstanding representative.
American sociologists have done a tremendous job in developing and refining techniques for testing the attitudes of various groups in the population. They are very adept at discerning the way in which these attitudes, and the social and political instrumentalities which groups devise to meet their particular problems, change under the impact of changing situations.
Valuable as these techniques are for many purposes, they are adequate only for periods of relative social calm. They test and describe why people are as they are, why they think the way they do, how they react to the given, known conditions in which they find themselves.
But they are grossly inadequate to explain violent, drastic changes in consciousness and behavior. As a matter of fact, both their political prejudices and the very refinement of their technique tends to make them shy away from the consideration of such changes which do not lend themselves so easily to precise measurement and documentation.
Mills notes a tremendous political apathy as the chief political characteristic of American society. He attributes this to a number of factors: The mass media of propaganda, entertainment and communication; the secrecy in which major political decisions are made; the helpless feeling of the individual confronted by the vast, interlocked government, business and labor bureaucracies which seem to grind along their way divorced, almost, from the control of any individual, leave alone of the “little man.” All of these no doubt have their validity.
“There were no plain targets of revolt,” he writes, “and the cold metropolitan manner had so entered the soul of overpowered men that they were made completely private and blase, down deep and for good.”
This appalls Mills, and gives a profoundly pessimistic cast to his book. Here is a society at dead center, drifting toward an ever increasing bureaucratization in structure and privatization, i.e., dehumanization of the individual. And in this situation, the new middle class which he is describing specifically, but also the working class which appears as part of the social matrix in his study, tend to gravitate to the present foci of power. Thus it is, and thus it will continue to be.
With regard to the middle class, there is no historical evidence to indicate that in a situation of social struggle “they will ‘choose’ only after their ‘choice’ has won.” Rather, there is much evidence to indicate that in those critical periods of history when rapid change is taking place, the political apathy of the middle class turns to a frenzy which attaches itself not so much to the dominant power, but rather to the most dynamic, economic class or political movement. It is precisely this tendency of the new middle class which constitutes at the same time one of the greatest opportunities as well as one of the greatest dangers in a time of social upheaval.
In Germany, the new middle class gravitated to the dynamism, the promise of a radical shake-up of society, made by the Nazi movement long before it had won, or was even close to winning. And the very powerful Social-Democratic movement was unable to attract the middle class, and was eventually overwhelmed because its “traditional,” gradualist approach had lost its appeal for the middle class at that juncture. The widespread attraction Stalinism has for sections of the new middle class abroad cannot be explained solely in terms of its inclination toward established power.
In describing the depoliticalization of American society, Mills contrasts the present situation to what happened here during the great depression. His pessimism, it would seem, derives from a feeling that the factors enumerated above which contribute to this apathy are here to stay, and what seems to be an underlying assumption, that nothing appears likely to counteract them in the future.
But the times in which we live, viewed from a platform broader than that offered by the techniques of sociological testing and investigation, can be seen as times which will subject the social fabric of America to tremendous strains. The dominant fact of the past ten years has been the vast, unexampled prosperity of the American people. Such has been the privileged position of the United States that all social and economic dissatisfactions, struggles, frustrations, could be absorbed and directed inside the flow of this all-pervading prosperity.
To believe that American society will continue indefinitely to enjoy this degree of unprecedented physical and economic well-being is to believe in miracles, and in permanent ones at that. And to believe that when the full impact of the permanent war economy, and later of the global war itself, places our society under the most drastic and shocking strains, the working class will fail to respond in the only way it can respond successfully: through a new development of political consciousness, is to permit counsels of despair to overcome the dictates of reason.
And as Mills so ably points out, it is the political reaction of the working class, in one way or another, which will determine the political role of the new middle class, as well as the political future of our whole society.
* * *
Footnote
1.
White Collar, by C. Wright Mills, Oxford University Press, 1951, 378 pp. $5.00.
 




To the Editor:
Comrade Shachtman’s article in the last two issues of the New International entitled Socialist Policy and the War presented an elaboration of the analysis and strategic orientation of the war resolution passed at the last convention of the Independent Socialist League (see Labor Action for July 23, 1951, Independent Socialism and the Third World War).
In the second article, however, there appeared a formulation which although quite correct in itself, is incomplete and also may be so general as to give rise to certain misconceptions about its meaning. I refer to the passage on page 205 of the July- August issue, which reads as follows:
“To maintain political opposition to the war is correct. To continue to prosecute the class struggle is correct. But to prosecute the class struggle in such a way that it would clearly imperil the military position of the government, even to the point where it may be defeated by the enemy and lose the war – that, in the conditions of the Third World War, would be disastrous to the working class and to socialism.”
The reason that misconceptions with regard to this passage are not only possible, but quite likely, is, in the first place, that it seems to employ a classical formula of socialist defensism, that is, of critical, or even “revolutionary” support of the war.
I use the word “seems” advisedly, as a careful reading of this passage in the context of the whole article should disabuse anyone of the notion that any degree of support to American imperialism is being proposed.
The classical formula of critical support to war reads something like this: We will continue to prosecute the class struggle, but only in ways which will not interfere with the government’s prosecution of the war. In other words, this formula subordinates the class struggle to the military and hence diplomatic and hence imperialist interests of the government. In practice, it cannot but mean a suspension of the class struggle in both its economic and political aspects in wartime, or at least its inhibition to a point at which the working class becomes a docile appendage of the capitalist class and its government in the interest of “victory.”
Comrade Shachtman’s formula is, of course, quite different. The critical phrase which differentiates it from the classical formula is “even to the point where it [the government] may be defeated by the enemy and lose the war.” In other words, the limiting criterion by which socialists would be guided in their tactics in the continuing class struggle would be not the military fortunes of the government in general, but only a situation in which a particular action in the class struggle (say a strike) would assure a Stalinist victory not only over the government, but over the working class itself.
Even if this is clear, I feel that the formula still remains so general as to leave out an extremely important element. Although it may be thought that among educated socialists this element may be taken for granted, it is precisely with regard to such “tactical” formulations, i.e., formulations which may be taken as more direct guides to action than is the case with general theoretical propositions, that precision of statement is essential.
The whole article is directed to the conclusion that in World War III socialist policy “must be based on the idea of ‘transforming the imperialist war into a democratic war’ that this can be accomplished only if the working class struggles successfully for a whole series of radically democratic economic and political measures “which would, on the one hand, ‘greatly enhance the military might of the country,’ and which, on the other hand, could not ‘be put into effect without transforming the war from a war of conquest into a just war”; and that in any event such a transformation cannot fully take place under the present regime in the United States or any other capitalist regime, but only under some form of workers’ government.
The objective of the class struggle, when viewed in its broadest terms, is the establishment of such a government. This holds true for us both in peacetime and during a war. Any other consequences it may have must be weighed against the degree to which it advances the workers toward this all-important objective. And it should be almost self-evident that a major class-struggle action which could take place at a time in which the bourgeois government finds itself in such a precarious position that loss of the war to Russia is an imminent possibility is likely to be fraught with major political consequences. In such a situation, the socialists would have to decide whether a continuation and expansion of the struggle would be likely to bring the workers to power (and thus “greatly enhance the military might of the country”), or whether its consequences could be only to deliver the country to conquest by Stalinism. The latter would most likely be true of an irresponsible strike by a relatively small number of workers in a vital industry. A major strike wave in such a context would indicate that the workers had already lost all confidence in the existing government, and that they were actively engaged in a struggle to replace it with one which they believe could prosecute the war against Stalinism successfully.
Although the above may seem to take us into the realm of speculations, I feel that it is desirable to bring out as clearly as possible all the considerations which would guide socialists in their strategic approach to the class struggle in World War III. Thus I believe Comrade Shachtman’s formula would be more precise if it read:
“To maintain political opposition to the war is correct. To continue to prosecute the class struggle is correct. But to prosecute the class struggle in such a way that its only consequence would be to imperil the military position of the government to the point where it may be defeated by the enemy and lose the war – that, in the conditions of the Third World War, would be disastrous to the working class and to socialism.”
 




My friend, Jack, says to me one day: “The Workers Party has made a very good analysis of what is wrong with the capitalistic system and how the government is nothing hut a tool of the fat boys to keep the workers down.
“But what I want to know,” he says, “it exactly what kind of a government setup do you advocate which wouldn’t be full of graft and corruption and politicians that is feathering their on nest and keeping some clique in power on the backs of the people?”
“Well,” I says, “we advocate a workers’ government.”
“I read Labor Action every week,” says Jack, “so you don’t have to tell me that. But even if you elect workers to Congress and have a president who used to be a longshoreman, what is to prevent them from selling out to the capitalists or some gang like Stalin’s bureaucrats?”
“It takes two men to make a corrupt politician,” I says. “One man who has the money or the power to buy him by cash or favors, and the politician himself who can sell out and still keep his position because the voters who elect him have no control over him once he is in office.
“So the only way to make any government set-up really serve the workers is first of all to eliminate the capitalists whose control over industry and trade gives them the money and power to control the government; and secondly to organize things in such a way that the common people have constant control over their representatives and can remove them anytime they don’t like what they are doing.”
“Well,” says Jack, “we have the right to impeach politicians and in California, at least, to recall them. But just try and get one of them out. If they are smart they get their payoff legally. And if they aren’t that smart, it still takes so much dough to recall one of them that we don’t have a chance.”
 
A Different Machinery
“That’s right,” I says. “That is why we advocate not only ending the economic power of the capitalists by nationalizing industry and putting it under the control of the workers, but also a completely different government machinery by which the workers can constantly control both industry and all parts of the government including the legislative, executive and judiciary.”
“That’s what I want to hear about,” says Jack. “What kind of a setup can actually keep the government serving the people instead of some clique?”
“A government based on councils of workers, farmers, housewives, professional people and the like,” I says. “Take it first on the local level. Now we elect a city council once every so many years on a district basis. In a workers’ government the municipal affairs would be run by a council made up of delegates from the unions, housewives and professional organizations. Each delegate would be responsible to the members of his own organization. He would be elected for a very short term, would serve at the same wage or salary as the people he represents, and could be recalled any day of the week by a simple majority vote of his organization.
“To recall him his constituents wouldn’t have to prove that he had taken a bribe or committed some other crime. Any time a majority of his organization felt he had voted the wrong way in the council, or that someone else would represent them more vigorously, they could replace him.”
“Well,” says Jack, “that sounds pretty good tome so far as councilmen are concerned. But how could you keep your mayor and chief of police and all the city department heads in line? After all, it wouldn’t be efficient to change the head of the health department every time somebody’s kid caught the measles.”
 
Everybody Represented
“No, it wouldn’t, and you can count on the workers to understand this as well as you and I do. But the important thing is to keep full control over all the departments in the hands of the common people through their complete and constant control over the council. That means that there should be no artificial division between the council and the departments and the courts. City health, direction of traffic, the schools, fire protection, city planning and all the other municipal functions can use technical experts to advise the people and their council on what needs to be done and how best to do it. They can also be in charge of directing the carrying out of the policies laid down by the delegates in the council. As long as they carry out their duties to the satisfaction of the council, OK. But the important thing is that as long as the council has complete control over them, and constant and complete responsibility to the working people organized in unions and other organizations, they won’t have much chance to work for some small clique or interest group.”
“Maybe you have something there,” says Jack. “But why wouldn’t it work just as well to have the delegates elected on a ward or district basis as it present, with everything else run like you described it. That way everybody would have a vote. Under our setup there might be a lot of people who wouldn’t belong to any organization which has a delegate. Wouldn’t they be robbed of their right to vote?”
“Every citizen who does anything useful would have the right to belong to some organization with a delegate,” I says. “Because every enterprise would be run not by a capitalist or a board of directors, but by the people who work in it.
“Housewives would band together not just to elect delegates to the city council, but also because the housewives organizations would most likely be in charge of such things as watching over prices, quality and service in the stores, neighborhood child care and recreational facilities and services, and other things about which they know best because they have to contend with them everyday. Any citizen who either contributes nothing to the community, or who can’t be bothered to look after his own welfare by joining and being active in the organization which controls that welfare would automatically disfranchise himself.”
 
Common Interests
“Well, that sounds OK,” says Jack, “but I still don’t see why you insist on delegates being elected by organizations instead of by wards or districts. Maybe it is just a pet theory of yours.”
“It may be a theory,” says I, “but everything’s a theory till it’s been put into practice. Like universal suffrage or atomic fission. The point is this:There are very few things which concern neighbors just because they are neighbors. In one neighborhood you may have an auto worker, a dentist, a longshoreman, a carpenter and a schoolteacher. Each of them has much more in common with people of their own occupation who may live on the other side of town than they have with each other.
“When the delegates from all the organizations meet, you can be sure that all interests will be represented in proportion to the number of men and women concerned with each. You can be sure, for instance, that the longshoreman will be in a much better position to keep tab on the longshore delegates to the council and to instruct them how to vote than he would be to keep tab on some doctor or carpenter who might come from the ward or district in which he lives.”
 
The First Step
“It seems to make sense,” says Jack. “I guess one of the reasons the capitalists and the politicians can run things as they please is because they are well organized and have plenty of time and money to maneuver elections. And when we go to vote we usually don’t know any more about each candidate or the real issues than what they tell us in their campaign literature.”
“That’s right,” I says to my friend Jack.“The district basis of voting is made to order to give the appearance of democracy while ensuring that the real strings of power remain in the hands of those who control concentrated wealth.
“And the first step toward a workers’ government.” I says, “is to organize a labor party so that at least all the workers will recognize that they must act according to their class interests politically just as they do economically in their unions. Once such a labor party has taken power in America, we can proceed to reorganize the whole political machinery to serve the interests of the vast majority instead of the few.”
“Give me some of them Labor Action subscription blanks,” says Jack. “I know a couple of guys I want to reorganize into some political machinery right now,” he says. “I mean into the Workers Party.”
 




SAN FRANCISCO – By the time this copy of Labor Action reaches the West Coast, the struggle of the maritime workers to retain their hiring halls and to improve their conditions will have come to ahead. On June 15 the waterfront will either be tied up by a strike, or a “compromise” will have been reached between the unions and the employers, or the workers will have bowed their necks before a strike-breaking government injunction.
The longshoremen and seafaring crafts whose contracts terminate June 15 face a united employer-government front which is determined to weaken them or break them once and for all. Truman’s “fact finding”board can have only one purpose: to render a decision which will put the unions on the spot before the public and which will give the government an excuse to issue an injunction under the anti-labor Taft-Hartley Act. Throughout the “negotiations” with the unions, the employers have shown that they are determined not to yield an inch from their position against the hiring halls. They feel that the government is backing them,and even more important, that the unions are disunited and weak in their determination to put up an all-out fight.
The key to the whole struggle in maritime is the unity of all waterfront and seafaring unions. If these unions were united behind a policy of struggle, and if they had some assurance of support from the rest of the labor movement, they could, face the employers and even the government with confidence in their ability to win.
 
Evasion Fatal
These days the danger of strike-breaking by injunction hangs over the heads of workers in all major industries. The miners and the railroad workers have both experienced the heavy hand of the notorious Judge Goldsborough, whose injunctions are nothing but the voice of the employers speaking in deadly legal phrases. Both John L. Lewis and the railroad labor chiefs have cowered before the majesty of the employers masquerading as “the law,”and have retreated. Will the maritime workers do the same?
If the answer is “yes,” then a dark future opens up before every longshoreman on the West Coast and every seaman shipping out of a union hiring hall, whether he belongs to the NMU (National Maritime Union), Seafarers International Union (SIU), Sailors Union of the Pacific (SUP), Marine, Cooks and Stewards (MC&S) or Marine, Firemen and Oilers (MFOW). For one thing is certain, the employers and their government regard the hiring halls as the chief bulwarks of union strength, and they are determined to undermine or tear down these bulwarks.
If the answer is “no” ... that is,if waterfront workers of all the unions involved stand solidly together and refuse to be blackjacked to work by a government injunction there will be a long, hard fight the result of which no one can guarantee. But it is only through this kind of a fight that the hiring halls can be kept under union control, and that the unions themselves can be preserved as organizations which are capable of defending and advancing the interests of their memberships.
If the leaders of the maritime unions really intend to save the hiring halls, they must know that in all probability this can be achieved only by striking, regardless of what the employers or their government may do. Every intelligent worker knew this weeks ago, and so did Harry Bridges, Bryson, Malone, Curran and Lundberg. Knowing this, it was the clear duty of these men to decide some time ago exactly what they would do, to sound out the rest of the labor movement for support,and to keep their memberships fully informed on all developments. Any attempt on their part to evade the issue of the probable injunction, or to act as if this were not the chief threat to the unions in their struggle with the employers meant that the unions would come to the June 15 deadline unprepared and unarmed for the struggle.
 
Real Unity Essential
Yet it is a well known fact that until two weeks before the strike deadline these men had not unified their strategy. Coming up to the eve of the strike, the unions were disunited. And the responsibility for this can be clearly laid, first of all,on the shoulders of the cliques in the leadership of the ILWU (Longshore Workers), MC&S and NMU which follow the line of the Communist Party (Stalinists). For years these men (Bridges, Bryson, the “hacks”of the “progressive caucus” in the NMU, and their cohorts) have played a rule or ruin game in the maritime unions. They have followed every twist and turn in the Stalinist party line as dictated not by the interests of the maritime workers but rather by the interests of the rulers in the Kremlin. This has resulted in confusion and division within the ranks of each union, and in constant friction and animosity among the various unions.
Bridges and his gang in the ILWU; Bryson and his in the MC&S and the Stalinists in the NMU always have the word “unity” on their lips. But for years every practical proposal for unity which has come from them has simply concealed as cheme to establish Stalinist domination over all waterfront and sea-going unions.
Harry Lundberg’s name was included in the above list not because his union is directly involved in this beef, but because it should be. He has used the disgust of maritime workers at the antics of the Stalinist cliques in the ILWU, NMU and MC&S to strengthen the hold of his own machine on the SIU-SUP, and to keep these unions isolated from the rest of maritime labor. The seamen in these unions have been lulled into a false sense of security by the contracts they have negotiated which seem to insure their retention of the hiring hall. But they are living in a fool’s paradise. If the unions whose contracts are terminating now lose control over their hiring halls either through a broken strike, or through yielding to a government injunction,the SIU-SUP will be dragged down in the general catastrophe, and that’s for sure!
Disunity is the great weakness of the waterfront. But it is a weakness which can and must be healed! Labor Action hopes sincerely that by June 15 the pressure of the memberships of all the unions involved will have forced their leaderships to close ranks, to plan a common strategy, and to initiate an all-out struggle which will strike the first and death-dealing blow to strikebreaking by injunction. If unity in this struggle is achieved by maritime labor, we are certain that workers in allied industries, that all good union men in all industries, will rally to the active support of their seafaring and waterfront brothers.
 




PORTLAND, Oregon, Nov. 25. – This tenth national convention of the CIO reflects in many ways the division of the world into the followers of U.S. capitalism on the one side and the adherents of Russian Stalinism on the other. No voice has been raised to proclaim the role of labor in America and the world as the third force which can oppose both these predatory powers and lead the way to a world organized in the interests of the common people.
At this convention only two forces are apparent to the naked eye. One is the small minority of delegates who represent the policies of the Communist Party, and the other Is the vast majority who support the policies of Philip Murray.
The readers of Labor Action may well wonder: where is the UAW? Where are those delegates who represent groups or unions which have in the past gone on record for a third party and for a really militant, democratic labor movement?
The answer is that they are sitting on their hands.
 
Militants Are Cowed
This convention will result in giving Phil Murray and the conservative-liberal ideas he represents greater power in the CIO than he ever has had before. With the complete rout of the Stalinists, no other force has appeared to take its position at the left wing of the CIO.
The militant wing is here, all right. But it is cowed and silent. Its fear of being identified with the Stalinists is so great that it dares not raise its voice in opposition either on general questions of policy, or on the completely undemocratic and bureaucratic practices used by Murray in controlling the convention.
The UAW delegation voted unanimously for the resolution which condemns any attempt to form a third party in America. The UAW delegation was prepared to fight any such statement in the resolutions committee. The resolution on political action actually passed by the resolutions committee did not contain, we are informed, the condemnation of third party efforts, but confined itself to a positive advocacy of CIO-PAC policies as carried out in the past election. However, when the printed report of the resolutions committee was distributed, the UAW delegates found that Murray had had this paragraph inserted behind the backs of the committee. Yet they apparently decided that it was “wiser” not to fight this bureaucratic trick openly and expose it from the floor.
The same goes for the undemocratic procedure announced by Murray which prevents the appearance of any minority resolutions on the floor. The resolutions committee had decided that minority reports and resolutions would be given the same privileges as those of the majority. When Murray opened the convention he simply announced that only majority resolutions would be presented, and that minority resolutions would be voted on only if the majority resolution had been defeated. The UAW delegation did not fight this undemocratic procedure from the floor.
 
Not Enough
It is important that every member of the UAW carefully consider the actions of their delegation at this convention. They should be compelled to give an explanation for their failure to fight for what they claim are their principles.
They have an explanation, but it isn't good enough. It isn't good enough for men of principle to say that they will fight behind the scenes, and that they will make a very clever interpretation of the fact that the resolution on political action says that no third party is to be advocated “at this time” to mean “today” but not necessarily “tomorrow.” It is not good enough for them to say that the CIO is now pretty much a Steel Workers organization as Murray has placed his men in all key regional and other national offices, and that this will have to be changed before an effective fight can be made against his conservative policies and bureaucratic practices.
It is not enough. The UAW delegation represents the largest union in the CIO with over a million members. It is not some two-by-four outfit which must fear to stand up on its feet and fight for its principles. They do not have to fear that they will be identified with the Stalinists if they have a superior program to offer the membership of the CIO.
The clever tactics of the UAW delegation and other real left-wing delegates will cost them and the membership of the CIO much in the future.
 




The tenth constitutional convention of the Congress of Industrial Organizations marks the end of an era in the history of this great labor organization.
This was the decade in which the CIO has been led by two groups of men representing two clashing points of view. These groups have worked together with little friction. Their alliance has now been broken for good by the political and social conflict which is taking place on a worldwide basis.
On the one hand we have the followers of the theories, ideas and practices of the Communist Party (Stalinists). These men entrenched themselves in the CIO during the thirties. They were some of the most active and militant leaders during the years when the CIO was marching ahead, organizing the workers in the mass production industries. The influence and authority which they gained during that period put them in a position to take over organizational control of a number of international unions. Ever since then they have been hanging on to this control by a combination of ruthless, bureaucratic rule, clever demagoguery and a minimum of service to the workers they represent.
 
Fight in the Open
Throughout its history in the CIO, this Stalinist gang (now commonly referred to as the “left wingers” by their rivals and the press) has pursued one consistent policy: to use its power in the CIO to promote the political interests of the rulers in the Kremlin. When these interests required militancy, they were as militant as any bureaucrats. When they required that the workers of America lie down and take everything the employers had to throw at them (as during the war years) the Stalinist leaders were the chief advocates of the no-strike pledge and every concession to the bosses.
The other group, which at this convention has broken the partnership and come into complete and unquestioned control of the national CIO as well as of most of the internationals in it, can best be described as liberal, capitalistically minded, labor bureaucrats. They too have their well-oiled machines which operate to stifle opposition in their unions from any source, and to perpetuate themselves in power. Their policies also vary from militancy, when the bosses give them no other choice, to a fervent desire to make deals with the employers which they can sell to their memberships so as to avoid strikes and keep the rank and file as quiet as possible.
At no time in the past have the Stalinists had the greatest influence in the CIO. The second group, led by John L. Lewis in his day and by Philip Murray since big John left the CIO, has always had the upper hand. But up to this convention, whatever disagreements there may have been were settled by deals in the back rooms. Now the fight is in the open, and the Stalinists are on the run.
 
Balance Changed
Why was the partnership broken? It is a well known fact that men like Murray always prefer a quiet deal to an open fight. For when the leaders of great unions fall out, when they begin slashing each other’s machines to ribbons, it always gives the rank and file a chance to break through the machine control and take matters into their own hands. That is what Murray and men who think like him fear more than a rival clique. That is why all these years these two groups of CIO leaders have quietly settled their disagreements without permitting the ranks even to know that a conflict was going on.
At this convention of the CIO, however, the balance of power between the Murray and the Stalinist wings had been changed drastically in Murray’s favor. During the past year the Stalinists have taken a whipping in two of the largest CIO unions (United Automobile Workers and National Maritime Union) and one of the smaller ones (Transport Workers), and their position has been challenged in several others where they had been in complete control before.
This made it possible for Murray and his lieutenants to open an all-out fight without having to fear that the Communist Party adherents would make serious trouble in any large unions except the United Electrical Workers, the International Longshoremen & Warehousemen and the Fur Workers. The other unions which they control either have such powerful anti-Communist groups in them that the Stalinists would be afraid to stage an all-out fight or are so small and weak that even if the Stalinists should try to pull them out of the CIO the loss would be hardly felt.
That is the organizational side of the question, and it should not be overlooked. This weakening of the Stalinists in CIO did not take place chiefly through maneuvers by the Murray bureaucracy, but by revolts of the membership against Stalinist control. In two major cases, to be sure, these revolts were led by turncoats from the Stalinist machines (Curran in NMU and Mike Quill in Transport). But the fact that in these cases, as well as in the others, anti- Stalinist factions won out, is ,an Indication of the fact that the Stalinists have begun to slip everywhere in the influence they have enjoyed in the CIO since the thirties.
Of course, this turn of the workers from Stalinism is not 100 per cent progressive, any way you look at it. No doubt thousands and even hundreds of thousands of them have been influenced more by the reactionary anti-Communist propaganda spread by the government, press and radio than by a clear understanding of the true nature of Stalinism. At the CIO convention in Portland the Murray faction’s arguments and attacks on the Stalinists were about half legitimate and progressive and half reactionary and red-baiting. They are leading the workers away from Stalinism, but not toward a sounder, more realistic position of struggle for their rights and interests against their ruling-class enemies in this country.
 
Shape of a New Era
An era has ended in the history of the CIO. The question for every worker who regards this great movement as the strongest and most progressive wing of American trade unionism is: what is the nature of the new era which the tenth constitutional convention has opened up?
The convention itself can’t give a full answer to this question for the happy reason that the officials who represented their memberships there are not the only ones who will decide this question. The economic, social and political developments in America, and in the world, and the way the rank and file of the CIO reacts to these developments will tell the whole story.
But there can be no doubt of the intentions of the Murray CIO bureaucracy in this matter. If they have their way, this will be the era in which the CIO becomes a powerful political force to prop up the capitalist system at home and abroad while gaining the most it can get for the workers while doing so.
They believe that the Democratic Party victory has ushered in the New New Deal. They forget that the old New Deal was not a rosy heaven for the workers. They have forgotten, or would like their constituents to forget that in 1940, after seven years of the old New Deal, there were still from ten to fifteen million unemployed; that according to their own statements at the time these unemployed were never adequately provided for by the New Deal; that during the New Deal the CIO had to fight on the picket lines for most of the major gains it made; and that the old New Deal solved the problem of full employment only by drafting eleven million young Americans into the armed forces and putting the rest to work to provide them with arms and sustenance.
 
Effects on Nation
They passed a great number of resolutions at this convention which, if carried out, would vastly improve the standard of living of the American people. These resolutions on housing, minimum wage, civil rights for Negroes and other minorities, medical care, taxation, wages, participation by representatives of labor in controlling the Marshall Plan, etc., etc., do not differ materially from resolutions passed at any other CIO convention. The point is that they were never carried but in the past because the CIO relied on the good will of the government with a little “pressure” from labor to carry them out.
Now they know what socialists have been saying for a century, that labor can be the DECISIVE political force in the country. Yet their proposals, running through all their speeches, on how their program is to be put into action, are no different than they were before the Truman election.
Murray and his co-thinkers dream of a peaceful partnership with capital in industry and in government. In this partnership they, the official leaders of the labor movement, will put their feet under the table with the millionaires, military brass and the government bureaucrats to arrange the life of the nation. The workers in the factories and mines, on the farms and railroads of the country will go on working diligently, producing “reasonable” profits for their employers, contented and safe in the knowledge that their elected trade union officers are looking after their welfare at the top. This is the bureaucratic paradise which Murray has to offer the millions of men and women who pay the bills for the CIO.
 
Warning to Dissenters
Of course, just as the nation is to be run by a bureaucratic partnership of labor leaders, capitalists, churchmen and politicians, the unions themselves are to be run by a partnership of anti-Communist bureaucrats. Any labor leader who tries to break this partnership by advocating policies contrary to those of Murray & Co. is committing a crime because when big-shots fall out the ranks may rally behind the factions and take things into their own hands.
The measures passed at this convention which give the National Executive Board great powers to intervene in the affairs of various internationals are now directed against the Stalinist leaders in some of the weaker unions. But the whole atmosphere generated at this convention along the line of demanding unquestioning adherence to the policies of the majority in political as well as all other matters can and will be used as a weapon against any dissenters who may appear in the future.
This is of vital importance to every thinking member in CIO. Already there is a “left” and a “right” wing in the Murray majority. However, the left wing went down the line with Murray at this convention in order to smash the Staijnists. They were silent when Murray violated democratic methods in running the convention. They were silent when Van Bittner and others made speeches which should make every thinking liberal, let alone people who consider themselves “radicals,” blush with shame. They did not put forth one idea of their own which would lead the workers back home to realize that Murray is not the only real leader in CIO.
 
Overall Meaning
Yet they were there. As Murray’s bureaucratic paradise reveals itself to the workers to be made of the same flimsy material as all other dreams, there will be more of them. As the ranks find out in the next few months that reliance on “their” president and “their” Congress, and their “American middle way” simply means that they have to carry the load of inflation or depression and, in any case, of the vast domestic and foreign military expenditures on their backs, the left wing will become stronger.
Of this there can be no doubt. Yet it is our contention that this tenth convention of the CIO will make the job of the left wing harder in the future, not easier.
For this convention did not smash the Stalinists. As we have pointed out, that job was done to the extent it has been done before the convention, by vote of the ranks in key unions. The convention simply recorded this fact and gave the Murray forces the heart to organize further measures to smash the Stalinists from above. At the same time, due to the timidity, “practicality” and inaction of the real left wing, it put more power in Murray’s hands and lent more prestige to Murray’s name and through it to his theories about the future role of labor in America than he has ever had before.
For the first time in the history of CIO this convention has established the principle that this great labor body can demand the loyal carrying out of all decisions not only in its basic field of trade union strategy and tactics, but also in the wider field of politics. And at the present time this means that all leaders of CIO are bound by convention decision to be loyal to the political ideas of Murray’s bureaucratic capitalism and to the Democratic Party which he hopes to make the vehicle for putting these ideas into practice.
That is the overall significance of this convention of the CIO. That is the New Era which Murray thinks he has inaugurated at Portland.
The old era of Stalinist-Murray collaboration lasted ten years. We predict that the New Era will not last a quarter as long. It will end either in the destruction of the free labor movement in America at the hands of those whom Murray seeks as peaceful partners, or much more likely, in an upsurge of the CIO spirit of the thirties but this time applied to the political struggle against the capitalists which will go hand in hand with the economic struggle. When this Murray era ends, Mr. Murray and his closest lieutenants in CIO will be swept away with the dream which they are now dreaming.
 




The other day my friend, Jack, and I were sitting in the Workers Party office reading the papers and chewing the fat generally.
“I’ll be damned,” says Jack, “if the AFL hasn’t gone and did something progressive for a change.”
“What have they done now?” says I.
“On a motion by Paul Clifford of the carpenters,” says Jack, “the San Francisco Council has unanimously disapproved Bill Green’s proposal to increase the work week from forty to forty-five hours. Furthermore, they are wondering what Green is thinking of, if anything, in proposing to junk the forty-hour week which labor fought so long to establish. Listen to this,” he says, and reads me the following from the paper.
“‘William Green ought to be ashamed of himself,’ said Joe Iocona of the culinary workers. ‘We want to go with the times, not backward. It’s about time we go for the six-hour day. We ought to tell Mr. Green he’s all wet. It’s about time somebody told him.’”
“Maybe Brother Iocona reads Labor Action,” I says. “We’ve been advocating the thirty-hour week without a cut in take-home pay for a long time, as a starter towards what the workers should get.”
“He don’t have to read Labor Action to know it’s the only proposition that makes sense,” says Jack, “though it wouldn’t do him much harm to read it at that. All he has to do is take a look at all the union members sitting around the hall waiting for work, or to read this other piece in the paper about General Motors laying off 445 workers this week in Oakland.”
“I guess the thirty-hour week is going to become a hot demand pretty soon,” I says, “especially if the layoffs get more widespread. But it’s going to have to go along with a demand for a real increase in wages. Otherwise the older workers who stand less chance of being laid off on account of their seniority will figure the only way to make a living is to chop the younger men off rather than cut hours and spread the work.”
 
Chewing Real Meat
“Yes,” says my friend Jack, “if is the old capitalistic game to keep the workers divided. If they get the older men saying to the young ones: ‘You’re a pretty good dog, and I’m a pretty good dog, but only one bone got tossed out today so you had better go get yours someplace else,’ they will have them just where they want them chewing on each other instead of all chewing on the capitalist, where the real meat grows.”
“That’s the way the capitalists would like to have it, all right,” I says, “but it looks like a lot of the dogs are getting too smart to fall for that one. The paper says that when General Motors announced the layoffs the union voted to cut their hours down to four days, and on a similar proposal the longshoremen voted overwhelmingly against any layoffs.”
“The real fight will come up this spring,” says Jack, “when the big union contracts are renewed. That’s when the whole labor movement had better get together and o to work on the fat boys in a pack for some real demands or there’ll be hell to pay.”
“Well,” I says, “you are right. But with leaders like Bill Green and Phil Murray and the rest of them, it doesn’t look too promising for this spring.”
“You never can tell,” says Jack, “what will happen when a pack of dogs gets real hungry and real mad. If some fat, lazy cur tries to stand between them and where the meat is he’s likely as not to end up wishing his mother had never whelped him.”
“And,” says Jack, “with the cost of living going up every day, us working stiffs is getti9ng hungrier and madder by the hour. When Central Labor Councils start growling at Old Lady Green it means the memberships have started chewing on their delegates for some action. First thing you know even Green will wake up to what’s going on and start whining at the employers for a few more bones to keep the boys quiet.”
 
Ten Bones
“Talking of bones,” I says, “just reminds me of something. Did you send those ten bones you promised for the Workers Party Fighting Fund Drive?”
“There you go,” says Jack, “I should have known better than to bring your attention to anythin that could be twisted around like that, on account of your one-track mind.
“As a matter of fact, I sent in my ten bones yesterday. And I hope and trust every dog smart enough to read this paper is also smart enough to go and do likewise.”
 




Darryl F. Zanuck’s Gentlemen’s Agreement comes as close to a serious treatment of anti-semitism as Hollywood is likely to allow under present circumstances. Unlike Crossfire which portrayed anti-Semitism in its Nazi extremes as it exists in fascist and near-fascist circles in the United States, Gentlemen’s Agreement puts its finger on the wide spread anti-Semitism among the most respectable people and institutions in our cultural, business and community life.
This picture deals with a young writer, Phil Green, who poses as a Jew in order to gather material for a series of articles on anti-Semitism for a liberal magazine. In a few weeks Green finds active anti-Semitism in the hiring policies of the very magazine for which he is writing. He finds anti-Semitism or the toleration of anti-Semitism in the respectable doctor who is treating his mother; in his Jewish secretary who is trying to “pass” as a Gentile and who is fearful that her comfortable position might be disturbed by the hiring of “kikey” Jews in her office; in his betrothed and the respectable middle-class circles in which she moves; in the barriers raised against his admittance to a fashionable resort or a suburban neighborhood; in rejections to applications for jobs or for admission to colleges; in his little boy’s playmates who taunt him for being a “dirty Jew”; in the inability of his friend, David Goldman, to take a good job because he can’t get a place for his family to live.
 
Personal Problem
This picture says much that needs to be said, and says it well. It even goes so far as to say that writing and talking about it, and protesting against anti-Semitism are not enough, but that what is needed is direct action against it whenever and wherever it rears its head. Yet the kind of action it advocates is the unorganized action of the protesting moral individual. This is the only kind of action the picture could logically propose. For anti-Semitism is portrayed in Gentlemen’s Agreement not as something which derives its driving force from the way in which our society is organized, but rather as a problem which stems from the ignorance, stupidity, bigotry and viciousness of individuals in our society.
No picture made in Hollywood can probe to the social depths of anti-Semitism or of Jim Crow in America, for to do so means to probe at the rotting heart of American capitalism. It is not just SOME colleges and universities which have racial and religious “quotas” imposed, perhaps, by individually prejudiced boards of trustees; Almost every institution of higher learning in this country which does not bar Jews and Negroes outright has such quotas. The whole government is so shot through with anti-Semitism that Jewish officials will pass over the names of Jews who stand at the top of civil service registers, in favor of Gentiles with lower grades or qualifications, for fear that they will be charged with favoritism.
Anti-Semitism is not solely a product of the dog-eat-dog struggle for jobs, for housing, for security and prestige in the professions and industrial and governmental bureaucracies, which is as much a part of capitalism as profits and unemployment. As a psychological fact it is perhaps equally generated by general feelings of insecurity, fear and helplessness in a tottering world which lead men to seek security by banding together with those who are most like themselves in appearance, language and religion and to strike out at those who are different.
This psychological fact is well understood by fascists. Thus, their anti-Semitic propaganda does not appeal solely to people’s economic needs or greeds. (“Kill the Jews and get their jobs and businesses.”) It appeals to the deep need of men whose lives and prospects are hopeless to find someone, or some group, weaker than themselves or their group as an object on which to vent their wrath.
Thus anti-Semitism and Jim Crow will last as long as the world is tottering, as long as people are helpless, insecure and afraid, as long as men must live empty lives. Anti-Semitism and Jim Crow will disappear from society only when mankind has so mastered its destiny that security and plenty and a full life are the normal prospects for the least of its members.
Though Gentlemen’s Agreement can urge those who see it to strike at anti-Semitism, it cannot urge them to smite it with methods adequate to the evil itself. For though anti-Semitism will die only in a society of plenty and security, its growth can be checked and its vigor sapped only by methods which strike at its social, economic and psychological roots. By this is meant: When men band together because they are determined to abolish a social and political system leading them into a blind alley, they no longer feel hopeless or afraid. People, thus organized, need no racial or religious scapegoats on whom to vent their wrath, for their hatred is directed against the real cause of their misery. For them, anti-Semitism is to be fought not only as an evil in itself, but as a double evil because it seeks to divide their ranks and confuse their objectives. For them human brotherhood is not simply a high ideal, but a method of organization and a necessary condition of victory.
 




The engineers, firemen and switchmen of the railroads of America are being slowly dragged by their union leaders to the conclusion of the latest wage and rules movement.
They say “the mills of the Gods grind slowly.” But compared to the mills of the rail labor leaders working under the Railway Labor Act, the Gods proceed with reckless speed.
One whole year has passed since the leadership of these organizations first decided to demand a much-needed revision in rules and wages. One year at the BEGINNING of which the railroad workers were behind the rest of labor in wages and conditions. One year at the BEGINNING of which they were miles behind the rising cost of living.
During this year the rest of the labor movement got one wage increase, is now about to fight it out for another one. During this whole period the rank and file enginemen and switchmen have been living on hopes and pulling in their belts.
 
Mock Battle
If it weren’t such a serious business for hundreds of thousands of families in America, the handling of this wage movement would look like a cheap comedy, with the audience (the rank anti file) cast in the role of the “fall guy.”
Reading the back issues of Labor, national rail labor newspaper, is like listening to one of those broadcasts of a floperoo fight. The “fighters” stagger about the ring in fond embrace, or make mighty swipes at the air. But the radio announcer reports a thrilling battle in which the champ is pounding the contender to a pulp. As one round after another goes by,the radio audience begins to wonder: How come so many blows have been dealt and so much damage done, yet the contender doesn’t seem to weaken and the fight goes on?
On May 31, 1947, Labor reported that the five operating brotherhoods had decided to re-submit to the carriers the rules program which had been abandoned (after much shouting about how necessary it was) in1946.
Twenty days later Labor reported that a meeting had been arranged for October 7 with the carriers on rules, and that a demand for higher wages was to be added.
By October 11 (five months from the opening bell) the “battle” began to warm up. The brotherhood leaders were making “firm statements” to the effect that unless the carriers came across, and promptly, they would do something or other about it. At the same time they decided to demand 30 cents an hour or $3 on the basic day, effective November 1, 1947.
From that time till this, in addition to the main event (the endless “negotiations,” “mediation,” “fact-finding”) the brotherhood chiefs have been staging a sideshow with the railroad managements: the “battle of the advertisements.”
The companies have spent thousands of dollars (which are doubtless deductible from taxes as an “operating expense”) in newspaper ads which claim that rail workers are rolling in money which they earn by “featherbedding.” And, quick to strike a blow where a blow is needed, the union chiefs have spent thousands of dues-dollars in newspaper ads which prove that rail workers have about the lowest hourly earnings of any industrial workers in the nation.
(Of course, the question might well be asked: You rail labor leaders are now proving that under your “leadership” your workers have been steadily losing ground for many years. This, it would seem, is about the most damaging admission of failure any labor leadership could make. If your whole past activity has resulted in making railroad labor “low man on the totem pole” of wages and conditions, the only honest thing you could do is to declare your bankruptcy and resign from office. How about it?)
 
Break Ranks
But, back to the main event. By November 8 Labor was quoting union officials to the effect that “operating workers will not brook delay on the wage question.” One week later headlines read: “Ops are Pushing for Showdown on Wages and Rules”; “Negotiations Move Into High Gear; Must Have Action Soon, Leaders Say.” That was exactly five months ago. The only people in “high gear,” it seems, were the headline writers on Labor’s staff.
Then, in November, the rail workers were treated to the usual scandal which disgraces their union movement. In the middle of negotiations, two of the participating organizations (the B of RT and the ORC) broke ranks and made a deal with the employers, leaving the remaining three to carry the fight for their original demands alone.
The word “fight” appears in the last sentence. So far it has been, as before,a good fight in Labor with the contestants still clinched in loving embrace while pawing the air with purely verbal haymakers.
From December 6 to January 24 the leaders of the three unions (engineers, firemen, switchmen) were in“mediation” with the employers. Thus forty-nine days were consumed in shadow boxing with employers who had already demonstrated clearly enough FOR EIGHT WHOLE MONTHS that they would make no concessions. Of course, the well-paid officials of both unions and companies took the holidays off from “mediation.” After all, it was only in the columns of Labor that a real fight was going on. (And that was for the benefit of the rail workers who had to work over the holidays at straight time rates, as usual.)
Three months ago mediation ended. In the meantime the union chiefs had taken a strike vote among the men, while assuring one and all that they had, really, no intention of striking. It was just one of those things you do under the Railway Labor Act to go through the motions of a fight for the benefit of the suckers who pay the freight in union dues.
 
Up and Down
By February 7 of this year Labor was at it again: “He’s up, he’s down, he’s up, he’s down” cries the announcer, while the contestants waltz around the ring in slow motion. By this time the proceedings had reached the stage of hearings before a President’s Emergency Board. As usual, smashing headlines appeared in the paper. “Three ‘Ops’ Present Strong Case for Pay Raises and Modern Rules”; “Much Larger Raise Held Justified by Months of Delay.” (Question: if “justified,” then why not demand a much larger pay raise?)
In the same issue of Labor, however, there appeared a small item stating that the brotherhoods had agreed to extend the deadline for the hearings to March 10 “in the public interest.” That was a good one! For eight long months the union leaders had been pleading, negotiating, mediating and who knows what all else. But even at this stage of the game they were quite willing to postpone things for days and weeks.
After all the “smashing testimony”and “telling arguments” presented be-fore the Emergency Board (any railroad man’s wife or ten-year-old kid could give all the “arguments” needed in ten minutes. One pay check and one sheaf of grocery, rent, light, etc., bills should be enough) the unions were offered just what everyone knew they would be offered: the same 15½ cents per hour offered months before, and a few insignificant rule changes.
Well, it’s been a long story, but it was a long “battle.” At the moment of writing the union leaders have “refused” to accept the Board’s proposals, have set a tentative strike date, and have again met to negotiate with the carriers. This is the fifteenth round.
 
Next Round Uncertain
What will happen now? Nobody knows. At least, nobody who works on the railroad knows. The engine-men and switchmen whose “leaders”have been engaged in the bloody conflict described above haven’t the slightest idea of where they stand. The odds are that the union chiefs,with heart-rending screams of protest (“we wuz robbed”) will accept the “decision,” that is, just what the Board offered. Again, probably, in the“public interest,” or some such pap. The only “interest” in which they don’t seem to be concerned at all is the interest of the men whom they are supposed to represent.
Eleven months is a long time to wait, even with a good announcer at the mike trying to keep the customers awake. While the rail workers’ wages have stood still all this time, and while their conditions are as bad as ever, the cost of living hasn’t stood still.
There is an off chance, of course, that things have gone so far that the union leaders won’t dare come before their memberships with the insulting “gains” offered. There is an off chance that they will realize that even though in the past they have been able to put on these phony shows and get away with it, this time their heads (read “salaries”) are on the block, and that they will therefore call the men out on strike.
The last railroad strike proved one thing. Despite their misleadership, once the chips are down rail workers can and will strike to a man. Last time Truman intimidated the leaders, he didn’t scare the rank and file. He knows that, the men know it, the country knows it and the brotherhood chiefs know it. That is probably the thing which scares them most. When railroad workers show the same solidarity and militancy in running their own union affairs as they showed in the rail strike of 1946 there will be no more year-long “negotiations.” They will then choose leaders who will get action, who will get results.
Rail labor need not be “low man on the totem pole” in wages and conditions. To rise in the scale, however, they need a new kind of leadership. That is one of the chief lessons of the present wage movement.
 




Editor:
I believe it is the duty of Labor Action to correct a flagrant distortion of the position of Henry Wallace on the settlement of strikes which appears in Hal Draper’s article entitled Henry Wallace’s Record on Labor and Jim Crow Much Unlike His Promises in the issue of May 10.
Comrade Draper quotes an article by Wallace in the New Republic of December 30, 1946 in part as follows:
“If a strike takes place in ... industries which are essential to the continued life of the nation, the industry should be taken over and operated by the government until a settlement can be reached ...”
Commenting on this part of Wallace’s proposals of 1946 Comrade Draper writes:
“What’s wrong with a little injunction to halt strikes for 80 days when it’s all right for the government to ‘take over’ the industry under circumstances where the union is deprived of any power?”
The distortion of Wallace’s position resides in the omission of the rest of Wallace’s proposal where the dots appear in the quotation. Here is the rest of the paragraph which is “symbolized” by the dots in Draper’s quotation:
“During this period of operation there should be no profits to the owners, in order to avoid the situation we have seen in the past where the government has simply acted as a stooge for the employers, who have hidden behind the pressure created by public indignation against the strikers and let the government drive a harder bargain with the workers than is fair or just. When the government acts, let it act truly as the representative of all the people.”
It seems to me too obvious to need emphasis that these sentences, omitted from the article, place Wallace’s proposal in an altogether different light from the impression given the readers of Labor Action. Should the government “seizure” of the railroads mean that all profits during government “operation” go into the national treasury pending settlement between the unions and the companies, there is not doubt that the capitalists and their newspapers would be howling bloody murder against government seizure rather than sitting back and laughing at the workers up their sleeves.
 
Comrade Draper and the Editor of Labor Action may well be convinced that this part of Wallace’s proposal is not sincere, or that if he were President he would not do what he advocates as a private citizen. However, this in no way justifies simply deleting this part of his proposal, it only necessitates analyzing it and exposing the impossibility of such action on the part of a capitalist government which is there to serve the bosses’ interests.
On the face of it, this deletion of a vital and pertinent part of Wallace’s proposal for handling strikes in an article mainly devoted to that question smacks of the worst practices of the capitalist and Stalinist press so roundly and justly condemned by Labor Action. It cannot but cast doubt in the minds of our readers on the reliability of the paper as a source of information. Even more seriously, it puts in question the political integrity of the paper and the Workers Party whose views it expresses.



 


Gordon Haskell





Draper’s Response
 




SAN FRANCISCO – The employers of America have taken off the gloves. The brass knuckles are bare for all to see. The government has ripped off the mask of “impartiality” in labor disputes. The face revealed underneath is the grinning skull of capital,stamped with the dollar sign, and spewing forth injunctions, police assault on peaceful pickets, and the armed force of the national guard.
The victims were yesterday the miners, the meat packers, and today the railroad workers. The chips are down, the die has been cast. Either the unions are going to take the gloves off too, stand together and fight, or the issue cannot be in doubt.
Government “seizure” of the railroads and the anti-strike injunction is forcing railroad workers and the labor movement as a whole to make a vital decision. Baldly stated, it is this: Either the rail unions are going to fight the railroad-government conspiracy with every means at their disposal, or labor in America will be in danger of forfeiting the right to strike.
 
Workers Indignant
A previous article which traced the history of the present rail wage and rules movement (Labor Action, May 3, 1948) said:
“The last railroad strike proved one thing. Despite their misleadership, once the chips are down rail workers can and will strike to a man. Last time Truman intimidated the leaders, he didn’t scare the rank and file. He knows that, the men know it, the country knows it and the brotherhood chiefs know it. That is probably the thing which scares them most.”
That statement was not ballyhoo, it was sober truth. The rail workers’ reaction to their chiefs yielding before the phony “seizure” and the phony injunction was, as far as can be established, almost unanimous. They were and are just plain mad. They see the choice before them clearly, and if they were permitted to do something about it, there is no doubt that they would choose to strike in the face of all the injunctions, intimidation and pressure they know would be brought against them.
The three rail union chiefs, Johnston, Robertson and Glover, know this better than anyone else. Drew Pearson reports that they pleaded with Truman’s man Friday, Steelman, for an injunction and told him plainly that without it they couldn’t sell the idea of calling off the strike to the more “radical” members of their unions. These “radicals” are 99 percent of their memberships, the men who actually run the trains and switch the cars, not those who sit in comfortable swivel-chairs and draw thousands of dollars in union salaries.
 
Everybody’s Battle
The rank-and-file railroad workers want to strike, regardless, not just because they badly need higher wages and better working conditions. They want to strike because they recognize the fact that if they don’t they are giving up any hope of real improvements in the future, and, equally important, they are giving up their right to assert themselves as freemen. They know that if they submit to the lawless, brute force of employer-government strikebreaking which seeks to cover itself with a fig leaf of spurious legality, they are admitting before their employers and the world that from now on they can be treated as serfs who are incapable of defending their rights and their organizations, let alone of fighting for elementary economic justice.
Finally, they feel that in this fight rail workers are not battling for themselves alone, but for all Americans who have to work for a living. If the employers and their government stooges can get away with breaking this strike without a fight, they will use the same method against the auto workers, the electrical workers, the telephone workers, the maritime workers and all others. Someone, some union, has to make a stand sooner or later. It cannot be that the American union movement, fifteen million strong, will permit itself to be bound and destroyed without a struggle, without a whimper. With a deep sense of the risk they propose to take and the terrible hardships involved, rail workers are saying all over the country: somebody has got to make a stand. It might as well be us!
There is no use kidding anyone about what is most likely to happen. The rail union chiefs hold all the organizational strings in their hands. No matter what the memberships may think, they have no way of forcing the chiefs to lead them in battle, or of striking despite the leaders’ capitulation. And at the present writing, there is little doubt that the leaders intend to capitulate. They have shown no stomach for the fight. Bold words have been followed by craven deeds. They have already abandoned many of the most essential demands originally served on the employers. All that is left is to gain some little concession, some tiny sop for the workers which will make it possible for them to sell a “settlement” to the ranks which will reduce the resignations from the unions to a minimum.
 
Caught in Vise
The rail workers are caught in a vise. One jaw is the concerted force of the employers and their government. The other is a union structure which deprives them of any real say in the most vital decisions which face their unions and hence each of them separately. Until they have broken the jaw which holds them organizationally helpless, they are not free to break the jaw of the employer-government conspiracy.
What is to be done? Many lodges have already passed resolutions urging their union chiefs to strike against the injunction. Better go to jail, better have no treasury, than to submit to slow strangulation, to a creeping paralysis which will transform the unions from weapons of struggle for workers’ rights into instruments for imposing slavery on free men!
This crisis does not confront railworkers alone. It confronts all workers, all unions. Rail workers are willing to fight, but workers in all unions, CIO, AFL and independent, can help them to break the vise which holds them, NOW.
 
No Submission
In every union local or lodge in the country where Labor Action is read, workers should pass resolutions urging the rail workers and their unions not to submit to serfdom by injunction and promising them full financial and organizational support. Such resolutions should be sent to local rail lodges, to the rail labor chiefs, to the international officers of the AFL and CIO unions and to the government. All workers who understand what is at stake should use this opportunity to express their solidarity, and to serve notice on the union leaders, the employer class and the government that American workers are not slaves and that they will not permit themselves to be enslaved.
Such resolutions, whether passed by rail lodges or by other union locals, are not futile. They may not succeed in stiffening the spines of the flabby, frightened old rail chiefs who are weighed down by multi-million union treasuries and long-established habits of crawling on their knees before the might and power of the rail companies and their government. But such resolutions will lay the groundwork for the battles which lie ahead. They will serve notice that the workers of America know what the employers and their government are proposing to do to them, and that they are through with compromise, with appeasement, with retreat.
One battle doesn’t make a war. One defeat doesn’t mean that all is lost. Resolutions passed by union locals urging the rail workers to stand and fight and promising them full support may not stave off defeat in this wage and rules movement. They can be the first step toward uniting and preparing the whole labor movement for the next battle in the war capital has declared on the working people of America.
 




Henry Wallace ended his speech on the radio announcing his candidacy for President on a third party ticket by referring to the small but determined army with which Gideon defeated the foes of Israel, and compared his followers to this army.
It is a well known fact that Wallace is given to reading his Bible, and hence it can be assumed that he exercised some care in selecting this comparison. Now it so happens that Gideon was one of the chief heroes of my childhood. So, out of curiosity, I dipped into the Book of Judges to re-read the story of Gideon and see if it could cast any light on Mr. Wallace’s notions about the campaign on which he has embarked.
The first thing which struck me was that Gideon was not nearly as determined a man as I had remembered him to be. Before he could gather the courage to start on his military venture, he demanded that Jehovah perform at least three distinct and most spectacular miracles for him. After these had been performed, so that he was absolutely sure that Jehovah was on his side, he began to choose his men.
Gideon then took his men down to the river, and observed the different ways in which they drank the water. Those who knelt down to drink were sent home as unfit for combat, while “everyone that lappeth the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth,” was selected for the army of three hundred which made up his shock troops.
 
“He Who Lappeth”
Now, I don’t quite know what relation lapping water like a dog may have to military virtues. But when we regard the shock troops of the Wallace army, as presently constituted, we may come to the conclusion that only those who lap up the last drop in the Stalinist party bucket are fit for front-line duty.
It must be admitted that Gideon’s army accomplished an almost incredible feat of arms, from a military point of view. The Bible reports that these three hundred men either killed or caused to be killed a hundred and twenty thousand of their enemies. Yet this was accomplished, not by a bold attack, but rather by a military ruse.
Gideon equipped his little force with trumpets, empty pitchers and torches. In three evenly divided parties they surrounded the sleeping camp of the Malachites and the hosts of the East. At a given signal “the three companies blew the trumpets and brake the pitchers and held the torches in their left hands and their trumpets in their right hands wherewith to blow. And they cried ‘the sword of Jehovah and of Gideon.’ And they stood every man in his place around the camp; and all the host ran; and they shouted and put them to flight. And they blew the three hundred trumpets, and Jehovah set every man’s sword against his fellow, and against all the host; and the host fled.”
It is a little difficult to see how the hosts of monopoly capitalism are to be routed by such methods, or similar ones applied to our political scene. The only force in this world capable of putting them to flight is the organized might of the working class, allied with all the people. But this might can be organized only by a program which openly assaults all the vested interests of our rotten society, and Mr. Wallace is and has been notorious for his lack of any such program, nay, for his willingness, in all his past political history, to accept half-way and quarter-way measures where only the full measure would do.
In any event, Gideon came to something of a sticky end. He had the modesty to refuse the crown of rulership offered him by his enthusiastic supporters right after the victory. Instead, however, he requested that they give him the earrings they had cut off the ears of their fallen enemies. These amounted to 1700 shekels of gold and Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah; and all Israel played the harlot after it there and it became a snare unto Gideon and to his home.”
Mr. Wallace has not, so far, shown Gideon’s modesty. The crown has been offered, and he has reached out for it. Now the question is: should the miracle happen, that is, should Wallace be elected, is there anything in his past record or in his present program which can lead us to believe that he will cast the idol of gold out of America?
 
Water Into Wine?
Those who ask us to believe that Wallace will bring about any significant change in our society want us to believe that the miracle of changing water into wine will take place before our eyes. They want us to believe that a Secretary of Agriculture who served the capitalists, and a Vice-President who served the capitalists, and a Secretary of Commerce who served, the capitalists will be transformed into a President who will serve the workers.
No. It will take more than the broken pitchers of the Stalinist party and the tin horns of liberalism to change the system. What is needed is an aroused working class, organized in a powerful party of labor with a program, not of reform, but of a sweeping new American revolution to do the job.
 

   “A few months ago,” says my friend Jack to me the other day, “you were telling me about how the workers and farmers and other people that do something useful will run things once they wake up and take over from the monopolists and politicians and the rest of the riff-raff that has the world by the tail these days.” “I seem to recall such a conversation,” says I. “I’ve been thinking about it,” says Jack, “but the more I think about it, the more it seems to me there’s a hole in it you could drive a two-ton truck through.” “Well,” I says, “let’s take another look at it and see if we can’t plug that hole up. But first let’s get one thing straight. The Workers Party doesn’t claim to have a crystal ball in which the socialist world of the future can be seen like a city map with every detail right in place. All we claim is that from our study of times in the past when workers rose up and took power some things they did worked line and can be used as a guide to the future, and other things led to defeat and helped to foul things up. “We take the lessons of these experiences, and add a little common sense, and try to teach as many as we can that some things can be made to work, and others can’t. That’s science and not crystal-gazing or blueprinting castles in the air and telling the workers: ‘You do it our way or the hell with you!’ ”  Who’ll Run Things “Okay,” says Jack, “have it your way, and I won’t ask for a blueprint. But I’ve got a little common sense too, or what we used to call horse- sense back on the farm. You said that when the working people take over from this riff-raff, committees of workers and farmers and professional people and housewives will run everything from the mines and farms and factories and railroads up through the federal government.” “That’s right,” I says. “Well,” says Jack, “that’s just where the big hole is. These folks may have a lot of sense when it comes to their own job, whatever it may be. But where are they going to get the brains and the training to run the whole works? After all, when you get up in the higher brackets of management and government things get pretty complicated. It’s one thing to run a lathe, and something very different to run a whole department, or a whole plant or the federal government.” “You can say that again,” says I. “I am saying it again,” says Jack. “About half the guys I know won’t even read Labor Action because they say it’s too deep for them. The sports pages and the funny books are about their speed. How do you figure guys like that are going to sit on a committee to run a factory or the national railroad system?” “Well,” I says, “maybe they won’t.” “That sounds,” says Jack, “like you’re giving up too easy. If these guys can’t run things, what happens to your whole picture of workers’ control under socialism?”  Plenty of Know-How “Use your bean, Jack,” I says. “Are these funny-book addicts the guys your local elects on the bargaining committee or as committeemen or shop stewards?” “Well,” says Jack, “not usually. Once in a while one of them gets popular and slips in and then there’s hell to pay.” “Sure,” I says. “That’s a little of the overhead of democracy. But by and large you got to admit that even the comic brigade is smart enough to elect men to represent them who know the time of day. What makes you think they’ll get dumber when they know the men they elect will have to be responsible for running the whole plant, and not just for bargaining with the boss or adjusting grievances or running union business as at present?” “Then you admit yourself,” says Jack, “that the average guy won’t know enough to run things himself, but will have to elect smarter men to run them. What’s going to prevent these smart boys from gradually taking over and running things to suit themselves and putting the rank and file right back where they are now, behind the eight-ball?” “There are just two things you overlook,” says I. “First, not everyone who feeds his mind on the funny books today is a dope. From the time most of these guys were kids they found out that the whole system was rigged against them. They were told in school that in this man’s country everyone has an equal chance. When they started looking for a job they found that was a lie. When they went into the army or into a factory they were told a thousand times: ‘you aren’t supposed to think; your job is to carry out orders.’ They found that the newspapers lied to them, and the most respected government officials lied to them. They found that the whole system is based on a million lies for the suckers, I don’t blame them much for going to the funny books, which at least don’t pretend to tell them the truth.” “That’s true,” says Jack. “So what?” “So these same guys are likely to take a much greater interest in things when they find that they can believe what they read in the papers and are told by public officials. Today they are lied to because this rotten system needs to fool people to keep them from revolting. Tomorrow, under socialism, the truth will be the chief weapon in the hands of the working class as only when they know the facts will they be able to make correct decisions.” “Yeah?” says Jack. “That could be. So how will that change things?” “The more people take an interest in running their affairs, the less chance the ‘smart boys’ you mention will have to take over in any capacity except as servants of the people assigned to do a specific job. The old adage will still hold true that eternal vigilance is the price of liberty. Only then it will be the vigilance of the great mass of people who will have the real power to decide how things will be run. Their vote today is a mockery of power as the real decisions are made in the secret meetings of boards of directors of banks and corporations and carried out by the so-called representatives of the peepul in government.” “Maybe so,” says Jack. “What was the second point you say I overlooked?”  Workers’ Control “It’s just as simple as the first one,” I says. “No one claims that as soon as the workers’ and farmers’ government is established every mother’s son is going to be on a factory management committee or a city planning committee or some other committee which is in charge of a part of the nation’s life which today is dictated by the corporations and their government. What I do say is that all public matters (including industry) will be run by committees elected by those most concerned, and not by a clique which rules by the divine right of owning enough stocks and bonds. There will be smarter guys, and guys who work harder and men who have won the confidence and respect of their fellow workers and fellow citizens. In our present set-up the man who gets to the top is usually the man blessed by rich parents, good connections, or a willingness to grind his fellow humans under his heel. “With real workers’ control and a truly democratic set-up in all aspects of life, that kind of tough bird will be most likely to end up at the bottom of the pile. Leadership is one thing the common people can always use. Under socialism the leaders will be selected on the basis of performance in a contest in which everyone really has an equal chance to use his natural abilities, and will be recalled the moment he shows that he is learning to abuse them.” “Well,” says Jack, “that was quite a speech. Maybe what you say is true. Anyway, I’ll think about it.” “I guess I got sort of wound up,” I says. “By the way,” I says, “are you through with that paper? I’ve been wondering how Trick Dacy got out of that last jam he was in.” “He didn’t,” says Jack. “It seems that Chief of Police Bannon was taking a cut from the dope ring and when Dacy called him in on the pinch his cops plugged Dacy full of holes. “It just goes to show you,” says Jack, “they can’t even keep government clean in the funnies any more.”   



Tito’s Imperial Communism
by R.H. Markham
Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1947, 292 pp.
This book on the Stalinist conquest of power in Yugoslavia is as
much a patriotic propaganda tract for American capitalism as an
analysis of Stalinism in the Balkans.
R.H. Markham has lived in the Balkans for more than thirty years –
first as a Protestant missionary, for the most part as correspondent
for the Christian Science Monitor. His knowledge of the culture and
politics of this region is perhaps unequalled among American
correspondents. Unfortunately, however, his bitter hatred for and
abysmal ignorance of Marxism leads him into such confusion in his
analysis of Stalinism that what he has to say loses much of its
potential value.
Markham’s description of how the Stalinists gained and held
power fits into the well-worn pattern of events in Stalin’s
satellite states of Eastern Europe. A totalitarian Stalinist clique
gains power by means of terrorism via typical GPU methods. All
opponents of the clique are either murdered or discredited as
“fascists.” A “popular front” government is formed by means
of splitting all non-Stalinist parties and accepting only the
completely subservient factions led by subservient leaders into the
ruling “coalition.” Industry is nationalized (90 per cent) under
complete control of the new bureaucracy. The whole nation is
“organized” into police-controlled bodies on the Russian pattern.
Markham does not much concern himself with describing specific
economic and social measures introduced by the Stalinist regime. He
confines himself mainly to proving beyond a shadow of a doubt that
all controlling positions in the political, economic and social life
of the country are held by Communist Party members, backed by the
ubiquitous secret police, and that all opposition is ruthlessly
crushed. He insists repeatedly that the regime is not supported by
any but the smallest minority of workers, peasants and intellectuals.
He does not even discuss whether or not the population at large, or
certain select sections of it, are better or worse off from the
material point of view.
Of special interest may be Markham’s description of how the
American and British governments were led to throw their support to
Tito and withdraw it from Mikhailovich during the war; of the way in
which the Yalta agreement was circumvented by Tito, etc. Also, for
those unfamiliar with this subject, Markham gives a good description
of the adherence to Stalinist ranks (and the elevation to high
office) of notorious fascist and reactionary leaders and supporters.
These include notably: Franz Piertz, former head of Milan Neditch’s,
air force; Marko Mesitch, who led a Ustachi band to the gates of
Stalingrad as part of Hitler’s army; Sulejman Filipovitch, who
headed one of the most ferocious Ustachi bands in exterminating the
Serbian population of Croatia. Similarly he gives a good description
of the typical Stalinist build-up of the hero-cult, aided by writers,
poets and artists who had distinguished themselves for sycophantic
adulation of every previous ruler of Yugoslavia.
 

   “Say,” says my friend Jack to me the other day, “what do you think of this here women’s strike against the high price of meat?” “I think it’s about time,” I says, “that the women of this country got themselves organized and did something. Men too,” I says. “But what good can this boycott do?” says Jack. “After all, folks got to eat meat, especially if they work hard. The way I see it, as long as wages and profits and everything else is sky-high, a one-week or even two-week boycott of meat ain’t going to do much except maybe to run a few butchers out of business who are operating on a shoestring anyway.” “Well,” I says, “it’s true that as long as the big meat packers and big ranchers and the railroads are allowed to make a fortune in profit out of the needs of the people, the boycott ALONE isn’t likely to bring the price down much and KEEP it down. That’s true.” “Well,” says Jack, “what can they do that will actually bring the price of meat and everything else the people need, down to whore ordinary folks can call their kids to the table without feeling ashamed of themselves?” “Lots of things,” I says. “Far instance, once they are organised to boycott meat, housewives can begin to really find out just what causes high prices. Their committees go to the butcher shop or the meat packers and demand lower prices. Everyone tells them: ‘It’s not my fault. Go to the next guy up the line.’ The housewives can say to each one: ‘Maybe you’re right. Let’s, have a look at your books so we can see for ourselves whether you are a lousy profiteer or just a victim of circumstances beyond your control.’” “You know how far they’d get with that kind of talk,” says Jack. “They would just be told to go chase themselves. No packing house is going to open its books to any housewives’ committee.” “All right,” says I. “But every refusal just drives one more spike into the lie that they all peddle when they say: ‘It’s not my fault, it’s the next guy.’ Then the housewives’ committees can go to the politicians of all parties and say: ‘The meat people have been giving us the runaround. They won’t open their books, which proves they’ve got something to hide. The government can force them to lower prices. We demand you do something at once.’” “But that won’t get them anywhere either,” says Jack. “You know damned well the politicians won’t do anything to hurt their buddies who own the big packing houses.” “Then there is only one place the housewives can go where they can get some real support, my friend, and that’s to the labor movement. We of the Workers Party tell them to go there from the start, while they are doing all these other things to expose the profiteers and their stooges in the government.” “But what can the labor movement do for them?” asks Jack. “After all, the unions have a hard enough time just trying to fight off the Taft-Hartley Law and get a few bucks increase in the paychecks.”  Need Tie-Up with Labor “The labor movement can do plenty,” says I. “They are up against the same proposition as all the consumers when they go up for their wage demands. The employers always say: ‘We can’t do anything for you ... circumstances beyond our control ... we have to pay high prices ... if we give you your demands we will have to raise our prices ...’ And when the unions say: ‘Open your books and prove it,’ as the General Motors workers did a couple of years back, they are told that they are a bunch of reds who should mind their own business. “The unions are finding out, just like the housewives’ committees, that as long as they have no political power they can’t get to first base with the employers, even though they get a wage raise now and then. More and more they are finding out, like the consumers’ committees, that as long as they don’t have political power, their power to bargain collectively or to boycott the profiteers is like the power of an eight-cylinder engine with four cylinders conked out.” “Well,” says Jack, “then it seems that if these consumer committees could get together with the unions they would have to form a political party before they could get anywhere.” “That’s right,” says I, “and that’s just what the Workers Party tells them. A political party based on the organized strength of the labor movement and backed by organized consumers’ groups and small farmers and professional people would be an unbeatable combination. With such a party in office there would be something these consumers and the workers could do besides just striking or boycotting. They would have the political power to enforce their will on the meat gougers and their sidekicks who are raising the prices of clothing and housing and everything else.” “Well,” says Jack, “I can see that you have a job figured out for these housewives’ meat committees that most of the women in them never even dreamed about. What makes you think they will ever go for the kind of thing you are talking about, even though it may sound reasonable enough to me?”  Learning Through Fighting “I think they will go for it,” I says, “because they will see for themselves that their boycott isn’t enough to do the job. These women have proved that they can get het up enough about a major social problem like high prices to get out of their kitchens and offices and jobs and organize themselves for action. That kind of spirit may die down, but as long as the problems exist these gals are going to keep on trying to solve them. “If what I say about the real cause for the high prices is true, they’ll keep on trying things till they hit the right combination. I think that combination is what I have been talking about: a labor party and local committees to run things under a labor government. If I am right, they will see it in time, and they will be doing all kinds of things they never dreamed about when they first started their meat boycott.” “Is that why the Workers Party supports this action even though you know it can’t really keep down the price of meat?” asks Jack. “Yes,” I says, “that’s why. When the common people are putting up a fight on anything, we want to be there to help them. We are confident that in the course of their fight they will learn more than we can teach them by just talking and writing. But we are there not only to help in whatever the immediate issue is, but also to preach the idea of a workers’ government and workers’ control as the real answer to their problems.”   



Editor:
I am surprised to find no comment in Labor Action on the statement of policy of the United Automobile Workers Executive Board in endorsing Truman and Barkley for President and Vice-President which was issued to the press for release on September 13.
Some time ago this same executive board went on record for the formation of a labor party in 1949 on the ground that neither of the existing major parties represents the work ing people. At that time Labor Action hailed this statement of intentions, though criticizing certain weaknesses in it, and especially the fact that the UAW leadership is taking no action to organize such a party now.
It seems to me that in view of the position already taken by the Executive Board of the UAW, their wholehearted endorsement of Truman, following in the path of the national CIO leadership, requires the sharpest criticism and condemnation from socialists.
The endorsement is bad enough. The completely uncritical and downright misleading manner in which it is made by the UAW leadership must be openly condemned by all those who favor a labor party, and particularly by socialist partisans of such an independent political organization of labor.
At the very least, a leadership which is supposedly committed to a labor party could have made a statement to the effect that in view of the impossibility of organizing such a body for the 1948 elections (for which the leadership must take its share of responsibility), it has no alternative but to endorse Truman as the lesser of two evils. Although socialists can’t accept such a short-sighted policy, at least it would be understandable to many workers in the UAW who are very uneasy about voting for one strikebreaker against another.
But the UAW leadership does nothing of the kind. Its statement reads, in part, as follows: “The lines between people and privilege have been clearly defined. The CIO supports an administration and a Congress which will roll back prices, which will assure homes at prices people can pay, which will move forward to achieve the President’s proposals on civil liberties for all citizens and economic security for every family, and will continue to seek peace without appeasement among nations so that the freedom of all men everywhere may be achieved.”
More lies about a possible Democratic Party administration could hardly be condensed in so short a statement. The editor of Labor Action as well as every worker who has given two minutes’ thought to the political realities in America knows damned well that a Democratic administration would not accomplish any one of these promises any more than a Republican administration will. The UAW Executive Board is kidding no one except, perhaps, Phil Murray, for whose benefit this statement was probably written.
I am confident that this matter having been called to your attention, Labor Action will condemn in fitting manner the political misleadership which the UAW Executive Board is giving the workers in this election.



 


Comradely yours,
Gordon Haskell



*

We are entirely in agreement with Comrade Haskell and plead guilty to negligence in failing to make special mention of the UAW’s September 13 statement. We have written so often and at such length about the attitude of the labor leaders, including the UAW leaders, on the elections and political action, that we mistakenly passed by the September 13 statement as just another one of those things which we have, unfortunately, come to expect from the labor leadership. We have frequently commented on the special contradictions in the position of the UAW leaders. In our articles (cited by Comrade Haskell) which discussed, and welcomed the statement by Walter Reuther promising to devote his energies to the creation of a new party, we noted the fact that the statement was contradicted by Reuther’s possible endorsement of Truman and certain support of “good” capitalist congressmen. It is our intention to return to the subject repeatedly in future editorials and articles which will survey the position of the labor leaders, notably those who speak of independent political action in one breath and of supporting Truman in the next one. – Ed.
 




(In the previous issue of Labor Action it was pointed out that since the railroad strike last May the railroad unions have been seething with discontent. The article ended by stating that the new element in the railroad labor picture was the announcement last May that the United Railroad Workers of America-CIO, was starting a drive to organize all workers on all roads leading into West Coast terminals, regardless of craft. This article is the second in a series of three written specially for Labor Action by Brother Haskell who is a locomotive fireman.)
*
It is difficult to estimate the full extent of the revolt in the brotherhoods since strike. Labor and the brotherhood magazines either give no publicity to what has happened, or refer to it in vague terms. On the other hand, such is the cutthroat competition among the different rail unions, that the representatives of each seek to exaggerate as much as possible the disaffection in the ranks of its rivals.
To the personal knowledge of the writer, several lodges of the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen in northern California passed resolutions demanding the resignation of Whitney. Estimates run from one to several hundreds in this area alone, of the firemen who left the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Engineers and joined the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers because of the role they believed Robertson to have played during the strike. It was also due in part to the propaganda by the BofLE to the effect that by joining it firemen were promoting the cause of one union for all enginemen. (It should be born in mind that the largest lodge of the BofLF&E on the Southern Pacific has under four hundred members.) If these instances have been repeated on a national scale, it can easily be seen that the movement is of tremendous proportions.
In the labor movement when full and accurate information is not available, a good way of estimating the sentiments of the ranks is to watch the reactions of the leadership. It is true that the conservative and bureaucratic union leadership does not express the will of the membership. But when feeling among the ranks runs too high, the leadership will often attempt to institute measures which it hopes will quiet the discontent and run it into “safe” channels – that is, channels which will in no way disturb the control and domination of the leadership.
 
Post-Strike Reactions
Judging from the response of the leadership in the railroad unions, the pressure from the rank and file must be at the bursting point. No sooner was the rail strike sold down the river, than the leaders began making what for them were very strange noises indeed. Whitney began issuing statements to the effect that the days of the independent brotherhoods were numbered, and that the BofRT was going to affiliate with one of the great national labor organizations. He appeared arm-in-arm with local and national CIO leaders on a platform at a New York City demonstration to protest the anti-labor laws pending before Congress.
Robertson began singing his old tune of amalgamation with the hogheads – and this time it was more than a song. The August issue of the BofLF&E magazine contained a referendum ballot on which the membership could vote for or against consolidation with the Engineers. Rumors fly thick and fast that the Engineers are also for consolidation or, for affiliation with the CIO, or both. At the same time that they issue these statements and give wings to these rumors, the brotherhood chiefs are proceeding with their usual vigor against any INDEPENDENT agitation from the ranks for amalgamation among the unions or affiliation with the CIO.
Among the non-operating unions the reactions are less obvious, but equally intense. Labor tries in every issue to prove to the men that the “tried and true” policies of the leaders and of the AFL in general are to the greatest benefit of the men. Actually, the leaders of the non-operating workers have less room in which to maneuver than do those of the operating brotherhoods, for they are firmly wedded to the AFL craft union policy as well as to the AFL organization. Their propaganda has to be along the traditional lines of the AFL’s attacks on the CIO – that is, to incite the skilled workers against the unskilled, to arouse and foster craft prejudices, prejudices against women workers and particularly against the Negroes.
 
CIO Enters Field
The announcement by the United Railroad Workers of America (URRWA-CIO) that they were going to start organizing railroad workers of all crafts on roads leading into West Coast terminals hit the railroad unions like a bombshell.
Previously the URRWA had confined itself to organizing non-operating workers and these chiefly on roads where company or independent unions had the contracts. They had won a collective bargaining election for all Maintenance of Way men on the Santa Fe in a contest with the AFL union. The fact of the matter is, however, that the issue in the Santa Fe election was mainly whether the existing “independent” union would go over to the URRWA-CIO. On the Pennsylvania, the URRWA had won three crafts out of eight in the shop and maintenance of equipment departments, but there the contest was mainly with the company union which had never been replaced by an independent labor organization. At the present time the URRWA-CIO is conducting another organizing campaign on the Pennsy for the remaining shop and maintenance of equipment crafts and is being opposed by the company union as well as by the shopcrafts unions of the AFL.
But this campaign on the Western roads was, apparently, to be an all-out battle for a real industrial union from top to bottom waged against all the old-line organizations. Workers who know the situation in the railroad unions greeted the announcement of the URRWA drive with high hopes. They knew the dissatisfaction among the men, the strivings for one powerful railroad union embracing all the men, which would put an end to the constant bickering, friction and interunion conflict which have led to the partial defeats of one wage movement after another; But they also knew that the rail union chiefs are men grown old in the experience of railroad unionism who would put up a terrific battle, with no holds barred, before they would permit themselves to be replaced by a democratic, rank and file controlled, militant industrial union on the rails.
The most progressive and intelligent railroad workers therefore hailed the announcement of the CIO drive with cheers, and naturally expected it to be immediately followed up by the kind of organizing drive of which they know the CIO is capable when it means business. They also expected the old-line unions, and particularly the operating ones, to descend on the West with dozens of organizers and hundreds of thousands of dollars to try to combat the CIO drive.
 
Drive Slows to Nothing
But weeks went by, and then months, and neither happened. Those on the inside soon found out that the URRWA-CIO was operating on what amounted to a shoestring, depending almost solely on what it could collect in initiation fees and dues to finance the Western drive.
The whole West Coast was provided with just one (1) representative from the national offices in Chicago, supplemented by a couple of very brief visits by A.B. Martin, National Director of the URRWA, and later by D.B. Anderson, National Secretary-Treasurer. It further turned out that there was no agreement among the recognized leaders of the CIO on the West Coast on this drive. Railroad workers, enquiring of state and local CIO Councils about the drive, were told that it was not authorized by the national CIO and was contrary to national CIO policy. Letters to this effect were sent by Mervyn Rathbone, Secretary of the state CIO Council, to brotherhood representatives which were then posted in the shops and yards and distributed among the workers. Finally, at the July meeting of the State CIO Council a formal resolution was passed condemning the drive and stating that it was not authorized by the National CIO.
On the other hand, the brotherhoods confined their opposition to the drive to posting these letters. Not a single organizer was sent into the field to combat the drive, and, to our knowledge, not a single piece of literature was distributed to the men attacking the CIO (except for the letters from Rathbone mentioned above). On July 3, 1946, a copy of a telegram from A.F. Whitney to one of his local henchmen was posted in which Whitney informed this man not to worry about the organizing activities of the CIO among members of the BRT. Whitney stated that he had just had a conference with Allan Heywood, National Director of Organization of the CIO, and that Heywood had promised him that he would put an end to such organizing activities at once.
(Next Week: What happened to the CIO drive to organize all railroad workers? Why did the URRWA-CIO, change its policy, and what is the real policy of the national CIO toward railroad workers? Should progressive rails support the URRWA-CIO and work to build it, or should they seek a different approach to their union problems? Read the answers to these questions in the filial article of this series on railroad labor in the next issue of Labor Action.)
 




(Continued from Last Week)
In the meantime, without a large staff, with-out public meetings, without literature to answer the thousand and one questions of railroad workers about the structure, program and policy of the URRWA-CIO; hundreds and even thousands of railroad workers of all crafts were joining the CIO union and signing cards authorizing the URRWA-CIO to represent them in collective bargaining with their employers. Despite the alleged “independence” and “conservatism” of the operating workers, in northern California at least, a majority of the men signing cards were from the operating crafts.
Despite the lack of literature, despite the confusion created by the information put out by the state CIO officers, and even despite the fact that at least one of them, locally in charge of the CIO drive in northern California, was a man whose unsavory record of irresponsibility and double-dealing has made him suspect in the eyes of the workers, hundreds of workers were signing up. They clamored for literature, demanded that a charter be issued and meetings held and that the drive be really organized as it should be. This was as good proof as anyone could want that the railroad workers want a change and want it quickly, and that, at least many of them see their best chance of a rapid change in the formation of an industrial union under the banner of the CIO.
And then, about the middle of August the drive for the operating men was stopped dead in its tracks. A.B. Martin, National Director of Railroad Organization of the CIO, informed his West Coast representatives to stop organizing members of the BRT, and to start cooperating with the representatives of that union. He informed them, further, to stop organizing all operating workers, and to confine themselves to the non-operating field.
 
Behind CIO’sChange of Policy
As was stated previously on the CIO rail drive, around the middle of August West Coast organizers of the United Railroad Workers of America-CIO were instructed to stop organizing men from the operating crafts. Instead of raiding the BRT, the URRWA-CIO was ordered to cooperate with the representatives of that organization.
What was behind this sudden change of CIO policy? The answer is a simple one. Whitney of the BRT has been hinting for some time that he is going to propose affiliation with either the AFL or CIO at the trainmen’s Convention this month. After he got news of the URRWA drive on his membership on the West Coast, he got the national leadership of the CIO to stop the drive by giving them some kind of assurances that he will get the convention to approve affiliation with the CIO.
This puts a new face on the whole future of railroad labor organization. If the BRT affiliates with the CIO it will represent a powerful force for the CIO among all operating workers. With the BRT in the fold, the CIO will then be in a good position to launch a drive to organize all operating workers into the operating department of the URRWA-CIO. This will be accomplished either through raiding the other operating unions via the BRT, or forcing them to affiliate as a whole in order to avoid such raids.
But from the point of view of the progressive railroad workers who want a democratic, militant industrial union, this also has a bad side to it. Whitney is noted even among the rail union chiefs for the ruthlessness of his methods in crushing any opposition and for the power of his machine. Only a child can believe that by putting on the CIO label Whitney will change his methods. Railroad workers are being told that the CIO will not accept the BRT unless they change their constitution “in line with CIO policy.” They should not put too much store by this. There is a wide difference even within the CIO among the various constitutions, and certainly a wide difference among the different unions in the actual degree of democracy enjoyed by the membership. Whitney and the members of his machine are certainly going to put up a fight to insure that they control the new union. Whether they succeed in their fight will depend on the militancy and alertness of the rank and file all over the country.
 
A Program Alone Is Not Enough
Among the non-operating workers, the CIO is definitely conducting a drive to take in all crafts, regardless of their present state of organization. (Note: This does not include Pullman porters. Dining car cooks and waiters, red caps and certain other workers are being organized by the Transport Service Workers-CIO.) This is a straight raiding operation on the AFL, no matter what fancy words may be used to describe it. As such, it is something new for the CIO. As everyone knows, the CIO was set up to organize the unorganized workers of the mass production industries into industrial unions. From time to time they have attempted to go into one or another field in which AFL unions are already established, such as the building trades. Generally speaking, these efforts have had small success. Is there any reason to believe that the railroad drive will be more successful?
Railroad men are very dissatisfied with their present organizations. At the same time, they are reluctant to change unless they know just what they are changing to. In this situation if the CIO union can offer them a definite program and show them an organizational structure in which the rank and file can really control its organization, there is good reason to believe that tens of thousands of workers will jump at the chance.
A good program alone, however, is not enough. What is needed, in addition, is enough money to publish literature explaining this program, and enough competent organizers to get to the men. So far, at least, the URRWA-CIO has not had enough money for these purposes, at least in the Western territory. Railroad workers who join the CIO union and participate actively in building it must realize not only this, but also that it will be a long up-hill fight. If it continues at its present pace, it is not likely that the URRWA-CIO will be able to hold collective bargaining elections on the Western roads for many months, perhaps even for a year or more. In the meantime the workers who join will be faced with the united opposition of the old-line organizations, the railroad managements and the government.
 
The Struggle in the CIO
There is one further fact which rail workers who join the CIO might as well get clear right now, and particularly on the West Coast. Within the CIO on the West Coast there is a terrific battle going on for control. On the one side are lined up the so-called “Murray” faction and on the other side the Communist Party-controlled unions led by Harry Bridges. In California, and generally on the Coast, the unions with the largest membership are controlled by the Bridges-Stalinist machine. The organization of several hundred thousand railroad workers into the CIO will change the whole balance of power, and it is therefore to be expected that both groups will bend every effort to keep or gain control of the URRWA-CIO in the West.
How do all these factors stack up when we consider the best course for railroad workers to follow?
Let’s add them up once again, and draw the balance sheet. Railroad labor is dissatisfied with the old-line craft unions which have failed to keep up conditions for railroad workers with those gained in other industries. Railroad workers want a new deal &dash; they want democratic, aggressive unionism. The United Railroad Workers of America-CIO offers the non-operating workers the opportunity to build for themselves a new industrial union on the rails &dash; but the rank and file railroad workers are going to have to do the job of building this union themselves, with very little financial and organizing help from the CIO. The operating workers may be faced with the prospect of one or more of their present organizations affiliating with the CIO, and therefore of fighting within the new CIO set-up for democratic control and militant policies. Within the CIO, railroad workers as well as all others are faced with a fight between the Murray leadership and the leadership of the Stalinist-dominated union.
There is no easy road for railroad labor to get what it wants. The CIO drive and the shift of one or more of the independent brotherhoods to the CIO may be just what was needed to break the stranglehold of the old-line leadership and conservative “business unionism” (the workers get “the business”) on railroad labor. But the results will be up to the rank and file railroaders.
It is they who will have to build the new union in the face of opposition from the bosses, the old union leadership and the government, which does not want railroad labor to take the road of militant struggle for its rights. It is the rank and file which will have to see to it that the CIO union does not become the tool of any faction, but the instrument of the rank and file.
 
Stormy Period of Struggle Ahead
American labor as a whole faces a stormy period of economic and political struggles. The railroad strike brought out more clearly than any other action of labor in recent years the line-up between the government and employers on one side and the workers on the other. The actions of Congress during that strike have made it clear to anyone with eyes to see that in the future the battles of labor are going to have to be fought on the political front just as much as on the picket line, and that pussyfooting tactics will lead to its economic subjugation.
Thus, in the new era which is opening for railroad labor, the fate of the railroad workers lies in their own hands. They now have the chance to build a democratic, militant industrial union. They have the chance to insure that they will choose leaders and put forth policies for this union which will be a real challenge to railroad management both politically and economically. The time to start is now, right at the beginning of the drive, before any machine has a chance to get control of the organization.
Every railroader must become an active, thinking member of his union. Every railroader must attend his union meetings, and elect officers who really represent him. If this is done, the URRWA-CIO will become one of the most powerful, most advanced union organizations of American labor, and the railroad workers will lead in the struggles ahead.
 




Three months ago the railroad workers of America had the eyes of the nation upon them when they tied up the country from one end to the other. Since that time they have dropped out of public attention. But within the railroad unions and among the workers generally the pot has not stopped boiling for a minute.
It is safe to state that there is no other single industry in which, the workers are so dissatisfied with their organizations and so anxious for a drastic change. The famous “conservatism” of both the operating and non-operating railroad unions which has made them “model labor organizations” in the eyes of the bosses and their press, has at the same time made them an object of hatred and disdain in the eyes of large sections of their memberships.
If Gallup were to conduct a poll among the men on the popularity of the different “Railway Labor Executives” it would be a very hazardous thing indeed to give odds on who would turn out to be the most hated: Harrison by the Clerks, Robertson by the Firemen, Whitney by the Brakemen, Johnson by the Engineers, Cashon by the Switchmen, and so on down the line. Railroad workers, watching the advances made by the rest of labor during the past fifty years, and comparing them to the, relatively stationary position of their own organizations, want something done about it, and quickly.
 
Union Rules Not Democratic
But what is to be done? That is the question. The railroad unions have constitutions which are models for dictatorship. The national presidents of the railroad unions, both operating and non-operating, are invested with powers which make them almost completely independent of the will of the memberships.
They can expel members and suspend charters for the flimsiest of reasons. The “circularization clauses” of the constitutions forbid individual members or lodges to send out circulars or other communications to the membership or to sister-lodges except when approved by the international presidents. Yet for railroad workers who are scattered in thin lines and small groups over hundreds and thousands of miles of track this right of circularization is the very life-blood of union democracy – and it is denied them.
Further, most railroad unions have the unit rule of convention representation. This means that each lodge, no matter what its membership, has one vote. All the incumbent officers of the Brotherhoods and unions have to do, then, so as to assure themselves complete control over the conventions, is to get the delegates from hundreds of tiny lodges (many of which are made up of insurance members who are no longer railroad men). The representatives of the large lodges with a majority of the men can do nothing about it.
 
Independent Organizations Spring Up
The lack of democracy within the Brotherhoods has led railroad workers to seek all kinds of ways to organize their action outside the regular union framework. In terminal after terminal independent organizations have sprung up with a variety of programs and goals. In some places these call themselves “terminal councils” and try to work as a sort of coordinating agency among the local lodges, with a progressive program.
On the West Coast and in northern Minnesota the Railroad Workers Joint Action Committee for three years published literature, held meetings and rallied the progressive rails to the cause of democratic, fighting, industrial unionism.
Six months ago, with a large blast of publicity, the National Brotherhoods Rank and File Association was founded in New York under the leadership of one Wellington Roe, former ghostwriter for A.F. Whitney. In Chicago, the Operating Railway Employees of America, led by Bill Knudsen, has tried to promote a dual union for operating workers and has been able to maintain itself for some three years, though without ever gaining enough strength to win a contract or get a collective bargaining election on any road. Since the strike, the Enginemen’s Consolidation Committee has gained widespread support in different parts of the country, despite the denunciations of the brotherhood chiefs, on a program for the consolidation of the Firemen’s and Engineer’s unions (BofLF&E and BofLE).
From the last issue of Labor we read that after years of denouncing all these efforts to give the militant railroad workers some organized form of expression, the Communist Party is trying to jump on the bandwagon by launching its own “rank and file” movement with a program of amalgamation of the railroad unions into one industrial organization.
 
Dissatisfaction Grows Since Strike
It is not necessary at this point to go into the programs and plans of action of all these different organizations. The fact of the matter is that they have been and are all supported by groups of from hundreds to thousands of rank and file railroaders with their money and their time. Railroad workers support these organizations because they feel that it is difficult if not impossible to get redress of their grievances through the usual trade union channels.
Though some of the methods employed by some of these organizations may be ill-advised, and though some of their programs may be inadequate if not downright foolish, and though some of them may be formed or used to promote the personal fortunes of fakers and racketeers, the fact that these organizations continue to spring up and to gain support of more or less wide groups of railroad workers proves the desire and determination of railroad labor to get a brand new deal in their union set-up.
Since the railroad strike the dissatisfaction of railroad labor with its organizations and their leadership has grown rather than diminished. Workers all over the country have been dropping out of their organizations by the hundreds and thousands. Lodges by the dozens have passed resolutions demanding the resignation or removal of their national officers. And, finally, a new factor entered the railroad labor picture after the strike which may change the whole situation drastically in the near future. That was the announcement in the Railroad Labor edition of the CIO News of May 27, 1946 that the United Railroad Workers of America, CIO, was starting a drive to organize workers of all crafts on all roads leading into West Coast terminals. Is this the answer to the railroad workers long-sought-after goal of militant, democratic, industrial unionism?
 

