


   We print below some correspondence sent by the Revolutionary Communist Party to the Labour Party, the Communist Party and the Independent Labour Party calling for the organizing of a united front campaign to force the Government to end its imperialist policy of intervention in the Far East. Only the I.L.P. Has replied. Any working-class organisation with the interests of the struggle at heart, would immediately come to the defence of the colonial people by organizing a united front campaign to mobilise the whole of the Labour movement for action. Neither the Labour Party nor the Communist Party are prepared to do this. The Labour Party backs up the infamous actions of the Government. The Communist Party does not wish to go further than harmless verbal protests. The reply of the I.L.P. Reveals its political bankruptcy. The panic of the I.L.P. Leadership, their fear of a united front with a revolutionary party which will expose the inadequacies of their policy, their retreat before theLabour leaders, can be seen in their replies to the R.C.P. This correspondence is of historic interest in showing the real positions taken by the organisations of the British working class parties in facing the tasks of rallying to the aid of the colonial peoples in their struggle for independence from imperialist domination. – Ed.  

* * *
From R.C.P. to the L.P.
11th November 1945
To the National Secretary,
Labour Party,
Transport House,
Smith Square, S.W.1.
Dear Comrade,
The actions of the Labour Government in Indo-China and Java are not the actions expected by the Labour masses who elected that Government, and are against all the principles for which the Labour Government claims to stand. Directed against the progressive aspirations for national freedom and democracy on the part of the colonial peoples, the military and political intervention of the Labour Government must be condemned by every section of the organised working class and progressive democratic opinion.
It is the opinion of the membership of the Revolutionary Communist Party that all who claim to speak for socialism, for internationalism, for democratic ways of life, have the duty to organise a campaign throughout the working class of opposition to the Government’s policy; to force the Government to end its policy of military intervention, and allow the peoples of these countries to organise their own form of national government and their own ways of life.
Labour with a white skin can never be free while Labour with a coloured skin is held in imperialist chains. It is the duty of the British working class to take action to prevent the Government from attempting to keep the colonial masses in chains.
We call upon the Labour Party to initiate, and take the leadership of a mighty united movement of organised Labour in Britain, a united front of all working-class political and industrial organisations, to refuse to handle or ship arms or other materials to be used against the people of Java and Indo-China; a united front which will force the Labour Government to end the present imperialist war of colonial intervention and to withdraw all British military personnel immediately from these areas.


     Yours fraternally,
Jock Haston
General Secretary, R.C.P.
For the Political Bureau



* * *
From R.C.P. to the C.P.
11th November, 1945
Harry Pollitt,
General Secretary,
Communist Party of Great Britain
Dear Comrade,
Enclosed is a copy of a letter sent by the Political Bureau of the Revolutionary Communist Party to the National Secretary of the Labour Party.
It is the view of the membership of the R.C.P. That a united campaign of all working-class organisations, such as outlined in the above mentioned letter, is an absolute duty which must be carried out by all members and organisations of the working class.
The Communist Party is undoubtedly the largest and most influential political organisation of the working class, after the Labour Party. It has therefore, a great responsibility to rouse the workers in defence of the colonial peoples.
We should be pleased to hear what steps your organisation has taken to force upon the Labour Party a campaign of opposition to the Government’s policy of intervention, and to know what steps you are prepared to take, independently of the Labour Party in the event of refusal, but in conjunction with the I.L.P., ourselves and other working-class organisations.


     Yours fraternally
Jock Haston,
General Secretary, R.C.P.
For the Political Bureau



* * *
R.C.P. to the I.L.P.
11th November 1945
Fenner Brockway,
Political Secretary,
Independent Labour Party
Dear Comrade,
Enclosed is a copy of a letter sent by the Political Bureau of the Revolutionary Communist Party to the National Secretary of the Labour Party.
It is the view of the membership of the R.C.P. that a united campaign of all working-class organisations, such as outlined by us in the above-mentioned letter, is an absolute duty which must be carried out by all members and organisations of the working class.
The I.L.P. Has a great responsibility to rouse the workers in defence of the colonial peoples. We would be pleased to hear what steps your organisation has taken to force upon the Labour Party a campaign of opposition to the Government’s policy of intervention, and to know what steps you are prepared to take independently of the Labour Party and Communist Party in the event of refusal, but in conjunction with the R.C.P. and other working-class organisations.


     Yours fraternally
Jock Haston,
General Secretary, R.C.P.
For the Political Bureau



* * *
Reply of I.L.P to R.C.P.
Nov. 14th , 1945.
The Revolutionary Communist Party,
256 Harrow Road,
London, W.2.
Dear Comrades,
We duly received your letter of the 11th inst., regarding the defence of the colonial peoples.
During the past two or three months we have unceasingly done our best in our Press and Platform to arouse the workers of Britain on behalf o four coloured brothers. We have been in close association with such bodies as the Pan-African Congress and our brother groups among the colonial peoples. In the House of Commons our Parliamentary Group are working with those elements of the Labour Party which desire that the Government policy of Imperialism by proxy should be ended. In particular we would refer you to the special statement issued by our Council two days ago which willappear in this week’s New Leader.
We agree with you that the I.L.P. Has a great responsibility and we have endeavoured to discharge this to the very best of our ability. We shall continue our efforts in the cause of International Socialism.


     Yours fraternally,
John McNair



* * *
R.C.P. to I.L.P.
19th November 1945.
General Secretary,
I.L.P.
Dear Comrade McNair,
Your letter of the 14th inst. was discussed [by the Political Bureau] at its meeting on the 17th November.
We are familiar with the activities of the I.L.P., as outlined by you, since we follow your press and the day to day work of your Party. But the principal point of our correspondence seems to have escaped your attention: “What steps are you prepared to take independently of the Labour Party and Communist Party (in the event of refusal by them), to conduct a united working-class campaign against the Government and in favour of the Indonesians in conjunction with the R.C.P. and other working-class organisations”
That is the crux of our letter to the I.L.P.
To repeat what is already known to you from our previous letter: we have sent a letter to the Labour Party, as the mass organisation of the working class in Britain, proposing that they should undertake the leadership of a campaign to force the Government to withdraw British troops from Java and Indo-China. The workers should be mobilised to “refuse to handle or ship arms and other material to be used against the people of Java and Indo-China,” to form a “united front which will force the Labour Government to end the present imperialist war of colonial intervention and to withdraw all military personnel immediately from these areas.”
We have addressed ourselves to the C.P. as the largest political organisation next to the Labour Party asking that they undertake such a campaign.
And we address the same appeal to the I.L.P. What steps are you prepared to take to initiate a campaign in conjunction with our organisation and other working-class organisations?
If the leadership of the I.L.P. does not believe that a campaign outlined by us is necessary, we would be pleased to hear alternative ideas. If you do not wish to have a joint campaign together with our organisationand otherworking-class bodies, please say so, and we will all know where you stand.
Trusting that the failure to answer this point was an oversight, we await a considered answer to our proposal.


     Yours fraternally
Jock Haston,
General Secretary, R.C.P.



* * *
Reply of I.L.P. to R.C.P.
Nov. 21st , 1945.
The General Secretary R.C.P.,
256 Harrow Road,
London, W.2.
Dear Comrade,
Thank you for your letter of the 19th in reply to mine of the 14th regarding the proposed campaign in favour of the Indonesians.
I note the specific question which you pose regarding a joint campaign. Neither the L.P. Not the C.P. would be prepared to conduct a campaign with yourselves or ourselves. It would be a waste of time making official approaches to them.
We are always prepared to collaborate with any workers in the struggle against capitalism and imperialism, but we do not think that the initiation of a campaign in conjunction with yourselves would serve any useful purpose. You have your function to fulfil and we have ours. You really do not believe in the I.L.P. and your general tendency is to use any collaboration in order to develop and put across your own political line.
We feel on the other hand, that, when engaged in a campaign against oppression one’s political line should be, in a sense, subordinated to the purpose of the campaign. The campaign should not exist to “boost” the I.L.P. or the R.C.P. but to redress the evil against which it has been organised.
We realise that this line of thought is not in accordance with your own political and social philosophy and for that reason we feel we can remain comrades in the common struggle without the conjunction to which you make special reference.


     Yours fraternally,
John McNair,
Gen. Sec.  

 




Working Men and Women of Neath,
You are about to elect a new M.P. to represent you in the House of Commons. This election, taking place at the end of the war against Germany, is probably THE most important of the war.
For the first time a Labour-Tory coalition candidate is being opposed by a revolutionary communist. Many workers have the illusion that the “Labour” candidate is a workers representative. But this is not so. He is a candidate of the Labour-Tory Coalition Government. He does not stand in this election as an independent representative of the working class but as a stooge for Churchill.
Are you in favour of the present coalition of the Labour leaders with Churchill and the other reactionary Tory-Liberal politicians of the capitalist class? Or are you for the end of this vile and bloody coalition and for the whole working class being mobilised for a great struggle to destroy capitalism and bring about a communist world? These are the issues at stake in this election.
The answer which you will give will profoundly affect the workers of the rest of Britain in the next few months.
 
A War for Profits – Not for Democracy
The capitalists, assisted by the Labour leaders have told us it was a war for “democracy and against fascism.” The Labour leaders have entered the coalition and acted as agents and lackeys of the capitalists on this pretext.
We Revolutionary Communists say that it has not been a war for democracy. We say to the workers that it has been from beginning to end, a war for profits on the part of the capitalist class who direct and control the war. Life and Labour has been conscripted. The workers have given all. But property has not been conscripted. The capitalists have been free to exploit the conscripted workers and make great profits and fortunes out of the war.
Not one single wage concession has been granted to the workers without a struggle. Whenever the workers were finally forced to strike after months of negotiations the boss class have vilified the workers, and the Labour a trade union leaders have helped them.
In India, and the other colonies the war has not brought freedom and democracy; it has brought nothing but poverty, brutality and starvation. The most elementary democratic rights are denied to the colonial people who are held down by a terror as brutal as Hitler’s terror. Five million Indian people died as the result of the great famine brought about by British imperialist misrule.
 
Reaction Supported Abroad
In “liberated” Europe the imperialist character of the war has been clearly shown. In foreign policy every reactionary force has received the support of Churchill and the coalition. It is not the workers, trade unionists, socialists and communists that the Tory-Labour Coalition Government aids. It is those miserable and greedy quislings who sided the “foreign enemy” against their own people at the eleventh hour.
It was with Darlan, Badoglio, King Victor, Plastiras – and similar reactionaries and quislings that they treated. It was these people, and their successors whom they have armed and supported against the European working classes.
In Greece the anti-Labour policy of Churchill and his government was most glaringly revealed. It is estimated that ten times more British troops were killed and wounded in the fighting to destroy the revolutionary Greek workers and peasants, than in the fight to drive the Germans out of Greece.
The government is even now preparing to assist, by all possible means, the return of the reactionary king to the Greek throne – the same king who in 1936 called the dictator Metaxas to power to suppress the Greek Trade Unions and Labour movement.
And the workers must never forget that the Labour leaders fully subscribed to Churchill’s policy of suppressing the Greek workers; they actively aided him – and boasted of this aid in carrying out his counter-revolutionary policy of intervention.
 
Solidarity with the German Workers – Workers of All Lands Unite!
Now that Germany has been defeated, a flood of atrocity stories has been poured forth by the Government through the capitalist press. The principal reason for this is to arouse a hatred for the German working class, in case of a communist revolution in Germany.
Yes, the Nazis have committed monstrous crimes! But they have committed them against the German working class as well. While the Nazis were committing monstrous crimes against the German working class, the British capitalists, who now weep crocodile tears condoned as progressive the fascist attacks against our German fellow workers and aided the Nazis.
The atrocities of the British imperialists in India are equal to those committed by the Nazis in Europe – concentration camps, mass starvation, disease, flogging of political prisoners, collective fines, starved prisoners – all these things are perpetrated by Churchill and his class in India today.
The race hatred in the British colonies, and in the Southern States of the United States against the Negro, is as vicious as the race hatred of the Nazis towards the Jews.
Remember the last war with its foul atrocity stories, which were afterwards officially admitted to have been lies. The workers must not be misled by the vile capitalist propaganda that every German worker is a beast; and has to be “re-educated” by our capitalist class.
It is our duty to remember the class ties and the great revolutionary sacrifices of the German worker anti-fascists. At this late hour we say bluntly and boldly to the workers of Neath and of Britain; You have more in common with the German worker than with Churchill and his class. Churchill and his class have more in common with fascism than with the miners, steel workers, and other sections of the British working class.
It was not a Nazi who said of Adolf Hitler that:
“... Hitler’s struggle cannot be read without admiration for the courage, the perserverance, and the vital force which enabled him to challenge, defy, conciliate and over-come all the authorities and resistances which barred his path.”
It was Winston Churchill, in his book Great Contemporaries.
The great and mighty labour movement of the German workers, which it was Hitler’s principal mission to destroy, and in which task he was aided with money and arms by British and American capitalism, will rise out of the ashes of Germany. Our task as workers is to help the German working class movement to arise. It is not possible to do so unless we fight night and day against the foul policy of race hatred and Vansittartism. It is not possible to do so unless we fight against the capitalists and the coalition policy of the Labour leaders and for the unity of the world working class.
Nearly a hundred years ago, Karl Marx, the founder of scientific socialism, raised a mighty banner of international Labour unity with his rousing slogan: “Workers of the world unite, would have nothing to lose but your chains, you have a world to win.” This is the message that we bring to you in this election and call upon you to support.
 
For the Socialist United States of Europe
Churchill and his class have shown themselves to be conscious of their class aims. They will go to any lengths of oppression to aid their European class brothers to maintain capitalism and suppress the working class. We for our part must become equally class conscious if we are to succeed in destroying capitalism and bringing about the socialist and communist future of man.
The capitalists have not solved a single problem by the war in Europe. They have opened the sores. To maintain capitalism and its national boundaries will mean military occupation, the suppression of the Labour movement, a lower standard of living, military dictatorship, fascism, and inevitably, a third world war.
The workers can have nothing in common with the capitalist programme. Our programme must be for the unification of Europe into a United Socialist State. For the destruction of European capitalism and power in the hands of the working class! Down with national boundaries and for the unification of the workers of Europe and Britain into a mighty communist brotherhood of men. Only on this road can Europe be restored, and a powerful future opened up for the toiling masses.
Post-War Prospects Under Capitalism – Poverty, Unemployment and a New War
The capitalists of this country have shown in times of peace that they could not give the workers full employment. Millions were unemployed on the Means Test, impoverished and living in miserable conditions. They can only employ the workers for purposes of war and slaughter. Every worker feels it in his bones that the next 15 to 20 years there will be tremendous unemployment and another great slaughter unless this foul system is destroyed once and for all. This is all that capitalism can offer – crisis, unemployment and a new bloody war. Herbert Morrison is already saying that the air raid shelters will do for the next war.
The present war has impoverished this country to a tremendous degree. From being a great creditor nation which drew tribute from the labour of workers in all parts of the world, Britain is now a debtor nation. It is we British workers from whom the capitalists of other countries, particularly America, will draw tribute in future if capitalism remains.
British foreign markets have been reduced to less than a third; and are not likely to be regained in the future. Moneys, which at one time came into Britain from capitalist investment abroad, and from the use of British ships by foreign capitalists, will no longer come into this country. The results will mean a terrible crisis for Britain at the end of the war – a crisis which the capitalists will try to throw on the backs of the workers.
Every serious worker must think out the problems that will face us in the period that lies ahead; and to think them out to the end.
The post-war period will not be a period of class collaboration and peace, as it is pictured by the Labour leaders.
 
Prepare for the Coming Class Battles
The task of serious a thoughtful socialist and communist workers is to explain this to our fellow workers and to prepare them to unite our forces in a great struggle to destroy capitalism.
In building up a false portrait of the future of Britain while the capitalist system remains, the Labour leaders help the capitalists to confuse the workers, to undermine their class consciousness, to destroy their socialist aspirations. They prepare the wat for the reaction.
We Trotskyists will not be a party to this deception. We will tell the workers the truth and organise the most conscious of them into a revolutionary party whose aim is destruction of this horrible system and the introduction of a socialist and communist system of society.
 
Labour Party Postpones Struggle for Socialism
To solve the present crisis, the most far-reaching anti-capitalist steps must be taken. Measures in the direction of socialist or communist society must be introduced. It is said by the Labour leaders in their General Election Statement that socialism is the only cure to the evils and ills of capitalism. But instead of fighting for socialism, they pushed it off into the dim and distant future. “Socialism cannot come as a result of a week-end revolution”, they say, therefore as “practical minded people” we will forget about socialism and pursue a policy of capitalist reforms.
In their new programme upon which they will go to the General Election, the Labour leaders announce radical sounding steps. But an examination of this programme shows that it demands even less than the last Labour Party Conference demanded: it is even less radical than their watery Election Programmes in previous years. The Labour leaders have turned in the right, and not to the left.
They promise to nationalise the coal and allied industries, the iron and steel industries, the transport industries. How quickly, and by what means, they conveniently do not mention.
They talk of compensating the capitalists who at present own and control these industries. Thus they propose to keep these capitalist parasites living on the backs of the workers and as a drag upon industry. Even if they carried out their avowed policy, any progressive significance it may have would be destroyed at the outset by the retention of the capitalist class. Their proposals have nothing in common with socialism. They are a state capitalist measure. They could not solve the crisis of capitalism, but only place its burdens on the backs of the workers.
 
The Revolutionary Communist Policy
Industrial and Economic Policy
We revolutionary Communists say:
As a first step to ensure a planned economy, as the basis for social security and adequate rising standards of life, it is necessary first and foremost to destroy capitalist property rights.
A socialist or communist government would act boldly and at once.
The banks, the land, the mines, transport, steel – all the great industries must be confiscated and nationalised, without compensation to the capitalist class.
To ensure workers’ democracy, the Works Committees and Trade Unions must have access to the books and the control over production. These Committees and workers’ organisations would be encouraged to elect a national planning board to centralise, co-ordinate and plan production as a whole.
All war profits must be confiscated and the distribution of food, clothing and other goods in short demand be undertaken by elected Committees of workers from the Co-operatives, distributive trades, factory committees and housewives.
The mansions, palaces and country houses of the capitalists must be confiscated and the allocation of housing be undertaken by tenants’ committees, who will participate in a great housing plan.
A rising scale of wages must be established to meet a rising cost of living; the rate for the job operated and a guaranteed minimum established. The share out of the working day must be operated and this the working day reduced.
Only on this basis will adequate social security for the sick workers and old aged people be established, as well as their right to consume on the basis of the same standards as an employed worker.
Democratic Demands
All anti-Labour legislation must be instantly repealed, including the infamous Trade Disputes Act, 1A(a), the Essential Works Order, the Emergency Powers Act and the Sedition Act.
Full democratic and political rights must be granted to men and women in the Forces, while all persons of 18 years and over must be given the right to elect their own form of government.
Immediate and unconditional national freedom from British domination must be granted to the Indian and colonial people. British armed forces must be withdrawn from the peoples thus freed, and full economic and military assistance granted to them to maintain their independence.
Military Policy
The present army officer caste must be disbanded and all known anti-Labour elements removed from positions of command. The election of worker-officers from the ranks must be introduced. At the same time military schools must be established under the control of the Trade Unions and political organisations of the working class. The state must finance these schools whose aim would be to train officers loyal to the working class, to protect the working class from attacks from their enemies at home and abroad.
The general arming of the people must be carried out and a workers’ militia established under the control of the trade union and factory organisations.
Foreign Policy
On the basis of this transitional Socialist policy at home, the workers’ government will fight against race hatred of all forms – Vansittartism, anti-semitism, and the colour bar. It will strive to unite the workers and soldiers of all Europe and of the world, by a policy of fraternalization and co-operation. It will aid, financially and practically, the workers of all countries to destroy capitalism and begin the creation of a socialist world.
On this road capitalist anarchy will be ended, with its unemployment, poverty, fascism and war. The Communist future of man will open out before us, and for the first time the mass of workers will rise from their knees and live like human beings.
This Communist future of man will not be brought about in collaboration with the capitalists, but only in desperate struggle against them. The capitalists have shown by two bloody wars, by dozens of civil wars and counter-revolutions, that they will protect their property and class privileges from all attacks, if necessary with arms. Experience shows that they will not peacefully allow the workers to take power through Parliament without precipitating a bloody struggle. To tell the workers otherwise is to deceive them.
It is the duty of all class conscious Communists and Socialists to patiently explain the crisis of capitalism, to forewarn of the unemployment and great struggles which must inevitably arise. It is their duty to participate in these class struggles with the object of uniting the workers into that mighty conscious movement which will destroy the capitalist system and begin the socialist future of man.
WORKERS OF NEATH!
In this election you can play your part; you can give a lead to the workers in the rest of the country by rejecting the policy of class collaboration and voting for class independence and class struggle.
 Down with capitalism and its bloody wars and unemployment!
 
Free the colonial people from imperialist domination and brutality!
 
For the unity of the workers of Britain with the workers of the world, against the capitalists!
 
End the Coalition!
 
Down with the Churchill Government!
 
For a Communist Britain as part of a Communist Europe and a Communist World

 




A CRISIS OF SIGNIFICANCE IS ROCKING THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF GREAT BRITAIN. IT IS THE MOST IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENT SINCE THE EXPLUSION OF THE TROTSKYISTS FROM THE COMMUNIST PARTY AT THE BATTERSEA CONFERENCE IN 1932.
In Party Branches, and district organisations, there is a growing criticism of the policy, particularly since the debacle of their line on the General Election when they called for a coalition with the capitalists.
Even at the recent Conference of the Y.C.L., held in London, Peter Kerrigan, spokesman for the Party leadership, came in for a measure of sharp criticism from numbers of delegates who spoke from the floor – which criticism was strengthened by the demands of fraternal delegates from Greece and Spain for a fighting policy against the Labour Government.
The pressure of criticism from the rank and file , and from the most conscientious local functionaries and factory leaders (in touch with the workers and the real desires of the membership), all this has finally compelled the leadership to sanction a small measure of internal democracy, and even public criticism in the columns of their periodical World News and Views.
The background to the crisis is the growing conflict in foreign policy between the Russians, the British and the Americans and its reflection in the policy of the Stalinist parties.
As with all previous switches in Stalin’s diplomacy, the leadership of the British Stalinists are not sure which way the conflict is going to resolve itself. Learning from the sad experience of their American brothers – Browder and Co., they are prepared for the possibility that they may have to come out into opposition to the policy of the Labour Government. Thus, while making concessions to the militant aspirations of the rank and file, they are preparing a bridge which they can cross over into downright opposition to the Labour Government, in the event that such a policy fits in with the needs of Stalinist diplomacy.
As yet no serious theoretical political opposition has found expression. In the main, it is an instinctive opposition arising out of the pressure of the workers upon the Party militants, and the unhappy experiences these latter are going through in putting the “line” over on their fellow workers who are to the Left of the C.P.
The distortion and debasement of Marxism, which for so many years has been palmed off under the “mysterious”, yet simple guise of “tactics”, no longer suffices to salve the conscience of troubled workers.
The questions: “How does the Party come to be pursuing the present policy?” and “Why has the Party policy suddenly switched so often, without preparation, catching the leaders and members unawares?” are being asked by the uneasy rank and file.
At the last Annual Conference of the C.P., the delegate from Abertillery, Morgan, opposed the policy of an electoral agreement with the Churchill, “Tehran” progressive Tories advocated by the leadership. The Abertillery delegate moved an amendment that progressive unity should exclude any section of the Tories. Summing up for the executive, John Gollan, asked the delegates to reject the Abertillery amendment because the C.P. could not afford to turn their backs on any allies, no matter from what source they came. There was one solitary vote for the Abertillery motion.
The opposition at that conference was not a principled opposition. It did not reject the “progressive” front as such or counterpose to it a workers’ front. It was prepared to have an agreement with the Liberals, who are as much a part of the capitalist political set-up as the Tories. The opposition sprang rather from the instinctive hatred of the Welsh miners for any bloc with the Tories, than from a principled understanding of the need for the independence of the working class organisations. But even that was a healthy sign. It was the first time for many years that opposition of such a character to the leadership had been voiced from the C.P. Conference floor. It is to be hoped that the Abertillery delegates will be able to go forward from the last Conference and make a really principled criticism of the development of the C.P. in the course of the war.
In the present discussion a letter to World News and Views (Oct. 20th) from the Marylebone branch of the C.P. “... rejects the Political Letter of the Executive Committee of August 8th,” and issued a summary of the branch discussions.
Interesting are the comments and criticisms made by the branch directed against tendencies to “bureaucracy” in the Party and the “stifling” of the “political life of the branches”; and “the social composition of the Party is unsatisfactory when a large proportion of the members are non-trade-unionists”.
“Although admitting errors”, the branch criticism explains “the Political Letter does not analyse the cause of these errors. Reference is made to the necessity of fighting against every liquidationist tendency, but it is not explained how such tendencies have come to exist in our party… the mere stating that errors have been made without an analysis of what led up to the errors, causes confusion amongst the membership, resulting in a lack of confidence in the Party and a reluctance to play a full part in the life of the Party. The handling of both the question of the post-war coalition and the question of the position of the American Party are further examples of this.”
This theme is repeated in other letters from various individual members in different parts of the country.
Unfortunately, neither the Marylebone Branch, not any of the critics, try to “explain how such tendencies have come to exist in our Party”, nor to make an “analysis of what led up to the errors”.
It is not incidental errors “of judgement on the part of the leadership that has caused these mistakes.” The root cause goes much deeper than that. The facts are that the C.P.G.B. has long broken with the programme and ideology of the class struggle, of communist internationalism and of world revolution. Following the Stalinised C.P. of Russia, and its brother parties in other countries, it has turned its back on all the fundamental teachings of Marx and Lenin, although some of the phrases of Marxism have been maintained as a blind.
The cynical disbandment of the Comintern was not an “error”, comrades! Lenin and Trotsky founded the Third International as the World Party of communist revolution. But Stalin traded the Comintern to American imperialism for a military and diplomatic agreement.
That is the key to the mystery of the changes in the Party “line”.
From being parties of the international working class revolution, the Stalinist parties have become puppets of Soviet diplomacy. How else is it possible to gain a clear understanding of the fantastic turns of Pollitt, Browder & Co., except on the basis of this theory?
When the Anglo-Russian-American alliance was riding high, the Comintern was ditched by Stalin as a gesture to Wall Street. Without a murmur of protest or criticism from a single national section; indeed with unanimous agreement of all the sections, it was decided that the workers don’t need an international, that the Third International has fulfilled all the tasks for which it had been brought into being.
This caused the first serious searching of souls on the part of the older Communist militants, who had been educated in the spirit of Internationalism. The newer members of the Party did not even know what the “Comintern” was or meant.
The best members of the C.P. have never been too happy supporting Churchill as the “leader of the nation” or breaking strikes of their fellow workers during the war. It was only their loyalty to the October Revolution, their fear that Russia might be defeated by the Nazis unless the British capitalists helped the Soviet Union, that kept them supporting the Party during the blackest days of the production committee campaign and breaking of any and every strike. The militants who did not drop out of the Party in disgust, clenched their teeth and hung on. They compensated themselves with the idea that once the Nazis were defeated, then we would really tackle the boss class here. But the continuation of the policy of class collaboration whilst the capitalists are on the offensive, sacking militants as redundant and while wages have tended to drop with the end of overtime etc., has been the last straw. Every party member who has not become completely corrupted and cynical, is in revolt against the present policy.
But if this revolt is to lead to a great step forward for the best members of the C.P. and of the working class, the militants have to work out a revolutionary and internationalist programme. The militants must study the lessons of October, why the rise of the bureaucracy in Russia, why the end of the Comintern, why the policy of the Communist Parties slavishly plods behind the Soviet foreign policy, why no extension of the revolution in Europe.
From the midst of this growing critical grouping in the C.P., many of the best elements will find their way out of the Stalinist morass into the ranks of the R.C.P. in the coming days of struggle. Pollitt and the leaders will try to stem and stifle this movement. But as the struggle of the workers grows into open battles, the militants and the working class fighters, thousands of whom still owe allegiance to the C.P., will form a common front with their Trotskyists comrades against the capitalist class. This will be the cement that Pollitt will find it difficult to loosen.
 







The following protest letter against the policies of the Attlee government in Indonesia and Indo-China was sent by the Political Bureau of the Revolutionary Communist Party of Great Britain, a Fourth Internationalist organization.



*
10th September, 1945
To the Prime Minister,
10 Downing Street
Westminster
The news that British troops are being used in Java and Indo-China against the nationalist movement is a matter of grave concern for the working class and the socialist movement in this country. The reports in the Daily Herald go to show that the British military authorities are openly collaborating with the Japanese authorities in putting down the revolution of the popular masses.
The true interests of the British working class demand that we support the Indonesian peoples in their struggle against Dutch and French imperialism. The policy of your government, in intervening on the side of the oppressors is entirely contrary to the interests of the working class. It serves to discredit the Labor Government in the eyes of the oppressed peoples of the world. Such a policy can only succeed in creating a gulf of mistrust and a wall of hostility between the mass of the oppressed colonial people and the working class movement of this country.
We believe that the overwhelming majority of the workers and middle class people who voted Labor into power, oppose the reactionary imperialist policy now being pursued by your government and we are voicing the desire of all class conscious workers in demanding that immediate steps be taken by your government to stop this imperialist intervention, to withdraw all British troops from Indonesia and thus allow the native peoples to freely choose their own form of government.



 


Yours truly,
Jock Haston,
For the Political Bureau, R.C.P.



 







How do the British workers in nationalized industry feel about the new setup?
An interesting investigation in one such industry has been conducted by the weekly of the National Union of Railwaymen, Railway Review, and the results were analyzed in its columns by James Jary. The following is condensed from an article by J. Haston in the British Socialist Appeal for March.



*
A sampling of nearly 500 workers was used. To the first question: “Did you support the nationalization of the railways?” the replies were overwhelmingly Yes. Only 5.9 per cent said No, as against 88.7 per cent Yes. (The rest were doubtful or “no reply.”)
The second question was: “After a year of national ownership, did you find your Job: (a) Encouraging – more, less, about the same? (b) Frustrating: more, less, about the same?” The answers broke down as follows:



More encouraging


.............


  9.7%




About the same


.............


45.5%




More frustrating


.............


44.0%



Jary comments that these figures are “evidence that mere change of ownership has not created a change in the human relations within the industry. As a body, railwaymen are a patient lot, seldom hasty in their decisions, but the picture here revealed provides food for thought for those who bear the burden of organization and administration.”
 
Workers Want Control
The third question: “Do you feel you have a share in running the railways?” Only a small percentage answered that they did – 14.4 per cent. Answering No were 75.3 per cent.
“Are you satisfied with the way your Local Departmental Committee handles questions about working methods?” To this, 38.8 per cent said Yes, and 53.2 per cent No.
“Do you think you ought to be consulted before changed methods are introduced of working?” – 96.9 per cent Yes, and 2.3 per cent No.
Summing up, Jary concludes: “The fundamental conclusion from this small survey is that railwaymen at the moment are in poor heart. They feel very disappointed that they have not been called on to exercise more influence in the shaping of a national transport service. They are not so much concerned about such material things as wages and hours as they might have been. But they do want to feel that they are a living part of this great enterprise.
“They know that they are intelligent and educated. They have a wealth of practical experience without which the theoreticians are inarticulate. All they ask is that they be given just a small opportunity consciously to participate in the management and direction of the service ...”
On the background of the mood and aspirations of the railwaymen as revealed by this material, the speeches of the general secretary of the NUR, J. Figgins, at the last Labor Party conference and at the Trade Union Congress can be readily understood.
Figgins stated that the present setup was alien to the needs of the industry and the workers in it. He demanded that the unions be given the right to fully participate from top to bottom in the management and running of the industry. At the present moment only one of the members of the leading board can be said to be drawn from the workers’ side of the industry, although even his connection with the union is now broken.
 
Program for Socialist Democracy
If the railway unions’ demands for full participation are to have full effect, it is essential that nationally and in various divisions, they must develop a program, not only for the technical development of the industry, but for its social reconstruction. For this purpose, special conferences should be called throughout the country where the rank and file of railway workers of all grades and in the various unions would get down to examining all the problems of reorganization.
The editors of the Railway Review have consistently demanded that the present machinery be replaced by industrial organization based on each large unit, through the meetings of all the workers in the unit and its dependent sub-units. Each of the huge terminal units in the London area, sending delegates to a council covering the areas as a whole, and so on for the rest of the country.
Representative industrial organs of this type are needed, with the legal right of access to all plans, documents and other data affecting operating and working conditions, and as the workers almost unanimously demand, with the equal right to be consulted before any changes in working conditions.
Such a reorganization would reveal a hitherto deep and untapped well of knowledge and resourcefulness, without which the forward drive to socialism is not possible.
 




Many rank and file members of the Communist Party are querying the official Stalinist slanders against Trotskyism. The following extracts from a letter, written by a member of the C.P., will be of interest to our readers. This comrade of the C.P. wrote that he is a “sympathiser of the R.C.P.... this does not imply that I agree completely with all points of the R.C.P.’s policy” He continues, “I herewith give some of the allegations made against the Trotskyists, with which, while I am not wholly convinced, and in fact, doubtful of their truth. I should like to learn your answer to the accusations. It is this: ‘Somewhat over a year ago (?) we drew your attention in this newsletter to the Trotskyists in the Carlton Club, now one sees Vatican Trotskyism at work. Trotskyism has provided a large part of the arsenal of every anti-Soviet campaign of the last twenty years, from that of Vidkun Quisling, following his expulsion from Russia in the late twenties, to that of Messrs. Hollis and Carter in 1947.’ (Russia Today Newsletter, 18th January, 1947).
It also states there is a link between Trotskyism and the firms of Burns, Osters and Washburn, and Eyre and Spottiswood. What is the truth about these hints of collaboration between the R.C.P. and (1) The Vatican, Roman Catholic Front; and (2) The Carlton Club? ...
I have recently read a borrowed book, The Revolution Betrayed and doubt very much the statement that the works of Lenin have been printed and published by the Soviet Union with excerpts and distortions by the Censor (page 52). Can you substantiate this allegation by L. Trotsky?”
* * *
5th June, 1947
Dear Comrade D.,
The Business Manager of the Socialist Appeal has handed your letter to me for a fuller answer to the various political questions you raise. I shall do my best to answer them sufficiently to satisfy you.
Regarding Trotsky’s statement on Page 52 of the Revolution Betrayed regarding the distortions of Lenin’s works: this is done in several ways; (a) by direct omission; (b) by the publication of many private letters about Trotsky, some of which Lenin afterwards admitted he had written on the basis of false information; (c) by annotations which give an entirely false view of the work and ideas in question.
Example 1. Lenin’s Testament, which is the last letter he wrote to the Bolshevik Party, has not been published to this day by the Stalinists. This letter has had a varied history – at some stages the Stalinists have denied its existence altogether, at others they admitted it existed but gave false quotations from it. Stalin quotes an excerpt from it in his book Leninism and also there is a quotation from it in International Press Correspondence, November 17th, 1927, Vol. 7 No. 64. On both occasions, Stalin misuses it. For instance, the Testament characterises Stalin as “rude and disloyal”. In Inpreccor Stalin “forgets” about “disloyal” and admits he is “rude”! But everyone knows that “disloyalty” was indeed a very sharp characterisation for Lenin to make.
It was in this letter that Lenin suggested to the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party that Stalin should be removed from the leadership of the Party. Just as this was suppressed, so also were a series of Lenin’s last letters, especially a polemical article directed against Stalin on the National Question.
Example 2. Almost every article that Lenin ever wrote in which he expressed solidarity with Trotsky, or showed unity with Trotsky, or faith in him as a collaborator, the Stalinists have suppressed. When you consider that Lenin and Trotsky drafted between them about 60% of all the documents of the Third International between the year of its foundation 1919 and 1922, you will get an idea of how many there are of such articles and letters. At the same time, every scrap of gossip and criticism which Lenin ever made of Trotsky, is collected and published, such as Lenin’s letters to Madame Kollontai, which Lenin later admitted he had written as a result of false information supplied to him by Kollontai.
 
Of course, Lenin and Trotsky had many differences and conducted many bitter polemical struggles against each other, especially before the revolution of 1917. But no two comrades who take their ideas seriously and who write on all aspects of the international workers’ struggle for socialism could possibly avoid conflict in ideas on a number of questions. Especially when the organisations are small, these polemics assume great importance, but as Lenin later pointed out they had all sinned a great deal by exaggeration in these polemical struggles, however, the revolution had found them closely united, and Trotsky more closely united with Lenin then even Zinoviev or Kamenev.
 
In 1907, Lenin said of Trotsky at the London Congress of the S.D.L.P.R.:
“A few words about Trotsky. There is no need here for me to dwell on our differences with him. Suffice to mention that Trotsky in his booklet, In Defence of the Party has publicly expressed his agreement with Kautsky, who wrote about the economic community of interests between the proletariat and the peasantry in the present revolution in Russia ...
These facts serve so far as I am concerned to recognise the closeness of Trotsky to our views.” (Minutes of the London Congress of the S.D.L.P.R., Paris 1909. p. 239)
On November 14th, 1917, at the session of the Petersburg Committee of S.D.L.P.R., Lenin said:
“I cannot even speak about this seriously (agreement with the Mensheviks and the S.R.’s). Trotsky has long ago said that unity is impossible. Trotsky has understood this, and since then there hasn’t been a better Bolshevik than he.” (Bulletin of the Russian Opposition, No. 7, 1929, pp. 33f.)
Again you know how the Stalinists tell the history of the civil war in Russia. Trotsky bungled and played a minor role is the theme, and Stalin was sent to one sector after another to get the Red Army out of the mess. Of course, Lenin’s correspondence with Trotsky during this period, one of the most intimate of their entire activity together, has never been published, although Trotsky was the Commissar for War and head of the Red Army, and Lenin was the head of the Russian state and of the Bolshevik Party. I could quote you extensively from this correspondence, but it should not be necessary. The very fact that the Stalinists have not published it is subject to question.
By omitting the favourable articles and letters, and publishing only the critical ones, the Stalinist editors have set themselves out to create the impression that Lenin and Trotsky were never in agreement, but on the contrary, always disagreed.
Example 3. All the annotations to Lenin’s collected works which were originally written when he was alive have been completely scrapped, and new “Stalinized” annotations written in by the new editors. Since these are in Russian and you will not be able to check this statement, I will give you an example of something you can check.
John Reed, as you probably know, wrote Ten Days That Shook The World at the time of the revolution. Lenin wrote a short introduction stating that it was the most truthful pen picture of the Russian Revolution, and he hoped it would be printed in millions of copies and in all languages. In this book Stalin is referred to only once – as a signatory to a document along with other commissars, in the appendix. Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Kamenev and Bukharin and other memorable names abound from page to page, and particularly is Trotsky’s role as leader of the October insurrection made clear.
After Lenin’s death, the Stalinists introduced a number of “annotations” stating that Reed was wrong here and misinformed there, etc., and giving a false interpretation of certain incidents. Needless to say, this book which could have sold at the rate of 2,000,000 copies during the war, has not been republished by the Stalinists for many years and they refuse to allow others to publish it since they have the copyright. When the News Chronicle wanted to serialise it in 1936, the Communist Party said yes, but on one condition: that all references to Trotsky be cut out! Needless to say, the News Chronicle refused this condition.
As to the slanderous statements that the Stalinists circulate about Trotskyists and the Carlton Club, the Vatican, etc., there is not the slightest truth in them. Quisling never was and never has had the slightest connection or remotest contact with Trotskyism. [1] This is merely a matter of slandering your opponents in the hope that some mud will stick. Indeed, the boot is on the other foot. When the Nazis occupied Norway and Quisling was installed, the only party of the workers that was allowed legal existence until 1941 when Russia was about to be attacked, was the Norwegian Communist Party! We did not have a united front with Churchill and Eden (both members of the Carlton Club) during the war; it was the Communist Party of Great Britain who did and who called us “Hitler’s agents” for refusing to do so.
It is not the Trotskyists, but the Italian and Polish Communist Parties who vote for the Roman Catholic Religion to be the state religion in Italy and Poland today.
Finally, the greatest frame-up in history: the Moscow Trials. I enclose a leaflet which no doubt you have heard about, challenging the Stalinist prosecutor at the Nuremburg Trials to produce any evidence to show the connections between Trotsky and the Nazis, which they claimed they had in documentary evidence in the Moscow Trials. Their failure to produced such evidence, was sufficient to expose Stalinism to every thinking worker.


     J.H.  

*
Footnote
1. Quisling, together with the C.P., conducted a campaign for Trotsky’s expulsion from Norway before the war.
 




The following cable has been sent to Nehru, Vice-President of the Indian government:
“REVOLUTIONARY COMMUNIST PARTY BRITAIN VIGOROUSLY PROTESTS ARRESTS COLVIN DE CILVA, ANTONIPILLAI, MUTHIAH, AND TRADE UNIONISTS BY MADRAS CONGRESS GOVERNMENT STOP THIS ATTACK ON DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS AND ORGANISATIONS OF THE WORKING CLASS IN FLAGRANT CONTRADICTION TO PROFESSED DEMOCRATIC AIMS OF CONGRESS AND ITS CLAIMS TO REPRESENT INDIAN MASSES STOP SUCH ACTIONS DAMAGE STRUGGLE FOR INDIAN INDEPENDENCE STOP DEMAND IMMEDIATE RELEASE OF ALL ARRESTED


     JOCK HASTON
GENERAL SECRETARY”  

 



/x-n52-mid-nov-1947-sa.pdf
Comrade and Fellow Worker,
As you are aware, the workers at the Savoy and its associated hotels, Claridges, the Berkeley and Simpsons have been in conflict with the management since last October 1946, when the great strike of catering workers took place. For the past months a struggle has been going on with the management over the alleged victimisation of a waiter shop-steward, Frank Piazza, and the workers came out on strike again on November 7th for trade union principles.
T he “Socialist Appeal” stated the case for the workers as reported by Trade Unionists and Trade Union officials in an article written by an active trade union militant employed at the Savoy – Marion Lunt – who has since been sacked on alleged grounds of redundancy.
As a result of that article, the Savoy bosses have entered a libel action against the Socialist Appeal claiming damages. The Savoy Hotel Ltd., the most powerful of the London catering employers, has secured an injunction against the Socialist Appeal which effectively silences us from commenting on the background of the workers' struggle until the case is heard in the High Court.
The Socialist Appeal has a proud record in speaking for the interests of the workers whenever they have fought the capitalist class. This is a clear case of Big Business versus the voice of militant Labour.
A case of this kind is very expensive and we rely upon the support of class conscious trade unionists to fight it to the end. We ask you to raise the matter in your Trade
Union Branch with a view to sending a donation to the Fund, and to get the maximum financial contributions from your members on a subscription list. All funds for this purpose should be sent to: SAVOY CASE, 256, Harrow Road, London, W.2.



 


Fraternally Yours,
Jock Haston
General Secretary, R.C.P.



 

